 1
Principles of Categorization 
Eleanor Rosch, 1978 
University of California, Berkeley 
 
First publised in: Rosch, Eleanor and Lloyd, Barbara B. (eds), Cognition and categorization 27-48. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.  
  
The following is a taxonomy of the animal kingdom. It has been attributed to an ancient 
Chinese encyclopedia entitled the Celestial Emporium of Benevolent Knowledge: 
On those remote pages it is written that animals are divided into (a) those that belong 
to the Emperor, (b) embalmed ones, (c) those that are trained, (d) suckling pigs, (e) 
mermaids, (f) fabulous ones, (g) stray dogs, (h) those that are included in this 
classification, (i) those that tremble as if they were mad, j) innumerable ones, (k) 
those drawn with a very fine camel's hair brush, (l) others, (m) those that have just 
broken a flower vase, (n) those that resemble flies from a distance (Borges, 1966, p. 
108). 
Conceptually, the most interesting aspect of this classification system is that it does not exist. 
Certain types of categorizations may appear in the imagination of poets, but they are never 
found in the practical or linguistic classes of organisms or of man-made objects used by any of 
the cultures of the world. For some years, I have argued that human categorization should not 
be considered the arbitrary product of historical accident or of whim but rather the result of 
psychological principles of categorization, which are subject to investigation. This chapter is a 
summary and discussion of those principles. 
The chapter is divided into five parts.  
The first part presents the two general principles that are proposed to underlie categorization 
systems. 
The second part shows the way in which these principles appear to result in a basic and 
primary level of categorization in the levels of abstraction in a taxonomy: It is essentially a 
 2
summary of the research already reported on basic level objects (Rosch et al., 1976). Thus the 
second section may be omitted by the reader already sufficiently familiar with that material.  
The third part relates the principles of categorization to the formation of prototypes in those 
categories that are at the same level of abstraction in a taxonomy. In particular, this section 
attempts to clarify the operational concept of prototypicality and to separate that concept 
from claims concerning the role of prototypes in cognitive processing, representation, and 
learning for which there is little evidence.  
The fourth part presents two issues that are problematical for the abstract principles of 
categorization stated in Part 1: (1) the relation of context to basic level objects and 
prototypes; and (2) assumptions about the nature of the attributes of real-world objects that 
underlie the claim that there is structure in the world.  
The fifth part is a report of initial attempts to base an analysis of the attributes, functions, and 
contexts of objects on a consideration of objects as props in culturally defined events. 
It should be noted that the issues in categorization with which we are primarily concerned have 
to do with explaining the categories found in a culture and coded by the language of that 
culture at a particular point in time. en we speak of the formation of categories, we mean 
their formation in the culture. This point is often misunderstood. The principles of 
categorization proposed are not as such intended to constitute a theory of the development of 
categories in children born into a culture nor to constitute a model of how categories are 
processed (how categorizations are made) in the minds of adult speakers of a language. 
THE PRINCIPLES 
Two general and basic principles are proposed for the formation of categories:  
The first has to do with the function of category systems and asserts that the task of category 
systems is to provide maximum information with the least cognitive effort.  
The second principle has to do with the structure of the information so provided and asserts 
that the perceived world comes as structured information rather than as arbitrary or 
unpredictable attributes. Thus maximum information with least cognitive effort is achieved if 
categories map the perceived world structure as closely as possible. This condition can be 
achieved either by the mapping of categories to given attribute structures or by the definition 
or redefinition of attributes to render a given set of categories appropriately structured.  
 3
These principles are elaborated in the following. 
Cognitive Economy.              
The first principle contains the almost common-sense notion that, as an organism, what one 
wishes to gain from one's categories is a great deal of information about the environment while 
conserving finite resources as much as possible. To categorize a stimulus means to consider it, 
for purposes 
Purposes of that categorization, not only equivalent to other stimuli in the same category but, 
also different from stimuli not in that category, On the one hand, it would appear to the 
organism's advantage to have as many properties as possible predictable from Knowing any one 
property, a principle that would lead to formation of large numbers of categories with as fine 
discriminations between categories as possible.  On the other hand , one purpose of 
categorization is to reduce the infinite differences among stimuli to behaviorally and 
cognitively usable proportions. It is to the organism's advantage not to differentiate one 
stimulus from others when that differentiation is irrelevant to the purposes at hand. 
Perceived World Structure.               
The second principle of categorization asserts that unlike the sets of stimuli used in traditional 
laboratory concept attainment tasks, the perceived world is not an unstructured total set of 
equiprobable co-occurring attributes Rather, the material objects of the world are perceive to 
possess (in Garner's, 1974, sense) high correlational structure. That is, given a knower who 
perceives the complex attributes of feathers fur and wings, it is an empirical fact provided by 
the perceived world that wings co-occur with feathers more than with fur. And given an actor 
with the motor programs for sitting, it is a fact of the perceived world that objects with the 
perceptual attributes of chairs are more likely to have functional sit-on-able-ness than objects 
with the appearance of cats. In short, combinations of what we perceive as the attributes of 
real objects do not occur uniformly. Some pairs, triples, etc., are quite probable, appearing in 
combination sometimes with one, sometimes another attribute; others are rare; others 
logically cannot or empirically do not occur. 
It should be emphasized that we are talking about the perceived world and not a metaphysical 
world without a knower. What kinds of attributes can be perceived are, of course, species-
specific. A  dog's sense of smell is more highly differentiated than a human's, and the structure 
of the world for a dog must surely include attributes of smell that we, as a species, are 
incapable of perceiving. Furthermore, because a dog's body is constructed differently from a 
 4
human's, its motor interactions with objects are necessarily differently structured. The "out 
there" of a bat, a frog, or a bee is surely more different still from that of a human. What 
attributes will be perceived given the ability to perceive them is undoubtedly determined by 
many factors having to do with the functional needs of the knower interacting with the physical 
and social environment. One influence on how attributes will be defined by humans is clearly 
the category system already existent in the culture at a given time. Thus, our segmentation of 
a bird's body such that there is an attribute called "wings" may be influenced not only by 
perceptual factors such as the gestalt laws of form that would lead us to consider the wings as 
a separate part (Palmer, in press) but also by the fact that at present we already have a 
cultural and linguistic category called "birds." Viewing attributes as, at least in part, constructs 
of the perceiver does not negate the higher-order structural fact about attributes at issue, 
namely that the attributes of wings and that of feathers do co-occur in the perceived world. 
These two basic principles of categorization, a drive toward cognitive economy combined with 
structure in the perceived world, have implications both for the level of abstraction of 
categories formed in a culture and for the, internal structure of those categories once formed. 
For purposes of explication, we may conceive of category systems as having both a verbal and 
horizontal dimension. The vertical dimension concerns the level of inclusiveness of the 
category - the dimension along which the terms collie, dog, mammal, animal, and living thing 
vary. The horizontal dimension concerns the segmentation of categories at the same level of 
inclusiveness - the dimension on which dog, cat car, bus chair, and sofa vary. The implication 
of the two principles of categorization for the vertical dimension is that not all possible levels 
of categorization are equally good or useful; rather, the most basic level of categorization will 
be the most inclusive (abstract) level at which the categories can mirror the structure of 
attributes perceived in the world. The implication of the principles of categorization for the 
horizontal dimension is that to increase the distinctiveness and flexibility of categories, 
categories tend to become defined in terms of prototypes or prototypical instances that 
contain the attributes most representative of items inside and least representative of items 
outside the category. 
THE VERTICAL DIMENSION OF CATEGORIES: BASIC-LEVEL OBJECTS 
In a programmatic series of experiments, we have attempted to argue that categories within 
taxonomies of concrete objects are structured such that there is generally one level of 
abstraction at which the most basic category cuts can be made (Rosch et al., 1976a). By 
category is meant a number objects that are considered equivalent. Categories are generally 
designated by names (e.g., dog, animal)  A taxonomy is a system by which categories are 
 5
related to one another by means of class inclusion, The greater the inclusiveness of a category 
within a taxonomy, the higher the level of abstraction., Each category within a taxonomy is 
entirely included within one other category (unless it is the highest level category) but is not 
exhaustive of that more inclusive category (see Kay, 1971).  Thus the term level of abstraction 
within a taxonomy refers to a particular level of inclusiveness. A familiar taxonomy is the 
Linnean system for the classification of animals. 
Our claims concerning a basic level of abstraction can be formalized in terms of cue validity 
(Rosch et al., 1976a) or in terms of the set theoretic representation of similarity provided by 
Tversky (1977, and Chapter 4 in this volume). Cue validity is a probabilistic concept; the 
validity of a given cue x as a predictor of a given category y (the conditional probability of y/x) 
increases as the frequency with which cue x is associated with category y increases and 
decreases as the frequency with which cue x is associated with categories other than y 
increases (Beach, 1964a, 1964b; Reed, 1972). The cue validity of an entire category may be 
defined as the summation of the cue validities for that category of each of the attributes of the 
category. A category with high cue validity is, by definition, more differentiated from other 
categories than one of lower cue validity. The elegant formulization that Tversky provides in 
Chapter 4 is in terms of the variable "category resemblance," which is defined as the weighted 
sum of the measures of all of the common features within a category minus the sum of .the 
measures of all of the distinctive features., Distinctive features include those that belong to 
only some members of a given category as well as those belonging to contrasting categories. 
Thus Tversky's formalization does not weight the effect of contrast categories as much as does 
the cue validity formulation. Tversky suggests that two disjoint classes tend to be combined 
whenever the weight of the added common features exceeds the weight of the distinctive 
features. 
A working assumption of the research on basic objects that (1) in the perceived world, 
information-rich bundles of perceptual and functional attributes occur that form natural 
discontinuities, and that (2),basic cuts in categorization are made at these discontinuities. 
Suppose that basic objects, (e.g., chair, car), are at the most inclusive level at which there are 
attributes common to all or most members of the category. Then both total cue validities and 
category resemblance are maximized at that level of abstraction at which basic objects are 
categorized. This is, categories one level more abstract will be superordinate categories (e.g., 
furniture, vehicle) whose members share only a few attributes among each other. Categories 
below the basic level will be bundles of common and, thus, predictable attributes and 
functions but contain many attributes that overlap with other categories (for example, kitchen 
chair shares most of its attributes with other kinds of chairs). 
 6
Superordinate categories have lower total cue validity and lower category resemblance than do 
basic-level categories, because they have fewer common attributes; in fact, the category 
resemblance measure of items within the superordinate can even be negative due to the high 
ratio of distinctive to common features. Subordinate categories have lower total cue validity 
than do basic categories, because they also share most attributes with contrasting subordinate 
categories; in Tversky's terms, they tend to be combined because the weight of the added 
common features tend to exceed the weight of the distinctive features, That basic objects are 
categories at the level of abstraction that maximizes cue validity and maximizes category 
resemblance is another way of asserting that basic objects are the categories that best mirror 
the correlational structure of the environment. 
We chose to look at concrete objects because they appeared to be a domain that was at once 
an indisputable aspect of complex natural language classifications yet at the same time were 
amenable to methods of empirical analysis. In our investigations of basic categories, the 
correlational structure of concrete objects was considered to consist of a number of 
inseparable aspects of form and 
function, any one of which could serve as the starting point for analysis. Four investigations 
provided converging operational definitions of the basic level of abstraction: attributes in 
common, motor movements in common, objective similarity in shape, and identifiability of 
averaged shapes. 
Common Attributes.            
Ethnobiologists had suggested on the basis of linguistic criteria and field observation that the 
fobs was the level of classification at which organisms had bundles of attributes in common and 
maximum discontinuity between classes (see Chapter 1). The purpose of our research was to 
provide a systematic empirical study of the co-occurrence of attributes in the most common 
taxonomies of biological and man-made objects in our own culture. 
The hypothesis that basic level objects are the most inclusive level of classification at which 
objects have numbers of attributes in common was tested for categories at three levels of 
abstraction for nine taxonomies: tree, fish, fruit, musical instruments, tool, clothing furniture 
and vehicle. Examples of the three levels for one biological and one nonbiological taxonomy 
are shown in Table 2.1. Criteria for choice of these specific items were that the taxonomies 
contain the most common (defined by word frequency) categories of concrete nouns in English, 
that the levels of abstraction bear simple class-inclusion relations to each other, and that those 
class-inclusion relations be generally known to our subjects (be agreed upon by a sample of 
 7
native English speakers) The middle level of abstraction was the hypothesized basic level: For 
nonbiological taxonomies, this corresponded to the intuition of the experimenters (which also 
turned out to be consistent with Berlin's linguistic criteria); for biological categories, we 
assumed that the basic level would be the level of the folk generic. 
Subjects received sets of words taken from these nine taxonomies; the subject's task was to list 
all of the attributes he could think of that were true of the items included in the class of things 
designated by each object name. Thus, for purposes of this study, attributes were defined 
operationally as whatever subjects agreed them to be with no implications for whether such 
analysis of an object could or could not be perceptually considered prior to knowledge of the 
object itself. Results of the study were as predicted: Very few attributes were listed for the 
superordinate categories, a significantly greater number listed for the supposed basic-level 
objects, and not significantly more attributes listed for subordinate level objects than for 
basic-level. An additional study showed essentially the same attributes listed for visually 
present objects as for the object names. The angle unpredicted result was that for the three 
biological taxonomies, the basic level, as defined by numbers of attributes in common, did not 
occur at the level of the folk generic but appeared at the level we had originally expected to 
be superordinate (e.g., tree rather than oak). 
TABLE 2.1 Examples of Taxonomies Used in Basic Object Research 
Superordinate Basic Level Subordinate 
Furniture Chair Kitchen chair 
  Living-room chair 
 Table Kitchen table 
  Dining-room table 
 Lamp Floor lamp 
  Desk lamp 
Tree Oak White oak 
  Red oak 
 Maple Silver maple 
  Sugar maple 
 Birch River birch 
  White birch 
Motor Movements.                
 8
Inseparable from the perceived attributes of objects are the ways in which humans habitually 
use or interact with those objects. For concrete objects, such interactions take the form of 
motor movements. For example, when performing the action of sitting down on a chair, a 
sequence of body and muscle movements are typically made that are inseparable from the 
nature of the attributes of chairs - legs, seat, back, etc. This aspect of objects is particularly 
important in light of the role that sensory-motor interaction with the world appears to play in 
the development of thought (Brunei, Olver, & Greenfield, I966; Nelson, I974; Piaget, I952). 
In our study of motor movements, each of the sets of words used in the previous experiment 
was administered to new subjects. A subject was asked to describe, in as much finely analyzed 
detail as possible, the sequences of motor movements he made when using or interacting with 
the object. Tallies of agreed upon listings of the same movements of the same body part in the 
same part of the movement sequence formed the unit of analysis. Results were identical to 
those of the attribute listings; basic objects were the most general classes to have motor 
sequences in common. For example, there are few motor programs we irry out to items of 
furniture in general and several specific motor programs +cried out in regard to sitting down on 
chairs, but we sit on kitchen and livingroom chairs using essentially the same motor programs. 
Similarity in Shapes.           
Another aspect of the meaning of a class of objects is the appearance of the objects in the 
class. In order to be able to analyze correlational structures by different but converging 
methods, it was necessary to find a method of analyzing similarity in the visual aspects of the 
objects that was not dependent on subjects' descriptions, that was free from effects of the 
object's name (which would not have been the case for subjects' ratings of similarity), and that 
went beyond similarity of _analyzable, listable attributes that had already been used in the 
first study described. For this purpose, outlines of the shape of two-dimensional 
representations of objects were used, an integral aspect of natural forms. Similarity in shape 
was measured by the amount of overlap of the two outlines when the outlines (normalized for 
size and orientation) were juxtaposed. 
Results showed that the ratio of overlapped to nonoverlapped area when two objects from the 
same basic-level category (e.g., two cars) were superimposed was far greater than when two 
objects from the same superordinate category 
were superimposed (e-g., a car and a motorcycle). Although some gain in ratio of overlap to 
nonoverlap also occurred for subordinate category objects (e.g., two sports cars), the gain 
 9
obtained by shifting from basic-level to subordinate objects was significantly less than the gain 
obtained by shifting from superordinate to basic-level objects. 
Identifiability of Averaged Shapes. 
If the basic level is the most inclusive level at which shapes of objects of a class are similar, a 
possible result of such similarity may be that the basic level is also the most inclusive level at 
which an averaged shape of an object can be recognized. To test this hypothesis, the same 
normalized superimposed shapes used in the previous experiment were used to draw an 
average outline of the overlapped figures. Subjects were then asked to identify both the 
superordinate category and the specific object depicted. Results showed that basic objects 
were the most general and inclusive categories at which the objects depicted could be 
identified. Furthermore, overlaps of subordinate objects were no more identifiable than 
objects at the basic level. 
In summary, our four converging operational definitions of basic objects all indicated the same 
level of abstraction to be basic in our taxonomies. Admittedly, the basic level for biological 
objects was not that predicted by the folk genus; however, this fact appeared to be simply 
accounted for by our subjects' lack of knowledge of the additional depth of real-world attribute 
structure available at the level of the folk generic (see Rosch et al., 1976a). 
Implications for Other Fields 
The foregoing theory of categorization and basic objects has implications for several traditional 
areas of study in psychology; some of these have been tested. 
Imagery.                 
The fact that basic-level objects were the most inclusive categories which an averaged 
member of the category could be identified suggested at basic objects might be the most 
inclusive categories for which it was possible form a mental image isomorphic to the 
appearance of members of the class as whole. Experiments using a signal-detection paradigm 
and a priming paradigm, both of which have been previously argued to be measures of imagery 
(Peterson Graham, I974; Rosch, 1975c), verified that, in so far as it was meaningful to e the 
term imagery, basic objects appeared to-be the most abstract categories for which an image 
could be reasonably representative of the class as a whole. 
Perception.            
 10
From all that has been said of the nature of basic classifications, would hardly be reasonable to 
suppose that in perception of the world, objects were first categorized either at the most 
abstract or at the most concrete level possible Two separate studies of picture verification 
(Rosch et al., 1976a; Smith, Balzano, & Walker, I978) indicate that, in fact, objects may be 
first :en or recognized as members of their basic category, and that only with the ad of 
additional processing can they be identified as members of their superordinate or subordinate 
category. 
Development.         
We have argued that classification into categories at the basic level is overdetermined because 
perception, motor movements, functions, and iconic images would all lead to the same level of 
categorization. Thus basic objects should be the first categorizations of concrete objects made 
by children. In fact, for our nine taxonomies, the basic level was the first named. And even 
when naming was controlled, pictures of several basic-level objects were sorted into groups 
"because they were the same type of thing" long before such a technique of sorting has become 
general in children. 
Language.              
From all that has been said, we would expect the most useful and, thus, most used name for an 
item to be the basic-level name. In fact, we found that adults almost invariably named pictures 
of the subordinate items of the nine taxonomies at the basic level, although they knew the 
correct superordinate and subordinate names for the objects. On a more speculative level, in 
the evolution of languages, one would expect names to evolve first for basic level objects, 
spreading both upward and downward as taxonomies increased in depth. Of great relevance for 
this hypothesis are Berlin's (1972) claims for such a pattern for the evolution of plant names, 
and our own (Rosch et al., 1976a) and Newport and Bellugi's (Chapter 3, this volume) finding 
for American Sign Language of the Deaf, that it was the basic-level categories that were most 
often coded by single signs and super- and subordinate categories that were likely to be 
missing. Thus a wide range of converging operations verify as basic the same levels of 
abstraction. 
THE HORIZONTAL DIMENSION: INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF CATEGORIES: PROTOTYPES 
Most, if not all, categories do not have clear-cut boundaries. To argue that basic object 
categories follow clusters of perceived attributes is not to say that such attribute clusters are 
necessarily discontinuous. 
 11
In terms of the principles of categorization proposed earlier, cognitive economy dictates that 
categories tend to be viewed as being as separate from each other and as clear-cut as possible. 
One way to achieve this is by means of formal, necessary and sufficient criteria for category 
membership. The attempt to impose such-criteria on categories marks virtual definitions in the 
tradition of Western reason. The psychological treatment of categories in the standard 
concept-identification paradigm lies within this tradition. Another way to achieve separateness 
and clarity of actually continuous categories is by conceiving of each category in terms of its 
clear cases rather than its boundaries. As Wittgenstein (1953) has pointed out, categorical 
judgments become a problem only if one is concerned with boundaries - in the normal course 
of life, two neighbors know on whose property they are standing without exact demarcation of 
the boundary line. Categories can be viewed in terms of their clear cases if the perceiver 
places emphasis on the correlational structure of perceived attributes such that the categories 
are represented by their most structured portions. 
By prototypes of categories we have generally meant the clearest cases of pry membership 
defined operationally by people's judgments of goodness of membership in the category. A 
great deal of confusion in the discussion of prototypes has arisen from two sources. First, the 
notion of prototypes has tended to become reified as though it meant a specific category 
member or mental structure. Questions are then asked in an either-or fashion about whether 
something is or is not the prototype or part of the prototype in exactly the same way in which 
the question would previously have been asked about the category boundary. Such thinking 
precisely violates the Wittgensteinian insight that we can judge how clear a case something is 
and deal with categories on the basis of clear cases in the total absence of information about 
boundaries. Second, the empirical findings about prototypicality have been confused with 
theories of processing - that is, there has been a failure to distinguish the structure of 
categories from theories concerning the use of that structure in processing. Therefore, let us 
first attempt to look at prototypes in as purely structural a fashion as possible. We will focus on 
what may be said about prototypes based on operational definitions and empirical findings 
alone without the addition of processing assumptions. 
Perception of typicality differences is, in the first place, an empirical fact of people's 
judgments about category membership. It is by now a well-documented finding that subjects 
overwhelmingly agree in their judgments of how good an example or clear a case members are 
of a category, even for categories about whose boundaries they disagree (Rosch, 1974, 1975b). 
Such judgments are reliable even under changes of instructions and items (Rips, Shoben, & 
Smith, 1973; Rosch, 1975b, 1975c; Rosch & Mervis, 1975). Were such agreement and reliability 
in judgment not to have been obtained, there would be no further point in discussion or 
 12
investigation of the issue. However, given the empirical verification of degree of 
prototypicality, we can proceed to ask what principles determine which items will be judged 
the more prototypical and what other variables might be affected by prototypicality. 
In terms of the basic principles of category formation, the formation of category prototypes 
should, like basic levels of abstraction, be determinate and be closely related to the initial 
formation of categories. For categories of concrete objects (which do not have a physiological 
basis, as categories such as colors and forms apparently do - Rosch, 1974), a reasonable 
hypothesis is that prototypes develop through the same principles such as maximization of cue 
validity and maximization of category resemblance as those principles governing the formation 
of the categories themselves. 
In support of such a hypothesis, Rosch and Mervis (1975) have shown that the more prototypical 
of a category a member is rated, the more attributes it .has in common with other members of 
the category and the fewer attributes in common with members of the contrasting categories. 
This finding was demonstrated for natural language superordinate categories, for natural 
language basic level categories, and for artificial categories in which the definition of 
attributes and the amount of experience with items was completely specified and controlled. 
The same basic principles can be represented in ways other than through attributes in 
common. Because the present theory is a structural theory, one aspect of it is that centrality 
shares the mathematical notions inherent in measures like the mean and mode. Prototypical 
category members have been found to represent the means of attributes that have a metric, 
such as size (Reed, 1972; Rosch, Simpson, & Miller, 1976). 
In short, prototypes appear to be just those members of a category that most reflect the 
redundancy structure of the category as a whole. That is, if categories form to maximize the 
information-rich cluster of attributes in the environment and, thus, the cue validity or category 
resemblance of the attributes of categories, prototypes of categories appear to form in such a 
manner as to maximize such dusters and such cue validity still further within categories. 
It is important to note that for natural language categories both at the superordinate and basic 
levels the extent to which items have attributes common to the category was highly negatively 
correlated with the extent to which they have attributes belonging to members of contrast 
categories. This appears to be part of the structure of real-world categories It may be that such 
structure is given by the correlated clusters of attributes of the real world. Or such structure, 
may be a result of the human tendency once a contrast exists to define attributes for 
contrasting categories so that the categories will be maximally distinctive. In either case, it is 
a fact that both representativeness within a category and distinctiveness from contrast 
 13
categories are correlated with prototypicality in real categories. For artificial categories, 
either principle alone will produce prototype effects (Rosch et al., 1976b; Smith & Balzano, 
personal communication) depending on the structure of the stimulus set. Thus to perform 
experiments to try to distinguish which principle is the one that determines prototype 
formation and category processing appears to be an artificial exercise. 
Tversky formalizes prototypicality as the member or members of the category with the highest 
summed similarity to all members of the category. This measure, although formally more 
tractable than that of cue validity, does not take account, as cue validity does, of an item's 
dissimilarity to contrast categories. This issue is discussed further later. 
Effects of Prototypicality on Psychological Dependent Variables 
The fact that prototypicality is reliably rated and is correlated with category structure does not 
have clear implications for particular processing models nor for a theory of cognitive 
representations of categories (see the introduction to Part III and Chapter 9). What is very clear 
from the extant research is that the prototypicality of items within a category can be shown to 
affect virtually all of the major dependent variables used as measures in psychological 
research. 
Speed of Processing: Reaction Time. 
The speed with which subjects can judge statements about category membership is one of the 
most widely used measures of processing in semantic memory research within the human 
information-processing framework. Subjects typically are required to respond true or false to 
statements of the form: X item is a member of Y category, where the dependent variable of 
interest is reaction time. In such tasks, for natural language categories, responses of true are 
invariably faster for the items that have been rated more prototypical. Furthermore, Rosch et 
al. (1976b) had subjects learn artificial categories where prototypicality was defined 
structurally for some subjects in terms of distance of a gestalt configuration from a prototype, 
for others in terms of means of attributes, and for still others in terms of family resemblance 
between attributes. Factors other than the structure of the category, such as frequency, were 
controlled. After learning was completed, reaction time in a category membership verification 
task proved to be a function of structural prototypicality. 
Speed of Learning of Artificial Categories (Errors) and Order of Development in Children.  
 14
Rate of learning of new material and the naturally obtainable measure of learning (combined 
with maturation) reflected in developmental order are two of the most pervasive dependent 
variables in psychological research. In the artificial categories used by Rosch et al. (1976b), 
prototypicality for all three types of stimulus material predicted speed of teaming of the 
categories. Developmentally, Anglin (1976) obtained evidence that young children learn 
category membership of good examples of categories before that of poor examples. Using a 
category-membership verification technique, Rosch (1973) found that the differences in 
reaction time to verify good and poor members were far more extreme for 10-year-old children 
than for adults, indicating that the children had learned the category membership of the 
prototypical members earlier than that of other members. 
Order and Probability of Item Output.             
Item output is normally taken to reflect some aspect of storage, retrieval, or category search. 
Battig and Montague (1969) provided a normative study of the probability with which college 
students listed instances of superordinate semantic categories. The order is correlated with 
prototypicality ratings (Rosch, 1975b). Furthermore, using the artificial categories in which 
frequency of experience with all items was controlled, Rosch et al. (1976b) demonstrated that 
the most prototypical items were the first and most frequently produced items when subjects 
were asked to list the members of the category. 
Effects of Advance Information on Performance: Set, Priming.                 
For colors (Rosch, 1975c), for natural superordinate semantic categories (Rosch, 1975b), and 
for artificial categories (Rosch et al., 1976b), it has been shown that degree of prototypicality 
determines whether advance information about the category name facilitates or inhibits 
responses in a matching task. 
The Logic of Natural Language Use of Category Terms: Hedges, Substitutability into Sentences, 
Superordination in ASL. Although logic may treat categories as though membership is all or 
none, natural languages themselves possess linguistic mechanisms for coding and coping with 
gradients of category membership. 
1. Hedges. In English there are qualifying terms such as "almost" and "virtually," which Lakoff 
(1972) calls "hedges." Even those who insist that statements such as "A robin is a bird" and "A 
penguin is a bird" are equally true, have to admit different hedges applicable to statements of 
category membership. Thus it is correct to say that a penguin is technically a bird but not that 
a robin is technically a bird, because a robin is more than just technically a bird; it is a real 
 15
bird, a bird par excellence. Rosch (1975a) showed that when subjects were given sentence 
frames such as "X is virtually Y," they reliably placed the more prototypical member of a pair of 
items into the referent slot, a finding which is isomorphic to Tversky's work on asymmetry of 
similarity relations (Chapter 4). 
2. Substitutability into sentences. The meaning of words is initimately tied to their use in 
sentences. Rosch (1977) has shown that prototypicality ratings for members of superordinate 
categories predicts the extent to which the member term is substitutable for the superordinate 
word in sentences. Thus, in the sentence "Twenty or so birds often perch on the telephone 
wires outside my window and twitter in the morining," the term "sparrow" may readily be 
substituted for "bird" but the result turns ludicrous by substitution of "turkey," an effect which 
is not simply a matter of frequency (Rosch, 1975d). 
3. Productive superordinates in ASL. Newport and Bellugi (Chapter 3) demonstrate that when 
superordinates in ASL are generated by means of a partial fixed list of category members, 
those members are the more prototypical items in the category. 
In summary, evidence has been presented that prototypes of categories are related to the 
major dependent variables with which psychological processes are typically measured. What 
the work summarized does not tell us, however, is considerably more than it tells us. The 
pervasiveness of prototypes in real-world categories and of prototypicality as a variable 
indicates that prototypes must have some place in psychological theories of representation, 
processing, and learning. However, prototypes themselves do not constitute any particular 
model of processes, representations, or learning. This point is so often misunderstood that it 
requires discussion: 
1. To speak of a prototype at all is simply a convenient grammatical fiction; what is really 
referred to are judgments of degree of prototypicality. Only in some artificial categories is 
there by definition a literal single prototype (for example, Posner, Goldsmith, & Welton, 1967; 
Reed, 1972; Rosch et al., 1976b). For natural-language categories, to speak of a single entity 
that is the prototype is either a gross misunderstanding of the empirical data or a covert theory 
of mental representation. 
2. Prototypes do not constitute any particular processing model for categories. For example, in 
pattern recognition, as Palmer (Chapter 9) points out, a prototype can be described as well by 
feature lists or structural descriptions as by templates. And many different types of matching 
operations can be conceived for matching to a prototype given any of these three modes of 
representation of the prototype. Other cognitive processes performed on categories such as 
 16
verifying the membership of an instance in a category, searching the exemplars of a category 
for the member with a particular attribute, or understanding the meaning of a paragraph 
containing the category name are not bound to any single process model by the fact that we 
may acknowledge prototypes. What the facts about prototypicality do contribute to processing 
notions is a constraint - process models should not be inconsistent with the known facts about 
prototypes. For example, a model should not be such as to predict equal verification times for 
good and bad examples of categories nor predict completely random search through a 
category. 
3. Prototypes do not constitute a theory of representation of categories. Although we have 
suggested elsewhere that it would be reasonable in light of the basic principles of 
categorization, if categories were represented by prototypes that were most representative of 
the items in the category and least representative of items outside the category (Rosch & 
Mervis, 1975; Rosch, 1977), such a statement remains an unspecified formula until it is made 
concrete by inclusion in some specific theory of representation. For example, different theories 
of semantic memory can contain the notion of prototypes in different fashions (Smith, 1978). 
Prototypes can be represented either by propositional or image systems (see Chapters 8 and 9). 
As with processing models, the facts about prototypes can only constrain, but do not 
determine, models of representation. A representation of categories in terms of conjoined 
necessary and sufficient attributes alone would probably be incapable of handling all of the 
presently known facts, but there are many representations other than necessary and sufficient 
attributes that are possible. 
4. Although prototypes must be learned, they do not constitute any particular theory of 
category learning. For example, learning of prototypicality in the types of categories examined 
in Rosch and Mervis (1975) could be represented in terms of counting attribute frequency (as in 
Neuman, 1974), in terms of storage of a set of exemplars to which one later matched the input 
(see Chapter 6 and the introduction to Part II), or in terms of explicit teaching of the 
prototypes once prototypicality within a category is established in a culture (e.g., "Now that's a 
real coat.") 
In short, prototypes only constrain but do not specify representation and process models. In 
addition, such models further constrain each other. For example, one could not argue for a 
frequency count of attributes in children's learning of prototypes of categories if one had 
reason to believe that children's representation of attributes did not allow for separability and 
selective attention to each attribute (see Chapter 5 and the introduction to Part 11). 
TWO PROBLEMATICAL ISSUES 
 17
The Nature of Perceived Attributes.                 
The derivations of basic objects and of prototypes from the basic principles of categorization 
have depended on the notion of a structure in the perceived world - bundles of perceived 
world attributes that formed natural discontinuities. When the research on basic objects and 
their prototypes was initially conceived (Rosch et al., 1976a), I thought of such attributes as 
inherent in the real world. Thus, given an organism that had sensory equipment capable of 
perceiving attributes such as wings and feathers, it was a fact in the real world that wings and 
feathers co-occurred. The state of knowledge of a person might be ignorant of (or indifferent 
or inattentive to) the attributes or might know of the attributes but be ignorant concerning 
their correlation. Conversely, a person might know of the attributes and their correlational 
structure but exaggerate that structure, turning partial into complete correlations (as when 
attributes true only of many members of a category are thought of as true of all members). 
However, the environment was thought to constrain categorizations in that human knowledge 
could not provide correlational structure where there was none at all. For purposes of the basic 
object experiments, perceived attributes were operationally defined as those attributes listed 
by our subjects. Shape was defined as measured by our computer programs. We thus seemed to 
have our system grounded comfortably in the real world. 
On contemplation of the nature of many of the attributes listed by our subjects, however, it 
appeared that three types of attributes presented a problem for such a realistic view: (1) some 
attributes, such as "seat" for the object "chair," appeared to have names that showed them not 
to be meaningful prior to knowledge of the object as chair; (2) some attributes such as "large" 
for the object "piano" seemed to have meaning only in relation to categorization of the object 
in terms of a superordinate category - piano is large for furniture but small for other kinds of 
objects such as buildings; (3) some attributes such as "you eat on it" for the object "table" were 
functional attributes that seemed to require knowledge about humans, their activities, and the 
real world in order to be understood (see Chapter 10). That is, it appeared that the analysis of 
objects into attributes was a rather sophisticated activity that our subjects (and indeed a 
system of cultural knowledge) might well be considered to be able to impose only after the 
development of the category system. 
In fact, the same laws of cognitive economy leading to the push toward basic level categories 
and prototypes might also lead to the definition of attributes of categories such that the 
categories once given would appear maximally distinctive from one another and such that the 
more prototypical items would appear even more representative of their own and less 
representative of contrastive categories. Actually, in the evolution of the meaning of terms in 
languages, probably both the constraint of real-world factors and the construction and 
 18
reconstruction of attributes are continually present. Thus, given a particular category system, 
attributes are defined such as to make the system appear as logical and economical as 
possible. However, if such a system becomes markedly out of phase with real-world 
constraints, it will probably tend to evolve to be more in line with those constraints - with 
redefinition of attributes ensuing if necessary. Unfortunately, to state the matter in such a way 
is to provide no clear place at which we can enter the system as analytical scientists. What is 
the unit with which to start our analysis? Partly in order to find a more basic real-world unit for 
analysis than attributes, we have turned our attention to the contexts in which objects occur - 
that is, to the culturally defined events in which objects serve as props. 
The Role of Context in Basic-Level Objects and Prototypes.       
It is obvious, even in the absence of controlled experimentation, that a man about to buy a 
chair who is standing in a furniture store surrounded by different chairs among which he must 
choose will think and speak about chairs at other than the basic level of "chair." Similarly, in 
regard to prototypes, it is obvious that when asked for the most typical African animal, people 
of any age will not name the same animal as when asked for the most typical American pet 
animal. Because interest in context is only beginning, it is not yet clear just what 
experimentally defined contexts will affect what dependent variables for what categories. But 
it is predetermined that there will be context effects for both the level of abstraction at which 
an object is considered and for which items are named, learned, listed, or expected in a 
category. Does this mean that our findings in regard to basic levels and prototypes are relevant 
only to the artificial situation of the laboratory is which a context is not specified? 
Actually, both basic levels and prototypes are, in a sense, theories about context itself. The 
basic level of abstraction is that level of abstraction that is appropriate for using, thinking 
about, or naming an object in most situations in which the object occurs (Rosch et al., 1976a). 
And when a context is not specified in an experiment, people must contribute their own 
context. Presumably, they do not do so randomly. Indeed, it seems likely that, in the absence 
of a specified context, subjects assume what they consider the normal context or situation for 
occurrence of that object. To make such claims about categories appears to demand an 
analysis of the actual events in daily life in which objects occur. 
THE ROLE OF OBJECTS IN EVENTS 
The attempt we have made to answer the issues of the origin of attributes and the role of 
context has been in terms of the use of objects in the events of daily human life. The study of 
events grew out of a interest in categorizations of the flow of experience. That is, our initial 
 19
interest was in the question of whether any of the principles of categorization we had found 
useful for understanding concrete objects appeared to apply to the cutting up of the continuity 
of experience into the discrete bounded temporal units that we call events. 
Previously, events have been studied primarily from two perspectives in psychology. Within 
ecological and social psychology, an observer records and attempts to segment the stream of 
another person's behavior into event sequences (for example, Barker & Wright, 1955; Newtson, 
1976). And within the artificial intelligence tradition, Story Understanders are being 
constructed that can "comprehend," by means of event scripts, statements about simple, 
culturally predictable sequences such as going to a restaurant (Shank, 1975). 
The unit of the event would appear to be a particularly important unit for analysis. Events 
stand at the interface between an analysis of social structure and culture and an analysis of 
individual psychology. It may be useful to think of scripts for events as the level of theory at 
which we can specify how culture and social structure enter the individual mind. Could we use 
events as the basic unit from which to derive an understanding of objects? Could we view 
objects as props for the carrying out of events and have the functions, perceptual attributes, 
and levels of abstraction of objects fall out of their role in such events? 
Our research to date has been a study rather than an experiment and more like a pilot study at 
that. Events were defined neither by observation of others nor by a priori units for scripts but 
introspectively in the following fashion. Students in a seminar on events were asked to choose 
a particular evening on which to list the events that they remembered of that day- e.g., to 
answer the question what did I do? (or what happened to me?) that day by means of a list of 
the names of the events. They were to begin in the morning. The students were aware of the 
nature of the inquiry and that the focus of interest was on the units that they would perceive 
as the appropriate units into which to chunk the days' happenings. After completing the list for 
that day, they were to do the same sort of lists for events remembered from the previous day, 
and thus to continue backwards to preceding days until they could remember no more day's 
events. They also listed events for units smaller and larger than a day: for example, the hour 
immediately preceding writing and the previous school quarter. 
The results were somewhat encouraging concerning the tractability of such a means of study. 
There was considerable agreement on the kinds of units into which a day should be broken - 
units such as making coffee, taking a shower, and going to statistics class. No one used much 
smaller units: That is, units such as picking up the toothpaste tube, squeezing toothpaste onto 
the brush, etc., never occurred. Nor did people use larger units such as "got myself out of the 
house in the morning" or "went to all my afternoon classes." Furthermore, the units that were 
 20
listed did not change in size or type with their recency or remoteness in time to the writing. 
Thus, for the time unit of the hour preceding writing, components of events were not listed. 
Nor were larger units of time given for a day a week past than for the day on which the list was 
composed. Indeed, it was dramatic how, as days further and further in the past appeared, 
fewer and fewer events were remembered although the type of unit for those that were 
remembered remained the same. That is, for a day a week past, a student would not say that 
he now only remembered getting himself out of the house in the morning (though such 
"summarizing" events could be inferred); rather he either did or did not remember feeding the 
cat that day (an occurrence that could also be inferred but for which inference and memory 
were introspectively clearly distinguishable). Indeed, it appeared that events such as "all the 
morning chores" as a whole do not have a memory representation separate from memory of 
doing the individual chores - perhaps in the way that superordinate categories, such as 
furniture, do not appear to be imageable per se apart from imaging individual items in the 
category. It should be noted that event boundaries appeared to be marked in a reasonable way 
by factors such as changes of the actors participating with ego, changes in the objects ego 
interacts with, changes in place, and changes in the type or rate of activity with an object, and 
by notable gaps in time between two reported events. 
A good candidate for the basic level of abstraction for events is the type of unit into which the 
students broke their days. The events they listed were just those kinds of events for which 
Shank (1975) has provided scripts. Scripts of events analyze the event into individual units of 
action; these typically occur in a predictable order. For example, the script for going to a 
restaurant contains script elements such as entering, going to a table, ordering, eating, and 
paying. Some recent research has provided evidence for the psychological reality of scripts and 
their elements (Bower, 1976). 
Our present concern is with the role of concrete objects in events. What categories of objects 
are required to serve as props for events at the level of abstraction of those listed by the 
students? In general, we found that the event name itself combined most readily with 
superordinate noun categories; thus, one gets dressed with clothes and needs various kitchen 
utensils to make breakfast. When such activities were analyzed into their script elements, the 
basic level appeared as the level of abstraction of objects necessary to script the events; e.g., 
in getting dressed, one puts on pants, sweater, and shoes, and in making breakfast, one cooks 
eggs in a frying pan. 
With respect to prototypes, it appears to be those category members judged the more 
prototypical that have attributes that enable them to fit into the typical and agreed upon 
script elements. We are presently collecting normative data on the intersection of common 
 21
events, the objects associated with those events and the other sets of events associated with 
those objects.2 In addition, object names for eliciting events are varied in level of abstraction 
and in known prototypicality in given categories. Initial results show a similar pattern to that 
obtained in the earlier research in which it was found that the more typical members of super-
ordinate categories could replace the superordinate in sentence frames generated by subjects 
told to "make up a sentence" that used the superordinate (Rosch, 1977). That is, the task of 
using a given concrete noun in a sentence appears to be an indirect method of eliciting a 
statement about the events in which objects play a part; that indirect method showed clearly 
that prototypical category members are those that can play the role in events expected of 
members of that category. 
The use of deviant forms of object names in narratives accounts for several recently explored 
effects in the psychological literature. Substituting object names at other than the basic level 
within scripts results in obviously deviant descriptions. Substitution of superordinates produces 
just those types of narrative that Bransford and Johnson (1973) have claimed are not 
comprehended; for example, "The procedure is actually quite simple. First you arrange things 
into different groups. Of course, one pile may be sufficient [p. 400]." It should be noted in the 
present context that what Bransford and Johnson call context cues are actually names of basic-
level events (e.g., washing clothes) and that one function of hearing the event name is to 
enable the reader to translate the superordinate terms into basic-level objects and actions. 
Such a translation appears to be a necessary aspect of our ability to match linguistic 
descriptions to world knowledge in a way that produces the "click of comprehension." 
On the other hand, substitution of subordinate terms for basic-level object names in scripts 
gives the effect of satire or snobbery. For example, a review (Garis, 1975) of a pretentious 
novel accused of actually being about nothing more than brand-name snobbery concludes, "And 
so, after putting away my 10 year-old Royal 470 manual and lining up my Mongol number 3 
pencils on my Goldsmith Brothers Formica imitation-wood desk, I slide into my oversize 
squirrel-skin L. L. Bean slippers and shuffle off to the kitchen. There, holding Decades in my 
trembling right hand, I drop it, plunk, into my new Sears 20-gallon, celadon-green Permanex 
trash can [p. 48]." 
Analysis of events is still in its initial stages. It is hoped that further understanding of the 
functions and attributes of objects can be derived from such an analysis. 
SUMMARY 
 22
The first part of this chapter showed how the same principles of categorization could account 
for the taxonomic structure of a category system organized around a basic level and also for 
the formation of the categories that occur within this basic level. Thus the principles described 
accounted for both the vertical and horizontal structure of category systems. Four converging 
operations were employed to establish the claim that the basic level provides the cornerstone 
of a taxonomy. The section on prototypes distinguished the empirical evidence for prototypes 
as structural facts about categories from the possible role of prototypes in cognitive 
processing, representation, and learning. Then we considered assumptions about the nature of 
the attributes of real-world objects and assumptions about context - insofar as attributes and 
contexts underlie the claim that there is structure in the world. Finally, a highly tentative pilot 
study of attributes and functions of objects as props in culturally defined events was 
presented. 
REFERENCES 
Anglin, J. Les premiers termes de rifirence de 1'enfant. In S. Ehrlich & E. Tuhring (Eds.), La 
memoire simantique. Paris: Bulletin de Psychologie, 1976. 
Barker, R., & Wright, H. Midwest and its children. Evanston, 111.: Row-Peterson, 1955. Battig, 
W. F., & Montague, W. E. Category norms for verbal items in 56 categories: A replication and 
extension of the Connecticut category norms. Journal of Experimental Psychology Monograph, 
1969, 80(3, Pt. 2). 
Beach, L. R. Cue probabilism and inference behavior. Psychological Monographs. 1964, 78, 
(Whole No. 582). (a) 
Beach, L. R. Recognition, assimilation, and identification of objects. Psychological Monographs, 
1964, 78(Whole No. 583). (b) 
Berlin, B. Speculations on the growth of ethnobotanical nomenclature. Language in Society, 
1972, 1, 51-86. 
Borges, J. L. Other inquisitions 1937-1952. New York: Washington Square Press, 1%6. Bower, G. 
Comprehending and recalling stories. Paper presented as Division 3 presidential address to the 
American Psychological Association, Washington, D.C., September 1976. 
This work is being done by Elizabeth Kreusi. 
 23
Bransford, 1. D., & Johnson, M. K. Considerations of some problems of comprehension. In W. 
Chase (Ed.), Visual information processing. New York: Academic Press, 1973. Bruner, J. S., 
Olver, R. R., & Greenfield, P. M. Studies in cognitive growth. New York: Wiley, 1966. 
Gar* L. The Margaret Mead of Madison Avenue. Ms., March 1975, pp. 47-48. 
Garner, W. R. The processing of information and structure. New York: Wiley, 1974. Kay, P. 
Taxonomy and semantic contrast. Language, 1971, 47, 866-887. 
Lakoff, G. Hedges: A study in meaning criteria and the logic of fuzzy concepts. Papers from the 
eighth regional meeting, Chicago Linguistics Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Linguistics 
Department, 1972. 
Nelson, K. Concept, word and sentence: Interrelations in acquisition and development. 
Psychological Review, 1974, 81, 267-285. 
Neuman, P. G. An attribute frequency model for the abstraction of prototypes. Memory and 
Cognition, 1974, 2, 241-248. 
Newtson, D. Foundations of attribution: The perception of ongoing behavior. In J. Harvey, W. 
Ickes, & R. Kidd (Eds.), New directions in attribution research. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 1976. 
Pillmer. S. Hierarchical structure in perceptual representation. Cognitive Psychology, in press. 
Peterson, M. J., & Graham, S. E. Visual detection and visual imagery. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, 1974, 103, 509-514. 
Piaget, J. The origins of intelligence in children. New York: International Universities Press, 
1952. 
Posner, M. 1., Goldsmith, R., & Welton, K. E. Perceived distance and the classification of 
distorted patterns. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 1967, 73, 28-38. 
Reed, S. K. Pattern recognition and categorization. Cognitive Psychology, 1972, 3, 382407. 
Rips, L. J., Shoben, E. J., & Smith, E. E. Semantic distance and the verification of semantic 
relations. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 1973, 12, 1-20. 
 24
Rosch, E. On the internal structure of perceptual and semantic categories. In T. E. Moore (Ed.), 
Cognitive development and the acquisition of language. New York: Academic Press, 1973. 
Rosch, E. Linguistic relativity. In A. Silverstein (Ed.), Human communication: Theoretical 
perspectives. New York: Halsted Press, 1974. 
Rosch, E. Cognitive reference points. Cognitive Psychology, 1975, 7, 532-547. (a) 
Rosch, E. Cognitive representations of semantic categories. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology: General., 1975, 104, 192-233. (b) 
Rosch, E. The nature of mental codes for _color categories es. Journal of Experimental Psy-
chology. Human Perception and Performance, 1975, 1, 303-322. (c) 
Rosch, E. Universals and cultural specifics inhuman categorization. In R. Brislin, S. Bochner, & 
W. Lonner (Eds.), Cross-cultural perspectives on learning. New York: Halsted Press, 1975. (d) 
Rosch, E. Human categorization. In N. Warren (Ed.), Advances in cross-cultural psychology (Vol. 
1). London: Academic Press, 1977. 
Rosch, E., & Mervis, C. B. Family resemblances: Studies in the internal structure of categories. 
Cognitive Psychology, 1975, 7, 573-605. 
Rosch, E., Mervis, C. B., Gray, W. D., Johnson, D. M., & Boyes-Braem, P. Basic objects in 
natural categories. Cognitive Psychology, 1976, 8, 382-439. (a) 
Rosch, E., Simpson, C., & Miller, R. S. Structural bases of typicality effects. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance. 1976, 2. 491-502. (b) 
Shank, R. C. The structure of episodes in memory. In D. G. Bobrow & A. Collins (Eds.), 
Representation and understanding: Studies in cognitive science. New York: Academic Press, 
1975. 
Smith, E. E. Theories of semantic memory. In W. K. Estes (Ed.), Handbook of learning and 
cognitive processes (Vol. 5). Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1978. Smith, E. E., 
& Balzano, G. J. Personal communication, April 1977. 
 25
Smith, E. E., Balzano, G. J., & Walker, J. H. Nominal, perceptual, and semantic codes is 
picture categorization. In J. Cotton & R. Klatzky (Eds.), Semantic factors in cognition. 
Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1978. 
Tversky, S. Features of similarity. Psychological Review, 1977, 84, 327-352.  
Wittgenstein, L. Philosophical investigations. New York: Macmillan, 1953. 
 

