A Study of Translation Edit Rate with Targeted Human Annotation
Matthew Snover and Bonnie Dorr
Institute for Advanced Computer Studies
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742
{snover,bonnie}@umiacs.umd.edu
Richard Schwartz, Linnea Micciulla, and John Makhoul
BBN Technologies
10 Moulton Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
{schwartz,lmicciul,makhoul}@bbn.com
Abstract
We examine a new, intuitive measure
for evaluating machine-translation output
that avoids the knowledge intensiveness
of more meaning-based approaches, and
the labor-intensiveness of human judg-
ments. Translation Edit Rate (TER) mea-
sures the amount of editing that a hu-
man would have to perform to change
a system output so it exactly matches a
reference translation. We show that the
single-reference variant of TER correlates
as well with human judgments of MT
quality as the four-reference variant of
BLEU. We also define a human-targeted
TER (or HTER) and show that it yields
higher correlations with human judgments
than BLEU—even when BLEU is given
human-targeted references. Our results in-
dicate that HTER correlates with human
judgments better than HMETEOR and
that the four-reference variants of TER
and HTER correlate with human judg-
ments as well as—or better than—a sec-
ond human judgment does.
1 Introduction
Due to the large space of possible correct trans-
lations, automatic machine translation (MT) has
proved a difficult task to evaluate. Human judg-
ments of evaluation are expensive and noisy. Many
automatic measures have been proposed to facili-
tate fast and cheap evaluation of MT systems, the
most widely used of which is BLEU (Papineni et
al., 2002), an evaluation metric that matches n-
grams from multiple references. A variant of this
metric, typically referred to as the “NIST” metric,
was proposed by Doddington (Doddington, 2002).
Other proposed methods for MT evaluation include
METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005), which uses
unigram matches on the words and their stems,
and a linear combination of automatic MT evalu-
ation methods along with meaning-based features
for identifying paraphrases (Russo-Lassner et al.,
2005).1
We define a new, more intuitive measure of
“goodness” of MT output—specifically, the number
of edits needed to fix the output so that it semanti-
cally matches a correct translation. In a less expen-
sive variant, we attempt to avoid the knowledge in-
tensiveness of more meaning-based approaches, and
the labor-intensiveness of human judgments. We
also seek to achieve higher correlations with human
judgments by assigning lower costs to phrasal shifts
than those assigned by n-gram-based approaches
such as BLEU.
Recently the GALE (Olive, 2005) (Global Au-
tonomous Language Exploitation) research program
introduced a new error measure called Translation
Edit Rate (TER)2 that was originally designed to
1One variant of the meaning-based approach incorporates
the translation error rate described in this paper. We adopt a
simpler evaluation paradigm that requires no meaning-based
features, but still achieves correlations that are better than the
existing standard, BLEU.
2Within the GALE community, the TER error measure is
referred to as Translation Error Rate , derived from the Word
Error Rate (WER) metric in the automatic speech recognition
community. The name is regrettable for its implication that it
223
Proceedings of the 7th Conference of the Association for Machine Translation in the Americas, pages 223-231,
Cambridge, August 2006. ©2006 The Association for Machine Translation in the Americas
count the number of edits (including phrasal shifts)
performed by a human to change a hypothesis so
that it is both fluent and has the correct meaning.
This was then decomposed into two steps: defining
a new reference and finding the minimum number
of edits so that the hypothesis exactly matches one
of the references. This measure was defined such
that all edits, including shifts, would have a cost
of one. Finding only the minimum number of ed-
its, without generating a new reference is the mea-
sure defined as TER; finding the minimum of edits
to a new targeted references is defined as human-
targeted TER (or HTER). We investigate both mea-
sures and also present a procedure to create targeted
references where a fluent speaker of the target lan-
guage creates a new reference translation targeted
for this system output by editing the hypothesis un-
til it is both fluent and has the same meaning as the
reference(s).
The next section describes work related to our
MT evaluation approach. Following this we define
TER and its human-targeted variant, HTER. We then
present our experimental design and results of our
experiments, comparing TER and HTER to BLEU
and METEOR (and their human-targeted variants,
HBLEU and HMETEOR). We compare these mea-
sures against human judgments of the fluency and
adequateness of the system output. Finally, we con-
clude with a summary of results and future work.
2 Related Work
The first attempts at MT evaluation relied on purely
subjective human judgments (King, 1996). Later
work measured MT error by post editing MT out-
put and counting the number of edits, typically mea-
sured in the number of keystrokes to convert the
system output into a “canonical” human translation
(Frederking and Nirenburg, 1994). Attempts have
been made to improve MT performance by auto-
matic post-editing techniques (Knight and Chander,
1994). Post editing measures have also been shown
effective for text summarization evaluation (Mani et
al., 2002) and natural language generation (Sripada
et al., 2004).
is the definitive MT measure. The authors make no such claim,
and have adopted the name Translation Edit Rate for use in this
paper and the wider community.
When developing MT systems, a purely auto-
matic measure of accuracy is preferred for rapid
feedback and reliability. Purely human based evalu-
ation metrics fail in this regard and have largely been
replaced by purely automatic MT evaluations. Au-
tomatic MT evaluation has traditionally relied upon
string comparisons between a set of reference trans-
lations and a translation hypothesis. The quality of
such automatic measures can only be determined by
comparisons to human judgments. One difficulty
in using these automatic measures is that their out-
put is not meaningful except to compare one system
against another.
BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002) calculates the score
of a translation by measuring the number of n-
grams, of varying length, of the system output that
occur within the set of references. This measure has
contributed to the recent improvement in MT sys-
tems by giving developers a reliable, cheap evalu-
ation measure on which to compare their systems.
However, BLEU is relatively unintuitive and relies
upon a large number of references and a large num-
ber of sentences in order to correlate with human
judgments.
METEOR (Banerjee and Lavie, 2005) is an evalu-
ation measure that counts the number of exact word
matches between the system output and reference.
Unmatched words are then stemmed and matched.
Additional penalities are assessed for reordering the
words between the hypothesis and reference. This
method has been shown to correlate very well with
human judgments.
An MT scoring measure that uses the notion of
maximum matching string (MMS) has been demon-
strated to yield high correlations with human judges
(Turian et al., 2003). The MMS method is similar to
the approach used by TER, in that it only allows a
string to be matched once, and also permits string
reordering. The MMS approach explicitly favors
long contiguous matches, whereas TER attempts to
minimize the number of edits between the reference
and the hypothesis. TER assigns a lower cost to
phrasal shifts than MMS, and does not explicitly fa-
vor longer matching strings.
224
3 Definition of Translation Edit Rate
TER is defined as the minimum number of edits
needed to change a hypothesis so that it exactly
matches one of the references, normalized by the
average length of the references. Since we are con-
cerned with the minimum number of edits needed to
modify the hypothesis, we only measure the number
of edits to the closest reference (as measured by the
TER score). Specifically:
TER =
# of edits
average # of reference words
Possible edits include the insertion, deletion, and
substitution of single words as well as shifts of word
sequences. A shift moves a contiguous sequence
of words within the hypothesis to another location
within the hypothesis. All edits, including shifts of
any number of words, by any distance, have equal
cost. In addition, punctuation tokens are treated as
normal words and mis-capitalization is counted as
an edit. 3
Consider the reference/hypothesis pair below,
where differences between the reference and hy-
pothesis are indicated by upper case:
REF: SAUDI ARABIA denied THIS WEEK
information published in the
AMERICAN new york times
HYP: THIS WEEK THE SAUDIS denied
information published in the
new york times
Here, the hypothesis (HYP) is fluent and means
the same thing (except for missing “American”) as
the reference (REF). However, TER does not con-
sider this an exact match. First, we note that the
phrase “this week” in the hypothesis is in a “shifted”
position (at the beginning of the sentence rather than
after the word “denied”) with respect to the hypothe-
sis. Second, we note that the phrase “Saudi Arabia”
in the reference appears as “the Saudis” in the hy-
pothesis (this counts as two separate substitutions).
Finally, the word “American” appears only in the
reference.
3It is possible that this measure could be improved by a more
careful setting of edit weights, but this paper is concerned with
exploring the current TER measure in use. The choice for shifts
to be cost one, regardless of length or distance, seems somewhat
arbitrary and other cost measures for shifts might yield higher
correlations with human judgments.
If we apply TER to this hypothesis and reference,
the number of edits is 4 (1 Shift, 2 Substitutions, and
1 Insertion), giving a TER score of 413 = 31%. BLEU
also yields a poor score of 32.3% (or 67.7% when
viewed as the error-rate analog to the TER score) on
the hypothesis because it doesn’t account for phrasal
shifts adequately.
Clearly these scores do not reflect the accept-
ability of the hypothesis, but it would take human
knowledge to determine that the hypothesis semanti-
cally matches the reference. A solution to this, using
human annotators is discussed in Section 4.
Optimal calculation of edit-distance with
move operations has been shown to be NP-
Complete(Shapira and Storer, 2002), causing us to
use the following approximation to calculate TER
scores. The number of edits for TER is calculated
in two phases. The number of insertions, deletions,
and substitutions is calculated using dynamic
programming. A greedy search is used to find the
set of shifts, by repeatedly selecting the shift that
most reduces the number of insertions, deletions
and substitutions, until no more beneficial shifts
remain. Note that a shift that reduces the number of
insertions, deletions, substitutions by just one has no
net reduction in cost, due to the cost of 1 for the shift
itself. However, in this case, we still adopt the shift,
because we find that the alignment is more correct
subjectively and often results in slightly lower edit
distance later on. Then dynamic programming
is used to optimally calculate the remaining edit
distance using a minimum-edit-distance (where
insertions, deletions and substitutions all have cost
1). The number of edits is calculated for all of the
references, and the best (lowest) score is used. The
pseudo-code for calculating the number of edits is
shown in Algorithm 1.
The greedy search is necessary to select the set
of shifts because an optimal sequence of edits (with
shifts) is very expensive to find. In order to fur-
ther reduce the space of possible shifts, to allow for
efficient computation, several other constraints are
used:
1. The shifted words must match the reference
words in the destination position exactly.
2. The word sequence of the hypothesis in the
225
Algorithm 1 Calculate Number of Edits
input: HYPOTHESIS h
input: REFERENCES R
E ←∞
for all r ∈ R do
h′ ← h
e← 0
repeat
Find shift, s, that most reduces min-edit-
distance(h′, r)
if s reduces edit distance then
h′ ← apply s to h′
e← e + 1
end if
until No shifts that reduce edit distance remain
e← e+ min-edit-distance(h′, r)
if e < E then
E ← e
end if
end for
return E
original position and the corresponding refer-
ence words must not exactly match.
3. The word sequence of the reference that corre-
sponds to the destination position must be mis-
aligned before the shift.
As an example, consider the following refer-
ence/hypothesis pair:
REF: a b c d e f c
HYP: a d e b c f
The words “b c” in the hypothesis can be shifted
to the left to correspond to the words “b c” in the
reference, because there is a mismatch in the current
location of “b c” in the hypothesis, and there is a
mismatch of “b c” in the reference. After the shift
the hypothesis is changed to:
REF: a b c d e f c
HYP: a b c d e f
The minimum-edit-distance algorithm is O(n2)
in the number of words. Therefore we use a beam
search, which reduces the computation to O(n), so
that the evaluation code works efficiently on long
sentences.
TER as defined above, only calculates the number
of edits between the best reference and the hypoth-
esis. It most accurately measures the error rate of
a hypothesis when that reference is the closest pos-
sible reference to the hypothesis. While predeter-
mined references can be used to measure the error
rate, the most accurate results require custom refer-
ences generated with the assistance of a human an-
notator.
4 Human-targeted Translation Edit Rate
As stated earlier, the acceptability of a hypothesis is
not entirely indicated by the TER score, which ig-
nores notions of semantic equivalence. This section
describes an approach that employs human annota-
tion to make TER be a more accurate measure of
translation quality. 4
Our human-in-the-loop evaluation, or HTER (for
Human-targeted Translation Edit Rate), involves a
procedure for creating targeted references. In or-
der to accurately measure the number of edits nec-
essary to transform the hypothesis into a fluent tar-
get language (English in our experiments) sentence
with the same meaning as the references, one must
do more than measure the distance between the hy-
pothesis and the current references. Specifically, a
more successful approach is one that finds the clos-
est possible reference to the hypothesis from the
space of all possible fluent references that have the
same meaning as the original references.
To approximate this, we use human annotators,
who are fluent speakers of the target language, to
generate a new targeted reference. We start with
an automatic system output (hypothesis) and one or
more pre-determined, or untargeted, reference trans-
lations. They could generate the targeted reference
by editing the system hypothesis or the original ref-
erence translation. We find that most editors edit
the hypothesis until it is fluent and has the same
meaning as the untargeted reference(s). We then
compute the minimum TER (using the technique de-
scribed above in Section 3) using this single targeted
reference as a new human reference. The targeted
reference is the only human reference used for the
purpose of measuring HTER. However, this refer-
ence is not used for computing the average reference
length.5
4The human-in-the-loop variant of TER is the one that will
be used in the GALE MT Evaluations this year.
5The targeted reference is not used to compute the average
226
Within this approach it is possible to reduce the
cost for development within a system. Specifically,
it is not necessary to create new references for each
run; for many systems, most translations do not
change from run to run. New targeted references
only need to be created for those sentences whose
translations have changed. Moreover, we probably
only need to create new references on sentences with
a significantly increased edit rate (since the last run).
The human annotation tool that we used for our
experiments displays all references and the system
hypothesis. In the main window, the annotation tool
shows where the hypothesis differs from the best ref-
erence, as determined by applying TER. The tool
also shows the minimum number of edits for the
“reference in progress.” In addition, the surrounding
reference sentences in the document are also shown
to give the annotator additional context. We found
that annotators took an average of 3 to 7 minutes per
sentence to provide a good targeted reference. The
time was relatively consistent over the 4 annotators,
but we believe this time could be reduced by a better
annotation tool.
An example set of references, hypothesis and
resulting human-targeted reference are shown
below:
Ref 1: The expert, who asked not to be
identified, added, "This depends
on the conditions of the bodies."
Ref 2: The experts who asked to remain
unnamed said, "the matter is
related to the state of the
bodies."
Hyp: The expert who requested
anonymity said that "the
situation of the matter is linked
to the dead bodies".
Targ: The expert who requested
anonymity said that "the matter
is linked to the condition of the
dead bodies".
Note that the the term “dead bodies,” which is a
correct translation from the Arabic, disagrees with
both references, but is present in the hypothesis and
targeted reference. The annotator can reach such
conclusions by using the surrounding context and
world knowledge.
reference length, as this would change the denominator in the
TER calculation, and crafty annotators could favor long targeted
references in order to minimize HTER.
5 Experimental Design
In our experiments, we used the results of two MT
systems, from MTEval 2004, which we call S1 and
S2. According to the distribution requirements set
by NIST for the shared metrics data, these sys-
tems remain anonymous. According to the MTE-
val 2004 metrics, S1 is one of the lower perform-
ing systems and S2 is one of the best systems. We
used 100 sentences from the MTEval 2004 Arabic
evaluation data set. Each sentence had four refer-
ence translations, which we will henceforth refer to
as untargeted references, that were used to calcu-
late BLEU scores in the MTEval 2004 evaluation.
The sentences were chosen randomly from the set of
sentences that had also been annotated with human
judgments of fluency and adequacy for the MTEval
2004 evaluation.6
In order to create the targeted references for
HTER, four monolingual native English annotators
corrected the system output. Two annotators were
assigned to each sentence from each system.7 An-
notators were coached on how to minimize the edit
rate.8 while preserving the meaning of the refer-
ence translations. Bilingual annotators could pos-
sibly give more accurate results, since they would
be better able to understand the source sentence
meaning, but are much more expensive to hire and
would likely take more time to complete the task.
Given that four references translations are available
to convey the meaning, monolingual annotators are
a cheaper, more readily available alternative.
If the annotators were told to simply edit the sys-
tem output, without any attempt to minimize HTER,
they would lack incentive to find a good targeted ref-
erence and would favor transforming the system out-
put using the least effort possible (e.g., by copying
one of the original references). In this case much
higher HTER scores result, which do not then cor-
6We used the community standard human judgments from
MTEval 2004. For time and cost reasons we did not generate
our own independent human judgments.
7Two annotators were used in this study so that issues of
annotator consistency could be examined. In practice one an-
notator per sentence would be adequate to create the targeted
references.
8The coaching given to the annotators in order to minimize
HTER, consisted mostly of teaching them which edits were con-
sidered by TER. The annotators also consulted with each other
during training to compare various techniques they found to
minimize HTER scores.
227
respond to calculating the minimum number of edits
required to transform the system output into a fluent
sentence with the same meaning as the references.
After the initial generation of the targeted refer-
ences, another pass of annotation was performed to
ensure that the new targeted references were suf-
ficiently accurate and fluent. During this second
pass, other annotators, other HTER annotators who
worked on different data, checked (and corrected) all
targeted references for fluency and meaning without
exposure to the system output. On average, this sec-
ond pass changed 0.63 words per sentence. This cor-
rection pass raised the average HTER score as the
annotators had typically erred in favor of the sys-
tem output. The corrections in this pass consisted
almost entirely of fixing small errors, that were a
result of annotator oversight, such as verb or tense
agreement.
6 Results
Table 1 shows that the HTER (i.e., TER with one
human-targeted reference) reduces the edit rate by
33% relative to TER with 4 untargeted references.
Substitutions were reduced by the largest factor, pre-
sumably because words were often judged synony-
mous. In both TER and HTER, the majority of the
edits were substitutions and deletions. Because TER
and HTER are edit-distance metrics, lower num-
bers indicate better performance. In previous pi-
lot studies with more experienced annotators, HTER
yielded an even higher reduction of 50%.9
Condition Ins Del Sub Shift Total
TER: 4 UnTarg Refs 4.6 12.0 25.8 7.2 49.6
HTER: 1 Targ Ref 3.5 10.5 14.6 4.9 33.5
Table 1: Untargeted (TER) and Human-targeted
(HTER) Results: Average of S1 and S2
In an analysis of shift size and distance, we found
that most shifts are short in length (1 word) and are
by less than 7 words. We also did a side-by-side
9The annotators in this study were recent additions to our
annotation group, as opposed to the veteran annotators we used
in our pilot study. In addition the annotators in this study were
placed under more strict time constraints, encouraging them not
to spend more than five minutes on a single sentence. This
tradeoff of annotation speed and annotation quality is important
to consider as HTER is considered for use in community-wide
MT evaluations.
comparison of HTER with BLEU and METEOR
(see Table 2)10 and found that human-targeted refer-
ences lower edit distance overall but the TER mea-
sure is aided more than BLEU by targeted refer-
ences: HTER yields a reduction of 33% whereas
HBLEU yields a reduction of 28%. It is possible
that performance of HBLEU is biased, as the tar-
geted references were designed to minimize TER
scores rather than BLEU scores. In the case of
BLEU and METEOR (and the human-targeted vari-
ants), we must subtract the score from 1 to get num-
bers that are comparable to TER (and its human-
targeted variant). That is, lower numbers indicate
better scores for all three measures.
We also did a study of the correlations among
TER, HTER, BLEU, HBLEU, METEOR, HME-
TEOR and Human Judgments, as shown in Table 3.
The table shows the Pearson Coefficients of correla-
tion between each of the evaluation metrics that we
measured. Note that the correlations along the di-
agonal are not always 1, as several of these are the
averages of multiple correlations.
TER, BLEU and METEOR are abbreviated as T,
B and M, respectively. T(1) refers to the application
of TER with only one untargeted reference. (The re-
ported correlation refers to an average of the 4 cor-
relations, one for each reference.)
B(1) and M(1) are analogously computed for
BLEU and METEOR, respectively. T(4), B(4), and
M(4) refer to the score computed using all 4 untar-
geted references for TER, BLEU, and METEOR, re-
spectively. HT, HB and HM refer to the application
of TER, BLEU, and METEOR, respectively, with
only one human-targeted reference. (The reported
correlation refers to an average of the 2 correlations,
one for each human-targeted reference.)
Human Judgments refer to the average of fluency
and adequacy judgments from both human judges.
Sentences from both systems were used for a total
of 200 data points—no significant differences were
found when only one of the systems was used. The
values for the evaluation measures decrease for bet-
ter values, whereas the values for human judgments
increase for better values; however, for clarity, we
report only the magnitude, not the sign of the corre-
10The 4 untargeted references were not used in calculating
the HTER, HBLEU, HMETEOR metrics.
228
Condition S1 S2 Average
BLEU: 4 UnTarg Refs 73.5 62.1 67.8
HBLEU: 1 Targ Ref 62.2 45.0 53.6
METEOR: 4 UnTarg Refs 46.0 39.2 42.1
HMETEOR: 1 Targ Ref 33.9 22.1 28.0
TER: 4 UnTarg Refs 53.2 46.0 49.6
HTER: 1 Targ Ref 39.7 27.2 33.5
Table 2: Untargeted and Human-targeted Scores: BLEU, HBLEU, METEOR, HMETEOR, TER, HTER
Measure T(1)
T(1) 0.737 T(4)
T(4) 0.792 1.000 HT
HT 0.606 0.789 0.929 B(1)
B(1) 0.473 0.521 0.457 0.709 B(4)
B(4) 0.518 0.606 0.565 0.737 1.000 HB
HB 0.502 0.624 0.794 0.535 0.687 0.919 M(1)
M(1) 0.555 0.652 0.623 0.479 0.553 0.607 0.845 M(4)
M(4) 0.586 0.727 0.675 0.488 0.596 0.643 0.888 1.000 HM
HM 0.482 0.618 0.802 0.433 0.545 0.761 0.744 0.806 0.945 HJ
HJ 0.390 0.539 0.630 0.325 0.391 0.579 0.493 0.550 0.602 1.000
Table 3: Correlations among TER (T), BLEU (B), METEOR (M), human variants (HT, HB, HM), and
Human Judgments (HJ)
lations.
The correlation between HTER (HT) and Human
Judgments (HJ) was very high with a Pearson co-
efficient of 0.630, exceeding the correlation of all
other metrics. T(1) and T(4) are both well corre-
lated with HT (r=0.606 and r=0.789, respectively),
and are ideal for system development where the cost
of HTER is prohibitive. In addition, T(1) is shown
to correlate as well with human judgments as B(4)
(r=0.390 and r=0.391, respectively), indicating that
equally valuable results can be gained with TER us-
ing one fourth of the number of references—even
without human targeting. While M(1) and M(4)
correlate better with Human Judgments than T(1)
and T(4), respectively, neither M(1) nor M(4) (nor
the human-targeted HM) correlate as well as with
human judgments as HTER (0.493/0.550/0.602 vs.
0.630).
In an analysis of standard deviation due to anno-
tator differences (Table 4), we observed that TER is
much less sensitive to the number of references than
BLEU and also that the standard deviation decreased
somewhat with targeted references. To compute
variance among annotators, we first compute the
variances from the mean for each sentence. Then we
then took the average (weighted by length) across
sentences and took the square root. Table 5 shows
the means for each annotator. The standard devia-
tion of these numbers is 2.8%.
We also examined correlations between the two
human judges and the evaluation metrics (see Ta-
ble 6). HJ-1 and HJ-2 refer to the two sets of human
judgments, each of which is the average of fluency
and adequacy. Correlating the two sets of human
judgments against each other shows a correlation of
only 0.478, less than the correlation of the average
of the judges with HTER, or even the correlation of
HTER with either individual human judgment set
(r=0.506 and r=0.575). In fact, even the TER(4)
measure (with untargeted references) correlates al-
most as well with each of the human judgments
(0.461 and 0.466) as each of the humans against
each other (0.478).
That HTER correlates better with average human
judgments than individual human judgments corre-
late with each other may seem paradoxical at first.
This is due to the fact that the individual judgments
actually have a high degree of disagreement. The av-
erage of many individual judgments actually forms
the better benchmark of performance. Much of the
dilemma arises in the difficulty of assigning a sub-
jective numerical judgment to a translation, and the
229
Condition Mean Std Dev
B: 4 UnTarg Refs 67.8 -
B: 3 of 4 UnTarg Refs 71.0 5.7
B: 1 of 4 UnTarg Refs 83.2 8.9
HB: 1 of 2 Targ Refs 53.6 10.1
M: 4 UnTarg Refs 42.1 -
M: 3 of 4 UnTarg Refs 43.3 3.4
M: 1 of 4 UnTarg Refs 49.6 7.9
HM: 1 of 2 Targ Refs 28.0 6.7
T: 4 UnTarg Refs 49.6 -
T: 3 of 4 UnTarg Refs 51.0 3.4
T: 1 of 4 UnTarg Refs 57.0 8.1
HT: 1 of 2 Targ Refs 33.5 6.8
Table 4: Standard Deviation Due to Annotator Differences for TER (T), BLEU (B), METEOR (M), and
human variants (HT, HB, HM)
Annotator Mean HTER
1 31.5
2 36.4
3 31.1
4 29.9
Table 5: Variance Among Annotators
Measure T(1) T(4) HT B(1) B(4) HB M(1) M(4) HM HJ-1
HJ-1 0.332 0.461 0.506 0.270 0.341 0.461 0.446 0.502 0.511 1.000 HJ-2
HJ-2 0.339 0.466 0.575 0.288 0.331 0.532 0.403 0.446 0.525 0.478 1.000
Table 6: Correlations among TER (T), BLEU (B), METEOR (M), human variants (HT, HB, HM), and
Individual Human Judgments
high degree of variability it entails. Given its corre-
lation to the average human judgment, HTER seems
to be a possible substitute for such subjective human
judgments.
7 Conclusions and Future Work
We have described a new measure for the ’goodness’
of MT, HTER, which is less subjective than pure hu-
man judgments. This method is expensive, in that it
requires approximately 3 to 7 minutes per sentence
for a human to annotate. While the studies presented
here use four reference translations to create a tar-
geted reference, fewer references would likely be
adequate, reducing the cost of the method, relative
to methods that require many reference translations.
HTER is not suitable for use in the development cy-
cle of an MT system, although it could be employed
on a periodic basis, but does appear to be a possi-
ble substitute for subjective human judgments of MT
quality.
We have shown that TER is adequate for research
purposes as it correlates reasonably well with human
judgments and also with HTER. However it gives an
overestimate of the actual translation error rate. Tar-
geted references mitigates this issue. When com-
pared with TER with 4 untargeted references, the
edit rate with HTER was reduced 33%.
In addition, HTER makes fine distinctions among
correct, near correct, and bad translations: correct
translations have HTER = 0 and bad translations
have high HTER, around 1.
In our correlation experiments, we showed that
BLEU and TER are highly correlated, and that
HTER is more highly correlated to human judg-
ments than BLEU or HBLEU. Although METEOR
using untargeted references is more highly corre-
lated than TER using untargeted references, human-
targeted HTER correlates with human judgments
better than METEOR, or its human-targeted vari-
ant (HMETEOR). Future studies might benefit from
also examining correlations with the MMS evalua-
tion metric(Turian et al., 2003).
The correlations shown were only on single sen-
tences; correlations on document length segments
230
should also be explored. In addition, the HTER
numbers do vary, depending on the training, skill,
and effort of the annotators. In a previous pilot
study, the reduction from TER to HTER was 50%
instead of 33%.
TER is easy to explain to people outside of the
MT community (i.e., the amount of work needed to
correct the translations). Both TER and HTER ap-
pear to be good predictors of human judgments of
translation quality. In addition, HTER may repre-
sent a method of capturing human judgments about
translation quality without the need for noisy sub-
jective judgments. The automatic TER score with
4 references correlates as well with a single human
judgment as another human judgment does, while
the scores with a human in the loop, such as HTER,
correlate significantly better with a human judgment
than a second human judgment does. This confirms
that if humans are to be used to judge the quality
of MT output, this should be done by creating a new
reference and counting errors, rather than by making
subjective judgments.
Acknowledgments
This work has been supported under the GALE pro-
gram of the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency, Contract No. HR0011-06-C-0022. We
would like to thank Philip Resnik, Grazia Russo-
Lassner, and Jimmy Lin for several fruitful discus-
sions on the TER error metric and its variants, as
well as Nathanial Waisbrot for discussions on the
algorithmic aspects of TER. We are also thankful
to Alon Lavie and his students for freely distribut-
ing the METEOR software, and to Audrey Le for
providing access to the system output and human
judgments upon which these experiments were con-
ducted. We would also like to thank the reviewers
for their valuable feedback.
References
Satanjeev Banerjee and Alon Lavie. 2005. METEOR:
An Automatic Metric for MT Evaluation with Im-
proved Correlation with Human Judgments. In Pro-
ceedings of the ACL 2005 Workshop on Intrinsic and
Extrinsic Evaulation Measures for MT and/or Summa-
rization.
George Doddington. 2002. Automatic Evaluation
of Machine Translation Quality Using N-gram Co-
Occurence Statistics. In Human Language Technol-
ogy: Notebook Proceedings, pages 128–132.
Robert Frederking and Sergei Nirenburg. 1994. Three
Heads are Better than One. In Proceedings of the
Fourth Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro-
cessing, ANLP-94.
Margaret King. 1996. Evaluating Natural Language
Processing Systems. Communication of the ACM,
29(1):73–79, January.
Kevin Knight and Ishwar Chander. 1994. Automated
Postediting of Documents. In Proceedings of National
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI).
Inderjeet Mani, Gary Klein, David House, and Lynette
Hirschman. 2002. SUMMAC: A Text Summarization
Evaluation. Natural Language Engineering, 8(1):43–
68.
S. Niessen, F.J. Och, G. Leusch, and H. Ney. 2000. An
evaluation tool for machine translation: Fast evalua-
tion for MT research. In Proceedings of the 2nd In-
ternational Conference on Language Resources and
Evaluation (LREC-2000), pages 39–45.
Joseph Olive. 2005. Global Autonomous Language Ex-
ploitation (GALE). DARPA/IPTO Proposer Informa-
tion Pamphlet.
Kishore Papineni, Salim Roukos, Todd Ward, and Wei-
Jing Zhu. 2002. Bleu: a Method for Automatic Eval-
uation of Machine Traslation. In Proceedings of the
40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics.
Grazia Russo-Lassner, Jimmy Lin, and Philip Resnik.
2005. A Paraphrase-Based Approach to Machine
Translation Evaluation. Technical Report LAMP-
TR-125/CS-TR-4754/UMIACS-TR-2005-57, Univer-
sity of Maryland, College Park.
Dana Shapira and James A. Storer. 2002. Edit Distance
with Move Operations. In Proceedings of the 13th An-
nual Symposium on Computational Pattern Matching,
pages 85–98.
Somayajulu Sripada, Ehud Reiter, and Lezan Haw-
izy. 2004. Evaluating an NLG System Using Post-
Editing. Technical Report AUCS/TR0402, Depart-
ment of Computing Science, University of Aberdeen.
Joseph P. Turian, Luke Shen, and I. Dan Melamed. 2003.
Evaluation of Machine Translation and its Evaluation.
In Proceedings of MT Summit IX.
231

