Wireless sensor networks: a survey
I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su*, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, E. Cayirci
Broadband and Wireless Networking Laboratory, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology,
Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
Received 12 December 2001; accepted 20 December 2001
Abstract
This paper describes the concept of sensor networks which has been made viable by the convergence of micro-
electro-mechanical systems technology, wireless communications and digital electronics. First, the sensing tasks and the
potential sensor networks applications are explored, and a review of factors influencing the design of sensor networks is
provided. Then, the communication architecture for sensor networks is outlined, and the algorithms and protocols
developed for each layer in the literature are explored. Open research issues for the realization of sensor networks are
also discussed.  2002 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
Keywords: Wireless sensor networks; Ad hoc networks; Application layer; Transport layer; Networking layer; Routing; Data link
layer; Medium access control; Error control; Physical layer; Power aware protocols
1. Introduction
Recent advances in micro-electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) technology, wireless communi-
cations, and digital electronics have enabled the
development of low-cost, low-power, multifunc-
tional sensor nodes that are small in size and
communicate untethered in short distances. These
tiny sensor nodes, which consist of sensing, data
processing, and communicating components, le-
verage the idea of sensor networks based on
collaborative effort of a large number of nodes.
Sensor networks represent a significant improve-
ment over traditional sensors, which are deployed
in the following two ways [39]:
• Sensors can be positioned far from the actual
phenomenon, i.e., something known by sense
perception. In this approach, large sensors
that use some complex techniques to distin-
guish the targets from environmental noise
are required.
• Several sensors that perform only sensing can be
deployed. The positions of the sensors and com-
munications topology are carefully engineered.
They transmit time series of the sensed pheno-
menon to the central nodes where computations
are performed and data are fused.
A sensor network is composed of a large num-
ber of sensor nodes, which are densely deployed
either inside the phenomenon or very close to it.
Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
www.elsevier.com/locate/comnet
*Corresponding author. Tel.: +1-404-894-5141; fax: +1-404-
894-7883.
E-mail addresses: ian@ece.gatech.edu (I.F. Akyildiz), weil-
ian@ece.gatech.edu (W. Su), yogi@ece.gatech.edu (Y. Sanka-
rasubramaniam), erdal@ece.gatech.edu (E. Cayirci).
1389-1286/02/$ - see front matter  2002 Published by Elsevier Science B.V.
PII: S1389-1286 (01 )00302-4
The position of sensor nodes need not be engi-
neered or pre-determined. This allows random
deployment in inaccessible terrains or disaster
relief operations. On the other hand, this also
means that sensor network protocols and algo-
rithms must possess self-organizing capabilities.
Another unique feature of sensor networks is the
cooperative effort of sensor nodes. Sensor nodes
are fitted with an on-board processor. Instead of
sending the raw data to the nodes responsible for
the fusion, sensor nodes use their processing abil-
ities to locally carry out simple computations and
transmit only the required and partially processed
data.
The above described features ensure a wide
range of applications for sensor networks. Some of
the application areas are health, military, and se-
curity. For example, the physiological data about
a patient can be monitored remotely by a doctor.
While this is more convenient for the patient,
it also allows the doctor to better understand the
patient’s current condition. Sensor networks can
also be used to detect foreign chemical agents in
the air and the water. They can help to identify the
type, concentration, and location of pollutants. In
essence, sensor networks will provide the end user
with intelligence and a better understanding of the
environment. We envision that, in future, wireless
sensor networks will be an integral part of our
lives, more so than the present-day personal
computers.
Realization of these and other sensor network
applications require wireless ad hoc networking
techniques. Although many protocols and algo-
rithms have been proposed for traditional wireless
ad hoc networks, they are not well suited for the
unique features and application requirements of
sensor networks. To illustrate this point, the dif-
ferences between sensor networks and ad hoc
networks [65] are outlined below:
• The number of sensor nodes in a sensor net-
work can be several orders of magnitude higher
than the nodes in an ad hoc network.
• Sensor nodes are densely deployed.
• Sensor nodes are prone to failures.
• The topology of a sensor network changes very
frequently.
• Sensor nodes mainly use broadcast communica-
tion paradigm whereas most ad hoc networks
are based on point-to-point communications.
• Sensor nodes are limited in power, computa-
tional capacities, and memory.
• Sensor nodes may not have global identification
(ID) because of the large amount of overhead
and large number of sensors.
Since large number of sensor nodes are densely
deployed, neighbor nodes may be very close to each
other. Hence, multihop communication in sensor
networks is expected to consume less power than
the traditional single hop communication. Fur-
thermore, the transmission power levels can be
kept low, which is highly desired in covert opera-
tions. Multihop communication can also effec-
tively overcome some of the signal propagation
effects experienced in long-distance wireless com-
munication.
One of the most important constraints on sensor
nodes is the low power consumption requirement.
Sensor nodes carry limited, generally irreplaceable,
power sources. Therefore, while traditional net-
works aim to achieve high quality of service (QoS)
provisions, sensor network protocols must focus
primarily on power conservation. They must have
inbuilt trade-off mechanisms that give the end user
the option of prolonging network lifetime at the
cost of lower throughput or higher transmission
delay.
Many researchers are currently engaged in de-
veloping schemes that fulfill these requirements. In
this paper, we present a survey of protocols and
algorithms proposed thus far for sensor networks.
Our aim is to provide a better understanding of the
current research issues in this field. We also at-
tempt an investigation into pertaining design
constraints and outline the use of certain tools to
meet the design objectives.
The remainder of the paper is organized as
follows: In Section 2, we present some potential
sensor network applications which show the use-
fulness of sensor networks. In Section 3, we discuss
the factors that influence the sensor network
design. We provide a detailed investigation of
current proposals in this area in Section 4. We
conclude our paper in Section 5.
394 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
2. Sensor networks applications
Sensor networks may consist of many different
types of sensors such as seismic, low sampling rate
magnetic, thermal, visual, infrared, acoustic and
radar, which are able to monitor a wide variety of
ambient conditions that include the following [23]:
• temperature,
• humidity,
• vehicular movement,
• lightning condition,
• pressure,
• soil makeup,
• noise levels,
• the presence or absence of certain kinds of ob-
jects,
• mechanical stress levels on attached objects, and
• the current characteristics such as speed, direc-
tion, and size of an object.
Sensor nodes can be used for continuous sens-
ing, event detection, event ID, location sensing,
and local control of actuators. The concept of
micro-sensing and wireless connection of these
nodes promise many new application areas. We
categorize the applications into military, environ-
ment, health, home and other commercial areas. It
is possible to expand this classification with more
categories such as space exploration, chemical
processing and disaster relief.
2.1. Military applications
Wireless sensor networks can be an integral part
of military command, control, communications,
computing, intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance
and targeting (C4ISRT) systems. The rapid de-
ployment, self-organization and fault tolerance
characteristics of sensor networks make them a
very promising sensing technique for military
C4ISRT. Since sensor networks are based on
the dense deployment of disposable and low-cost
sensor nodes, destruction of some nodes by hostile
actions does not affect a military operation as
much as the destruction of a traditional sensor,
which makes sensor networks concept a better
approach for battlefields. Some of the military
applications of sensor networks are monitoring
friendly forces, equipment and ammunition; bat-
tlefield surveillance; reconnaissance of opposing
forces and terrain; targeting; battle damage as-
sessment; and nuclear, biological and chemical
(NBC) attack detection and reconnaissance.
Monitoring friendly forces, equipment and am-
munition: Leaders and commanders can constantly
monitor the status of friendly troops, the condi-
tion and the availability of the equipment and
the ammunition in a battlefield by the use of sen-
sor networks. Every troop, vehicle, equipment
and critical ammunition can be attached with
small sensors that report the status. These reports
are gathered in sink nodes and sent to the troop
leaders. The data can also be forwarded to the
upper levels of the command hierarchy while being
aggregated with the data from other units at each
level.
Battlefield surveillance: Critical terrains, ap-
proach routes, paths and straits can be rapidly
covered with sensor networks and closely watched
for the activities of the opposing forces. As the
operations evolve and new operational plans are
prepared, new sensor networks can be deployed
anytime for battlefield surveillance.
Reconnaissance of opposing forces and terrain:
Sensor networks can be deployed in critical ter-
rains, and some valuable, detailed, and timely in-
telligence about the opposing forces and terrain
can be gathered within minutes before the oppos-
ing forces can intercept them.
Targeting: Sensor networks can be incorporated
into guidance systems of the intelligent ammuni-
tion.
Battle damage assessment: Just before or after
attacks, sensor networks can be deployed in the
target area to gather the battle damage assessment
data.
Nuclear, biological and chemical attack detec-
tion and reconnaissance: In chemical and biological
warfare, being close to ground zero is important
for timely and accurate detection of the agents.
Sensor networks deployed in the friendly region
and used as a chemical or biological warning sys-
tem can provide the friendly forces with critical
reaction time, which drops casualties drastically.
We can also use sensor networks for detailed
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 395
reconnaissance after an NBC attack is detected.
For instance, we can make a nuclear reconnais-
sance without exposing a recce team to nuclear
radiation.
2.2. Environmental applications
Some environmental applications of sensor
networks include tracking the movements of birds,
small animals, and insects; monitoring environ-
mental conditions that affect crops and livestock;
irrigation; macroinstruments for large-scale Earth
monitoring and planetary exploration; chemical/
biological detection; precision agriculture; biolog-
ical, Earth, and environmental monitoring in ma-
rine, soil, and atmospheric contexts; forest fire
detection; meteorological or geophysical research;
flood detection; bio-complexity mapping of the
environment; and pollution study [2,6–8,10,11,14,
31,35,39,40,42,61,81,88,89].
Forest fire detection: Since sensor nodes may be
strategically, randomly, and densely deployed in a
forest, sensor nodes can relay the exact origin of
the fire to the end users before the fire is spread
uncontrollable. Millions of sensor nodes can be
deployed and integrated using radio frequencies/
optical systems. Also, they may be equipped with
effective power scavenging methods [12], such as
solar cells, because the sensors may be left unat-
tended for months and even years. The sensor
nodes will collaborate with each other to perform
distributed sensing and overcome obstacles, such
as trees and rocks, that block wired sensors’ line of
sight.
Biocomplexity mapping of the environment [11]:
A biocomplexity mapping of the environment re-
quires sophisticated approaches to integrate in-
formation across temporal and spatial scales
[26,87]. The advances of technology in the remote
sensing and automated data collection have en-
abled higher spatial, spectral, and temporal reso-
lution at a geometrically declining cost per unit
area [15]. Along with these advances, the sensor
nodes also have the ability to connect with the
Internet, which allows remote users to control,
monitor and observe the biocomplexity of the
environment.
Although satellite and airborne sensors are
useful in observing large biodiversity, e.g., spatial
complexity of dominant plant species, they are not
fine grain enough to observe small size biodiver-
sity, which makes up most of the biodiversity in
an ecosystem [43]. As a result, there is a need for
ground level deployment of wireless sensor nodes
to observe the biocomplexity [29,30]. One example
of biocomplexity mapping of the environment is
done at the James Reserve in Southern California
[11]. Three monitoring grids with each having 25–
100 sensor nodes will be implemented for fixed view
multimedia and environmental sensor data loggers.
Flood detection [7]: An example of a flood de-
tection is the ALERT system [90] deployed in the
US. Several types of sensors deployed in the
ALERT system are rainfall, water level and
weather sensors. These sensors supply information
to the centralized database system in a pre-defined
way. Research projects, such as the COUGAR
Device Database Project at Cornell University [7]
and the DataSpace project at Rutgers [38], are
investigating distributed approaches in interacting
with sensor nodes in the sensor field to provide
snapshot and long-running queries.
Precision Agriculture: Some of the benefits is the
ability to monitor the pesticides level in the drink-
ing water, the level of soil erosion, and the level of
air pollution in realtime.
2.3. Health applications
Some of the health applications for sensor net-
works are providing interfaces for the disabled;
integrated patient monitoring; diagnostics; drug
administration in hospitals; monitoring the move-
ments and internal processes of insects or other
small animals; telemonitoring of human physio-
logical data; and tracking and monitoring doctors
and patients inside a hospital [8,42,60,71,88].
Telemonitoring of human physiological data: The
physiological data collected by the sensor net-
works can be stored for a long period of time [41],
and can be used for medical exploration [62]. The
installed sensor networks can also monitor and
detect elderly people’s behavior, e.g., a fall [9,16].
These small sensor nodes allow the subject a
396 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
greater freedom of movement and allow doctors to
identify pre-defined symptoms earlier [56]. Also,
they facilitate a higher quality of life for the sub-
jects compared to the treatment centers [5]. A
‘‘Health Smart Home’’ is designed in the Faculty
of Medicine in Grenoble––France to validate the
feasibility of such system [60].
Tracking and monitoring doctors and patients
inside a hospital: Each patient has small and light
weight sensor nodes attached to them. Each sensor
node has its specific task. For example, one sensor
node may be detecting the heart rate while another
is detecting the blood pressure. Doctors may also
carry a sensor node, which allows other doctors to
locate them within the hospital.
Drug administration in hospitals: If sensor nodes
can be attached to medications, the chance of
getting and prescribing the wrong medication to
patients can be minimized. Because, patients will
have sensor nodes that identify their allergies and
required medications. Computerized systems as
described in [78] have shown that they can help
minimize adverse drug events.
2.4. Home applications
Home automation: As technology advances,
smart sensor nodes and actuators can be buried in
appliances, such as vacuum cleaners, micro-wave
ovens, refrigerators, and VCRs [67]. These sensor
nodes inside the domestic devices can interact with
each other and with the external network via the
Internet or Satellite. They allow end users to
manage home devices locally and remotely more
easily.
Smart environment: The design of smart envi-
ronment can have two different perspectives, i.e.,
human-centered and technology-centered [1]. For
human-centered, a smart environment has to adapt
to the needs of the end users in terms of input/
output capabilities. For technology-centered, new
hardware technologies, networking solutions, and
middleware services have to be developed. A sce-
nario of how sensor nodes can be used to create a
smart environment is described in [36]. The sensor
nodes can be embedded into furniture and appli-
ances, and they can communicate with each other
and the room server. The room server can also
communicate with other room servers to learn
about the services they offered, e.g., printing,
scanning, and faxing. These room servers and
sensor nodes can be integrated with existing em-
bedded devices to become self-organizing, self-
regulated, and adaptive systems based on control
theory models as described in [36]. Another
example of smart environment is the ‘‘Residen-
tial Laboratory’’ at Georgia Institute of Techno-
logy [21]. The computing and sensing in this
environment has to be reliable, persistent, and
transparent.
2.5. Other commercial applications
Some of the commercial applications are mon-
itoring material fatigue; building virtual key-
boards; managing inventory; monitoring product
quality; constructing smart office spaces; environ-
mental control in office buildings; robot control
and guidance in automatic manufacturing envi-
ronments; interactive toys; interactive museums;
factory process control and automation; moni-
toring disaster area; smart structures with sensor
nodes embedded inside; machine diagnosis; trans-
portation; factory instrumentation; local control
of actuators; detecting and monitoring car thefts;
vehicle tracking and detection; and instrumenta-
tion of semiconductor processing chambers, ro-
tating machinery, wind tunnels, and anechoic
chambers [2,8,14,23,24,42,63,69–71,77,88].
Environmental control in office buildings: The air
conditioning and heat of most buildings are cen-
trally controlled. Therefore, the temperature inside
a room can vary by few degrees; one side might be
warmer than the other because there is only one
control in the room and the air flow from the
central system is not evenly distributed. A dis-
tributed wireless sensor network system can be
installed to control the air flow and temperature in
different parts of the room. It is estimated that
such distributed technology can reduce energy
consumption by two quadrillion British Thermal
Units (BTUs) in the US, which amounts to saving
of $55 billion per year and reducing 35 million
metric tons of carbon emissions [71].
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 397
Interactive museums: In the future, children will
be able to interact with objects in museums to
learn more about them. These objects will be able
to respond to their touch and speech. Also, chil-
dren can participate in real time cause-and-effect
experiments, which can teach them about science
and environment. In addition, the wireless sensor
networks can provide paging and localization in-
side the museum. An example of such museums
is the San Franciso Exploratorium that features a
combination of data measurements and cause-
and-effect experiments [71].
Detecting and monitoring car thefts: Sensor
nodes are being deployed to detect and identify
threats within a geographic region and report these
threats to remote end users by the Internet for
analysis [69].
Managing inventory control: Each item in a
warehouse may have a sensor node attached. The
end users can find out the exact location of the
item and tally the number of items in the same
category. If the end users want to insert new in-
ventories, all the users need to do is to attach the
appropriate sensor nodes to the inventories. The
end users can track and locate where the inven-
tories are at all times.
Vehicle tracking and detection: There are two
approaches as described in [77] to track and detect
the vehicle: first, the line of bearing of the vehicle is
determined locally within the clusters and then it is
forwarded to the base station, and second, the raw
data collected by the sensor nodes are forwarded
to the base station to determine the location of the
vehicle.
3. Factors influencing sensor network design
A sensor network design is influenced by many
factors, which include fault tolerance; scalability;
production costs; operating environment; sensor
network topology; hardware constraints; transmis-
sion media; and power consumption. These factors
are addressed by many researchers as surveyed in
this paper. However, none of these studies has a
full integrated view of all factors that are driving
the design of sensor networks and sensor nodes.
These factors are important because they serve as a
guideline to design a protocol or an algorithm for
sensor networks. In addition, these influencing
factors can be used to compare different schemes.
3.1. Fault tolerance
Some sensor nodes may fail or be blocked due
to lack of power, have physical damage or envi-
ronmental interference. The failure of sensor nodes
should not affect the overall task of the sensor
network. This is the reliability or fault tolerance
issue. Fault tolerance is the ability to sustain sen-
sor network functionalities without any interrup-
tion due to sensor node failures [37,55,75]. The
reliability RkðtÞ or fault tolerance of a sensor node
is modelled in [37] using the Poisson distribution
to capture the probability of not having a failure
within the time interval (0; t):
RkðtÞ ¼ expðkktÞ ð1Þ
where kk and t are the failure rate of sensor node k
and the time period, respectively.
Note that protocols and algorithms may be
designed to address the level of fault tolerance
required by the sensor networks. If the environ-
ment where the sensor nodes are deployed has
little interference, then the protocols can be more
relaxed. For example, if sensor nodes are being
deployed in a house to keep track of humidity and
temperature levels, the fault tolerance requirement
may be low since this kind of sensor networks is
not easily damaged or interfered by environmental
noise. On the other hand, if sensor nodes are being
deployed in a battlefield for surveillance and de-
tection, then the fault tolerance has to be high
because the sensed data are critical and sensor
nodes can be destroyed by hostile actions. As a
result, the fault tolerance level depends on the ap-
plication of the sensor networks, and the schemes
must be developed with this in mind.
3.2. Scalability
The number of sensor nodes deployed in
studying a phenomenon may be in the order of
hundreds or thousands. Depending on the appli-
cation, the number may reach an extreme value of
millions. The new schemes must be able to work
398 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
with this number of nodes. They must also utilize
the high density nature of the sensor networks.
The density can range from few sensor nodes to
few hundred sensor nodes in a region, which can
be less than 10 m in diameter [14]. The density can
be calculated according to [8] as
lðRÞ ¼ ðNpR2Þ=A ð2Þ
where N is the number of scattered sensor nodes in
region A; and R, the radio transmission range.
Basically, lðRÞ gives the number of nodes within
the transmission radius of each node in region A.
In addition, the number of nodes in a region
can be used to indicate the node density. The node
density depends on the application in which the
sensor nodes are deployed. For machine diagnosis
application, the node density is around 300 sensor
nodes in a 5 5 m2 region, and the density for the
vehicle tracking application is around 10 sensor
nodes per region [77]. In general, the density can
be as high as 20 sensor nodes/m3 [77]. A home may
contain around two dozens of home appliances
containing sensor nodes [67], but this number will
grow if sensor nodes are embedded into furniture
and other miscellaneous items. For habitat moni-
toring application, the number of sensor nodes
ranges from 25 to 100 per region [11]. The density
will be extremely high when a person normally
containing hundreds of sensor nodes, which are
embedded in eye glasses, clothing, shoes, watch,
jewelry, and human body, is sitting inside a sta-
dium watching a basketball, football, or baseball
game.
3.3. Production costs
Since the sensor networks consist of a large
number of sensor nodes, the cost of a single node
is very important to justify the overall cost of
the networks. If the cost of the network is more
expensive than deploying traditional sensors, then
the sensor network is not cost-justified. As a re-
sult, the cost of each sensor node has to be kept
low. The state-of-the-art technology allows a Blue-
tooth radio system to be less than 10$ [71]. Also,
the price of a PicoNode is targeted to be less than
1$ [70]. The cost of a sensor node should be much
less than 1$ in order for the sensor network to be
feasible [70]. The cost of a Bluetooth radio, which
is known to be a low-cost device, is even 10 times
more expensive than the targeted price for a sensor
node. Note that a sensor node also has some ad-
ditional units such as sensing and processing units
as described in Section 3.4. In addition, it may be
equipped with a location finding system, mobilizer,
or power generator depending on the applications
of the sensor networks. As a result, the cost of a
sensor node is a very challenging issue given the
amount of functionalities with a price of much less
than a dollar.
3.4. Hardware constraints
A sensor node is made up of four basic com-
ponents as shown in Fig. 1: a sensing unit, a pro-
cessing unit, a transceiver unit and a power unit.
They may also have application dependent addi-
tional components such as a location finding sys-
tem, a power generator and a mobilizer. Sensing
units are usually composed of two subunits: sen-
sors and analog to digital converters (ADCs). The
analog signals produced by the sensors based on
the observed phenomenon are converted to digital
signals by the ADC, and then fed into the pro-
cessing unit. The processing unit, which is gener-
ally associated with a small storage unit, manages
the procedures that make the sensor node collab-
orate with the other nodes to carry out the as-
signed sensing tasks. A transceiver unit connects
the node to the network. One of the most impor-
tant components of a sensor node is the power
unit. Power units may be supported by a power
scavenging unit such as solar cells. There are also
other subunits, which are application dependent.
Fig. 1. The components of a sensor node.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 399
Most of the sensor network routing techniques
and sensing tasks require the knowledge of loca-
tion with high accuracy. Thus, it is common that a
sensor node has a location finding system. A mo-
bilizer may sometimes be needed to move sensor
nodes when it is required to carry out the assigned
tasks.
All of these subunits may need to fit into a
matchbox-sized module [39]. The required size
may be smaller than even a cubic centimeter [69]
which is light enough to remain suspended in the
air. Apart from the size, there are also some other
stringent constraints for sensor nodes. These nodes
must [42]
• consume extremely low power,
• operate in high volumetric densities,
• have low production cost and be dispensable,
• be autonomous and operate unattended,
• be adaptive to the environment.
Since the sensor nodes are often inaccessible,
the lifetime of a sensor network depends on the
lifetime of the power resources of the nodes. Power
is also a scarce resource due to the size limitations.
For instance, the total stored energy in a smart
dust mote is on the order of 1 J [69]. For wireless
integrated network sensors (WINS) [86], the total
average system supply currents must be less than
30 lA to provide long operating life. WINS nodes
are powered from typical lithium (Li) coin cells
(2.5 cm in diameter and 1 cm in thickness) [86].
It is possible to extend the lifetime of the sensor
networks by energy scavenging [71], which means
extracting energy from the environment. Solar
cells is an example for the techniques used for
energy scavenging.
The transceiver unit of sensor nodes may be a
passive or active optical device as in smart dust
motes [69] or a radio frequency (RF) device. RF
communications require modulation, band pass,
filtering, demodulation and multiplexing circuitry,
which make them more complex and expensive.
Also, the path loss of the transmitted signal be-
tween two sensor nodes may be as high as the
fourth order exponent of the distance between
them, because the antennas of the sensor nodes are
close to the ground [69]. Nevertheless, RF com-
munication is preferred in most of the ongoing
sensor network research projects, because the pack-
ets conveyed in sensor networks are small, data
rates are low (i.e., generally less than 1 Hz) [71],
and the frequency re-use is high due to short
communication distances. These characteristics
also make it possible to use low duty cycle radio
electronics for sensor networks. However, design-
ing energy efficient and low duty cycle radio cir-
cuits is still technically challenging, and current
commercial radio technologies such as those used
in Bluetooth is not efficient enough for sensor net-
works because turning them on and off consumes
much energy [77].
Though the higher computational powers are
being made available in smaller and smaller pro-
cessors, processing and memory units of sensor
nodes are still scarce resources. For instance, the
processing unit of a smart dust mote prototype is a
4 MHz Atmel AVR 8535 micro-controller with 8
KB instruction flash memory, 512 bytes RAM and
512 bytes EEPROM [66]. TinyOS operating sys-
tem is used on this processor, which has 3500 bytes
OS code space and 4500 bytes available code
space. The processing unit of another sensor node
prototype, namely lAMPS wireless sensor node,
has a 59–206 MHz SA-1110 micro-processor [77].
A multithreaded l-OS operating system is run on
lAMPS wireless sensor nodes.
Most of the sensing tasks require the knowledge
of position. Since sensor nodes are generally de-
ployed randomly and run unattended, they need to
corporate with a location finding system. Location
finding systems are also required by many of the
proposed sensor network routing protocols as ex-
plained in Section 4. It is often assumed that each
sensor node will have a global positioning system
(GPS) unit that has at least 5 m accuracy [48]. In
[74] it is argued that equipping all sensor nodes
with a GPS is not viable for sensor networks. An
alternative approach where a limited number of
nodes use GPS and help the other nodes to find
out their locations terrestrially as proposed in [74].
3.5. Sensor network topology
Sheer numbers of inaccessible and unattended
sensor nodes, which are prone to frequent failures,
400 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
make topology maintenance a challenging task.
Hundreds to several thousands of nodes are de-
ployed throughout the sensor field. They are de-
ployed within tens of feet of each other [39]. The
node densities may be as high as 20 nodes/m3 [77].
Deploying high number of nodes densely requires
careful handling of topology maintenance. We
examine issues related to topology maintenance
and change in three phases:
3.5.1. Pre-deployment and deployment phase
Sensor nodes can be either thrown in mass or
placed one by one in the sensor field. They can be
deployed by
• dropping from a plane,
• delivering in an artillery shell, rocket or missile,
• throwing by a catapult (from a ship board, etc.),
• placing in factory, and
• placing one by one either by a human or a ro-
bot.
Although the sheer number of sensors and their
unattended deployment usually preclude placing
them according to a carefully engineered deploy-
ment plan, the schemes for initial deployment
must
• reduce the installation cost,
• eliminate the need for any pre-organization and
pre-planning,
• increase the flexibility of arrangement, and
• promote self-organization and fault tolerance.
3.5.2. Post-deployment phase
After deployment, topology changes are due to
change in sensor nodes’ [39,50]
• position,
• reachability (due to jamming, noise, moving ob-
stacles, etc.),
• available energy,
• malfunctioning, and
• task details.
Sensor nodes may be statically deployed.
However, device failure is a regular or common
event due to energy depletion or destruction. It is
also possible to have sensor networks with highly
mobile nodes. Besides, sensor nodes and the net-
work experience varying task dynamics, and they
may be a target for deliberate jamming. Therefore,
sensor network topologies are prone to frequent
changes after deployment.
3.5.3. Re-deployment of additional nodes phase
Additional sensor nodes can be re-deployed at
any time to replace the malfunctioning nodes or
due to changes in task dynamics. Addition of new
nodes poses a need to re-organize the network.
Coping with frequent topology changes in an ad
hoc network that has myriads of nodes and very
stringent power consumption constraints requires
special routing protocols. This issue is examined in
detail in Section 4.
3.6. Environment
Sensor nodes are densely deployed either very
close or directly inside the phenomenon to be ob-
served. Therefore, they usually work unattended in
remote geographic areas. They may be working
• in busy intersections,
• in the interior of a large machinery,
• at the bottom of an ocean,
• inside a twister,
• on the surface of an ocean during a tornado,
• in a biologically or chemically contaminated
field,
• in a battlefield beyond the enemy lines,
• in a home or a large building,
• in a large warehouse,
• attached to animals,
• attached to fast moving vehicles, and
• in a drain or river moving with current.
This list gives us an idea about under which
conditions sensor nodes are expected to work.
They work under high pressure in the bottom of
an ocean, in harsh environments such as a debris
or a battlefield, under extreme heat and cold such
as in the nozzle of an aircraft engine or in arctic
regions, and in an extremely noisy environment
such as under intentional jamming.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 401
3.7. Transmission media
In a multihop sensor network, communicating
nodes are linked by a wireless medium. These links
can be formed by radio, infrared or optical media.
To enable global operation of these networks, the
chosen transmission medium must be available
worldwide.
One option for radio links is the use of indus-
trial, scientific and medical (ISM) bands, which
offer license-free communication in most coun-
tries. The International Table of Frequency Allo-
cations, contained in Article S5 of the Radio
Regulations (Volume 1), species some frequency
bands that may be made available for ISM appli-
cations. They are listed in Table 1.
Some of these frequency bands are already be-
ing used for communication in cordless phone sys-
tems and wireless local area networks (WLANs).
For sensor networks, a small-sized, low-cost, ul-
tralow power transceiver is required. According to
[68], certain hardware constraints and the trade-off
between antenna efficiency and power consump-
tion limit the choice of a carrier frequency for such
transceivers to the ultrahigh frequency range. They
also propose the use of the 433 MHz ISM band in
Europe and the 915 MHz ISM band in North
America. The transceiver design issues in these two
bands are addressed in [25,51]. The main advan-
tages of using the ISM bands are the free radio,
huge spectrum allocation and global availability.
They are not bound to a particular standard,
thereby giving more freedom for the implementa-
tion of power saving strategies in sensor networks.
On the other hand, there are various rules and
constraints, like power limitations and harmful
interference from existing applications. These fre-
quency bands are also referred to as unregulated
frequencies.
Much of the current hardware for sensor nodes
is based upon RF circuit design. The lAMPS
wireless sensor node, described in [77], uses a Blue-
tooth-compatible 2.4 GHz transceiver with an in-
tegrated frequency synthesizer. The low-power
sensor device described in [93], uses a single chan-
nel RF transceiver operating at 916 MHz. The
WINS architecture [69] also uses radio links for
communication.
Another possible mode of internode communi-
cation in sensor networks is by infrared. Infrared
communication is license-free and robust to in-
terference from electrical devices. Infrared based
transceivers are cheaper and easier to build. Many
of today’s laptops, PDAs and mobile phones offer
an infrared data association interface. The main
drawback though, is the requirement of a line of
sight between sender and receiver. This makes in-
frared a reluctant choice for transmission medium
in the sensor network scenario.
An interesting development is that of the smart
dust mote [42], which is an autonomous sensing,
computing and communication system that uses op-
tical medium for transmission. Two transmission
schemes, passive transmission using a corner-cube
retroreflector (CCR), and active communication
using a laser diode and steerable mirrors, are ex-
amined in [88]. In the former, the mote does not
require an onboard light source. A configuration
of three mirrors (CCR) is used to communicate a
digital high or low. The latter uses an onboard
laser diode and an active-steered laser communi-
cation system to send a tightly collimated light
beam toward the intended receiver.
The unusual application requirements of sen-
sor networks make the choice of transmission
media more challenging. For instance, marine ap-
plications may require the use of the aqueous
transmission medium. Here, one would like to use
long-wavelength radiation that can penetrate the
water surface. Inhospitable terrain or battlefield
applications might encounter error prone channels
Table 1
Frequency bands available for ISM applications
Frequency band Center frequency
6765–6795 kHz 6780 kHz
13,553–13,567 kHz 13,560 kHz
26,957–27,283 kHz 27,120 kHz
40.66–40.70 MHz 40.68 MHz
433.05–434.79 MHz 433.92 MHz
902–928 MHz 915 MHz
2400–2500 MHz 2450 MHz
5725–5875 MHz 5800 MHz
24–24.25 GHz 24.125 GHz
61–61.5 GHz 61.25 GHz
122–123 GHz 122.5 GHz
244–246 GHz 245 GHz
402 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
and greater interference. Moreover, a sensor an-
tenna might not have the height and radiation
power of those in other wireless devices. Hence, the
choice of transmission medium must be supported
by robust coding and modulation schemes that ef-
ficiently model these vastly different channel char-
acteristics.
3.8. Power consumption
The wireless sensor node, being a micro-elec-
tronic device, can only be equipped with a limited
power source (<0.5 Ah, 1.2 V). In some applica-
tion scenarios, replenishment of power resources
might be impossible. Sensor node lifetime, there-
fore, shows a strong dependence on battery life-
time. In a multihop ad hoc sensor network, each
node plays the dual role of data originator and
data router. The disfunctioning of few nodes can
cause significant topological changes and might
require re-routing of packets and re-organization
of the network. Hence, power conservation and
power management take on additional impor-
tance. It is for these reasons that researchers are
currently focusing on the design of power-aware
protocols and algorithms for sensor networks.
In other mobile and ad hoc networks, power
consumption has been an important design factor,
but not the primary consideration, simply because
power resources can be replaced by the user. The
emphasis is more on QoS provisioning than the
power efficiency. In sensor networks though, power
efficiency is an important performance metric, di-
rectly influencing the network lifetime. Application
specific protocols can be designed by appropriately
trading off other performance metrics such as delay
and throughput with power efficiency.
The main task of a sensor node in a sensor field
is to detect events, perform quick local data pro-
cessing, and then transmit the data. Power con-
sumption can hence be divided into three domains:
sensing, communication, and data processing.
The sensing unit and its components were in-
troduced in Section 3.4. Sensing power varies with
the nature of applications. Sporadic sensing might
consume lesser power than constant event moni-
toring. The complexity of event detection also
plays a crucial role in determining energy expen-
diture. Higher ambient noise levels might cause
significant corruption and increase detection
complexity. Power consumption in data commu-
nication and processing are discussed in detail in
the following subsections.
3.8.1. Communication
Of the three domains, a sensor node expends
maximum energy in data communication. This
involves both data transmission and reception. It
can be shown that for short-range communication
with low radiation power (0 dbm), transmission
and reception energy costs are nearly the same.
Mixers, frequency synthesizers, voltage control
oscillators, phase locked loops (PLL) and power
amplifiers, all consume valuable power in the
transceiver circuitry. It is important that in this
computation we not only consider the active power
but also the start-up power consumption in the
transceiver circuitry. The start-up time, being of
the order of hundreds of micro-seconds, makes the
start-up power non-negligible. This high value for
the start-up time can be attributed to the lock time
of the PLL. As the transmission packet size is re-
duced, the start-up power consumption starts to
dominate the active power consumption. As a re-
sult, it is inefficient in turning the transceiver ON
and OFF, because a large amount of power is spent
in turning the transceiver back ON each time.
In [77], the authors present a formulation for
the radio power consumption (Pc) as
Pc ¼ NT½PTðTon þ TstÞ þ PoutðTonÞ	
þ NR½PRðRon þ RstÞ	 ð3Þ
where PT=R is the power consumed by the trans-
mitter/receiver; Pout, the output power of the trans-
mitter; T =Ron, the transmitter/receiver on time;
T=Rst, the transmitter/receiver start-up time and
NT=R, the number of times transmitter/receiver is
switched on per unit time, which depends on the
task and medium access control (MAC) scheme
used. Ton can further be rewritten as L=R, where L
is the packet size and R, the data rate. Today’s
state-of-the-art low power radio transceiver has
typical PT and PR values around 20 dbm and Pout
close to 0 dbm [59]. Note that PicoRadio aims at
a Pc value of 20 dbm.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 403
The design of a small-sized, low-cost, ultralow
power transceiver is discussed in [68]. A direct-
conversion architecture is proposed for the trans-
ceiver circuitry. Based on their results, the authors
present a power budget and estimate the power
consumption to be at least an order of magnitude
less than the values given above for PT and PR
values.
3.8.2. Data processing
Energy expenditure in data processing is much
less compared to data communication. The ex-
ample described in [69], effectively illustrates this
disparity. Assuming Rayleigh fading and fourth
power distance loss, the energy cost of transmit-
ting 1 KB a distance of 100 m is approximately the
same as that for executing 3 million instructions by
a 100 million instructions per second (MIPS)/W
processor. Hence, local data processing is crucial
in minimizing power consumption in a multihop
sensor network.
A sensor node must therefore have built-in
computational abilities and be capable of inter-
acting with its surroundings. Further limitations of
cost and size lead us to the choice of complemen-
tary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) technol-
ogy for the micro-processor. Unfortunately, this
has inbuilt limitations on energy efficiency. A
CMOS transistor pair draws power everytime it is
switched. This switching power is proportional to
the switching frequency, device capacitance (which
further depends on the area) and square of the
voltage swing. Reducing the supply voltage is
hence an effective means of lowering power con-
sumption in the active state. Dynamic voltage
scaling, explored in [52,64], aims to adapt proces-
sor power supply and operating frequency to
match workloads. When a micro-processor han-
dles time-varying computational load, simply re-
ducing the operating frequency during periods of
reduced activity results in a linear decrease in
power consumption, but reducing the operating
voltage gives us quadratic gains. On the other
hand, this compromises on peak performance of
the processor. Significant energy gains can be ob-
tained by recognizing that peak performance is not
always desired and therefore, the processor’s op-
erating voltage and frequency can be dynamically
adapted to instantaneous processing requirements.
In [80], the authors propose a workload predic-
tion scheme based on adaptive filtering of the
past workload profile and analyze several filter-
ing schemes. Other low power CPU organization
strategies are discussed in [28,49,91].
The power consumption in data processing (Pp)
can be formulated as follows:
Pp ¼ CV 2ddf þ VddI0eVdd=n
0VT ð4Þ
where C is the total switching capacitance; Vdd, the
voltage swing and f, the switching frequency. The
second term indicates the power loss due to leak-
age currents [80]. The lowering of threshold volt-
age to satisfy performance requirements results in
high subthreshold leakage currents. Coupled with
the low duty cycle operation of the micro-proces-
sor in a sensor node, the associated power loss
becomes significant [77].
It is to be noted that there may be some addi-
tional circuitry for data encoding and decoding.
Application specific integrated circuits may also be
used in some cases. In all these scenarios, the de-
sign of sensor network algorithms and protocols
are influenced by the corresponding power ex-
penditures, in addition to those that have been
discussed.
4. Sensor networks communication architecture
The sensor nodes are usually scattered in a
sensor field as shown in Fig. 2. Each of these scat-
tered sensor nodes has the capabilities to collect
data and route data back to the sink and the end
users. Data are routed back to the end user by a
multihop infrastructureless architecture through
the sink as shown in Fig. 2. The sink may commu-
nicate with the task manager node via Internet or
Satellite.
The protocol stack used by the sink and all
sensor nodes is given in Fig. 3. This protocol stack
combines power and routing awareness, integrates
data with networking protocols, communicates
power efficiently through the wireless medium, and
promotes cooperative efforts of sensor nodes. The
protocol stack consists of the application layer,
transport layer, network layer, data link layer,
404 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
physical layer, power management plane, mobility
management plane, and task management plane.
Depending on the sensing tasks, different types of
application software can be built and used on the
application layer. The transport layer helps to
maintain the flow of data if the sensor networks
application requires it. The network layer takes
care of routing the data supplied by the transport
layer. Since the environment is noisy and sensor
nodes can be mobile, the MAC protocol must be
power aware and able to minimize collision with
neighbors’ broadcast. The physical layer addresses
the needs of a simple but robust modulation,
transmission and receiving techniques. In addition,
the power, mobility, and task management planes
monitor the power, movement, and task distribu-
tion among the sensor nodes. These planes help
the sensor nodes coordinate the sensing task and
lower the overall power consumption.
The power management plane manages how a
sensor node uses its power. For example, the sen-
sor node may turn off its receiver after receiving a
message from one of its neighbors. This is to avoid
getting duplicated messages. Also, when the power
level of the sensor node is low, the sensor node
broadcasts to its neighbors that it is low in power
and cannot participate in routing messages. The
remaining power is reserved for sensing. The mo-
bility management plane detects and registers the
movement of sensor nodes, so a route back to the
user is always maintained, and the sensor nodes
can keep track of who are their neighbor sensor
nodes. By knowing who are the neighbor sensor
nodes, the sensor nodes can balance their power
and task usage. The task management plane bal-
ances and schedules the sensing tasks given to a
specific region. Not all sensor nodes in that region
are required to perform the sensing task at the
same time. As a result, some sensor nodes perform
the task more than the others depending on their
power level. These management planes are needed,
so that sensor nodes can work together in a power
efficient way, route data in a mobile sensor net-
work, and share resources between sensor nodes.
Without them, each sensor node will just work
individually. From the whole sensor network
standpoint, it is more efficient if sensor nodes can
collaborate with each other, so the lifetime of the
sensor networks can be prolonged. Before we dis-
cuss the need for the protocol layers and man-
agement planes in sensor networks, we map three
existing work [42,69,77] to the protocol stack as
shown in Fig. 3.
The so-called WINS is developed in [69], where
a distributed network and Internet access is pro-
vided to the sensor nodes, controls, and proces-
sors. Since the sensor nodes are in large number,
the WINS networks take advantage of this short
distance between sensor nodes to provide multi
hop communication and minimize power con-
sumption. The way in which data is routed back to
the user in the WINS networks follows the archi-
tecture specified in Fig. 2. The sensor node, i.e., a
WINS node, detects the environmental data, and
the data is routed hop by hop through the WINS
nodes until it reaches the sink, i.e., a WINS gate-
way. So the WINS nodes are sensor nodes A, B, C,
Fig. 3. The sensor networks protocol stack.
Fig. 2. Sensor nodes scattered in a sensor field.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 405
D, and E according to the architecture in Fig. 2.
The WINS gateway communicates with the user
through conventional network services, such as the
Internet. The protocol stack of a WINS network
consists of the application layer, network layer,
MAC layer, and physical layer. Also, it is explicitly
pointed out in [69] that a low-power protocol suite
that addresses the constraints of the sensor net-
works should be developed.
The smart dust motes [42], i.e., sensor nodes,
may be attached to objects or even float in the air
because of their small size and light weight. They
use MEMS technology for optical communication
and sensing. These motes may contain solar cells
to collect energy during the day, and they require a
line of sight to communicate optically with the
base station transceiver or other motes. Compar-
ing the smart dust communication architecture
with the one in Fig. 2, the smart dust mote, i.e.,
the sensor node, typically communicates directly
with the base station transceiver, i.e., sink. A peer-
to-peer communication is also possible, but there
are possible collision problems in medium access
due to ‘‘hidden nodes’’. The protocol layers in
which the smart dust motes incorporate are ap-
plication layer, MAC layer, and the physical layer.
Another approach to design protocols and al-
gorithms for sensor networks is driven by the re-
quirements of the physical layer [77]. The protocols
and algorithms should be developed according to
the choice of physical layer components, such as
the type of micro-processors, and the type of re-
ceivers. This bottom–up approach of the lAMPS
wireless sensor node also addresses the importance
of the application layer, network layer, MAC layer,
and physical layer as illustrated in Fig. 3 to be
tightly integrated with the sensor node’s hardware.
The lAMPS wireless sensor node also communi-
cates with the user according to the architecture
specified in Fig. 2. Different schemes, such as time
division multiple access (TDMA) versus frequency
division multiple access (FDMA) and binary mod-
ulation versus M-ary modulation are compared in
[77]. This bottom–up approach points out that
sensor network algorithms have to be aware of the
hardware and able to use special features of
the micro-processors and transceivers to minimize
the sensor node’s power consumption. This may
push toward a custom solution for different types
of sensor node design. Different types of sensor
nodes deployed also lead to different types of sen-
sor networks. This may also lead to different types
of collaborative algorithms.
4.1. Application layer
To the best of our knowledge, although many
application areas for sensor networks are defined
and proposed, potential application layer proto-
cols for sensor networks remains a largely unex-
plored region. In this survey, we examine three
possible application layer protocols, i.e., sensor
management protocol (SMP), task assignment and
data advertisement protocol (TADAP), and sensor
query and data dissemination protocol (SQDDP),
needed for sensor networks based on the proposed
schemes related to the other layers and sensor
network application areas. All of these application
layer protocols are open research issues.
4.1.1. Sensor management protocol
Designing an application layer management
protocol has several advantages. Sensor networks
have many different application areas, and ac-
cessing them through networks such as Internet is
aimed in some current projects [69]. An applica-
tion layer management protocol makes the hard-
ware and softwares of the lower layers transparent
to the sensor network management applications.
System administrators interact with sensor
networks by using SMP. Unlike many other net-
works, sensor networks consist of nodes that do
not have global IDs, and they are usually infra-
structureless. Therefore, SMP needs to access the
nodes by using attribute-based naming and loca-
tion-based addressing, which are explained in de-
tail in Section 4.3.
SMP is a management protocol that provides
the software operations needed to perform the
following administrative tasks:
• introducing the rules related to data aggrega-
tion, attribute-based naming and clustering to
the sensor nodes,
• exchanging data related to the location finding
algorithms,
406 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
• time synchronization of the sensor nodes,
• moving sensor nodes,
• turning sensor nodes on and off,
• querying the sensor network configuration and
the status of nodes, and re-configuring the sen-
sor network, and
• authentication, key distribution and security in
data communications.
The descriptions of some of these tasks are gi-
ven in [20,23,66,74,75].
4.1.2. Task assignment and data advertisement
protocol
Another important operation in the sensor net-
works is interest dissemination. Users send their
interest to a sensor node, a subset of the nodes or
whole network. This interest may be about a cer-
tain attribute of the phenomenon or a triggering
event. Another approach is the advertisement of
available data in which the sensor nodes advertise
the available data to the users, and the users query
the data which they are interested in. An applica-
tion layer protocol that provides the user software
with efficient interfaces for interest dissemination
is useful for lower layer operations, such as routing
as explained in Section 4.3.
4.1.3. Sensor query and data dissemination protocol
SQDDP provides user applications with inter-
faces to issue queries, respond to queries and col-
lect incoming replies. Note that these queries are
generally not issued to particular nodes. Instead,
attribute-based or location-based naming is pre-
ferred. For instance, ‘‘the locations of the nodes
that sense temperature higher than 70 F’’ is an
attribute-based query. Similarly, ‘‘temperatures
read by the nodes in region A’’ is an example for
location-based naming.
Sensor query and tasking language (SQTL) [75]
is proposed as an application that provides even
a larger set of services. SQTL supports three types
of events, which are defined by keywords receive,
every, and expire. Receive keyword defines events
generated by a sensor node when the sensor node
receives a message; every keyword defines events
occurred periodically due to a timer time-out; and
expire keyword defines the events occurred when a
timer is expired. If a sensor node receives a mes-
sage that is intended for it and contains a script,
the sensor node then executes the script. Although
SQTL is proposed, different types of SQDDP can
be developed for various applications. The use of
SQDDPs may be unique to each application.
4.1.4. Open research issues
Although SQTL is proposed, there are still
other application layer protocols need to be de-
veloped to provide a greater level of services. As
mentioned before, the SMP allows software to
perform administrative tasks such as moving sen-
sor nodes and time synchronization of the nodes.
Research developments should also focus on the
TADAP and SQDDP as described in Sections
4.1.2 and 4.1.3.
4.2. Transport layer
The need for transport layer is pointed out in
the literature [69,71]. This layer is especially nee-
ded when the system is planned to be accessed
through Internet or other external networks. How-
ever, to the best of our knowledge there has not
been any attempt thus far to propose a scheme or
to discuss the issues related to the transport layer
of a sensor network in literature. TCP with its
current transmission window mechanisms does
match to the extreme characteristics of the sensor
network environment. An approach such as TCP
splitting [4] may be needed to make sensor net-
works interact with other networks such as Inter-
net. In this approach, TCP connections are ended
at sink nodes, and a special transport layer pro-
tocol can handle the communications between
the sink node and sensor nodes. As a result, the
communication between the user and the sink
node is by UDP or TCP via the Internet or Sat-
ellite; on the other hand, the communication be-
tween the sink and sensor nodes may be purely by
UDP type protocols, because each sensor node has
limited memory.
Unlike protocols such as TCP, the end-to-end
communication schemes in sensor networks are
not based on global addressing. These schemes
must consider that attribute-based naming is used
to indicate the destinations of the data packets.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 407
The attributed-based naming is described in Sec-
tion 4.3. The factors such as power consumption
and scalability, and the characteristics like data-
centric routing makes sensor networks need dif-
ferent handling in transport layer. Thus, these
requirements stress the need for new types of
transport layer protocols.
4.2.1. Open research issues
The development of transport layer protocols is
a challenging effort because the sensor nodes are
influenced by the factors explained in Section 3,
especially the hardware constraints such as the
limited power and memory. As a result, each
sensor node cannot store large amount of data like
a server in the Internet, and acknowledgements are
too costly for sensor networks. Therefore, new
schemes that split the end-to-end communication
probably at the sinks may be needed where UDP
type protocols are used in the sensor network and
traditional TCP/UDP protocols in the Internet or
Satellite network.
4.3. Network layer
Sensor nodes are scattered densely in a field
either close to or inside the phenomenon as shown
in Fig. 2. As discussed in Section 1, special mul-
tihop wireless routing protocols between the sen-
sor nodes and the sink node are needed. The ad
hoc routing techniques already proposed in the
literature [65] do not usually fit the requirements of
the sensor networks due to the reasons explained
in Section 1. The networking layer of sensor net-
works is usually designed according to the fol-
lowing principles:
• Power efficiency is always an important consid-
eration.
• Sensor networks are mostly data centric.
• Data aggregation is useful only when it does not
hinder the collaborative effort of the sensor
nodes.
• An ideal sensor network has attribute-based ad-
dressing and location awareness.
One of the following approaches can be used to
select an energy efficient route. We use Fig. 4 to
describe each of these approaches, where node T is
the source node that senses the phenomena. It has
the following four possible routes to communicate
with the sink:
• Route 1: Sink-A-B-T, total PA¼ 4, total a ¼ 3,
• Route 2: Sink-A-B-C-T, total PA¼ 6, total
a ¼ 6,
• Route 3: Sink-D-T, total PA¼ 3, total a ¼ 4,
• Route 4: Sink-E-F-T, total PA¼ 5, total a ¼ 6,
where PA is the available power and ai, the energy
required to transmit a data packet through the
related link.
• Maximum available power (PA) route: The
route that has maximum total available power
is preferred. The total PA is calculated by sum-
ming the PAs of each node along the route.
Based on this approach, Route 2 is selected in
Fig. 4. However, Route 2 includes the nodes
in Route 1 and an extra node. Therefore, al-
though it has a higher total PA, it is not a power
efficient one. As a result, it is important not to
consider the routes derived by extending the
routes that can connect the sensor to the sink
as an alternative route. Eliminating Route 2,
we select Route 4 as our power efficient route
when we use maximum PA scheme.
• Minimum energy (ME) route: The route that
consumes ME to transmit the data packets be-
tween the sink and the sensor node is the ME
route. As shown in Fig. 4, Route 1 is the ME
route.
Fig. 4. The power efficiency of the routes.
408 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
• Minimum hop (MH) route: The route that
makes the MH to reach the sink is preferred.
Route 3 in Fig. 4 is the most efficient route
based on this scheme. Note that the ME scheme
selects the same route as the MH when the same
amount of energy, i.e., all a are the same, is used
on every link. Therefore, when nodes broadcast
with same power level without any power con-
trol, MH is then equivalent to ME.
• Maximum minimum PA node route: The route
along which the minimum PA is larger than
the minimum PAs of the other routes is pre-
ferred. In Fig. 4, Route 3 is the most efficient
and Route 1 is the second efficient paths. This
scheme precludes the risk of using up a sensor
node with low PA much earlier than the others
because they are on a route with nodes which
has very high PAs.
Another important issue is that routing may be
based on data centric. In data-centric routing, the
interest dissemination is performed to assign the
sensing tasks to the sensor nodes. There are two
approaches used for interest dissemination: sinks
broadcast the interest [39], and sensor nodes
broadcast an advertisement for the available data
[35] and wait for a request from the interested sinks.
The data-centric routing requires attribute-
based naming [20,22,54,75]. For attribute-based
naming, the users are more interested in querying
an attribute of the phenomenon, rather than que-
rying an individual node. For instance,‘‘the areas
where the temperature is over 70 F’’ is a more
common query than ‘‘the temperature read by a
certain node’’. The attribute-based naming is used
to carry out queries by using the attributes of the
phenomenon. The attribute-based naming also
makes broadcasting, attribute-based multicasting,
geo-casting and any-casting important for sensor
networks.
The data aggregation is a technique used to
solve the implosion and overlap problems in data-
centric routing [35]. In this technique, a sensor
network is usually perceived as a reverse multicast
tree as shown in Fig. 5 where the sink asks the
sensor nodes to report the ambient condition of
the phenomena. Data coming from multiple sensor
nodes are aggregated as if they are about the same
attribute of the phenomenon when they reach the
same routing node on the way back to the sink.
For example, sensor node E aggregates the data
from sensor nodes A and B while sensor node F
aggregates the data from sensor nodes C and D
as shown in Fig. 5. Data aggregation can be per-
ceived as a set of automated methods of combining
the data that comes from many sensor nodes into a
set of meaningful information [34]. With this re-
spect, data aggregation is known as data fusion
[35]. Also, care must be taken when aggregating
data, because the specifics of the data, e.g., the
locations of reporting sensor nodes, should not be
left out. Such specifics may be needed by certain
applications.
One other important function of the network
layer is to provide internetworking with external
networks such as other sensor networks, command
and control systems and the Internet. In one sce-
nario, the sink nodes can be used as a gateway to
other networks. While another scenario is creating
a backbone by connecting sink nodes together and
making this backbone access other networks via a
gateway.
To provide insight into current research on the
networking layer, we discuss different schemes
proposed for the sensor networks for the rest of
this section.
Small minimum energy communication network
(SMECN): A protocol is developed in [73], which
computes an energy efficient subnetwork, namely
the MECN, when a communication network is
given. A new algorithm called SMECN is pro-
posed by [48] to also provide such a subnetwork.
Fig. 5. Example of data aggregation.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 409
The subnetwork, i.e., subgraph, constructed by
SMECN is smaller than the one that is constructed
by MECN if the broadcast region is circular
around a broadcaster for a given power setting.
The subgraph G of the graph G0, which represents
the sensor network, minimizes the energy usage
satisfying the following conditions: the number of
edges in G is less than in G0 while containing all
nodes in G0; if two nodes, u and v, are connected in
graph G0, they are also connected in subgraph G;
the energy required to transmit data from node u
to all its neighbors in subgraph G is less than the
energy required to transmit to all its neighbors
in graph G0. The SMECN also follows the ME
property, which MECN uses to construct the
subnetwork. The ME property is such that there
exists a ME path in subgraph G between node u
and v for every pair ðu; vÞ of nodes that are con-
nected in G0.
The power required to transmit data between
node u and v is modelled as pðu; vÞ ¼ tdðu; vÞn,
where t is a constant; dðu; vÞ, the distance between
node u and v; and nP 2, the path-loss exponent
experienced by radio transmission. Also, the
power needed to receive data is c. Since pðu; vÞ
increases by nth power of the distance between
node u and v, it may take less power to relay data
than directly transmit data between node u and v.
The path between node u (i.e., u0) and v (i.e., uk) is
represented by r, where r ¼ ðu0; u1; . . . ; ukÞ in the
subgraph G ¼ ðV ;EÞ is an ordered list of nodes
such that the pair ðui; uiþ1Þ 2 E. Also, the length of
r is k. The total power consumption between node
u0 and uk is
CðrÞ ¼
Xk1
i¼0
ðpðui; uiþ1Þ þ cÞ ð5Þ
where pðui; uiþ1Þ is the power required to transmit
data between node ui, and uiþ1; and c, the power
required to receive data. A path r is a ME path
from u0 to uk if CðrÞ6Cðr0Þ for all paths r0 between
node u0 and uk in G0. As a result, a subgraph G has
the ME property if for all ðu; vÞ 2 V , there exists a
path r in G, which is a ME path in G0 between
node u and v.
Flooding: Flooding is an old technique that can
also be used for routing in sensor networks. In
flooding, each node receiving a data or manage-
ment packet repeats it by broadcasting, unless a
maximum number of hops for the packet is
reached or the destination of the packet is the
node itself. Flooding is a reactive technique, and it
does not require costly topology maintenance and
complex route discovery algorithms. However, it
has several deficiencies such as [35]:
• Implosion: Implosion is a situation where dupli-
cated messages are sent to the same node. For
example, if sensor node A has N neighbor sen-
sor nodes that are also the neighbors of sensor
node B, the sensor node B receives N copies of
the message sent by sensor node A.
• Overlap: If two nodes share the same observing
region, both of them may sense the same stimuli
at the same time. As a result, neighbor nodes re-
ceive duplicated messages.
• Resource blindness: The flooding protocol does
not take into account of the available energy re-
sources. An energy resource aware protocol
must take into account the amount of energy
available to them at all time.
Gossiping: A derivation of flooding is gossiping
[32] in which nodes do not broadcast but send the
incoming packets to a randomly selected neighbor.
A sensor node randomly selects one of its neigh-
bors to send the data. Once the neighbor node
receives the data, it selects randomly another sen-
sor node. Although this approach avoid the im-
plosion problem by just having one copy of a
message at any node, it takes long time to propa-
gate the message to all sensor nodes.
Sensor protocols for information via negotiation
(SPIN): A family of adaptive protocols called
SPIN [35] is designed to address the deficiencies
of classic flooding by negotiation and resource
adaptation. The SPIN family of protocols are de-
signed based on two basic ideas: sensor nodes
operate more efficiently and conserve energy by
sending data that describe the sensor data instead
of sending the whole data, e.g., image, and sensor
nodes must monitor the changes in their energy
resources.
SPIN has three types of messages, i.e., ADV,
REQ, and DATA. Before sending a DATA
410 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
message, the sensor broadcasts an ADV message
containing a descriptor, i.e., meta-data, of the
DATA as shown in Step 1 of Fig. 6. If a neighbor
is interested in the data, it sends a REQ message
for the DATA and DATA is sent to this neighbor
sensor node as shown in Steps 2 and 3 of Fig. 6,
respectively. The neighbor sensor node then re-
peats this process as illustrated in Steps 4, 5, and 6
of Fig. 6. As a result, the sensor nodes in the entire
sensor network, which are interested in the data,
will get a copy.
Note that SPIN is based on data-centric routing
[35] where the sensor nodes broadcast an adver-
tisement for the available data and wait for a re-
quest from interested sinks.
Sequential assignment routing (SAR): In [83], a
set of algorithms, which perform organization,
management and mobility management operations
in sensor networks, are proposed. Self-organizing
MAC for sensor networks (SMACS) is a distrib-
uted protocol that enables a collection of sensor
nodes to discover their neighbors and establish
transmission/reception schedules without the need
for a central management system. The eavesdrop
and register (EAR) algorithm is designed to sup-
port seamless interconnection of the mobile nodes.
The EAR algorithm is based on the invitation
messages and on the registration of stationary
nodes by the mobile nodes. The SAR algorithm
creates multiple trees where the root of each tree
is an one hop neighbor from the sink. Each tree
grows outward from the sink while avoiding nodes
with very low QoS (i.e., low throughput/high de-
lay) and energy reserves. At the end of this pro-
cedure, most nodes belong to multiple trees. This
allows a sensor node to choose a tree to relay its
information back to the sink. There are two pa-
rameters associated with each path, i.e., a tree,
back to the sink:
• Energy resources: The energy resources is esti-
mated by the number of packets, which the sen-
sor node can send, if the sensor node has
exclusive use of the path.
• Additive QoS metric: A high additive QoS met-
ric means low QoS.
The SAR algorithm selects the path based on
the energy resources and additive QoS metric of
each path, and the packet’s priority level. As a
result, each sensor node selects its path to route the
data back to the sink.
Also, two more algorithms called single winner
election and multiwinner election handle the nec-
essary signaling and data transfer tasks in local
cooperative information processing.
Low-energy adaptive clustering hierarchy
(LEACH): LEACH is a clustering-based protocol
that minimizes energy dissipation in sensor net-
works [34]. The purpose of LEACH is to randomly
select sensor nodes as cluster-heads, so the high-
energy dissipation in communicating with the base
station is spread to all sensor nodes in the sensor
network. The operation of LEACH is separated
into two phases, the set-up phase and the steady
phase. The duration of the steady phase is longer
than the duration of the set-up phase in order to
minimize the overhead.
During the set-up phase, a sensor node chooses
a random number between 0 and 1. If this random
number is less than the threshold T ðnÞ, the sensor
node is a cluster-head. T ðnÞ is calculated as
T ðnÞ ¼
P
1 P ½rmodð1=P Þ	 if n 2 G;
0 otherwise;
8<
:
where P is the desired percentage to become a
cluster-head; r, the current round; and G, the set of
nodes that have not being selected as a cluster-
head in the last 1=P rounds. After the cluster-
heads are selected, the cluster-heads advertise to all
Fig. 6. The SPIN protocol [35].
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 411
sensor nodes in the network that they are the new
cluster-heads. Once the sensor nodes receive the
advertisement, they determine the cluster that they
want to belong based on the signal strength of the
advertisement from the cluster-heads to the sensor
nodes. The sensor nodes inform the appropriate
cluster-heads that they will be a member of the
cluster. Afterwards, the cluster-heads assign the
time on which the sensor nodes can send data to
the cluster-heads based on a TDMA approach.
During the steady phase, the sensor nodes can
begin sensing and transmitting data to the cluster-
heads. The cluster-heads also aggregate data from
the nodes in their cluster before sending these data
to the base station. After a certain period of time
spent on the steady phase, the network goes into
the set-up phase again and entering into another
round of selecting the cluster-heads.
Directed diffusion: The directed diffusion data
dissemination paradigm is proposed in [39] where
the sink sends out interest, which is a task de-
scription, to all sensors as shown in Fig. 7(a). The
task descriptors are named by assigning attribute-
value pairs that describe the task. Each sensor
node then stores the interest entry in its cache. The
interest entry contains a timestamp field and sev-
eral gradient fields. As the interest is propagated
throughout the sensor network, the gradients from
the source back to the sink are set up as shown in
Fig. 7(b). When the source has data for the inter-
est, the source sends the data along the interest’s
gradient path as shown in Fig. 7(c). The interest
and data propagation and aggregation are deter-
mined locally. Also, the sink must refresh and re-
inforce the interest when it starts to receive data
from the source. Note that the directed diffusion is
based on data-centric routing where the sink
broadcasts the interest.
4.3.1. Open research issues
An overview of the protocols proposed for
sensor networks is given in Table 2. These proto-
cols need to be improved or new protocols need to
be developed to address higher topology changes
and higher scalability. Also, new internetworking
schemes should be developed to allow easy com-
munication between the sensor networks and ex-
ternal networks, e.g., Internet.
4.4. Data link layer
The data link layer is responsible for the mul-
tiplexing of data streams, data frame detection,
medium access and error control. It ensures reli-
able point-to-point and point-to-multipoint con-
nections in a communication network. In the
following two subsections, we discuss some of the
medium access and error control strategies for
sensor networks.
4.4.1. Medium access control
The MAC protocol in a wireless multihop self-
organizing sensor network must achieve two goals.
The first is the creation of the network infra-
structure. Since thousands of sensor nodes are
densely scattered in a sensor field, theMAC scheme
must establish communication links for data trans-
fer. This forms the basic infrastructure needed for
wireless communication hop by hop and gives
the sensor network self-organizing ability. The
second objective is to fairly and efficiently share
communication resources between sensor nodes.
Traditional MAC schemes can all be categorized
based on their resource sharing mechanisms. Table
3 provides an insight into the advantages and
disadvantages, and application domains of these
classes.
Reasons why existing MAC protocols cannot be
used: It has been emphasized in earlier sections
Fig. 7. An example of directed diffusion [39]: (a) propagate
interest, (b) set up gradient and (c) send data.
412 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
that novel protocols and algorithms are needed to
effectively tackle the unique resource constraints
and application requirements of sensor networks.
To illustrate the impact of these constraints, let
us take a closer look at MAC schemes in other
wireless networks and analyze why they cannot be
adopted into the sensor network scenario.
In a cellular system, the base stations form a
wired backbone. A mobile node is only a single hop
away from the nearest base station. This type of
network is also referred to as infrastructure based
in literature. The primary goal of the MAC pro-
tocol in such systems is the provision of high QoS
and bandwidth efficiency. Power conservation as-
sumes only secondary importance as base stations
have unlimited power supply and the mobile user
can replenish exhausted batteries in the handset.
Hence, medium access is invariably inclined toward
a dedicated resource assignment strategy. Such an
access scheme is impractical for sensor networks as
there is no central controlling agent like the base
station. This makes network-wide synchronization
a difficult proposition. Moreover, power efficiency
directly influences network lifetime in a sensor
network and hence is of prime importance.
Bluetooth and the mobile ad hoc network
(MANET) are probably the closest peers to the
sensor networks. Bluetooth is an infrastructure-
less short-range wireless system intended to re-
place the cable between electronic user terminals
with RF links. The Bluetooth topology is a star
network where a master node can have up to
seven slave nodes wirelessly connected to it to
form a piconet. Each piconet uses a centrally as-
signed TDMA schedule and frequency hopping
pattern. Transmission power is typically around
20 dBm and the transmission range is of the or-
der of tens of meters. The MAC protocol in a
MANET has the task of forming the network
infrastructure and maintaining it in the face of
mobility. Hence, the primary goal is the provision
of high QoS under mobile conditions. Al-
though the nodes are portable battery-powered
devices, they can be replaced by the user and
hence, power consumption is only of secondary
importance.
Table 2
An overview of network layer schemes
Network layer scheme Description
SMECN [48] Creates a subgraph of the sensor network that contains the ME path
Flooding Broadcasts data to all neighbor nodes regardless if they receive it before or not
Gossiping [32] Sends data to one randomly selected neighbor
SPIN [35] Sends data to sensor nodes only if they are interested; has three types of messages, i.e., ADV, REQ,
and DATA
SAR [83] Creates multiple trees where the root of each tree is one hop neighbor from the sink; select a tree for
data to be routed back to the sink according to the energy resources and additive QoS metric
LEACH [34] Forms clusters to minimize energy dissipation
Directed diffusion [39] Sets up gradients for data to flow from source to sink during interest dissemination
Table 3
Categorization of MAC protocols
Category Resource sharing mode Application domain Disadvantages
Dedicated assignment
or fixed allocation
Pre-determined fixed allocation Appropriate for continuous
traffic and provides bounded
delay
Inefficient for bursty traffic
Demand based According to demand or user
request
Useful for variable rate and
multimedia traffic
Additional overhead and delay
due to reservation process
Random access or
contention based
Channel contention when trans-
mission packets are available
Suitable for bursty traffic Inefficient for delay-sensitive
traffic
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 413
In contrast to these two systems, the sensor
network may have a much larger number of nodes.
The transmission power (0 dBm) and radio range
of a sensor node is much less than those of the
Bluetooth or the MANET. Topology changes
are more frequent in a sensor network and can be
attributed both to node mobility and failure. The
mobility rate can also be expected to be much
lower than in the MANET. In essence, the primary
importance of power conservation to prolong
network lifetime in a sensor network means that
none of the existing Bluetooth or MANET MAC
protocols can be directly used.
MAC for sensor networks: It is evident from our
previous discussions that the MAC protocol for
sensor networks must have built-in power conser-
vation, mobility management and failure recovery
strategies. Though many schemes for medium ac-
cess have been proposed for MANETs [85,94,95]
the design of an efficient MAC scheme for the new
regime of sensor networks is still an open research
issue. Thus far, both fixed allocation and random
access versions of medium access have been pro-
posed [83,93]. Demand-based MAC schemes may
be unsuitable for sensor networks due their large
messaging overhead and link set-up delay. Power
conservation is achieved by the use of power saving
operation modes and by preferring time-outs to
acknowledgements, wherever possible.
It has been reasoned in [69] that since radios
must be turned off during idling for precious
power savings, the MAC scheme should include a
variant of TDMA. Such a medium access mecha-
nism is presented in [83]. Further, contention-
based channel access is deemed unsuitable due
to their requirement to monitor the channel at
all times. It must be noted however, that random
medium access can also support power conserva-
tion, as in the IEEE 802.11 standard for WLANs,
by turning off radios depending on the status of
the net allocation vector. Constant listening times
and adaptive rate control schemes can also help
achieve energy efficiency in random access schemes
for sensor networks [93]. Some of the proposed
MAC protocols are discussed next.
SMACS and the EAR algorithm: The SMACS
protocol [83] achieves network start-up and link-
layer organization, and the EAR algorithm en-
ables seamless connection of mobile nodes in a
sensor network. SMACS is a distributed infra-
structure-building protocol which enables nodes to
discover their neighbors and establish transmis-
sion/reception schedules for communication with-
out the need for any local or global master nodes.
In this protocol, the neighbor discovery and
channel assignment phases are combined so that
by the time nodes hear all their neighbors, they
would have formed a connected network. A com-
munication link consists of a pair of time slots
operating at a randomly chosen, but fixed fre-
quency (or frequency hopping sequence). This is
a feasible option in sensor networks, since, as
mentioned earlier in Section 3.7, the available
bandwidth can be expected to be much higher than
the maximum data rate for sensor nodes. Such
a scheme avoids the necessity for network-wide
synchronization, although communicating neigh-
bors in a subnet need to be time synchronized.
Power conservation is achieved by using a random
wake-up schedule during the connection phase and
by turning the radio off during idle time slots.
The EAR protocol [83] attempts to offer con-
tinuous service to the mobile nodes under both
mobile and stationary conditions. Here, the mobile
nodes assume full control of the connection pro-
cess and also decide when to drop connections,
thereby minimizing messaging overhead. The EAR
is transparent to the SMACS, so that the SMACS
is functional until the introduction of mobile nodes
into the network. In this model, the network is
assumed to be mainly static, i.e., any mobile node
has a number of stationary nodes in its vicinity. A
drawback of such a time-slot assignment scheme is
the possibility that members already belonging to
different subnets might never get connected.
CSMA based medium access: A CSMA based
MAC scheme for sensor networks is presented in
[93]. Traditional CSMA based schemes are deemed
inappropriate as they all make the fundamental
assumption of stochastically distributed traffic and
tend to support independent point-to-point flows.
On the contrary, the MAC protocol for sensor
networks must be able to support variable, but
highly correlated and dominantly periodic traffic.
Any CSMA based medium access scheme has two
important components, the listening mechanism
414 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
and the backoff scheme. As reported and based on
simulations in [93], the constant listen periods
are energy efficient and the introduction of ran-
dom delay provides robustness against repeated
collisions. Fixedwindow and binary exponential de-
crease backoff schemes are recommended to main-
tain proportional fairness in the network. A phase
change at the application level is also advocated to
get over any capturing effects. It is proposed in this
work that the energy consumed per unit of suc-
cessful communication can serve as a good indi-
cator of energy efficiency.
An adaptive transmission rate control (ARC)
scheme, that achieves medium access fairness by
balancing the rates of originating and route-thru
traffic is also discussed here. This ensures that
nodes closer to the access point are not favored
over those deep down into the network. The ARC
controls the data origination rate of a node in
order to allow the route-thru traffic to propagate.
A progressive signalling mechanism is used to in-
form the nodes to lower their data originating rate.
The ARC uses a linear increase and multiplicative
decrease approach [57]. While the linear increase
leads to more aggressive channel competition, the
multiplicative decrease controls transmission fail-
ure penalty. Since dropping route-thru traffic is
costlier, the associated penalty is lesser than that
for originating data transmission failure. This en-
sures that route-thru traffic is preferred over the
originating traffic.
The computational nature of this scheme makes
it more energy efficient than handshaking and
messaging schemes using the radio. The ARC also
attempts to reduce the problem of hidden nodes
in a multihop network by constantly tuning the
transmission rate and performing phase changes,
so that periodic streams are less likely to repeat-
edly collide.
Hybrid TDMA/FDMA based: This centrally
controlled MAC scheme is introduced in [77]. In
this work, the effect of non-ideal physical layer
electronics on the design of MAC protocols for
sensor networks is investigated. The system is as-
sumed to be made up of energy constrained sensor
nodes that communicate to a single, nearby, high-
powered base station (<10 m). Specifically, the
machine monitoring application of sensor net-
works, with strict data latency requirements, is
considered and a hybrid TDMA–FDMA medium
access scheme is proposed. While a pure TDMA
scheme dedicates the full bandwidth to a single
sensor node, a pure FDMA scheme allocates min-
imum signal bandwidth per node. Despite the fact
that a pure TDMA scheme minimizes the transmit
on-time, it is not always preferred due to the as-
sociated time synchronization costs. An analytical
formula is derived in [77] to find the optimum
number of channels which gives the lowest system
power consumption. This determines the hybrid
TDMA–FDMA scheme to be used. The optimum
number of channels is found to depend on the
ratio of the power consumption of the transmitter
to that of the receiver. If the transmitter consumes
more power, a TDMA scheme is favored, while
the scheme leans toward FDMA when the receiver
consumes greater power.
To get a deeper insight into the salient features
and effectiveness of MAC protocols for sensor
networks, we present a qualitative overview in
Table 4. It also serves as an indicator for compar-
ative evaluation of some of the MAC schemes
Table 4
Qualitative overview of MAC protocols for sensor networks
MAC protocol Channel access mode Sensor network specifics Power conservation
SMACS and EAR [83] Fixed allocation of duplex
time slots at fixed frequency
Exploitation of large available
bandwidth compared to sensor data
rate
Random wake up during set-up
and turning radio off while idle
Hybrid TDMA/FDMA
[77]
Centralized frequency and
time division
Optimum number of channels cal-
culated for minimum system energy
Hardware based approach for
system energy minimization
CSMA based [93] Contention-based random
access
Application phase shift and pre-
transmit delay
Constant listening time for
energy efficiency
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 415
proposed thus far in literature. The column titled
sensor network specifics aims to illustrate the novel
and important features in each of these schemes
that enable their application in the sensor network
domain. They present the deviations and differ-
ences from traditional MAC schemes, which by
themselves would not be applicable. We also out-
line how each of these schemes achieves power ef-
ficiency.
4.4.2. Power saving modes of operation
Regardless of which type of medium access
scheme is used for sensor networks, it certainly
must support the operation of power saving modes
for the sensor node. The most obvious means of
power conservation is to turn the transceiver off
when it is not required. Though this power saving
method seemingly provides significant energy
gains, an important point that must not be over-
looked is that sensor nodes communicate using
short data packets. As explained in Section 3.8.1,
the shorter the packets, the more the dominance
of start-up energy. In fact, if we blindly turn the
radio off during each idling slot, over a period of
time, we might end up expending more energy
than if the radio had been left on. As a result,
operation in a power saving mode is energy effi-
cient only if the time spent in that mode is greater
than a certain threshold. There can be a number of
such useful modes of operation for the wireless
sensor node, depending on the number of states
of the micro-processor, memory, A/D convertor
and the transceiver. Each of these modes can be
characterized by its power consumption and the
latency overhead, which is the transition power
to and from that mode. A dynamic power man-
agement scheme for wireless sensor networks
is discussed in [80] where five power saving modes
are proposed and intermode transition policies
are investigated. The threshold time is found
to depend on the transition times and the indi-
vidual power consumption of the modes in ques-
tion.
4.4.3. Error control
Another important function of the data link
layer is the error control of transmission data. Two
important modes of error control in communica-
tion networks are the forward error correction
(FEC) and automatic repeat request (ARQ). To
the best of our knowledge, the application of ARQ
schemes is thus far unexplored in the regime of
sensor networks, though many adaptive and low-
power versions are existent in literature for other
mobile networks [44,97]. The usefulness of ARQ
in sensor network applications is limited by the
additional re-transmission cost and overhead. On
the other hand, decoding complexity is greater
in FEC, as error correction capabilities need to be
built-in. Considering this, simple error control
codes with low-complexity encoding and decoding
might present the best solutions for sensor net-
works. In the design of such a scheme it is im-
portant to have good knowledge of the channel
characteristics and implementation techniques.
In the following subsection, we briefly review the
motivation and basic design considerations for
FEC, which in turn will help us understand the
requirements for sensor networks.
FEC: Link reliability is an important parameter
in the design of any wireless network, and more so
in sensor networks, due to the unpredictable and
harsh nature of channels encountered in various
application scenarios. Some of the applications
like mobile tracking and machine monitoring re-
quire high data precision. Channel bit error rate
(BER) is a good indicator of link reliability. The
BER can be shown to be directly proportional to
the symbol rate Rs and inversely proportional to
both the received SNR ðEs=N0Þ and the transmitter
power level Pout. Let us assume that a coding
scheme with rate R is used. If the data symbol
transmission rate remains the same as that before
coding, the total symbol transmission rate must
increase to Rs=R. Also, if the transmission power is
unchanged, the received energy per symbol de-
creases to REs. The BER measured at the decoder
input, the raw BER, is hence greater than the BER
without coding. This loss is overcome in the de-
coder by exploiting the redundancy and structure
of the code to correct some of the transmission
errors. In fact, a good choice of the error cor-
recting code can result in several orders of mag-
nitude reduction in BER and an overall gain. The
coding gain is generally expressed in terms of
the additional transmit power needed to obtain the
416 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
same BER without coding. A simple (15,11) Ham-
ming code is found to reduce BER by almost 103
and ensures a coding gain of 1.5 dB for binary
phase shift keying modulated data and additive
white Gaussian noise model [92].
Reliable data communication can hence be
provided either by increasing the output transmit
power ðPoutÞ or the use of suitable FEC. Since a
sensor node has limited power resources, the for-
mer option is not feasible. We hence turn to FEC.
As we have seen, FEC can achieve significant
reduction in the BER for any given value of Pout.
However, we must take into account the additional
processing power that goes into encoding and de-
coding. This processing power is drawn from the
limited resources possessed by the node. This
might be critical for sensor networks though it can
be negligibly small in other wireless networks. If
the associated processing power is greater than the
coding gain, then the whole process in energy
inefficiency and the system is better off without
coding. On the other hand, FEC is a valuable asset
in sensor networks, if the sum of the encoding and
decoding processing powers is less than the trans-
mission power savings. It is to be noted that all
these computations and comparisons must be
carried out for a given, in most cases application
specific, BER.
Though adaptive FEC has received some at-
tention in other wireless networks, it remains lar-
gely unexplored in sensor networks. The impact of
adapting packet size and error control on energy
efficiency in wireless systems is investigated in
[47,58]. In [76], the authors examine this issue for
sensor networks. They assume a frequency non-
selective, slow Rayleigh fading channel and use
convolutional codes for FEC. Based on their anal-
ysis, they conclude that the average energy con-
sumption per useful bit shows an exponential
increase with the constraint length of the code and
is independent of the code rate. Moreover, they
find that FEC is generally inefficient if the decoding
is performed using a micro-processor and recom-
mend an on-board dedicated Viterbi decoder. To
the best of our knowledge, other coding schemes
remain unexplored. Simple encoding techniques
that enable easy decoding might present an energy
efficient solution for sensor networks.
4.4.4. Open research issues
Though some medium access schemes have
been proposed for sensor networks, the area is still
largely open to research. So is the mainly unex-
plored domain of error control in sensor networks.
Key open research issues include:
• MAC for mobile sensor networks: The proposed
SMACS and EAR [83] perform well only in a
mainly static sensor networks. It is assumed in
the connection schemes that a mobile node
has many static nodes as neighbors. These algo-
rithms must be improved to deal with more ex-
tensive mobility in the sensor nodes and targets.
Mobility issues, carrier sensing, and backoff
mechanisms for the CSMA based scheme also
remain largely unexplored.
• Determination of lower bounds on the energy re-
quired for sensor network self-organization.
• Error control coding schemes: Error control is
extremely important in some sensor network
applications like mobile tracking and machine
monitoring. Convolutional coding effects have
been considered in [77]. The feasibility of other
error control schemes in sensor networks needs
to be explored.
• Power saving modes of operation: To prolong
network lifetime, a sensor node must enter into
periods of reduced activity when running low on
battery power. The enumeration and transition
management for these nodes is open to research.
Some ideas are outlined in [80].
4.5. Physical layer
The physical layer is responsible for frequency
selection, carrier frequency generation, signal de-
tection, modulation and data encryption. Fre-
quency selection aspects have been dealt with in
Section 3.7. Frequency generation and signal de-
tection have more to do with the underlying
hardware and transceiver design and hence are
beyond the scope of our paper. In the following, we
focus on signal propagation effects, power effi-
ciency and modulation schemes for sensor net-
works.
It is well known that long-distance wireless
communication can be expensive, both in terms
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 417
of energy and implementation complexity. While
designing the physical layer for sensor networks,
energy minimization assumes significant impor-
tance, over and above the decay, scattering, shad-
owing, reflection, diffraction, multipath and fading
effects. In general, the minimum output power re-
quired to transmit a signal over a distance d is
proportional to dn, where 26 n < 4. The exponent
n is closer to four for low-lying antennae and near-
ground channels [72,82], as is typical in sensor
network communication. This can be attributed to
the partial signal cancellation by a ground-reflected
ray. While trying to resolve these problems, it
is important that the designer is aware of inbuilt
diversities and exploits this to the fullest. For
instance, multihop communication in a sensor
network can effectively overcome shadowing and
path-loss effects, if the node density is high enough.
Similarly, while propagation losses and channel
capacity limit data reliability, this very fact can
be used for spatial frequency re-use. Energy effi-
cient physical layer solutions are currently being
pursued by researchers. Although some of these
topics have been addressed in literature, it still re-
mains a vastly unexplored domain of the wireless
sensor networks. A discussion of some existing
ideas follows.
The choice of a good modulation scheme is
critical for reliable communication in a sensor
network. Binary and M-ary modulation schemes
are compared in [77]. While an M-ary scheme can
reduce the transmit on-time by sending multiple
bits per symbol, it results in complex circuitry and
increased radio power consumption. These trade-
off parameters are formulated in [76] and it is
concluded that under start-up power dominant
conditions, the binary modulation scheme is more
energy efficient. Hence, M-ary modulation gains
are significant only for low start-up power systems.
A low-power direct-sequence spread-spectrum
modem architecture for sensor networks is pre-
sented in [13]. This low-power architecture can be
mapped to an ASIC technology to further improve
efficiency.
Ultrawideband (UWB) or impulse radio (IR)
has been used for baseband pulse radar and
ranging systems and has recently drawn consider-
able interest for communication applications [18],
especially in indoor wireless networks [53]. UWB
employs baseband transmission and thus, it re-
quires no intermediate or radio carrier frequencies.
Generally, pulse position modulation is used. The
main advantage of UWB is its resilience to multi-
path [17,45,46]. Low transmission power and
simple transceiver circuitry, make UWB an at-
tractive candidate for sensor networks.
4.5.1. Open research issues
The physical layer is a largely unexplored area
in sensor networks. Open research issues range
from power efficient transceiver design to modu-
lation schemes. A few of these are given below
• Modulation schemes: Simple and low-power
modulation schemes need to be developed
for sensor networks. The modulation scheme
can be either baseband, as in UWB, or pass-
band.
• Strategies to overcome signal propagation effects:
Signal propagation effects in sensor networks
have been dealt with in Section 4.5.
• Hardware design: Tiny, low-power, low-cost
transceiver, sensing and processing units need
to be designed. Power efficient hardware man-
agement strategies are also essential.
5. Conclusion
The flexibility, fault tolerance, high sensing fi-
delity, low-cost and rapid deployment character-
istics of sensor networks create many new and
exciting application areas for remote sensing. In
the future, this wide range of application areas will
make sensor networks an integral part of our lives.
However, realization of sensor networks needs
to satisfy the constraints introduced by factors
such as fault tolerance, scalability, cost, hardware,
topology change, environment and power con-
sumption. Since these constraints are highly
stringent and specific for sensor networks, new
wireless ad hoc networking techniques are re-
quired. Many researchers are currently engaged in
developing the technologies needed for different
layers of the sensor networks protocol stack as
shown in Fig. 3. A list of current sensor networks
418 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
research projects is given in Table 5. Along with
the current research projects, we encourage more
insight into the problems and more development in
solutions to the open research issues as described
in this paper.
References
[1] G.D. Abowd, J.P.G. Sterbenz, Final report on the inter-
agency workshop on research issues for smart environ-
ments, IEEE Personal Communications (October 2000)
36–40.
[2] J. Agre, L. Clare, An integrated architecture for cooper-
ative sensing networks, IEEE Computer Magazine (May
2000) 106–108.
[3] I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, A power aware enhanced routing
(PAER) protocol for sensor networks, Georgia Tech
Technical Report, January 2002, submitted for publica-
tion.
[4] A. Bakre, B.R. Badrinath, I-TCP: indirect TCP for mobile
hosts, Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems, Vancouver, BC, May
1995, pp. 136–143.
[5] P. Bauer, M. Sichitiu, R. Istepanian, K. Premaratne, The
mobile patient: wireless distributed sensor networks for
patient monitoring and care, Proceedings 2000 IEEE
EMBS International Conference on Information Technol-
ogy Applications in Biomedicine, 2000, pp. 17–21.
[6] M. Bhardwaj, T. Garnett, A.P. Chandrakasan, Upper
bounds on the lifetime of sensor networks, IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Communications ICC’01, Helsinki,
Finland, June 2001.
[7] P. Bonnet, J. Gehrke, P. Seshadri, Querying the physical
world, IEEE Personal Communications (October 2000)
10–15.
[8] N. Bulusu, D. Estrin, L. Girod, J. Heidemann, Scalable
coordination for wireless sensor networks: self-configuring
localization systems, International Symposium on Com-
munication Theory and Applications (ISCTA 2001), Am-
bleside, UK, July 2001.
[9] B.G. Celler et al., An instrumentation system for the
remote monitoring of changes in functional health status of
the elderly, International Conference IEEE-EMBS, New
York, 1994, pp. 908–909.
Table 5
Current research projects
Project name Research area HTTP location
SensoNet [3] Transport, network, data link and physical layers
Power control, mobility and task management planes
http://www.ece.gatech.edu/research/
labs/bwn/
WINS [22,69] Distributed network and Internet access to sensors,
controls, and processors
http://www.janet.ucla.edu/WINS/
SPIN [35] Data dissemination protocols http://nms.lcs.mil.edu/projects/leach
SPINS [66] Security protocol http://paris.cs.berkeley.edu/
perrig/projects.html
SINA [75,84] Information networking architecture http://www.eecis.udel.edu/cshen/
lAMPS [77] Framework for implementing adaptive energy-aware
distributed microsensors
http://www-mtl.mil.edu/research/
icsystems/uamps/
LEACH [34] Cluster formation protocol http://nms.lcs.mit.edu/projects/leach
Smart dust [42] Laser communication from a cubic millimeter
Mote delivery
SubmicroWatt electronics
Power sources
MacroMotes (COTS Dust)
http://robotics.eecs.berkeley.edu/
pister/SmartDust/
SCADDS
[8,11,20,22,23,27,33,39,96]
Scalable coordination architectures for deeply distributed
and dynamic systems
http://www.isi.edu/scadds/
PicoRadio [70,71] Develop a ‘‘system-on-chip’’ implementation of a PicoNode http://bwrc.eecs.berkeley.edu/Re-
search/Pico_Radio/PicoNode.htm
PACMAN [79] Mathematical framework that incorporates key features of
computing nodes and networking elements
http://pacman.usc.edu
Dynamic sensor networks
[19]
Routing and power aware sensor management Network
services API
http://www.east.isi.edu/DIVl0/dsn/
Aware home [36] Requisite technologies to create a home environment that
can both perceive and assist its occupants
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/fce/ahri
COUGAR device database
project [7]
Distributed query processing http://www.cs.cornell.edu/database/
cougar/index.htm
DataSpace [38] Distributed query processing http://www.cs.rutgers.edu/dataman
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 419
[10] A. Cerpa, D. Estrin, ASCENT: adaptive self-configuring
sensor networks topologies, UCLA Computer Science
Department Technical Report UCLA/CSDTR-01-0009,
May 2001.
[11] A. Cerpa, J. Elson, M. Hamilton, J. Zhao, Habitat
monitoring: application driver for wireless communica-
tions technology, ACM SIGCOMM’2000, Costa Rica,
April 2001.
[12] A. Chandrakasan, R. Amirtharajah, S. Cho, J. Goodman,
G. Konduri, J. Kulik, W. Rabiner, A. Wang, Design
considerations for distributed micro-sensor systems, Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE 1999 Custom Integrated Circuits
Conference, San Diego, CA, May 1999, pp. 279–286.
[13] C. Chien, I. Elgorriaga, C. McConaghy, Low-power direct-
sequence spread-spectrum modem architecture for distrib-
uted wireless sensor networks, ISLPED’01, Huntington
Beach, California, August 2001.
[14] S. Cho, A. Chandrakasan, Energy-efficient protocols for
low duty cycle wireless microsensor, Proceedings of the
33rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences, Maui, HI Vol. 2 (2000), p. 10.
[15] R. Colwell, Testimony of Dr. Rita Colwell, Director,
National Science Foundation, Before the Basic Research
Subcommitte, House Science Committe, Hearing on Re-
mote Sensing as a Research and Management Tool,
September 1998.
[16] G. Coyle et al., Home telecare for the elderly, Journal of
Telemedicine and Telecare 1 (1995) 183–184.
[17] R.J. Cramer, M.Z. Win, R.A. Scholtz, Impulse radio
multipath characteristics and diversity reception, IEEE
International Conference on Communications ICC’98 Vol.
3 (1998), pp. 1650–1654.
[18] J.M. Cramer, R.A. Scholtz, M.Z. Win, On the analysis of
UWB communication channels, IEEE MILCOM’99, 1999,
pp. 1191–1195.
[19] DSN Team, Multilateration Poster, SensIT Workshop,
St. Petersburg, FL, April 2001.
[20] J. Elson, D. Estrin, Random, ephemeral transaction
identifiers in dynamic sensor networks, Proceedings 21st
International Conference on Distributed Computing Sys-
tems, Mesa, AZ, April 2001, pp. 459–468.
[21] I.A. Essa, Ubiquitous sensing for smart and aware
environments, IEEE Personal Communications (October
2000) 47–49.
[22] D. Estrin, L. Girod, G. Pottie, M. Srivastava, Instrumen-
ting the world with wireless sensor networks, International
Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP 2001), Salt Lake City, Utah, May 2001.
[23] D. Estrin, R. Govindan, J. Heidemann, S. Kumar, Next
century challenges: scalable coordination in sensor net-
works, ACM MobiCom’99, Washingtion, USA, 1999,
pp. 263–270.
[24] D. Estrin, R. Govindan, J. Heidemann, Embedding the
Internet, Communication ACM 43 (2000) 38–41.
[25] P. Favre et al., A 2V, 600 lA, 1 GHz BiCMOS super
regenerative receiver for ISM applications, IEEE Journal
of Solid State Circuits 33 (1998) 2186–2196.
[26] M. Gell-Mann, What is complexity? Complexity 1 (1),
1995.
[27] L. Girod, D. Estrin, Robust range estimation using
acoustic and multimodal sensing, Proceedings of the
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS 2001), Maui, Hawaii, October 2001.
[28] K. Govil, E. Chan, H. Wasserman, Comparing algorithms
for dynamic speed-setting of a low-power CPU, Procee-
dings of ACM MobiCom’95, Berkeley, CA, November
1995, pp. 13–25.
[29] M.P. Hamilton, M. Flaxman, Scientific data visualization
and biological diversity: new tools for spatializing multi-
media observations of species and ecosystems, Landscape
and Urban Planning 21 (1992) 285–297.
[30] M.P. Hamilton, Hummercams, robots, and the virtual
reserve, Directors Notebook, February 6, 2000, available
from http://www.jamesreserve.edu/news.html.
[31] B. Halweil, Study finds modern farming is costly, World
Watch 14 (1) (2001) 9–10.
[32] S. Hedetniemi, A. Liestman, A survey of gossiping and
broadcasting in communication networks, Networks 18 (4)
(1988) 319–349.
[33] J. Heidemann, F. Silva, C. Intanagonwiwat, Building
efficient wireless sensor networks with low-level naming,
Proceedings of the Symposium on Operating Systems
Principles, Banff, Canada, 2001.
[34] W.R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, H. Balakrishnan,
Energy-efficient communication protocol for wireless mic-
rosensor networks, IEEE Proceedings of the Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences, January
2000, pp. 1–10.
[35] W.R. Heinzelman, J. Kulik, H. Balakrishnan, Adaptive
protocols for information dissemination in wireless sensor
networks, Proceedings of the ACM MobiCom’99, Seattle,
Washington, 1999, pp. 174–185.
[36] C. Herring, S. Kaplan, Component-based software systems
for smart environments, IEEE Personal Communications,
October 2000, pp. 60–61.
[37] G. Hoblos, M. Staroswiecki, A. Aitouche, Optimal design
of fault tolerant sensor networks, IEEE International
Conference on Control Applications, Anchorage, AK,
September 2000, pp. 467–472.
[38] T. Imielinski, S. Goel, DataSpace: querying and monitor-
ing deeply networked collections in physical space, ACM
International Workshop on Data Engineering for Wireless
and Mobile Access MobiDE 1999, Seattle, Washington,
1999, pp. 44–51.
[39] C. Intanagonwiwat, R. Govindan, D. Estrin, Directed
diffusion: a scalable and robust communication paradigm
for sensor networks, Proceedings of the ACM Mobi-
Com’00, Boston, MA, 2000, pp. 56–67.
[40] C. Jaikaeo, C. Srisathapornphat, C. Shen, Diagnosis of
sensor networks, IEEE International Conference on Com-
munications ICC’01, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001.
[41] P. Johnson et al., Remote continuous physiological mon-
itoring in the home, Journal of Telemed Telecare 2 (2)
(1996) 107–113.
420 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422
[42] J.M. Kahn, R.H. Katz, K.S.J. Pister, Next century
challenges: mobile networking for smart dust, Proceedings
of the ACM MobiCom’99, Washington, USA, 1999,
pp. 271–278.
[43] T.H. Keitt, D.L. Urban, B.T. Milne, Detecting critical
scales in fragmented landscapes, Conservation Ecology 1
(1) (1997) 4. Available from <http://www.consecolo.org/
vol1/iss1/art4>.
[44] R. Kravets, K. Schwan, K. Calvert, Power-aware commu-
nication for mobile computers, Proceedings of Mo-
MUC’99, San Diego, CA, November 1999, pp. 64–73.
[45] H. Lee, B. Han, Y. Shin, S. Im, Multipath characteristics
of impulse radio channels, IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference Proceedings, Tokyo, Vol. 3, 2000, pp. 2487–
2491.
[46] C.J. Le Martret, G.B. Giannakis, All-digital impulse radio
for MUI/ISI-resilient multiuser communications over fre-
quency-selective multipath channels, Proceedings of IEEE
Military Communications Conference (MILCOM’00),
Vol. 2, 2000, pp. 655–659.
[47] P. Letteri, M.B. Srivastava, Adaptive frame length control
for improving wireless link throughput, range and energy
efficiency, Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM’98, San Fran-
cisco, USA, March 1998, pp. 564–571.
[48] L. Li, J.Y. Halpern, Minimum-energy mobile wireless
networks revisited, IEEE International Conference on
Communications ICC’01, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001.
[49] J. Lorch, A. Smith, Reducing processor power consump-
tion by improving processor time management in a single-
user operating system, Proceedings of ACM MobiCom’96,
1996.
[50] S. Meguerdichian, F. Koushanfar, G. Qu, M. Potkonjak,
Exposure in wireless ad-hoc sensor networks, Proceed-
ings of ACM MobiCom’01, Rome, Italy, 2001, pp. 139–
150.
[51] T. Melly, A. Porret, C.C. Enz, E.A. Vittoz, A 1.2 V, 430
MHz, 4dBm power amplifier and a 250 lW Frontend,
using a standard digital CMOS process, IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Low Power Electronics and Design
Conference, San Diego, August 1999, pp. 233–237.
[52] R. Min, T. Furrer, A. Chandrakasan, Dynamic voltage
scaling techniques for distributed microsensor networks,
Proceedings of ACM MobiCom’95, August 1995.
[53] F.R. Mireles, R.A. Scholtz, Performance of equicorrelated
ultra-wideband pulse-position-modulated signals in the
indoor wireless impulse radio channel, IEEE Conference
on Communications, Computers and Signal Processing,
Vol. 2, 1997, pp. 640–644.
[54] J. Mirkovic, G.P. Venkataramani, S. Lu, L. Zhang, A self-
organizing approach to data forwarding in largescale
sensor networks, IEEE International Conference on Com-
munications ICC’01, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001.
[55] D. Nadig, S.S. Iyengar, A new architecture for distributed
sensor integration, Proceedings of IEEE Southeastcon’93,
Charlotte, NC, April 1993.
[56] Y.H. Nam et al., Development of remote diagnosis system
integrating digital telemetry for medicine, International
Conference IEEE-EMBS, Hong Kong, 1998, pp. 1170–
1173.
[57] T. Nandagopal, T. Kim, X. Gao, V. Bhargavan, Achieving
MAC layer fairness in wireless packet networks, Proceed-
ings of the ACM MobiCom’00, Boston, MA, 2000.
[58] B. Narendran, J. Sienicki, S. Yajnik, P. Agrawal, Evalu-
ation of an adaptive power and error control algorithm
for wireless systems, IEEE International Conference
on Communications ICC’97, Montreal, Canada, June
1997.
[59] National Semiconductor Corporation, LMX3162 Single
Chip Radio Transceiver, Evaluation Notes and Datasheet,
March 2000.
[60] N. Noury, T. Herve, V. Rialle, G. Virone, E. Mercier, G.
Morey, A. Moro, T. Porcheron, Monitoring behavior in
home using a smart fall sensor, IEEE-EMBS Special Topic
Conference on Microtechnologies in Medicine and Bio-
logy, October 2000, pp. 607–610.
[61] With Glacier Park in Its Path, Fire Spreads to 40,000
Acres, New York Times, Vol. 150, Issue 51864, p. 24, 0p, 1
map, 4c, 9/2/2001.
[62] M. Ogawa et al., Fully automated biosignal acquisition in
daily routine through 1 month, International Conference
on IEEE-EMBS, Hong Kong, 1998, pp. 1947–1950.
[63] N. Priyantha, A. Chakraborty, H. Balakrishnan, The
cricket location-support system, Proceedings of ACM
MobiCom’00, August 2000, pp. 32–43.
[64] T. Pering, T. Burd, R. Brodersen, The simulation and
evaluation of dynamic voltage scaling algorithms, Pro-
ceedings of International Symposium on Low Power
Electronics and Design ISLPED’98, August 1998, pp.
76–81.
[65] C. Perkins, Ad Hoc Networks, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
MA, 2000.
[66] A. Perrig, R. Szewczyk, V. Wen, D. Culler, J.D. Tygar,
SPINS: security protocols for sensor networks, Procee-
dings of ACM MobiCom’01, Rome, Italy, 2001, pp. 189–
199.
[67] E.M. Petriu, N.D. Georganas, D.C. Petriu, D. Makrakis,
V.Z. Groza, Sensor-based information appliances, IEEE
Instrumentation and Measurement Magazine (December
2000) 31–35.
[68] A. Porret, T. Melly, C.C. Enz, E.A. Vittoz, A low-power
low-voltage transceiver architecture suitable for wireless
distributed sensors network, IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Circuits and Systems’00, Geneva, Vol. 1, 2000, pp.
56–59.
[69] G.J. Pottie, W.J. Kaiser, Wireless integrated network
sensors, Communications of the ACM 43 (5) (2000) 551–
558.
[70] J. Rabaey, J. Ammer, J.L. da Silva Jr., D. Patel, Pico-
Radio: ad-hoc wireless networking of ubiquitous low-
energy sensor/monitor nodes, Proceedings of the IEEE
Computer SocietyAnnualWorkshoponVLSI (WVLSI’00),
Orlanda, Florida, April 2000, pp. 9–12.
[71] J.M. Rabaey, M.J. Ammer, J.L. da Silva Jr., D. Patel, S.
Roundy, PicoRadio supports ad hoc ultra-low power
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422 421
wireless networking, IEEE Computer Magazine (2000)
42–48.
[72] T. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and
Practice, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1996.
[73] V. Rodoplu, T.H. Meng, Minimum energy mobile wireless
networks, IEEE Journal of Selected Areas in Communi-
cations 17 (8) (1999) 1333–1344.
[74] A. Savvides, C. Han, M. Srivastava, Dynamic fine-grained
localization in ad-hoc networks of sensors, Proceedings of
ACM MobiCom’01, Rome, Italy, July 2001, pp. 166–179.
[75] C. Shen, C. Srisathapornphat, C. Jaikaeo, Sensor infor-
mation networking architecture and applications, IEEE
Personal Communications, August 2001, pp. 52–59.
[76] E. Shih, B.H. Calhoun, S. Cho, A. Chandrakasan, Energy-
efficient link layer for wireless microsensor networks,
Proceedings IEEE Computer Society Workshop on VLSI
2001, Orlando, FL, April 2001, pp. 16–21.
[77] E. Shih, S. Cho, N. Ickes, R. Min, A. Sinha, A. Wang, A.
Chandrakasan, Physical layer driven protocol and algo-
rithm design for energy-efficient wireless sensor networks,
Proceedings of ACM MobiCom’01, Rome, Italy, July
2001, pp. 272–286.
[78] B. Sibbald, Use computerized systems to cut adverse drug
events: report, CMAJ: Canadian Medical Association
Journal 164 (13) (2001) 1878, 1/2p, 1c.
[79] S. Singh, M. Woo, C.S. Raghavendra, Power-aware
routing in mobile ad hoc networks, Proceedings of ACM
MobiCom’98, Dallas, Texas, 1998, pp. 181–190.
[80] A. Sinha, A. Chandrakasan, Dynamic power management
in wireless sensor networks, IEEE Design and Test of
Computers, March/April 2001.
[81] S. Slijepcevic, M. Potkonjak, Power efficient organization
of wireless sensor networks, IEEE International Confer-
ence on Communications ICC’01, Helsinki, Finland, June
2001.
[82] K. Sohrabi, B. Manriquez, G. Pottie, Near-ground wide-
band channel measurements, IEEE Proceedings of Vehic-
ular Technology Conference, New York, 1999.
[83] K. Sohrabi, J. Gao, V. Ailawadhi, G.J. Pottie, Protocols
for self-organization of a wireless sensor network, IEEE
Personal Communications, October 2000, pp. 16–27.
[84] C. Srisathapornphat, C. Jaikaeo, C. Shen, Sensor in-
formation networking architecture, International Work-
shop on Parallel Processing, September 2000, pp. 23–
30.
[85] Y. Tseng, S. Wu, C. Lin, J. Sheu, A multi-channel MAC
protocol with power control for multi-hop mobile ad hoc
networks, IEEE International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems, Mesa, AZ, April 2001, pp. 419–424.
[86] S. Vardhan, M. Wilczynski, G. Pottie, W.J. Kaiser,
Wireless integrated network sensors (WINS): distributed
in situ sensing for mission and flight systems, IEEE
Aerospace Conference, Vol. 7, 2000, pp. 459–463.
[87] B. Walker, W. Steffen, An overview of the implications of
global change of natural and managed terrestrial ecosys-
tems, Conservation Ecology 1 (2) (1997). Available from
<http://www.consecol.org/vol1/iss2/art2>.
[88] B. Warneke, B. Liebowitz, K.S.J. Pister, Smart dust:
communicating with a cubic-millimeter computer, IEEE
Computer (January 2001) 2–9.
[89] http://www.fao.org/sd/EIdirect/EIre0074.htm.
[90] http://www.alertsystems.org.
[91] M. Weiser et al., Scheduling for reduced CPU energy,
Proceedings of 1st USENIX Symposium on Operating
System Design and Implementation, November 1994,
pp. 13–23.
[92] S. Wicker, Error Control Coding for Digital Communica-
tion and Storage, Prentice-Hall, EnglewoodCliffs, NJ, 1995.
[93] A. Woo, D. Culler, A transmission control scheme for
media access in sensor networks, Proceedings of ACM
MobiCom’01, Rome, Italy, July 2001, pp. 221–235.
[94] S. Wu, C. Lin, Y. Tseng, J. Sheu, A new multi channel
MAC protocol with on-demand channel assignment for
multihop mobile ad hoc networks, International Sympo-
sium on Parallel Architectures, Algorithms, and Networks,
I-SPAN 2000, Dallas, 2000, pp. 232–237.
[95] S. Wu, Y. Tseng, J. Sheu, Intelligent medium access for
mobile ad hoc networks with busy tones and power
control, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions (September 2000) 1647–1657.
[96] Y. Xu, J. Heidemann, D. Estrin, Geography-informed
energy conservation for ad hoc routing, Proceedings of
ACM MobiCom’2001, Rome, Italy, July 2001.
[97] M. Zorzi, R. Rao, Error control and energy consumption
in communications for nomadic computing, IEEE Trans-
actions on Computers 46 (3) (1997) 279–289.
422 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 38 (2002) 393–422

