Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159
www.elsevier.com/locate/comnetNeXt generation/dynamic spectrum access/cognitive
radio wireless networks: A survey
Ian F. Akyildiz, Won-Yeol Lee, Mehmet C. Vuran *, Shantidev Mohanty
Broadband and Wireless Networking Laboratory, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, United States
Received 2 January 2006; accepted 2 May 2006
Available online 17 May 2006
Responsible Editor: I.F. AkyildizAbstract
Today’s wireless networks are characterized by a fixed spectrum assignment policy. However, a large portion of the
assigned spectrum is used sporadically and geographical variations in the utilization of assigned spectrum ranges from
15% to 85% with a high variance in time. The limited available spectrum and the inefficiency in the spectrum usage neces-
sitate a new communication paradigm to exploit the existing wireless spectrum opportunistically. This new networking
paradigm is referred to as NeXt Generation (xG) Networks as well as Dynamic Spectrum Access (DSA) and cognitive
radio networks. The term xG networks is used throughout the paper. The novel functionalities and current research chal-
lenges of the xG networks are explained in detail. More specifically, a brief overview of the cognitive radio technology is
provided and the xG network architecture is introduced. Moreover, the xG network functions such as spectrum manage-
ment, spectrum mobility and spectrum sharing are explained in detail. The influence of these functions on the performance
of the upper layer protocols such as routing and transport are investigated and open research issues in these areas are also
outlined. Finally, the cross-layer design challenges in xG networks are discussed.
 2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Next generation networks; Dynamic spectrum access networks; Cognitive radio networks; Spectrum sensing; Spectrum
management; Spectrum mobility; Spectrum sharing1. Introduction
Today’s wireless networks are regulated by a
fixed spectrum assignment policy, i.e. the spectrum1389-1286/$ - see front matter  2006 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2006.05.001
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 404 894 5141; fax: +1 404 894
7883.
E-mail addresses: ian@ece.gatech.edu (I.F. Akyildiz), wylee@
ece.gatech.edu (W.-Y. Lee), mcvuran@ece.gatech.edu (M.C.
Vuran), shanti@ece.gatech.edu (S. Mohanty).is regulated by governmental agencies and is
assigned to license holders or services on a long term
basis for large geographical regions. In addition, a
large portion of the assigned spectrum is used spo-
radically as illustrated in Fig. 1, where the signal
strength distribution over a large portion of the
wireless spectrum is shown. The spectrum usage is
concentrated on certain portions of the spectrum
while a significant amount of the spectrum remains
unutilized. According to Federal Communications.
Fig. 1. Spectrum utilization.
2128 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159Commission (FCC) [20], temporal and geographical
variations in the utilization of the assigned spectrum
range from 15% to 85%. Although the fixed spec-
trum assignment policy generally served well in the
past, there is a dramatic increase in the access to
the limited spectrum for mobile services in the
recent years. This increase is straining the effective-
ness of the traditional spectrum policies.
The limited available spectrum and the inefficiency
in the spectrum usage necessitate a new communi-
cation paradigm to exploit the existing wireless spec-
trum opportunistically [3]. Dynamic spectrum access
is proposed to solve these current spectrum ineffi-
ciency problems. DARPAs approach on Dynamic
Spectrum Access network, the so-called NeXt Gener-
ation (xG) program aims to implement the policy
based intelligent radios known as cognitive radios
[67,68].
NeXt Generation (xG) communication net-
works, also known as Dynamic Spectrum Access
Networks (DSANs) as well as cognitive radio net-
works, will provide high bandwidth to mobile users
via heterogeneous wireless architectures and
dynamic spectrum access techniques. The inefficient
usage of the existing spectrum can be improved
through opportunistic access to the licensed bands
without interfering with the existing users. xG net-
works, however, impose several research challenges
due to the broad range of available spectrum as well
as diverse Quality-of-Service (QoS) requirements of
applications. These heterogeneities must be cap-
tured and handled dynamically as mobile terminals
roam between wireless architectures and along the
available spectrum pool.
The key enabling technology of xG networks is
the cognitive radio. Cognitive radio techniques pro-
vide the capability to use or share the spectrum inan opportunistic manner. Dynamic spectrum access
techniques allow the cognitive radio to operate in
the best available channel. More specifically, the cog-
nitive radio technology will enable the users to (1)
determine which portions of the spectrum is avail-
able and detect the presence of licensed users when
a user operates in a licensed band (spectrum sens-
ing), (2) select the best available channel (spectrum
management), (3) coordinate access to this channel
with other users (spectrum sharing), and (4) vacate
the channel when a licensed user is detected (spec-
trum mobility).
Once a cognitive radio supports the capability to
select the best available channel, the next challenge
is to make the network protocols adaptive to the
available spectrum. Hence, new functionalities are
required in an xG network to support this adaptivity.
In summary, the main functions for cognitive radios
in xG networks can be summarized as follows:
• Spectrum sensing: Detecting unused spectrum
and sharing the spectrum without harmful inter-
ference with other users.
• Spectrum management: Capturing the best avail-
able spectrum to meet user communication
requirements.
• Spectrum mobility: Maintaining seamless com-
munication requirements during the transition
to better spectrum.
• Spectrum sharing: Providing the fair spectrum
scheduling method among coexisting xG users.
These functionalities of xG networks enable spec-
trum-aware communication protocols. However,
the dynamic use of the spectrum causes adverse
effects on the performance of conventional commu-
nication protocols, which were developed consider-
ing a fixed frequency band for communication. So
far, networking in xG networks is an unexplored
topic. In this paper, we also capture the intrinsic
challenges for networking in xG networks and lay
out guidelines for further research in this area. More
specifically, we overview the recent proposals for
spectrum sharing and routing in xG networks as
well as the challenges for transport protocols. More-
over, the effect of cross-layer design is addressed for
communication in xG networks.
The xG network communication components
and their interactions are illustrated in Fig. 2. It is
evident from the significant number of interactions
that the xG network functionalities necessitate a
cross-layer design approach. More specifically, spec-
Fig. 2. xG network communication functionalities.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2129trum sensing and spectrum sharing cooperate with
each other to enhance spectrum efficiency. In spec-
trum management and spectrum mobility functions,
application, transport, routing, medium access and
physical layer functionalities are carried out in a
cooperative way, considering the dynamic nature
of the underlying spectrum.
This paper presents a definition, functions and
current research challenges of the xG networks. In
Section 2, we provide a brief overview of the cognitive
radio technology. The xG network architectures on
licensed band and on unlicensed band are presented
in Section 3. In Section 4, we explain the existing
work and challenges in spectrum sensing. Then, we
describe the xG network functionalities: spectrum
management, spectrum mobility and spectrum shar-
ing in Sections 5, 6, and 7, respectively. In Section 8,
we investigate how xG features influence the perfor-
mance of the upper layer protocols, i.e., routing
and transport. Finally, we explain how xG functions
can be implemented in a cross-layer approach in Sec-
tion 9 and conclude the paper in Section 10.2. Cognitive radio
Cognitive radio technology is the key technology
that enables an xG network to use spectrum in a
dynamic manner. The term, cognitive radio, can
formally be defined as follows [20]:A ‘‘Cognitive Radio’’ is a radio that can change its
transmitter parameters based on interaction with
the environment in which it operates.
From this definition, two main characteristics of
the cognitive radio can be defined [27,58]:
• Cognitive capability: Cognitive capability refers
to the ability of the radio technology to capture
or sense the information from its radio environ-
ment. This capability cannot simply be realized
by monitoring the power in some frequency band
of interest but more sophisticated techniques are
required in order to capture the temporal and
spatial variations in the radio environment and
avoid interference to other users. Through this
capability, the portions of the spectrum that
are unused at a specific time or location can be
identified. Consequently, the best spectrum
and appropriate operating parameters can be
selected.
• Reconfigurability: The cognitive capability pro-
vides spectrum awareness whereas reconfigu-
rability enables the radio to be dynamically
programmed according to the radio environ-
ment. More specifically, the cognitive radio can
be programmed to transmit and receive on a
variety of frequencies and to use different trans-
mission access technologies supported by its
hardware design [34].
2130 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159The cognitive radio concept was first introduced
in [45,46], where the main focus was on the radio
knowledge representation language (RKRL) and
how the cognitive radio can enhance the flexibility
of personal wireless services. The cognitive radio is
regarded as a small part of the physical world to
use and provide information from environment.
The ultimate objective of the cognitive radio is to
obtain the best available spectrum through cogni-
tive capability and reconfigurability as describedFig. 3. Spectrum hole concept.
Fig. 4. Physical architecture of the cognitive radio [12,34]: (a) Cogn
architecture.before. Since most of the spectrum is already
assigned, the most important challenge is to share
the licensed spectrum without interfering with the
transmission of other licensed users as illustrated
in Fig. 3. The cognitive radio enables the usage of
temporally unused spectrum, which is referred to
as spectrum hole or white space [27]. If this band is
further used by a licensed user, the cognitive radio
moves to another spectrum hole or stays in the same
band, altering its transmission power level or mod-
ulation scheme to avoid interference as shown in
Fig. 3.
In the following subsections, we describe the
physical architecture, cognitive functions and recon-
figurability capabilities of the cognitive radio
technology.
2.1. Physical architecture of the cognitive radio
A generic architecture of a cognitive radio trans-
ceiver is shown in Fig. 4(a) [34]. The main compo-
nents of a cognitive radio transceiver are the radio
front-end and the baseband processing unit. Each
component can be reconfigured via a control busitive radio transceiver and (b) wideband RF/analog front-end
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2131to adapt to the time-varying RF environment. In
the RF front-end, the received signal is amplified,
mixed and A/D converted. In the baseband process-
ing unit, the signal is modulated/demodulated and
encoded/decoded. The baseband processing unit of
a cognitive radio is essentially similar to existing
transceivers. However, the novelty of the cognitive
radio is the RF front-end. Hence, next, we focus
on the RF front-end of the cognitive radios.
The novel characteristic of cognitive radio trans-
ceiver is a wideband sensing capability of the RF
front-end. This function is mainly related to RF
hardware technologies such as wideband antenna,
power amplifier, and adaptive filter. RF hardware
for the cognitive radio should be capable of tuning
to any part of a large range of frequency spectrum.
Also such spectrum sensing enables real-time
measurements of spectrum information from radio
environment. Generally, a wideband front-end archi-
tecture for the cognitive radio has the following struc-
ture as shown in Fig. 4(b) [12]. The components of a
cognitive radio RF front-end are as follows:
• RF filter: The RF filter selects the desired band
by bandpass filtering the received RF signal.
• Low noise amplifier (LNA): The LNA amplifies
the desired signal while simultaneously minimiz-
ing noise component.
• Mixer: In the mixer, the received signal is mixed
with locally generated RF frequency and con-
verted to the baseband or the intermediate fre-
quency (IF).
• Voltage-controlled oscillator (VCO): The VCO
generates a signal at a specific frequency for a
given voltage to mix with the incoming signal.
This procedure converts the incoming signal to
baseband or an intermediate frequency.
• Phase locked loop (PLL): The PLL ensures that
a signal is locked on a specific frequency and can
also be used to generate precise frequencies with
fine resolution.
• Channel selection filter: The channel selection fil-
ter is used to select the desired channel and to
reject the adjacent channels. There are two types
of channel selection filters [52]. The direct conver-
sion receiver uses a low-pass filter for the channel
selection. On the other hand, the superheterodyne
receiver adopts a bandpass filter.
• Automatic gain control (AGC): The AGC main-
tains the gain or output power level of an ampli-
fier constant over a wide range of input signal
levels.In this architecture, a wideband signal is received
through the RF front-end, sampled by the high
speed analog-to-digital (A/D) converter, and mea-
surements are performed for the detection of the
licensed user signal. However, there exist some limi-
tations on developing the cognitive radio front-end.
The wideband RF antenna receives signals from var-
ious transmitters operating at different power levels,
bandwidths, and locations. As a result, the RF front-
end should have the capability to detect a weak sig-
nal in a large dynamic range. However, this capabil-
ity requires a multi-GHz speed A/D converter with
high resolution, which might be infeasible [12,13].
The requirement of a multi-GHz speed A/D con-
verter necessitates the dynamic range of the signal to
be reduced before A/D conversion. This reduction
can be achieved by filtering strong signals. Since
strong signals can be located anywhere in the wide
spectrum range, tunable notch filters are required
for the reduction [12]. Another approach is to use
multiple antennas such that signal filtering is per-
formed in the spatial domain rather than in the fre-
quency domain. Multiple antennas can receive
signals selectively using beamforming techniques
[13].
As explained previously, the key challenge of the
physical architecture of the cognitive radio is an
accurate detection of weak signals of licensed users
over a wide spectrum range. Hence, the implementa-
tion of RF wideband front-end and A/D converter
are critical issues in xG networks.
2.2. Cognitive capability
The cognitive capability of a cognitive radio
enables real time interaction with its environment
to determine appropriate communication parame-
ters and adapt to the dynamic radio environment.
The tasks required for adaptive operation in open
spectrum are shown in Fig. 5 [27,46,58], which is
referred to as the cognitive cycle. In this section,
we provide an overview of the three main steps of
the cognitive cycle: spectrum sensing, spectrum anal-
ysis, and spectrum decision. The details and the
related work of these functions are described in Sec-
tions 4 and 5.
The steps of the cognitive cycle as shown in Fig. 5
are as follows:
1. Spectrum sensing: A cognitive radio monitors the
available spectrum bands, captures their infor-
mation, and then detects the spectrum holes.
Fig. 5. Cognitive cycle.
2132 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–21592. Spectrum analysis: The characteristics of the
spectrum holes that are detected through spec-
trum sensing are estimated.
3. Spectrum decision: A cognitive radio determines
the data rate, the transmission mode, and the
bandwidth of the transmission. Then, the appro-
priate spectrum band is chosen according to the
spectrum characteristics and user requirements.
Once the operating spectrum band is determined,
the communication can be performed over this spec-
trum band. However, since the radio environment
changes over time and space, the cognitive radio
should keep track of the changes of the radio envi-
ronment. If the current spectrum band in use
becomes unavailable, the spectrum mobility function
that will be explained in Section 6, is performed to
provide a seamless transmission. Any environmen-
tal change during the transmission such as primary
user appearance, user movement, or traffic variation
can trigger this adjustment.
2.3. Reconfigurability
Reconfigurability is the capability of adjusting
operating parameters for the transmission on the
fly without any modifications on the hardware com-
ponents. This capability enables the cognitive radio
to adapt easily to the dynamic radio environment.
There are several reconfigurable parameters that
can be incorporated into the cognitive radio [20]
as explained below:
• Operating frequency: A cognitive radio is capable
of changing the operating frequency. Based on
the information about the radio environment,the most suitable operating frequency can be
determined and the communication can be
dynamically performed on this appropriate oper-
ating frequency.
• Modulation: A cognitive radio should reconfigure
the modulation scheme adaptive to the user
requirements and channel conditions. For exam-
ple, in the case of delay sensitive applications, the
data rate is more important than the error rate.
Thus, the modulation scheme that enables the
higher spectral efficiency should be selected. Con-
versely, the loss-sensitive applications focus on
the error rate, which necessitate modulation
schemes with low bit error rate.
• Transmission power: Transmission power can be
reconfigured within the power constraints. Power
control enables dynamic transmission power con-
figuration within the permissible power limit. If
higher power operation is not necessary, the cog-
nitive radio reduces the transmitter power to a
lower level to allow more users to share the spec-
trum and to decrease the interference.
• Communication technology: A cognitive radio can
also be used to provide interoperability among
different communication systems.
The transmission parameters of a cognitive radio
can be reconfigured not only at the beginning of a
transmission but also during the transmission.
According to the spectrum characteristics, these
parameters can be reconfigured such that the
cognitive radio is switched to a different spectrum
band, the transmitter and receiver parameters are
reconfigured and the appropriate communication
protocol parameters and modulation schemes are
used.
3. The xG network architecture
Existing wireless network architectures employ
heterogeneity in terms of both spectrum policies
and communication technologies [3]. Moreover,
some portion of the wireless spectrum is already
licensed to different purposes while some bands
remain unlicensed. For the development of commu-
nication protocols, a clear description of the xG net-
work architecture is essential. In this section, the xG
network architecture is presented such that all pos-
sible scenarios are considered.
The components of the xG network architecture,
as shown in Fig. 6, can be classified in two groups as
the primary network and the xG network. The basic
Fig. 6. xG network architecture.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2133elements of the primary and the xG network are
defined as follows:
• Primary network: An existing network infrastruc-
ture is generally referred to as the primary net-
work, which has an exclusive right to a certain
spectrum band. Examples include the common
cellular and TV broadcast networks. The compo-
nents of the primary network are as follows:
– Primary user: Primary user (or licensed user)
has a license to operate in a certain spectrum
band. This access can only be controlled by
the primary base-station and should not be
affected by the operations of any other unli-
censed users. Primary users do not need any
modification or additional functions for coex-
istence with xG base-stations and xG users.
– Primary base-station: Primary base-station (or
licensed base-station) is a fixed infrastructure
network component which has a spectrum
license such as base-station transceiver system
(BTS) in a cellular system. In principle, the
primary base-station does not have any xG
capability for sharing spectrum with xG users.
However, the primary base-station may be
requested to have both legacy and xG proto-cols for the primary network access of xG
users, which is explained below.• xG network: xG network (or cognitive radio net-
work, Dynamic Spectrum Access network, sec-
ondary network, unlicensed network) does not
have license to operate in a desired band. Hence,
the spectrum access is allowed only in an oppor-
tunistic manner. xG networks can be deployed
both as an infrastructure network and an ad
hoc network as shown in Fig. 6. The components
of an xG network are as follows:
– xG user: xG user (or unlicensed user, cognitive
radio user, secondary user) has no spectrum
license. Hence, additional functionalities are
required to share the licensed spectrum band.
– xG base-station: xG base-station (or unli-
censed base-station, secondary base-station)
is a fixed infrastructure component with xG
capabilities. xG base-station provides single
hop connection to xG users without spectrum
access license. Through this connection, an xG
user can access other networks.
– Spectrum broker: Spectrum broker (or sched-
uling server) is a central network entity that
plays a role in sharing the spectrum resources
among different xG networks. Spectrum
2134 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159broker can be connected to each network and
can serve as a spectrum information manager
to enable coexistence of multiple xG networks
[10,32,70].Fig. 7. xG network on licensed band.The reference xG network architecture is shown
in Fig. 6, which consists of different types of net-
works: a primary network, an infrastructure based
xG network, and an ad-hoc xG network. xG net-
works are operated under the mixed spectrum envi-
ronment that consists of both licensed and
unlicensed bands. Also, xG users can either commu-
nicate with each other in a multihop manner or
access the base-station. Thus, in xG networks, there
are three different access types as explained next:
• xG network access: xG users can access their own
xG base-station both on licensed and unlicensed
spectrum bands.
• xG ad hoc access: xG users can communicate
with other xG users through ad hoc connection
on both licensed and unlicensed spectrum bands.
• Primary network access: The xG users can also
access the primary base-station through the
licensed band.
According to the reference architecture shown in
Fig. 6, various functionalities are required to sup-
port the heterogeneity in xG networks. In Section
3.1, we describe the xG network functions to sup-
port the heterogeneity of the network environment.
Moreover, in Sections 3.2 and 3.3, we overview xG
network applications and existing architectures.
3.1. xG network functions
As explained before, xG network can operate in
both licensed and unlicensed bands. Hence, the func-
tionalities required for xG networks vary according
to whether the spectrum is licensed or unlicensed.
Accordingly, in this section, we classify the xG net-
work operations as xG network on licensed band
and xG network on unlicensed band. The xG network
functions are explained in the following sections
according to this classification.
3.1.1. xG network on licensed band
As shown in Fig. 1, there exist temporally unused
spectrum holes in the licensed spectrum band.
Hence, xG networks can be deployed to exploit
these spectrum holes through cognitive communi-
cation techniques. This architecture is depicted inFig. 7, where the xG network coexists with the pri-
mary network at the same location and on the same
spectrum band.
There are various challenges for xG networks on
licensed band due to the existence of the primary
users. Although the main purpose of the xG net-
work is to determine the best available spectrum,
xG functions in the licensed band are mainly aimed
at the detection of the presence of primary users.
The channel capacity of the spectrum holes depends
on the interference at the nearby primary users.
Thus, the interference avoidance with primary users
is the most important issue in this architecture.
Furthermore, if primary users appear in the spec-
trum band occupied by xG users, xG users should
vacate the current spectrum band and move to the
new available spectrum immediately, called spec-
trum handoff.
3.1.2. xG network on unlicensed band
Open spectrum policy that began in the industrial
scientific and medical (ISM) band has caused an
impressive variety of important technologies and
innovative uses. However, due to the interference
among multiple heterogeneous networks, the spec-
trum efficiency of ISM band is decreasing. Ulti-
mately, the capacity of open spectrum access, and
the quality of service they can offer, depend on the
degree to which a radio can be designed to allocate
spectrum efficiently.
xG networks can be designed for operation on
unlicensed bands such that the efficiency is
improved in this portion of the spectrum. The xG
network on unlicensed band architecture is illustrated
in Fig. 8. Since there are no license holders, all
network entities have the same right to access the
spectrum bands. Multiple xG networks coexist in
the same area and communicate using the same por-
tion of the spectrum. Intelligent spectrum sharing
Fig. 8. xG network on unlicensed band.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2135algorithms can improve the efficiency of spectrum
usage and support high QoS.
In this architecture, xG users focus on detecting
the transmissions of other xG users. Unlike the
licensed band operations, the spectrum handoff is
not triggered by the appearance of other primary
users. However, since all xG users have the same right
to access the spectrum, xG users should compete with
each other for the same unlicensed band. Thus,
sophisticated spectrum sharing methods among xG
users are required in this architecture. If multiple
xG network operators reside in the same unlicensed
band, fair spectrum sharing among these networks
is also required.
3.2. xG network applications
xG networks can be applied to the following
cases:
Leased network: The primary network can pro-
vide a leased network by allowing opportunistic
access to its licensed spectrum with the agreement
with a third party without sacrificing the service
quality of the primary user [56]. For example, the
primary network can lease its spectrum access right
to a mobile virtual network operator (MVNO).
Also the primary network can provide its spectrum
access rights to a regional community for the pur-
pose of broadband access.
Cognitive mesh network: Wireless mesh networks
are emerging as a cost-effective technology for pro-
viding broadband connectivity [4]. However, as the
network density increases and the applications
require higher throughput, mesh networks require
higher capacity to meet the requirements of the
applications. Since the cognitive radio technology
enables the access to larger amount of spectrum,
xG networks can be used for mesh networks thatwill be deployed in dense urban areas with the pos-
sibility of significant contention [38]. For example,
the coverage area of xG networks can be increased
when a meshed wireless backbone network of infra-
structure links is established based on cognitive
access points (CAPs) and fixed cognitive relay nodes
(CRNs) [6]. The capacity of a CAP, connected via a
wired broadband access to the Internet, is distrib-
uted into a large area with the help of a fixed
CRN. xG networks have the ability to add tempo-
rary or permanent spectrum to the infrastructure
links used for relaying in case of high traffic load.
Emergency network: Public safety and emergency
networks are another area in which xG networks can
be implemented [41]. In the case of natural disasters,
which may temporarily disable or destroy existing
communication infrastructure, emergency personnel
working in the disaster areas need to establish emer-
gency networks. Since emergency networks deal with
the critical information, reliable communication
should be guaranteed with minimum latency. In
addition, emergency communication requires a sig-
nificant amount of radio spectrum for handling huge
volume of traffic including voice, video and data. xG
networks can enable the usage of the existing spec-
trum without the need for an infrastructure and by
maintaining communication priority and response
time.
Military network: One of the most interesting
potential applications of an xG network is in a mil-
itary radio environment [47]. xG networks can
enable the military radios choose arbitrary, interme-
diate frequency (IF) bandwidth, modulation
schemes, and coding schemes, adapting to the vari-
able radio environment of battlefield. Also military
networks have a strong need for security and pro-
tection of the communication in hostile environ-
ment. xG networks could allow military personnel
to perform spectrum handoff to find secure spec-
trum band for themselves and their allies.
3.3. Existing architectures
The main representative examples of the xG net-
work architectures are described in this section.
Spectrum pooling: In [61,62], a centralized
spectrum pooling architecture is proposed based
on orthogonal frequency division multiplexing
(OFDM). This architecture consists of an xG
base-station and mobile xG users. OFDM has the
advantage of feeding certain sub-carriers with zeros
resulting in no emission of radio power on the
Table 1
IEEE 802.22 WRAN system capacity and coverage [65]
RF channel bandwidth 6 MHz
Average spectrum efficiency 3 bit/s/Hz
Channel capacity 18 Mbit/s
System capacity per subscriber
(forward)
1.5 Mbit/s
System capacity per subscriber
(return)
384 kbit/s
Forward/return ratio 3.9
Over-subscription ratio 50
Number of subscribers per
forward channel
600
(FDD operation is assumed to
maximize system capacity for large
coverage distances, TDD would reduce
capacity to 75% per TV channel)
Minimum number of subscribers 90 subs.
Assumed early take-up rate 3 bit/s/Hz
Potential number of subscribers 1800 subs.
Assumed number of persons
per household
2.5 persons
Total number of persons
per coverage area
4500 persons
WRAN base station EIRP 98.3 W
Radius of coverage for WRAN system 30.7 km
Minimum population density covered 1.5 person/km2
Assuming 1.5 Mbit/s forward and 384 kbit/s return in a 6 MHz
channel with 3 bit/s/Hz and 50:1 over-subscription, each TV
channel can provide service to up to 600 subscribers. The area
that the Wireless Regional Area network (WRAN) operator
needs to cover should include enough subscribers to make it
economically viable early in the process when the take-up rate is
low. This will define the potential subscriber base and the pop-
ulation density for a sustainable business case.
2136 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159carriers that are occupied by the licensed users. The
licensed user detection is performed through detec-
tion frames that are periodically broadcast by the
base-station. During the detection frames, the
mobile users perform spectrum sensing. The sensing
information is then gathered at the base-station.
Mobile terminals modulate a complex symbol at
maximum power in the sub-carriers where a licensed
user appears. Through this operation, the base-
station receives an amplified signal on all sub-carri-
ers with new licensed users. Physical and MAC layer
issues, such as detection of spectral access, schedul-
ing, and handoff are ongoing investigations in this
architecture.
CORVUS: In [8,14], a cognitive radio approach
for usage of virtual unlicensed spectrum (CORVUS)
system is presented to exploit unoccupied licensed
bands. In CORVUS, based on the local spectrum
sensing, the primary user detection and the spec-
trum allocation are performed in a coordinated
manner. This cooperative effort greatly increases
the system’s ability in identifying and avoiding pri-
mary users. In CORVUS, a group of users form a
secondary user group (SUG) to coordinate their
communication. Each member of this group senses
the spectrum pool, which is divided into sub-chan-
nels. A universal control channel is used by all
groups for coordination and separate group control
channels are used by the members of a group to
exchange sensing information and establish second-
ary user links. The performance of the physical and
link layers are evaluated through the CORVUS test-
bed [44]. Moreover, recently, a reliable link mainte-
nance protocol is proposed within CORVUS to
maintain the quality of secondary user communica-
tion [64].
IEEE 802.22: IEEE 802.22 is the first worldwide
standard based on the cognitive radio technology
[16,31] and is now in the process of standardization.
This project, formally called the standard for wire-
less regional area networks (WRAN), focuses on
constructing fixed point-to-multipoint WRAN that
will utilize UHF/VHF TV bands between 54 and
862 MHz. Specific TV channels as well as guard
bands will be used for communication in IEEE
802.22. The IEEE 802.22 system specifies a fixed
point-to-multipoint wireless air interface whereby
a base-station manages its own cell and all associ-
ated users, which are denoted as consumer premise
equipments (CPEs). IEEE 802.22 base-station man-
ages a unique feature of distributed sensing. This is
needed to ensure proper incumbent protection andis managed by the base-station, which instructs the
various CPEs to perform distributed measurement
activities. The IEEE 802.22 system specifies spectral
efficiencies in the range of 0.5–5 bit/s/Hz. A distinc-
tive feature of IEEE 802.22 WRAN as compared to
the existing IEEE 802 standards is the base-station
coverage range, which can go up to 100 km if the
power is not an issue. Current specified coverage
range is 33 km at 4 W CPE effective isotropic radi-
ated power (EIRP) [66]. Table 1 depicts the capacity
and coverage of IEEE 802.22 WRAN system. IEEE
802.22 working group was formed in 2004 and has
finalized the specification of technical requirements.
The first draft of IEEE 802.22 standard will be
ready around mid 2006.
DIMSUMnet: The dynamic intelligent manage-
ment of spectrum for ubiquitous mobile network
(DIMSUMnet) [10] implements statistically multi-
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2137plexed access (SMA) to spectrum in the coordinated
access band (CAB). While the CAB improves the
spectrum access efficiency and fairness, the SMA
is focused on improving the spectrum utilization.
CAB is a contiguous chunk of spectrum reserved
by regulating authorities. A spectrum broker
permanently owns the CAB and leases it according
to requests. DIMSUMnet uses a centralized, regio-
nal network level brokering mechanism that aims
to significantly improve spectrum utilization while
reducing the complexity and the agility require-
ments of the deployed system. The base-station reg-
isters with its designated radio access network
manager (RANMAN), which negotiates a lease
with a spectrum information and management
(SPIM) broker for an appropriate portion of the
spectrum. If the lease is successfully obtained, the
RANMAN configures the leased spectrum in
the base-station. The base-station sends the spec-
trum information received from the RANMAN to
its users for the configuration of client. The spec-
trum utilization of DIMSUMnet is currently mea-
sured in existing Code Division Multiple Access
(CDMA) and Global System for Mobile communi-
cation (GSM) cellular networks, aimed at character-
izing feasibility of CAB and SMA [35]. Recent work
focuses on the spectrum pricing and allocation func-
tions for spectrum brokers [11].
DRiVE/OverDRiVE project: The European
Dynamic Radio for IP Services in Vehicular Envi-
ronments (DRiVE) project focuses on dynamic
spectrum allocation in heterogeneous networks by
assuming a common coordinated channel [75]. The
follow-up project, Spectrum Efficient Uni- and Mul-
ticast Over Dynamic Radio Networks in Vehicular
Environments (OverDRiVE) aims at UMTS
enhancements and coordination of existing radio
networks into a hybrid network to ensure spectrum
efficient provision of mobile multimedia services
[26]. Two aspects of dynamic spectrum allocation
were investigated in DRiVE/OverDRiVE, i.e.,
temporal dynamic spectrum allocation (DSA), and
spatial DSA [39]. In the case of the temporal
DSA, a radio access network (RAN) can use the
spectrum that is not currently being used by other
RANs, at that time. On the other hand, spatial
DSA allows spectrum allocations to adapt to regio-
nal fluctuations in traffic demands. The efficiency of
these DSA schemes depends on the ability to predict
the traffic load. Although these projects have shown
significant potential for increasing spectral effi-
ciency, the reconfigurable system implementationfor temporal and spatial DSA is still a major
challenge.
Nautilus: Nautilus project is designed to empha-
size distributed coordination enabled spectrum shar-
ing, without relying on centralized control [48]. In
the Nautilus project, a distributed, scalable and effi-
cient coordination framework for open spectrum ad
hoc networks is proposed, which accounts for spec-
trum heterogeneity while not relying on the existence
of a pre-defined common channel for control traffic
[73,74]. Based on this framework, three different col-
laborative spectrum access schemes are presented. In
[73], a graph coloring based collaborative spectrum
access scheme is proposed, where a topology-opti-
mized allocation algorithm is used for the fixed
topology. In mobile networks, however, the network
topology changes due to the node mobility. Using
this global optimization approach, the network
needs to completely recompute spectrum assign-
ments for all users after each change, resulting in
high computational and communication overhead.
Thus, distributed spectrum allocation based on local
bargaining is proposed in [15], where mobile users
negotiate spectrum assignment within local self-
organized groups. For the resource constrained net-
works such as sensor and ad hoc network, rule-based
device centric spectrum management is proposed,
where unlicensed users access the spectrum indepen-
dently according to both local observation and pre-
determined rules. Currently, this project focuses on
selecting the best channel for data transmission
using proposed distributed coordination framework.
OCRA network: In [5], an OFDM-based cogni-
tive radio (OCRA) network is proposed. OCRA
network considers all possible deployment scenarios
over the heterogeneous xG network environment
and develops cross-layer operations for the OFDM
based dynamic spectrum access. OCRA network
architecture and its components are shown in
Fig. 6. For the spectrum decision and the spectrum
handoff, OCRA network provides a novel concept
of an OFDM-based spectrum management over
the heterogeneous spectrum environment. Based
on this physical layer (PHY) structure, a dual-mode
spectrum sharing framework is proposed, which
enables access to existing networks as well as coor-
dination between xG users. Furthermore, a new
routing paradigm that considers joint re-routing
and spectrum handoff is proposed. Moreover,
OCRA network introduces multi-spectrum trans-
port techniques to exploit the available but
non-contiguous wireless spectrum for high quality
2138 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159communication. In [5], the testbed design for evalu-
ation and integration of the OCRA network is pro-
posed. The OCRA testbed is based on IEEE
802.11a/g technology, which exploits the OFDM
technology. Moreover, a standalone cognitive sens-
ing unit is developed to emulate the spectrum sens-
ing capabilities of the cognitive radio.
4. Spectrum sensing
An important requirement of the xG network is
to sense the spectrum holes. As explained in Section
2, a cognitive radio is designed to be aware of and
sensitive to the changes in its surrounding. The spec-
trum sensing function enables the cognitive radio to
adapt to its environment by detecting spectrum
holes.
The most efficient way to detect spectrum holes is
to detect the primary users that are receiving data
within the communication range of an xG user. In
reality, however, it is difficult for a cognitive radio
to have a direct measurement of a channel between
a primary receiver and a transmitter. Thus, the most
recent work focuses on primary transmitter detec-
tion based on local observations of xG users.
Generally, the spectrum sensing techniques can
be classified as transmitter detection, coopera-
tive detection, and interference-based detection, as
shown in Fig. 9. In the following sections, we
describe these spectrum sensing methods for xG net-
works and discuss the open research topics in this
area.
4.1. Transmitter detection (non-cooperative
detection)
The cognitive radio should distinguish between
used and unused spectrum bands. Thus, the cognitive
radio should have capability to determine if a signalFig. 9. Classification of spectrum sensing techniques.from primary transmitter is locally present in a cer-
tain spectrum. Transmitter detection approach is
based on the detection of the weak signal from a pri-
mary transmitter through the local observations of
xG users. Basic hypothesis model for transmitter
detection can be defined as follows [25]:
xðtÞ ¼
nðtÞ H 0;
hsðtÞ þ nðtÞ H 1;
(
ð1Þ
where x(t) is the signal received by the xG user, s(t)
is the transmitted signal of the primary user, n(t) is
the AWGN and h is the amplitude gain of the chan-
nel. H0 is a null hypothesis, which states that there is
no licensed user signal in a certain spectrum band.
On the other hand, H1 is an alternative hypothesis,
which indicates that there exist some licensed user
signal.
Three schemes are generally used for the trans-
mitter detection according to the hypothesis model
[53]. In the following subsections, we investigate
matched filter detection, energy detection and cyclo-
stationary feature detection techniques proposed
for transmitter detection in xG networks.
4.1.1. Matched filter detection
When the information of the primary user signal
is known to the xG user, the optimal detector in sta-
tionary Gaussian noise is the matched filter since it
maximizes the received signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)
[53]. While the main advantage of the matched filter
is that it requires less time to achieve high process-
ing gain due to coherency, it requires a priori know-
ledge of the primary user signal such as the
modulation type and order, the pulse shape, and
the packet format. Hence, if this information is
not accurate, then the matched filter performs
poorly. However, since most wireless network sys-
tems have pilot, preambles, synchronization word
or spreading codes, these can be used for the coher-
ent detection.
4.1.2. Energy detection
If the receiver cannot gather sufficient informa-
tion about the primary user signal, for example, if
the power of the random Gaussian noise is only
known to the receiver, the optimal detector is an
energy detector [53]. In order to measure the energy
of the received signal, the output signal of bandpass
filter with bandwidth W is squared and integrated
over the observation interval T. Finally, the output
of the integrator, Y, is compared with a threshold, k,
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2139to decide whether a licensed user is present or not
[17].
If the energy detection can be applied in a non-
fading environment where h is the amplitude gain
of the channel as shown in (1), the probability of
detection Pd and false alarm Pf are given as follows
[17]:
P d ¼ PfY > kjH 1g ¼ Qm
ffiffiffiffiffi
2c
p
;
ffiffiffi
k
p 
; ð2Þ
P f ¼ PfY > kjH og ¼
Cðm; k=2Þ
CðmÞ ; ð3Þ
where c is the SNR, u = TW is the time bandwidth
product, C(Æ) and C(Æ, Æ) are complete and incomplete
gamma functions and Qm( ) is the generalized Mar-
cum Q-function. From the above functions, while
a low Pd would result in missing the presence of
the primary user with high probability which in turn
increases the interference to the primary user, a high
Pf would result in low spectrum utilization since
false alarms increase the number of missed opportu-
nities. Since it is easy to implement, the recent work
on detection of the primary user has generally
adopted the energy detector [23,53].
In [25], the shadowing and the multi-path fading
factors are considered for the energy detector. In
this case, while Pf is independent of C, when the
amplitude gain of the channel, h, varies due to
the shadowing/fading, Pd gives the probability of
the detection conditioned on instantaneous SNR
as follows:
P d ¼
Z
x
Qm
ffiffiffiffiffi
2c
p
;
ffiffiffi
k
p 
fcðxÞdx; ð4Þ
where fc(x) is the probability distribution function
of SNR under fading.
However, the performance of energy detector is
susceptible to uncertainty in noise power. In order
to solve this problem, a pilot tone from the pri-
mary transmitter is used to help improve the
accuracy of the energy detector in [53]. Another
shortcoming is that the energy detector cannot dif-
ferentiate signal types but can only determine the
presence of the signal. Thus, the energy detector is
prone to the false detection triggered by the unin-
tended signals.
4.1.3. Cyclostationary feature detection
An alternative detection method is the cyclosta-
tionary feature detection [12,22,57]. Modulated sig-
nals are in general coupled with sine wave carriers,
pulse trains, repeating spreading, hopping sequen-ces, or cyclic prefixes, which result in built-in period-
icity. These modulated signals are characterized as
cyclostationarity since their mean and autocorrela-
tion exhibit periodicity. These features are detected
by analyzing a spectral correlation function. The
main advantage of the spectral correlation func-
tion is that it differentiates the noise energy from
modulated signal energy, which is a result of the fact
that the noise is a wide-sense stationary signal with
no correlation, while modulated signals are cyclosta-
tionary with spectral correlation due to the embed-
ded redundancy of signal periodicity. Therefore, a
cyclostationary feature detector can perform better
than the energy detector in discriminating against
noise due to its robustness to the uncertainty in noise
power [57]. However, it is computationally complex
and requires significantly long observation time.
For more efficient and reliable performance, the
enhanced feature detection scheme combining cyclic
spectral analysis with pattern recognition based on
neural networks is proposed in [22]. Distinct fea-
tures of the received signal are extracted using cyclic
spectral analysis and represented by both spectral
coherent function and spectral correlation density
function. The neural network, then, classifies signals
into different modulation types.
4.2. Cooperative detection
The assumption of the primary transmitter detec-
tion is that the locations of the primary receivers are
unknown due to the absence of signalling between
primary users and the xG users. Therefore, the cog-
nitive radio should rely on only weak primary trans-
mitter signals based on the local observation of the
xG user [72,73]. However, in most cases, an xG
network is physically separated from the primary
network so there is no interaction between them.
Thus, with the transmitter detection, the xG user
cannot avoid the interference due to the lack of
the primary receiver’s information as depicted in
Fig. 10(a). Moreover, the transmitter detection
model cannot prevent the hidden terminal problem.
An xG transmitter can have a good line-of-sight to a
receiver, but may not be able to detect the transmit-
ter due to the shadowing as shown in Fig. 10(b).
Consequently, the sensing information from other
users is required for more accurate detection.
In the case of non-cooperative detection ex-
plained in Section 4.1, the xG users detect the pri-
mary transmitter signal independently through their
local observations. Cooperative detection refers to
Fig. 10. Transmitter detection problem: (a) Receiver uncertainty and (b) shadowing uncertainty.
2140 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159spectrum sensing methods where information from
multiple xG users are incorporated for primary user
detection. Cooperative detection can be imple-
mented either in a centralized or in a distributed
manner [23,71]. In the centralized method, the xG
base-station plays a role to gather all sensing infor-
mation from the xG users and detect the spectrum
holes. On the other hand, distributed solutions
require exchange of observations among xG users.
Cooperative detection among unlicensed users is
theoretically more accurate since the uncertainty in
a single user’s detection can be minimized [25].
Moreover, the multi-path fading and shadowing
effect are the main factors that degrade the perfor-
mance of primary user detection methods [44].
However, cooperative detection schemes allow to
mitigate the multi-path fading and shadowing
effects, which improves the detection probability in
a heavily shadowed environment [25].
In [55], the limitation of non-cooperative spec-
trum sensing approaches is investigated. Generally,
the data transmission and sensing function are co-
located in a single xG user device. However, this
architecture can result in suboptimal spectrum deci-
sion due to possible conflicts between data transmis-
sion and sensing. In order to solve this problem, in
[55], two distinct networks are deployed separately,
i.e., the sensor network for cooperative spectrum
sensing and the operational network for data trans-
mission. The sensor network is deployed in the
desired target area and senses the spectrum. A cen-
tral controller processes the spectrum information
collected from sensors and makes the spectrum
occupancy map for the operational network. The
operational network uses this information to deter-
mine the available spectrum.While cooperative approaches provide more
accurate sensing performance, they cause adverse
effects on resource-constrained networks due to
the additional operations and overhead traffic.
Furthermore, the primary receiver uncertainty
problem caused by the lack of the primary receiver
location knowledge is still unsolved in the coopera-
tive sensing. In the following section, we explain
interference-based detection methods, which aim
to address these problems.
4.3. Interference-based detection
Interference is typically regulated in a transmit-
ter-centric way, which means interference can be
controlled at the transmitter through the radiated
power, the out-of-band emissions and location of
individual transmitters. However, interference actu-
ally takes place at the receivers, as shown in
Fig. 10(a) and (b).
Therefore recently, a new model for measuring
interference, referred to as interference temperature
shown in Fig. 11 has been introduced by the FCC
[21]. The model shows the signal of a radio station
designed to operate in a range at which the received
power approaches the level of the noise floor. As
additional interfering signals appear, the noise floor
increases at various points within the service area, as
indicated by the peaks above the original noise
floor. Unlike the traditional transmitter-centric
approach, the interference temperature model
manages interference at the receiver through the
interference temperature limit, which is represented
by the amount of new interference that the receiver
could tolerate. In other words, the interference tem-
perature model accounts for the cumulative RF
Power at
Receiver
Original Noise Floor
Interference 
Temperature Limit
Licensed Signal
New Opportunities
for
Minimum Service
Range with
Interference Cap
Service Range at
Original Noise Floor
 Spectrum Access 
Fig. 11. Interference temperature model [21].
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2141energy from multiple transmissions and sets a max-
imum cap on their aggregate level. As long as xG
users do not exceed this limit by their transmissions,
they can use this spectrum band.
However, there exist some limitations in measur-
ing the interference temperature. In [9], the interfer-
ence is defined as the expected fraction of primary
users with service disrupted by the xG operations.
This method considers factors such as the type of
unlicensed signal modulation, antennas, ability to
detect active licensed channels, power control, and
activity levels of the licensed and unlicensed users.
However, this model describes the interference dis-
rupted by a single xG user and does not consider
the effect of multiple xG users. In addition, if xG
users are unaware of the location of the nearby pri-
mary users, the actual interference cannot be
measured using this method.
In [63], a direct receiver detection method is pre-
sented, where the local oscillator (LO) leakage power
emitted by the RF front-end of the primary receiver
is exploited for the detection of primary receivers. In
order to detect the LO leakage power, low-cost
sensor nodes can be mounted close to the primary
receivers. The sensor nodes detect the leakage LO
power to determine the channel used by the primary
receiver and this information is used by the unli-
censed users to determine the operation spectrum.
4.4. Spectrum sensing challenges
There exist several open research challenges that
need to be investigated for the development of the
spectrum sensing function.
• Interference temperature measurement: The diffi-
culty of this receiver detection model lies in effec-tively measuring the interference temperature.
An xG user is naturally aware of its transmit
power level and its precise location with the help
of a positioning system. With this ability, however,
its transmission could cause significant interfer-
ence at a neighboring receiver on the same fre-
quency. However, currently, there exists no
practical way for a cognitive radio to measure or
estimate the interference temperature at nearby
primary receivers. Since primary receivers are usu-
ally passive devices, an xG user cannot be aware of
the precise locations of primary receivers. Further-
more, if xG users cannot measure the effect of their
transmission on all possible receivers, a useful
interference temperature measurement may not
be feasible.
• Spectrum sensing in multi-user networks: Usually,
xG networks reside in a multi-user environment
which consists of multiple xG users and primary
users. Furthermore, the xG networks can also
be co-located with other xG networks competing
for the same spectrum band. However, current
interference models [9,21] do not consider the
effect of multiple xG users. Multi-user environ-
ment makes it more difficult to sense the primary
users and to estimate the actual interference.
Hence, spectrum sensing functions should be
developed considering the possibility of multi-
user/network environment. In order to solve the
multi-user problem, the cooperative detection
schemes can be considered, which exploit the spa-
tial diversity inherent in a multi-user network.
• Detection capability: One of the main require-
ments of xG networks is the detection of the
primary users in a very short time [24,53].
OFDM-based xG networks are known to be
excellent fit for the physical architecture of xG
2142 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159networks [5,57,62]. Since multi-carrier sensing
can be exploited in OFDM-based xG networks,
the overall sensing time can be reduced. Once a
primary user is detected in a single carrier, sens-
ing in other carriers is not necessary. In [57], a
power-based sensing algorithm in OFDM net-
works is proposed for detecting the presence of
a primary user. It is shown that the overall detec-
tion time is reduced by collecting information
from each carrier. However, this necessitates
the use of a large number of carriers, which
increases the design complexity. Hence, novel
spectrum sensing algorithms need to be devel-
oped such that the number of samples needed
to detect the primary user is minimized within a
given detection error probability.
5. Spectrum management
In xG networks, the unused spectrum bands will
be spread over wide frequency range including both
unlicensed and licensed bands. These unused spec-
trum bands detected through spectrum sensing
show different characteristics according to not only
the time varying radio environment but also the
spectrum band information such as the operating
frequency and the bandwidth.
Since xG networks should decide on the best
spectrum band to meet the QoS requirements over
all available spectrum bands, new spectrum man-
agement functions are required for xG networks,
considering the dynamic spectrum characteristics.
We classify these functions as spectrum sensing,
spectrum analysis, and spectrum decision. While
spectrum sensing, which is discussed in Section 4,
is primarily a PHY layer issue, spectrum analysis
and spectrum decision are closely related to the
upper layers. In this section, spectrum analysis and
spectrum decision are investigated.
5.1. Spectrum analysis
In xG networks, the available spectrum holes
show different characteristics which vary over time.
Since the xG users are equipped with the cognitive
radio based physical layer, it is important to under-
stand the characteristics of different spectrum
bands. Spectrum analysis enables the characteriza-
tion of different spectrum bands, which can be
exploited to get the spectrum band appropriate to
the user requirements.In order to describe the dynamic nature of xG
networks, each spectrum hole should be character-
ized considering not only the time-varying radio
environment and but also the primary user activity
and the spectrum band information such as operat-
ing frequency and bandwidth. Hence, it is essential
to define parameters such as interference level,
channel error rate, path-loss, link layer delay, and
holding time that can represent the quality of a par-
ticular spectrum band as follows:
• Interference: Some spectrum bands are more
crowded compared to others. Hence, the spectrum
band in use determines the interference character-
istics of the channel. From the amount of the
interference at the primary receiver, the permissi-
ble power of an xG user can be derived, which is
used for the estimation of the channel capacity.
• Path loss: The path loss increases as the operating
frequency increases. Therefore, if the transmis-
sion power of an xG user remains the same, then
its transmission range decreases at higher fre-
quencies. Similarly, if transmission power is
increased to compensate for the increased path
loss, then this results in higher interference for
other users.
• Wireless link errors: Depending on the modula-
tion scheme and the interference level of the spec-
trum band, the error rate of the channel changes.
• Link layer delay: To address different path loss,
wireless link error, and interference, different
types of link layer protocols are required at dif-
ferent spectrum bands. This results in different
link layer packet transmission delay.
• Holding time: The activities of primary users can
affect the channel quality in xG networks. Hold-
ing time refers to the expected time duration that
the xG user can occupy a licensed band before
getting interrupted. Obviously, the longer the
holding time, the better the quality would be.
Since frequent spectrum handoff can decrease
the holding time, previous statistical patterns of
handoff should be considered while designing
xG networks with large expected holding time.
Channel capacity, which can be derived from the
parameters explained above, is the most important
factor for spectrum characterization. Usually SNR
at the receiver has been used for the capacity estima-
tion. However, since SNR considers only local
observations of xG users, it is not enough to avoid
interference at the primary users. Thus, spectrum
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2143characterization is focused on the capacity estima-
tion based on the interference at the licensed receiv-
ers. The interference temperature model [21] given
in Section 4.3 can be exploited for this approach.
The interference temperature limit indicates an
upper bound or cap on the potential RF energy that
could be introduced into the band. Consequently,
using the amount of permissible interference, the
maximum permissible transmission power of an
xG user can be determined.
In [63], a spectrum capacity estimation method
has been proposed that considers the bandwidth
and the permissible transmission power. Accord-
ingly, the spectrum capacity, C, can be estimated
as follows:
C ¼ B log 1þ S
N þ I
 
; ð5Þ
where B is the bandwidth, S is the received signal
power from the xG user, N is the xG receiver noise
power, and I is the interference power received at
the xG receiver due to the primary transmitter.
Estimating spectrum capacity has also been
investigated in the context of OFDM-based cogni-
tive radio systems in [57]. Accordingly, the spectrum
capacity of the OFDM-based xG networks is
defined as follows [57]:
C ¼
Z
X
1
2
log2 1þ
Gðf ÞS0
N 0
 
df ; ð6Þ
where X is the collection of unused spectrum seg-
ments, G(f) is the channel power gain at frequency
f, S0 and N0 are the signal and noise power per unit
frequency, respectively.
The recent work on spectrum analysis, as dis-
cussed above, only focuses on spectrum capacity
estimation. However, besides the capacity, other
factors such as delay, link error rate, and holding
time also have significant influence on the quality
of services. Moreover, the capacity is closely related
to both interference level and path loss. However, a
complete analysis and modeling of spectrum in xG
networks is yet to be developed. In order to decide
on the appropriate spectrum for different types of
applications, it is desirable and an open research
issue to identify the spectrum bands combining all
characterization parameters described above.
5.2. Spectrum decision
Once all available spectrum bands are character-
ized, appropriate operating spectrum band shouldbe selected for the current transmission considering
the QoS requirements and the spectrum characteris-
tics. Thus, the spectrum management function must
be aware of user QoS requirements.
Based on the user requirements, the data rate,
acceptable error rate, delay bound, the transmission
mode, and the bandwidth of the transmission can be
determined. Then, according to the decision rule, the
set of appropriate spectrum bands can be chosen. In
[73], five spectrum decision rules are presented,
which are focused on fairness and communication
cost. However, this method assumes that all chan-
nels have similar throughput capacity. In [36], an
opportunistic frequency channel skipping protocol
is proposed for the search of better quality channel,
where this channel decision is based on SNR. In
order to consider the primary user activity, the num-
ber of spectrum handoff, which happens in a certain
spectrum band, is used for spectrum decision [37].
Spectrum decision constitutes rather important but
yet unexplored issues in xG networks, which are pre-
sented in the following subsection.
5.3. Spectrum management challenges
There exist several open research issues that need
to be investigated for the development of spectrum
decision function.
• Decision model: Signal to noise ratio (SNR) is not
sufficient to characterize the spectrum band in xG
networks. Besides the SNR, many spectrum char-
acterization parameters would affect the quality,
as investigated in Section 5.1. Thus, how to
combine these spectrum characterization para-
meters for the spectrum decision model is still
an open issue. Moreover, in OFDM based xG
networks, multiple spectrum bands can be simul-
taneously used for the transmission. For these
reasons, a decision framework for the multiple
spectrum bands should be provided.
• Multiple spectrum band decision: In xG networks,
multiple spectrum bands can be simultaneously
used for the transmission. Moreover, the xG net-
works do not require the selected multiple bands
to be contiguous. Thus, an xG user can send
packets over non-contiguous spectrum bands.
This multi-spectrum transmission shows less
quality degradation during the spectrum handoff
compared to the conventional transmission on
single spectrum band [5]. For example, if a pri-
mary user appears in a particular spectrum band,
2144 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159the xG user has to vacate this band. However,
since the rest of spectrum bands will maintain
the communication, abrupt service quality degra-
dation can be mitigated. In addition, transmis-
sion in multiple spectrum bands allows lower
power to be used in each spectrum band. As a
result, less interference with primary users is
achieved, compared to the transmission on single
spectrum band [5]. For these reasons, a spectrum
management framework should support multiple
spectrum decision capabilities. For example, how
to determine the number of spectrum bands and
how to select the set of appropriate bands are still
open research issues in xG networks.
• Cooperation with reconfiguration: The cognitive
radio technology enables the transmission
parameters of a radio to be reconfigured for opti-
mal operation in a certain spectrum band. For
example, if SNR is fixed, the bit error rate
(BER) can be adjusted to maintain the channel
capacity by exploiting adaptive modulation tech-
niques, e.g., cdma2000 1x EVDO [1,18]. Hence, a
cooperative framework that considers both spec-
trum decision and reconfiguration is required.
• Spectrum decision over heterogenous spectrum
bands: Currently, certain spectrum bands are
already assigned to different purposes while some
bands remain unlicensed. Thus, the spectrum
used by xG networks will most likely be a combi-
nation of exclusively accessed spectrum and unli-
censed spectrum. In case of licensed bands, the xG
users need to consider the activities of primary
users in spectrum analysis and decision in order
not to influence the primary user transmission.
Conversely, in unlicensed bands, since all the xG
users have the same spectrum access rights,
sophisticated spectrum sharing techniques are
necessary. In order to decide the best spectrum
band over this heterogeneous environment, xG
network should support spectrum decision
operations on both the licensed and the unli-
censed bands considering these different charac-
teristics.
6. Spectrum mobility
xG networks target to use the spectrum in a
dynamic manner by allowing the radio terminals,
known as the cognitive radio, to operate in the best
available frequency band. This enables ‘‘Get the
Best Available Channel’’ concept for communicationpurposes. To realize the ‘‘Get the Best Available
Channel’’ concept, an xG radio has to capture the
best available spectrum. Spectrum mobility is
defined as the process when an xG user changes
its frequency of operation. In the following sections,
we describe the spectrum handoff concept in xG net-
works and discuss open research issues in this new
area.
6.1. Spectrum handoff
In xG networks, spectrum mobility arises when
current channel conditions become worse or a pri-
mary user appears. Spectrum mobility gives rise to
a new type of handoff in xG networks that we refer
to as spectrum handoff. The protocols for different
layers of the network stack must adapt to the chan-
nel parameters of the operating frequency. More-
over, they should be transparent to the spectrum
handoff and the associated latency.
As pointed out in earlier sections, a cognitive
radio can adapt to the frequency of operation.
Therefore, each time an xG user changes its fre-
quency of operation, the network protocols are
going to shift from one mode of operation to
another. The purpose of spectrum mobility manage-
ment in xG networks is to make sure that such tran-
sitions are made smoothly and as soon as possible
such that the applications running on an xG user
perceive minimum performance degradation during
a spectrum handoff. It is essential for the mobility
management protocols to learn in advance about
the duration of a spectrum handoff. This information
should be provided by the sensing algorithm. Once
the mobility management protocols learn about this
latency, their job is to make sure that the ongoing
communications of an xG user undergo only mini-
mum performance degradation.
Consequently, multi-layer mobility management
protocols are required to accomplish the spectrum
mobility functionalities. These protocols support
mobility management adaptive to different types
of applications. For example, a TCP connection
can be put to a wait state until the spectrum handoff
is over. Moreover, since the TCP parameters will
change after a spectrum handoff, it is essential to
learn the new parameters and ensure that the transi-
tion from the old parameters to new parameters are
carried out rapidly. For a data communication e.g.,
FTP, the mobility management protocols should
implement mechanisms to store the packets that
are transmitted during a spectrum handoff, whereas
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2145for a real-time application there is no need to store
the packets as the stored packets, if delivered later,
will be stale packets and can not be used by the cor-
responding application.6.2. Spectrum mobility challenges in xG networks
The followings are the open research issues for
efficient spectrum mobility in xG networks.
• At a particular time, several frequency bands
may be available for an xG user. Algorithms
are required to decide the best available spectrum
based on the channel characteristics of the avail-
able spectrum and the requirements of the appli-
cations that are being used by an xG user.
• Once, the best available spectrum is selected, the
next challenge is to design new mobility and con-
nection management approaches to reduce delay
and loss during spectrum handoff.
• When the current operational frequency becomes
busy (this may happen if a licensed user starts to
use this frequency) in the middle of a communi-
cation by an xG user, then applications running
on this node have to be transferred to another
available frequency band. However, the selection
of new operational frequency may take time.
Novel algorithms are required to ensure that
applications do not suffer from severe perfor-
mance degradation during such transitions.
• Spectrum handoff may occur due to reasons
other than the detection of the primary user.
Thus, there exist various other spectrum handoff
schemes in xG networks. If an xG user moves
from one place to another, spectrum handoff
may occur just because the available spectrum
bands change. Thus the desired spectrum handoff
scheme should integrate inter-cell handoff. Apart
from this, spectrum handoff between different
networks, referred to as vertical handoff is also
likely to occur in xG networks. Under such a
diverse environment, it is essential that spectrum
handoff scheme takes all the above mentioned
possibilities into consideration.
• Spectrum mobility in time domain: xG networks
adapt to the wireless spectrum based on available
bands on the spectrum. Since these available
channels change over time, enabling QoS in this
environment is challenging. The physical radio
should ‘‘move’’ through the spectrum to meet
the QoS requirements.• Spectrum mobility in space: The available bands
also change as a user moves from one place to
another. Hence, continuous allocation of spec-
trum is a major challenge. in xG networks.
7. Spectrum sharing
In xG networks, one of the main challenges in
open spectrum usage is the spectrum sharing. Spec-
trum sharing can be regarded to be similar to gen-
eric medium access control (MAC) problems in
existing systems. However, as we will investigate in
this section, substantially different challenges exist
for spectrum sharing in xG networks. The coexis-
tence with licensed users and the wide range of
available spectrum are two of the main reasons for
these unique challenges. In this section, we delve
into the specific challenges for spectrum sharing in
xG networks, overview the existing solutions and
discuss open research areas.
In order to provide a directory for different chal-
lenges during spectrum sharing, we first enumerate
the steps in spectrum sharing in xG networks. The
challenges and the solutions proposed for these
steps will then be explained in detail. The spectrum
sharing process consists of five major steps.
1. Spectrum sensing: An xG user can only allocate a
portion of the spectrum if that portion is not used
by an unlicensed user. In Section 4, the solutions
and the challenges for this problem, i.e., spec-
trum sensing, are described. Accordingly, when
an xG node aims to transmit packets, it first
needs to be aware of the spectrum usage around
its vicinity.
2. Spectrum allocation: Based on the spectrum
availability, the node can then allocate a channel.
This allocation not only depends on spectrum
availability, but it is also determined based on
internal (and possibly external) policies. Hence,
the design of a spectrum allocation policy to
improve the performance of a node is an impor-
tant research topic.
3. Spectrum access: In this step, another major
problem of spectrum sharing comes into picture.
Since there may be multiple xG nodes trying to
access the spectrum, this access should also be
coordinated in order to prevent multiple users
colliding in overlapping portions of the spectrum.
4. Transmitter-receiver handshake: Once a portion of
the spectrum is determined for communication,
2146 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159the receiver of this communication should also be
indicated about the selected spectrum. Hence, a
transmitter-receiver handshake protocol is essen-
tial for efficient communication in xG networks.
Note that the term handshake by no means
restricts this protocol between the transmitter
and the receiver. A third party such as a central-
ized station can also be involved.
5. Spectrum mobility: xG nodes are regarded as
‘‘visitors’’ to the spectrum they allocate. Hence,
if the specific portion of the spectrum in use is
required by a licensed user, the communica-
tion needs to be continued in another vacant
portion. As a result, spectrum mobility is also
important for successful communication between
xG nodes.
The existing work in spectrum sharing in xG net-
works aims to provide solutions for each step
explained above. The existing solutions constitute
a rich literature for spectrum sharing in xG net-
works. In Section 7.1, we classify the spectrum shar-
ing techniques and describe the fundamental results
about these techniques in xG networks. These work
provide insight about how a spectrum sharing pro-
tocol can be designed. Accordingly, in Sections 7.2
and 7.3, we overview the solutions for spectrum
sharing among multiple coexisting xG networks
(inter-network spectrum sharing), and inside an xG
network (intra-network spectrum sharing), respec-
tively. Finally, in Section 7.4, the open research
issues for spectrum sharing in xG networks are
discussed.
7.1. Overview of spectrum sharing techniques
The existing solutions for spectrum sharing in xG
networks can be mainly classified in three aspects:
i.e., according to their architecture assumption, spec-
trum allocation behavior, and spectrum access tech-
nique as shown in Fig. 12. In this section, we
describe these three classifications and present the
fundamental results that analyze these classifica-Fig. 12. Classification of spectrum sharing in xG networks based on
technique.tions. The analysis of xG spectrum sharing tech-
niques has been investigated through two major
theoretical approaches. While some work uses opti-
mization techniques to find the optimal strategies
for spectrum sharing, game theoretical analysis
has also been used in this area.
The first classification for spectrum sharing tech-
niques in xG networks is based on the architecture,
which can be described as follows:
• Centralized spectrum sharing: In these solutions, a
centralized entity controls the spectrum alloca-
tion and access procedures [7,51,70]. With aid
to these procedures, generally, a distributed sens-
ing procedure is proposed such that each entity in
the xG network forward their measurements
about the spectrum allocation to the central
entity and this entity constructs a spectrum allo-
cation map.
• Distributed spectrum sharing: Distributed solu-
tions are mainly proposed for cases where the
construction of an infrastructure is not preferable
[15,29,40,54,71–73]. Accordingly, each node is
responsible for the spectrum allocation and
access is based on local (or possibly global)
policies.
The second classification for spectrum sharing
techniques in xG networks is based on the access
behavior. More specifically, the spectrum access
can be cooperative or non-cooperative as explained
below:
• Cooperative spectrum sharing: Cooperative (or
collaborative) solutions consider the effect of
the node’s communication on other nodes
[7,15,29,40,71]. In other words, the interference
measurements of each node are shared among
other nodes. Furthermore, the spectrum alloca-
tion algorithms also consider this information.
While all the centralized solutions can be regarded
as cooperative, there also exist distributed cooper-
ative solutions.architecture, spectrum allocation behavior, and spectrum access
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2147• Non-cooperative spectrum sharing: Contrary to
the cooperative solutions, non-cooperative (or
non-collaborative, selfish) solutions consider
only the node at hand [54,72,73]. These solutions
are also referred to as selfish. While non-cooper-
ative solutions may result in reduced spectrum
utilization, the minimal communication require-
ments among other nodes introduce a tradeoff
for practical solutions.
These two solutions have generally been com-
pared through their spectrum utilization, fairness,
and throughput. The utilization and fairness in spec-
trum access has been investigated in [50], where the
spectrum allocation problem is modeled as a graph
coloring problem and both centralized and distrib-
uted approaches are investigated. Using this model,
an optimization framework is developed. In this
framework, secondary users allocate channels
according to the interference that will be caused by
the transmission. Both cooperative and non-cooper-
ative approaches are considered such that coopera-
tive approaches also consider the effect of the
channel allocation on the potential neighbors. The
simulation results show that cooperative approaches
outperform non-cooperative approaches as well as
closely approximating the global optimum. More-
over, the comparison of centralized and distributed
solutions reveals that distributed solution closely fol-
lows the centralized solution. A similar analysis has
also been provided in [74], where the effects of col-
laboration in spectrum access is investigated. An
important assumption in these work is that second-
ary users know the location and transmit power of
primary users so that the interference calculations
can be performed easily. However, such an assump-
tion may not always be valid in xG networks.
Game theory has also been exploited for perfor-
mance evaluation of xG spectrum access schemes.
Especially, the comparison between cooperative
and non-cooperative approaches has been presented
in [49] through game theoretical analysis. In [49],
game theory is exploited to analyze the behavior
of the cognitive radio for distributed adaptive chan-
nel allocation. It is assumed that users deploy
CDMA and determine the operating channel and
the coding rate by keeping transmission power con-
stant. It is shown that the cooperative case can be
modeled as an exact potential game, which con-
verges to a pure strategy Nash equilibrium solution.
However, this framework has been shown not to be
applicable for non-cooperative spectrum sharingand a learning algorithm has been proposed. The
evaluations reveal that Nash equilibrium point for
cooperative users is reached quickly and results in
a certain degree of fairness as well as improved
throughput. On the other hand, the learning
algorithm for non-cooperative users converge to a
mixed strategy allocation. Moreover, the fairness
is degraded when non-cooperative approach is used.
While this approach results in slightly worse perfor-
mance, the information exchange required by selfish
users is significantly low.
Finally, the third classification for spectrum shar-
ing in xG networks is based on the access technol-
ogy as explained below:
• Overlay spectrum sharing: Overlay spectrum shar-
ing refers to the spectrum access technique used.
More specifically, a node accesses the network
using a portion of the spectrum that has not been
used by licensed users [7,15,40,54,71–73]. As a
result, interference to the primary system is
minimized.
• Underlay spectrum sharing: Underlay spectrum
sharing exploits the spread spectrum techniques
developed for cellular networks [29]. Once a spec-
trum allocation map has been acquired, an xG
node begins transmission such that its transmit
power at a certain portion of the spectrum is
regarded as noise by the licensed users. This tech-
nique requires sophisticated spread spectrum
techniques and can utilize increased bandwidth
compared to overlay techniques.
The effects of underlay and overlay approaches in
a cooperative setting are investigated in [19], where
non-cooperative users are analyzed using a game
theoretical framework. Using this framework, it is
shown that frequency division multiplexing is opti-
mal when interference among users is high. As a
result, the overlay approach becomes more efficient
than underlay when interference among users is
high. The lack of cooperation among users,
however, necessitates an overlay approach. The
comparative evaluations show that the performance
loss due to the lack of cooperation is small, and van-
ishes with increasing SNR. However, in this frame-
work, the cost and inaccuracies of information
exchange between users are not considered.
Another comparison of underlay and overlay
approaches is provided in [42]. The comparison is
based on the influence of the secondary system on
the primary system in terms of outage probability
2148 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159and three spectrum sharing techniques have been
considered. The first technique (spreading based
underlay) requires secondary users to spread their
transmit power over the full spectrum such as
CDMA or Ultra Wide Band (UWB). The second
technique (interference avoidance overlay) requires
nodes to choose a frequency band to transmit such
that the interference at a primary user is minimized.
Also an hybrid technique (spreading based underlay
with interference avoidance) is investigated where a
node spreads its transmission over the entire spec-
trum and also null or notch frequencies where a pri-
mary user is transmitting. Consequently, first, the
interference statistics for each technique are deter-
mined for outage probability analysis. Then, the
outage probability for each technique is derived
assuming no system knowledge, perfect system
knowledge, and limited system knowledge. Similar
to other existing work, when perfect system knowl-
edge is assumed, the overlay scheme outperforms
the underlay scheme in terms of outage probability.
However, when interference avoidance is incorpo-
rated into spectrum sharing, the underlay scheme
with interference avoidance guarantees smaller out-
age probability than the pure interference avoid-
ance. In a more realistic case, when limited system
knowledge is considered, the importance of the
hybrid technique is exacerbated. The overlay
schemes result in poor performance due imperfec-
tions at spectrum sensing. More specifically, a node
can transmit at a channel where a primary user is
transmitting. However, when underlay with interfer-
ence avoidance is used, the interference caused to
the primary user is minimized. Another important
result is that a higher number of secondary usersFig. 13. Inter-network and intra-networkcan be accommodated by the hybrid scheme than
the pure interference avoidance scheme.
The theoretical work on spectrum access in xG
networks reveals important tradeoffs for the design
of spectrum access protocols. As expected, it has
been shown that cooperative settings result in higher
utilization of the spectrum as well as fairness. How-
ever, this advantage may not be so high considering
the cost of cooperation due to frequent information
exchange among users. On the other hand, the spec-
trum access technique, i.e., whether it is overlay or
underlay, affects the performance in each setting.
While an overlay technique focuses on the holes in
the spectrum, dynamic spreading techniques are
required for underlay techniques for interference-
free operation between primary and secondary sys-
tems. Considering the tradeoff between system com-
plexity and performance, hybrid techniques may be
considered for the spectrum technique. In the follow-
ing two sections, we explain the existing spectrum
sharing techniques that are combinations of the
three classifications we have discussed in this section.
7.2. Inter-network spectrum sharing
xG networks are envisioned to provide opportu-
nistic access to the licensed spectrum using unli-
censed users. This setting enables multiple systems
being deployed in overlapping locations and spec-
trum as shown in Fig. 13. Hence, spectrum sharing
among these systems is an important research topic
in xG networks. Up to date, inter-network spectrum
sharing has been regulated via static frequency
assignment among different systems or centralized
allocations between different access points of a sys-spectrum sharing in xG networks.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2149tem in cellular networks. In ad-hoc networks, only
the interference issues in the ISM band has been
investigated focusing mostly on the coexistence of
WLAN and Bluetooth networks. Consequently,
intra-network spectrum sharing in xG networks
poses unique challenges that have not been consid-
ered before in wireless communication systems. In
this section, we overview the recent work in this
research area.
7.2.1. Centralized inter-network spectrum sharing
As a first step for the coexistence of open spec-
trum systems, in [33], the common spectrum coordi-
nation channel (CSCC) etiquette protocol is
proposed for coexistence of IEEE 802.11b and
802.16a networks. The reason we do not consider
this work as a complete solution for xG networks
is that it necessitates modifications in users using
both of the networks. More specifically, each node
is assumed to be equipped with a cognitive radio
and a low bit-rate, narrow-band control radio.
The coexistence is maintained through the coordi-
nation of these nodes with each other by broadcast-
ing CSCC messages. Each user determines the
channel it can use for data transmission such that
interference is avoided. In case channel selection is
not sufficient to avoid interference, power adapta-
tion is also deployed. The evaluations reveal that
when there is vacant spectrum to use frequency
adaptation, CSCC etiquette protocol improves
throughput by 35–160% via both frequency and
power adaptation. Another interesting result is that
when nodes are clustered around IEEE 802.11b
access points, which is a realistic assumption,
the throughput improvement of CSCC protocol
increases.
In addition to the competition for the spectrum,
competition for the users is also considered in [32].
In this work, a central spectrum policy server
(SPS) is proposed to coordinate spectrum demands
of multiple xG operators. In this scheme, each oper-
ator bids for the spectrum indicating the cost it will
pay for the duration of the usage. The SPS then
allocates the spectrum by maximizing its profit from
these bids. The operators also determine an offer for
the users and users select which operator to use for a
given type of traffic. When compared to a case
where each operator is assigned an equal share of
the spectrum, the operator bidding scheme achieves
higher throughput leading to higher revenue for the
SPS, as well as a lower price for the users according
to their requirements. This work opens a new per-spective by incorporating competition for users as
well as the spectrum in xG networks.
7.2.2. Distributed inter-network spectrum sharing
A distributed spectrum sharing scheme for wire-
less Internet service provides (WISPs) that share
the same spectrum is proposed in [43], where a dis-
tributed QoS based dynamic channel reservation
(D-QDCR) scheme is used. The basic concept
behind D-QDCR is that a base station (BSs) of a
WISP competes with its interferer BSs according
to the QoS requirements of its users to allocate a
portion of the spectrum. Similar to the CSCC proto-
col [33], the control and data channels are sepa-
rated. The basic unit for channel allocation in
D-QDCR is called Q-frames. When a BS allocates
a Q-frame, it uses the control and data channels
allocated to it for coordination and data communi-
cation between the users. The competition between
BSs are performed according to the priority of each
BS depending on a BSs data volume and QoS
requirement. Moreover, various competition poli-
cies are proposed based on the type of traffic a user
demands. Although thorough evaluations are not
provided in [43], the D-QDCR scheme serves an
important contribution for inter-network spectrum
sharing.
The inter-network spectrum sharing solutions so
far provide a broader view of the spectrum sharing
solution including certain operator policies for the
determination of the spectrum allocation. A major
problem for the existing solutions in the xG network
architecture is the requirement for a common con-
trol channel. We detail the potential problems and
open research issues in this aspect in Section 7.4.
7.3. Intra-network spectrum sharing
A significant amount of work on spectrum shar-
ing focuses on intra-network spectrum sharing,
where the users of an xG network try to access the
available spectrum without causing interference to
the primary users. In this section, we overview the
existing work and the proposed solutions in this
area while providing a classification of existing
protocols in terms of the classification provided in
Section 7.1.
7.3.1. Cooperative intra-network spectrum sharing
A cooperative local bargaining (LB) scheme is
proposed in [15] to provide both spectrum utiliza-
tion and fairness. The local bargaining framework
2150 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159is formulated based on the framework in [50,74].
Local bargaining is performed by constructing local
groups according to a poverty line that ensures a
minimum spectrum allocation to each user and
hence focuses on fairness of users. The evaluations
reveal that local bargaining can closely approximate
centralized graph coloring approach at a reduced
complexity. Moreover, localized operation via
grouping provides an efficient operation between a
fully distributed and a centralized scheme.
Another approach that considers local groups for
spectrum sharing is provided in [71], where a heter-
ogeneous distributed MAC (HD-MAC) protocol is
proposed. A potential problem in the solution pro-
vided in LB [15] is that a common control channel
may not exist in xG networks or can be occupied
by a primary user. In [71], it is shown that for a
given topology, very limited number of common
channels exist for each of the users in a network.
However, when local neighbors are considered, a
node shares many channels with its neighbors.
Based on this observation, a clustering algorithm
is proposed such that each group selects a common
channel for communication, and distributed sensing
and spectrum sharing is provided through this
channel. Moreover, if this channel is occupied by
a primary user at a specific time, the nodes reorga-
nize themselves to use another control channel.
The performance evaluations show that the distri-
buted grouping approach outperforms common
control channel approaches especially when the
traffic load is high.
The notion of busy tones, which are mainly used
in some ad-hoc network protocols, is extended to
the xG networks in [40] with the dynamic open spec-
trum sharing MAC (DOSS-MAC) protocol. As a
result, when a node is using a specific data channel
for communication, both the transmitter and the
receiver send a busy tone signal through the associ-
ated busy tone channel. In order to further eliminate
control channel communication, FFT-based radio
and the noncoherent modulation/demodulation-
based radio designs are proposed which theoreti-
cally enable receivers to detect the carrier frequency
and the bandwidth of a signal without any control
information.
In addition to spectrum allocation, transmit
power determination is also included in the spec-
trum sharing protocol in [29]. In this work both sin-
gle channel and multi-channel asynchronous
distributed pricing (SC/MC-ADP) schemes are pro-
posed, where each node announces its interferenceprice to other nodes. Using this information from
its neighbors, a node can first allocate a channel
and in case there exist users in that channel, then,
determine its transmit power. As a result, this
scheme can be classified as a hybrid of underlay
and overlay techniques. While there exist users
using distinct channels, multiple users can share
the same channel by adjusting their transmit power.
Furthermore, the SC-ADP algorithm provides
higher rates to users when compared to selfish algo-
rithms where users select the best channel without
any knowledge about their neighbors’ interference
levels. Finally, it is shown that under high interfer-
ence, the proposed algorithm outperforms underlay
techniques.
So far, we have presented distributed solutions
where a fixed infrastructure is not assumed. In [7],
dynamic spectrum access protocol (DSAP), which
is a centralized solution for spectrum sharing in
xG networks, is presented. This solution is similar
to the SPS approach [32] described in Section 7.2
with a focus on intra-network spectrum sharing.
The dynamic spectrum access protocol (DSAP) pro-
posed in this work enables a central entity to lease
spectrum to users in a limited geographical region.
DSAP consists of clients, DSAP server, and relays
that relay information between server and clients
that are not in the direct range of the server. More-
over, clients inform the server their channel condi-
tions so that a global view of the network can be
constructed at the server. By exploiting cooperative
and distributed sensing, DSAP servers construct a
RadioMap. This map is used for channel assign-
ments which are leased to clients for a limited
amount of time.
7.3.2. Non-cooperative intra-network spectrum
sharing
An opportunistic spectrum management scheme is
proposed in [73], where users allocate channels based
on their observations of interference patterns and
neighbors. In the device centric spectrum manage-
ment scheme (DCSM), the communication overhead
is minimized by providing five different system rules
for spectrum allocation. As a result, users allocate
channels according to these rules based on their
observations instead of collaborating with other
users. In case more than one node chooses the same
channel in close proximity, random access techniques
are used to resolve the contention. The comparative
analysis of this scheme with the cooperative schemes
show that rule-based spectrum access results in
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2151slightly worse performance. However, the communi-
cation overhead is reduced significantly.
A spectrum sharing protocol for ad-hoc xG net-
works, (AS-MAC), is proposed in [54]. AS-MAC
exploits the RTS-CTS exchange and Network Allo-
cation Vector (NAV) concepts of the IEEE 802.11
MAC protocol [30] in an open spectrum setting.
Moreover, a common control channel is used such
that transmitter receiver handshake is initiated
through this channel. In this work, the xG network
is assumed to coexist with a GSM network. Each
node first listens to the broadcast channel of the
GSM network as well as the control channel of
the xG network, and each node then constructs its
NAV and selects channels accordingly.
In addition to the spectrum allocation methods, a
transmitter receiver handshake method is proposed
in [72] as a part of a cross-layer decentralized cogni-
tive MAC (DC-MAC) protocol. The details of this
work is explained in Section 9. In the transmitter-
receiver handshake method, each user is assigned a
set of channels is continuously monitored by the
user. A transmitter selects one of those channels
and initiates communication. The actual data chan-
nel selection is then performed through this initial
handshake channel.
7.4. Spectrum sharing challenges
In the previous sections, the theoretical findings
and solutions for spectrum sharing in xG networks
are investigated. Although there already exists a
vast amount of research in spectrum sharing, there
are still many open research issues for the realiza-
tion of efficient and seamless open spectrum opera-
tion. In the following, we detail the challenges for
spectrum sharing in xG networks along with some
possible solutions.
7.4.1. Common control channel (CCC)
Many spectrum sharing solutions, either central-
ized or distributed, assume a CCC for spectrum
sharing [7,40,54]. It is clear that a CCC facilitates
many spectrum sharing functionalities such as trans-
mitter receiver handshake [40], communication with
a central entity [7], or sensing information exchange.
However, due to the fact that xG network users are
regarded as visitors to the spectrum they allocate,
when a primary user chooses a channel, this channel
has to be vacated without interfering. This is also
true for the CCC. As a result, implementation of a
fixed CCC is infeasible in xG networks. Moreover,in a network with primary users, a channel common
for all users is shown to be highly dependent on the
topology, hence, varies over time [71]. Consequently,
for protocols requiring a CCC, either a CCC mitiga-
tion technique needs to be devised or local CCCs
need to be exploited for clusters of nodes [71]. On
the other hand when CCC is not used, the transmit-
ter receiver handshake becomes a challenge. For this
challenge, receiver driven techniques proposed in
[72] may be exploited.
7.4.2. Dynamic radio range
Radio range changes with operating frequency
due to attenuation variation. In many solutions, a
fixed range is assumed to be independent of the
operating spectrum [15,71]. However, in xG net-
works, where a large portion of the wireless spec-
trum is considered, the neighbors of a node may
change as the operating frequency changes. This
effects the interference profile as well as routing
decisions. Moreover, due to this property, the
choice of a control channel needs to be carefully
decided. It would be much efficient to select control
channels in the lower portions of the spectrum
where the transmission range will be higher and to
select data channels in the higher portions of the
spectrum where a localized operation can be utilized
with minimized interference. So far, there exists no
work addressing this important challenge in xG net-
works and we advocate operation frequency aware
spectrum sharing techniques due the direct interde-
pendency between interference and radio range.
7.4.3. Spectrum unit
Almost all spectrum sharing techniques discussed
in the previous sections consider a channel as the
basic spectrum unit for operation. Many algorithms
and methods have been proposed to select the suit-
able channel for efficient operation in xG networks.
However, in some work, the channel is vaguely
defined as ‘‘orthogonal non-interfering’’ [73],
‘‘TDMA, FDMA, CDMA, or a combination of
them’’ [50], or ‘‘a physical channel as in IEEE
802.11, or a logical channel associated with a spec-
trum region or a radio technology’’ [71]. In other
work, the channel is simply defined in the frequency
dimension as frequency bands [33,40,43,49,54]. It is
clear that the definition of a channel as a spectrum
unit for spectrum sharing is crucial in further devel-
oping algorithms. Since a huge portion of the spec-
trum is of interest, it is clear that properties of a
channel may not be constant due to the effects of
2152 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159operating frequency. On the contrary, a channel is
usually assumed to provide the same bandwidth as
other channels [15,29,42,50,73].
Furthermore, the existence of primary users and
the heterogeneity of the networks that are available
introduce additional challenges to the choice of a
spectrum unit/channel. Hence, different resource
allocation units such as CSMA random access,
TDMA time slots, CDMA codes, as well as hybrid
types can be allocated to the primary users. In order
to provide seamless operation, these properties need
to be considered in the choice of a spectrum unit. In
[28], the necessity of a spectrum space for a spectrum
unit is also advocated. The possible dimensions of
the spectrum space are classified as power, fre-
quency, time, space, and signal. Although not
orthogonal, these dimensions can be used to distin-
guish signals [28].
For this purpose, we describe a three dimensional
space model for modeling network resources that
has been proposed in [59]. Although this work
focuses on heterogeneity in next generation/fourth
generation (NG/4G) networks, as discussed in
[59], it can be easily incorporated into xG networks.
Based on this three dimensional resource-space, a
novel Virtual Cube concept has been proposed in
order to evaluate the performance of each network.
The Virtual Cube concept defines a unit structure
based on the resource allocation techniques used
in existing networks.
The resource is modeled in a three dimensional
resource-space with time, rate, and power/code
dimensions as shown in Fig. 14. The time dimension
models the time required to transfer information.Fig. 14. Virtual cube model.The rate dimension models the data rate of the net-
work. Thus, the capacity of different networks with
the same connection durations but different data
rates are captured in the rate dimension. Further-
more, in the case of CDMA networks, the band-
width increase due to the multi-code transmissions
is also captured in this dimension. The power/code
dimension models the energy consumed for trans-
mitting information through the network. Note
that, the resource in terms of available bandwidth
can be modeled using the time and rate dimensions.
However, the cost of accessing different networks
vary in terms of the power consumed by the wireless
terminal. Hence, a third dimension is required. Each
network type requires different power levels for
transmission of the MAC frames because of various
modulation schemes, error coding and channel
coding techniques. As a result, the resource differ-
ences in these aspects are captured in the power
dimension.
Using this model, heterogeneous access types in
existing networks as well as xG network spectrum
can be modeled based on a generic spectrum unit.
We advocate that determining a common spectrum
unit is crucial for efficient utilization of the wireless
spectrum and seamless operability with existing pri-
mary networks.
8. Upper layer issues
In addition to the unique challenges of xG net-
works in terms of spectrum sensing, spectrum man-
agement, spectrum mobility, and spectrum sharing,
upper layer issues such as routing, flow control and
congestion control are also important for the reali-
zation of dynamic spectrum networks. In this
section, we overview the challenges related to these
areas.
8.1. Routing challenges
Routing constitutes a rather important but yet
unexplored problem in xG networks. Especially in
xG networks with multi-hop communication
requirements, the unique characteristics of the open
spectrum phenomenon necessitates novel routing
algorithms to be developed. So far, the research
on xG networks is primarily on spectrum sensing
techniques and spectrum sharing solutions. How-
ever, we emphasize that the need for routing algo-
rithms in open spectrum environment constitutes
an important topic in xG network research. In this
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2153section, we overview two existing solutions for rout-
ing and discuss open research topics in this area.
A major design choice for routing in xG net-
works is the collaboration between routing and
spectrum management. The dynamic spectrum that
is intermittent in terms of both time and space
necessitates such an approach [60,69]. Simulation-
based comparisons are performed in [60,69] for
cross-layer and decoupled approaches for routing
and spectrum management. The results in both of
these work reveal that a cross-layer solution that
constructs routes and determines the operating
spectrum jointly for each hop outperforms a
sequential approach where routes are selected inde-
pendent of the spectrum allocation [60,69].
In [60], the inter-dependence between route selec-
tion and spectrum management is investigated.
First, a decoupled route selection and spectrum
management methodology is proposed. In this
scheme, the route selection is performed independent
of the spectrum management using the shortest-path
algorithm. The spectrum sharing is performed using
the scheme in [71]. In this scheme, routing layer
invokes path discovery to select routes. The spec-
trum management is then performed on each hop.
A cross-layer solution that considers joint route
selection and spectrum management is also pro-
posed. In this approach, each source node uses
DSR to find candidate paths and schedules a time
and channel for each hop. This source-based routing
technique is performed centrally using a global view
of the network to show the upper bound in achiev-
able performance. A similar comparison of layered
and cross-layer approach is presented in [69] using
a novel graph modeling technique, which will be dis-
cussed in the following. The simulations in both
[60,69] reveal that cross-layer approach is advanta-
geous for routing in xG networks since the availabil-
ity of spectrum directly affects the end-to-end
performance. These two solutions for routing
in xG networks clearly show that cross-layer
approaches that jointly consider route and spectrum
selection is necessary for xG networks.
Another unique challenge for routing in xG net-
works is the development tools for analytical evalu-
ation of routing protocols. Traditionally, routing
protocols for ad hoc networks are analyzed using
graph models. However, in these networks, the
communication spectrum is fixed and continuous
contrary to the dynamic nature of xG networks.
Hence, a node can use the same set of static chan-
nel(s) for communication with all neighbors [69].On the contrary, modeling network topology and
connectivity of an xG network is challenging. In
[69], a layered graph model is proposed for this chal-
lenge. In this model, each layer corresponds to a
channel in the network. In each layer, each node is
represented by subnodes forming the vertex in each
layer. This model is exploited in [69] to construct
routes. Using different cost functions for each edge,
required constraints for routes such as interference
avoidance can be achieved. This model provides
an interesting solution for xG network modeling
for relatively static link properties. However, as will
be discussed in the following, time-varying nature of
available links necessitates time dependent models
for a complete analysis of xG networks.
Although these solutions provide interesting
results for routing in xG networks, there are still
major challenges and open research topics that has
not been addressed before. Below, we summarize
the open research issues for routing in xG networks:
• Common control channel: It has also been empha-
sized in Section 7.4 that the lack of a common
control channel (CCC) in xG networks consti-
tutes a major problem. Traditional routing pro-
tocols require either local or global broadcast
messages for specific functionalities such as
neighbor discovery, route discovery and route
establishment. However, even broadcasting in
xG networks is a major problem due to the lack
of a CCC. Hence, solutions considering this fact
is required in xG networks.
• Intermittent connectivity: In xG networks, the
reachable neighbors of a node may change rap-
idly. This is due to two reasons. First, the avail-
able spectrum may change or vanish as licensed
users exploit the network. Moreover, once a node
selects a channel for communication it is no
longer reachable through other channels. As a
result, the connectivity concept used for wireless
networks is different in xG networks and depends
on the spectrum. For this purpose channel-based
models such as the one in [69] is required as well
as time-based solutions.
• Re-routing: In xG networks, due to the intermit-
tent connectivity, a route established for a flow
can change due to the available spectrum in addi-
tion to mobility. Hence, the re-routing algo-
rithms considering the dynamic spectrum is
necessary for routing in xG networks. A spec-
trum-aware routing adapts route selection to
spectrum fluctuations [73].
2154 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159• Queue management: The queue management in
xG networks is another challenge which has not
been addressed to date. An xG terminal may
have multiple interfaces for communication with
different nodes. Since the available spectrum var-
ies over time, these interfaces may become
unavailable requiring the packets served through
that interface moved to other interfaces. In addi-
tion, the quality of service requirements may
deploy various priorities on different traffic types.
Hence, the implementation of a single queue or
multiple queues for each traffic type of each inter-
face needs to be investigated.
8.2. Transport layer challenges
Transport protocols constitute an unexplored
area for xG networks since there exist no work on
this area yet. Several solutions have been proposed
to improve the performance of TCP and UDP in
conventional wireless networks in recent years [2].
These studies focus on mechanisms to limit the per-
formance degradation of TCP and UDP that arise
because of wireless link errors and access delays.
However, the xG networks impose unique chal-
lenges for transport protocols as explained below:
The performance of TCP depends on the packet
loss probability and the round trip time (RTT).
Wireless link errors and, hence, the packet loss prob-
ability not only depends on the access technology,
but also on the frequency in use, interference level,
and the available bandwidth. Therefore, the wireless
TCP and UDP protocols that are designed for exist-
ing wireless access technologies cannot be used in
dynamic spectrum assignment based xG networks.
On the other hand, RTT of a TCP connection
depends indirectly on the frequency of operation.
For example, if the packet error rate (or equiva-
lently, the frame error rate) is higher at a particular
frequency band, a higher number of link layer
retransmissions are required to successfully trans-
port a packet across the wireless channel. Moreover,
the wireless channel access delay in xG networks
depends on the operation frequency, the interfer-
ence level, and the medium access control protocol.
These factors influence the RTT of a TCP connec-
tion. Therefore, based on the frequency of opera-
tion, RTT and packet loss probability observed by
a TCP protocol will vary. Hence, transport proto-
cols need to be designed to adapt to these
variations.The operation frequency of a cognitive radio in
xG networks may vary from time to time due to
spectrum handoff as explained in Section 6. When
an xG terminal changes its operating frequency, this
results in a finite amount of delay before the new
frequency can be operational. This is referred to
as the spectrum handoff latency. The spectrum hand-
off latency can increase the RTT, which leads to
retransmission timeout (RTO). Conventional trans-
port protocols can perceive this RTO as packet loss
and invoke its congestion avoidance mechanism
resulting in reduced throughput. To eliminate the
adverse effects of spectrum mobility, transport pro-
tocols need to be designed such that they are trans-
parent to spectrum handoff.
9. Cross-layer design
The communication challenges outlined above
necessitate new communication protocols to be
designed for spectrum-aware communication in
xG networks. As explained before, the performance
of xG networking functionalities directly depend on
the properties of the spectrum band in use. This
direct relationship necessitates a cross-layer design
in the entire xG networking protocol stack. In
particular, the effects of the selected spectrum band
and the changes due to spectrum mobility need to be
carefully considered in the design of communication
protocols. Moreover, the spectrum management
functionalities such as spectrum sensing and spec-
trum handoff should work in collaboration with
the communication protocols. Based on this
motivation, in the following sections, we overview
the challenges for the cross-layer design in xG
networks.
9.1. Cross-layer challenges in spectrum
management
The dynamic nature of the underlying spectrum
in xG networks necessitates communication proto-
cols to adapt to the wireless channel parameters.
Moreover, the behavior of each protocol affects
the performance of other protocols. For example,
different medium access techniques used in xG net-
works, directly affect the round trip time (RTT)
for the transport protocols. Similarly, when re-rout-
ing is done because of link failures arising from
spectrum mobility, the RTT and error probability
in the communication path change accordingly.
The change in error probability also affects the
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2155performance of the medium access protocols. Con-
sequently, all these changes affect the overall quality
of the user applications.
The spectrum management function cooperates
with the communication layers, as shown in
Fig. 2. In order to decide the appropriate spectrum
band, the spectrum management requires the infor-
mation regarding QoS requirement, transport, rout-
ing, scheduling, and sensing. Hence, these
interdependencies among functionalities of the com-
munication stack, and their close coupling with the
physical layer necessitate a cross layer spectrum
management function which considers medium
access, routing, and transport, and application
requirements as well as available spectrum in the
selection of the operating spectrum.
9.2. Cross-layer challenges in spectrum handoff
Spectrum handoff results in latency, which affects
the performance of the communication protocols.
Thus, the main challenge in spectrum handoff is to
reduce the latency for spectrum sensing. The
spectrum handoff latency has adverse effects on
the performance of transport protocols. Moreover,
during spectrum handoff, the channel parameters
such as path loss, interference, wireless link error,
and link layer delay are influenced by the dynamic
use of the spectrum. On the other hand, the changes
in the PHY and MAC channel parameters can initi-
ate spectrum handoff. Moreover, the user applica-
tion may request spectrum handoff to find a better
quality spectrum band.
As shown in Fig. 2, the spectrum mobility func-
tion cooperates with spectrum management func-
tion and spectrum sensing to decide on an
available spectrum band. In order to estimate the
effect of the spectrum handoff latency, information
about the link layer and sensing delays are required.
Transport and application layer should also be
aware of the latency to reduce the abrupt quality
degradation. In addition, the routing information
is also important for the route recovery using spec-
trum handoff. For these reasons, the spectrum
handoff is closely related to the operations in all
communication layers.
9.3. Cross-layer challenges in spectrum sharing
The performance of spectrum sharing directly
depends on the spectrum sensing capabilities of
the xG users. Spectrum sensing is primarily aPHY layer function. However, in the case of coop-
erative detection, xG users should use ad hoc con-
nection for exchanging sensing information, which
necessitates a cross-layer design between spectrum
sharing and spectrum sensing. It is clear that the
performance of communication protocols depends
on spectrum sensing, i.e., getting information about
the spectrum utilization. Two major challenges exist
in this aspect.
The first challenge is the interference mitigation.
While interference occurs at a receiver, spectrum
scanning alone only provides information about
transmitters [33]. Hence, cooperative techniques
that necessitate transmitters to consider both their
interference to other users and the interference at
their receivers are required. The superiority of
cooperative techniques in terms of system perfor-
mance has already been demonstrated in many
studies [15,29,40,71]. On the other hand, such a
collaboration increases the communication over-
head and may lead to overall system performance
degradation when channel capacity or energy
consumption is considered. Consequently, effective
spectrum sharing techniques that enable efficient
collaboration between different xG nodes in terms
of spectrum sensing information sharing are
required.
The second challenge about spectrum sensing is
that the whole spectrum cannot be sensed all the
time. More specifically, due to the huge range of
spectrum foreseen for xG networks, a significant
amount of time is required to sense the whole spec-
trum. Since sensing consumes energy this process
has to be carefully scheduled. As a result, it may
not be practical to assume that a node has an accu-
rate knowledge about the spectrum at all times.
Moreover, current radio technologies prevent con-
tinuous spectrum sensing if only a single radio is
deployed on a device. During communication, spec-
trum sensing has to be stopped to switch to the
required channel and perform communication.
Hence, this operation requires cross-layer interac-
tion between the physical layer and the upper layers.
More specifically, communication attempts need to
be coordinated with spectrum sensing events. As
an alternative, the effect of using multiple radios
has been investigated in [54], where a two trans-
ceiver operation is considered such that a trans-
ceiver always listens to the control channel for
sensing. This operation improves the system perfor-
mance, however, the complexity and device costs
are high.
2156 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159The spectrum sharing techniques discussed in
Section 7 decouples spectrum allocation and spec-
trum sensing. In decentralized cognitive MAC
(DC-MAC) scheme proposed in [72], a cross-layer
approach for spectrum allocation and spectrum
sensing is considered. Contrary to many work, in
[72], limited spectrum sensing is addressed, where
only a portion of the whole spectrum can be sensed.
Moreover, spectrum sensing is jointly performed
with spectrum allocation and application layer such
that the node senses a portion of the spectrum only
if it will allocate a channel due to a request from the
application layer. First, an optimal approach for
channel allocation is provided followed by a greedy
suboptimal approach. A node is assumed to be able
to sense one channel among N possible channels.
Through performance evaluation, it is shown that
the greedy approach closely approximates the opti-
mal solution. Moreover, this solution is also robust
to inaccuracies in spectrum sensing and limited
knowledge.
9.4. Cross-layer challenges in upper layers
Since available spectrum bands in xG networks
with multi-hop communication are different for
each hop, spectrum sensing information is required
for topology configuration in xG networks. More-
over, a major design choice for routing in xG net-
works is the collaboration between routing and
spectrum decision. If the optimal route from an
xG user to another results in interference to the pri-
mary users, end-to-end latency or packet losses can
be affected along the route due to this interaction.
To mitigate the degradation, multiple spectrum
interfaces at intermediate nodes may be selected.
Therefore, end-to-end route may consist of multiple
hops traversing different spectrum bands.
Finally, re-routing needs to be performed in a
cross-layer fashion. If a link failure occurs due to
spectrum mobility, the routing algorithm needs to
differentiate this failure from a node failure. Fur-
thermore, intermediate xG users can perform re-
routing by exploiting the spectrum information
available from spectrum sensing functionality select
better routes method.
Due to the dynamic frequency of operation, the
RTT and packet loss rates vary in xG networks,
which leads to variations in packet transmission
delay. Moreover, medium access schemes introduce
access delay. All these factors influence the round
trip time of a connection, which in turn affect theperformance of transport protocols. Moreover, the
latency associated with a spectrum handoff increases
the instantaneous RTT of the packet transmission.
Consequently, transport protocols for xG networks
should be designed in a spectrum aware approach
that introduces cooperative operation with the other
communication layers.
10. Conclusions
xG networks are being developed to solve current
wireless network problems resulting from the lim-
ited available spectrum and the inefficiency in the
spectrum usage by exploiting the existing wireless
spectrum opportunistically. xG networks, equipped
with the intrinsic capabilities of the cognitive radio,
will provide an ultimate spectrum-aware communi-
cation paradigm in wireless communications. In this
survey, intrinsic properties and current research
challenges of the xG networks are presented. We
investigate the unique challenges in xG networks
by a bottom-up approach, starting from the capa-
bilities of cognitive radio techniques to the commu-
nication protocols that need to be developed for
efficient communication. Moreover, novel spectrum
management functionalities such as spectrum sens-
ing, spectrum analysis, and spectrum decision as
well as spectrum mobility are introduced.
The discussions provided in this survey strongly
advocate spectrum-aware communication protocols
that consider the spectrum management functional-
ities. This cross-layer design requirement necessitates
a rethinking of the existing solutions developed for
wireless networks. Many researchers are currently
engaged in developing the communication technolo-
gies and protocols required for xG networks.
However, to ensure efficient spectrum-aware commu-
nication, more research is needed along the lines
introduced in this survey.
References
[1] 3GPP2, cdma2000 High rate packet data air interface
specification, TS C.S20024 V2.0, October 2000.
[2] O.B. Akan, I.F. Akyildiz, ATL: an adaptive transport layer
for next generation wireless internet, IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Communications (JSAC) 22 (5) (2004)
802–817.
[3] I.F. Akyildiz, Y. Altunbasak, F. Fekri, R. Sivakumar,
AdaptNet: adaptive protocol suite for next generation
wireless internet, IEEE Communications Magazine 42 (3)
(2004) 128–138.
[4] I.F. Akyildiz, X. Wang, W. Wang, Wireless mesh networks:
a survey, Computer Networks Journal 47 (4) (2005) 445–487.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2157[5] I.F. Akyildiz, Y. Li, OCRA: OFDM-based cognitive radio
networks, Broadband and Wireless Networking Laboratory
Technical Report, March 2006.
[6] L. Berlemann, S. Mangold, B.H.Walke, Policy-based
reasoning for spectrum sharing in cognitive radio net-
works, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005,
pp. 1–10.
[7] V. Brik, E. Rozner, S. Banarjee, P. Bahl, DSAP: a protocol
for coordinated spectrum access, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN
2005, November 2005, pp. 611–614.
[8] R.W. Brodersen, A. Wolisz, D. Cabric, S.M. Mishra, D.
Willkomm, Corvus: a cognitive radio approach for usage of
virtual unlicensed spectrum, Berkeley Wireless Research
Center (BWRC) White paper, 2004.
[9] T.X. Brown, An analysis of unlicensed device operation in
licensed broadcast service bands, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN
2005, November 2005, pp. 11–29.
[10] M.M. Buddhikot, P. Kolody, S. Miller, K. Ryan, J. Evans,
DIMSUMNet: new directions in wireless networking using
coordinated dynamic spectrum access, in: Proc. IEEE
WoWMoM 2005, June 2005, pp. 78–85.
[11] M.M. Buddhikot, K. Ryan, Spectrum management in
coordinated dynamic spectrum access based cellular net-
works, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp.
299–307.
[12] D. Cabric, S.M. Mishra, R.W. Brodersen, Implementation
issues in spectrum sensing for cognitive radios, in: Proc. 38th
Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers
2004, November 2004, pp. 772–776.
[13] D. Cabric, R.W Brodersen, Physical layer design issues
unique to cognitive radio systems, in: Proc. IEEE Personal
Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC) 2005,
September 2005.
[14] D. Cabric, S.M. Mishra, D. Willkomm, R. Brodersen, A.
Wolisz, A Cognitive radio approach for usage of virtual
unlicensed spectrum, in: Proc. 14th IST Mobile and Wireless
Communications Summit, June 2005.
[15] L. Cao, H. Zheng, Distributed spectrum allocation via local
bargaining, in: Proc. IEEE Sensor and Ad Hoc Communi-
cations and Networks (SECON) 2005, September 2005, pp.
475–486.
[16] C. Cordeiro, K. Challapali, D. Birru, S. Shankar, IEEE
802.22: the first worldwide wireless standard based on
cognitive radios, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November
2005, pp. 328–337.
[17] F. Digham, M. Alouini, M. Simon, On the energy detection
of unknown signals over fading channels, in: Proc. IEEE
ICC 2005, vol. 5, May 2003, pp. 3575–3579.
[18] E. Esteves, The high data rate evolution of the cdma2000
cellular systemMobility and Teletraffic for Wireless Com-
munications, vol. 5, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000, pp.
61–72.
[19] R. Etkin, A. Parekh, D. Tse, Spectrum sharing for unli-
censed bands, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November
2005, pp. 251–258.
[20] FCC, ET Docket No 03-222 Notice of proposed rule making
and order, December 2003.
[21] FCC, ET Docket No 03-237 Notice of inquiry and notice of
proposed Rulemaking, November 2003. ET Docket No. 03-
237.
[22] A. Fehske, J.D. Gaeddert, J.H. Reed, A new approach to
signal classification using spectral correlation and neuralnetworks, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005,
pp. 144–150.
[23] G. Ganesan, Y.G. Li, Cooperative spectrum sensing in
cognitive radio networks, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005,
November 2005, pp. 137–143.
[24] G. Ganesan, Y.G. Li, Agility improvement through coop-
erative diversity in cognitive radio networks, in: Proc.
GLOBECOM, November 2005, pp. 2505–2509.
[25] A. Ghasemi, E.S. Sousa, Collaborative spectrum sensing for
opportunistic access in fading environment, in: Proc. IEEE
DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 131–136.
[26] D. Grandblaise, D. Bourse, K. Moessner, P. Leaves,
Dynamic spectrum allocation (DSA) and reconfigurability,
in: Proc. Software-Defined Radio (SDR) Forum, November
2002.
[27] S. Haykin, Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless com-
munications, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations 23 (2) (2005) 201–220.
[28] W.D. Horne, Adaptive spectrum access: using the full
spectrum space, in: Proc. Telecommunications Policy
Research Conference (TPRC), September 2003.
[29] J. Huang, R.A. Berry, M.L. Honig, Spectrum sharing with
distributed interference compensation, in: Proc. IEEE
DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 88–93.
[30] IEEE 802.11, Wireless LAN medium access control (MAC)
and physical layer (PHY) specifications, 1999.
[31] IEEE 802.22 Working group on wireless regional area
networks, Available from: <http://www.ieee802.org/22/>.
[32] O. Ileri, D. Samardzija, N.B. Mandayam, Demand respon-
sive pricing and competitive spectrum allocation via spec-
trum server, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005,
pp. 194–202.
[33] X. Jing, D. Raychaudhuri, Spectrum co-existence of IEEE
802.11b and 802.16a networks using CSCC etiquette proto-
col, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 243–
250.
[34] F.K. Jondral, Software-defined radio-basic and evolution to
cognitive radio, EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communi-
cation and Networking 2005.
[35] T. Kamakaris, M.M. Buddhikot, R. Iyer, A case for
coordinated dynamic spectrum access in cellular networks,
in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 289–
298.
[36] V. Kanodia, A. Sabharwal, E. Knightly, MOAR: a multi-
channel opportunistic auto-rate media access protocol for ad
hoc networks, in: Proc. IEEE BROADNETS 2004, October
2004, pp. 600–610.
[37] S. Krishnamurthy, M. Thoppian, S. Venkatesan, R. Prak-
ash, Control channel based MAC-layer configuration, rout-
ing and situation awareness for cognitive radio networks,
in: Proc. IEEE MILCOM 2005, October 2005.
[38] P. Kyasanur, X. Yang, N.H. Vaidya, Mesh networking
protocols to exploit physical layer capabilities, in: Proc. First
IEEE Workshop on Wireless Mesh Networks (WiMesh),
September 2005.
[39] P. Leaves, K. Moessner, R. Tafazoli, D. Grandblaise, D.
Bourse, R. Tonjes, M. Breveglieri, Dynamic spectrum
allocation in composite reconfigurable wireless networks,
IEEE Comm. Magazine, vol. 42, May 2004, pp. 72–81.
[40] L. Ma, X. Han, C.-C. Shen, Dynamic open spectrum sharing
MAC protocol for wireless ad hoc network, in: Proc. IEEE
DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 203–213.
2158 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159[41] D. Maldonado, B. Lie, A. Hugine, T.W. Rondeau, C.W.
Bostian, Cognitive radio applications to dynamic spectrum
allocation, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005,
pp. 597–600.
[42] R. Menon, R.M. Buehrer, J.H. Reed, Outage probability
based comparison of underlay and overlay spectrum sharing
techniques, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005,
pp. 101–109.
[43] G. Marias, Spectrum scheduling and brokering based on
QoS demands of competing WISPs, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN
2005, November 2005, pp. 684–687.
[44] S.M. Nishra, D. Cabric, C. Chang, D. Willkomm, B.
Schewick, A. Wolisz, R.W. Brodersen, A real time cognitive
radio testbed for physical and link layer experiments, in:
Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 562–567.
[45] J. Mitola III, Cognitive radio for flexible mobile multimedia
communication, in: Proc. IEEE International Workshop on
Mobile Multimedia Communications (MoMuC) 1999,
November 1999, pp. 3–10.
[46] J. Mitola III, Cognitive radio: an integrated agent architec-
ture for software defined radio, Ph.D Thesis, KTH Royal
Institute of Technology, 2000.
[47] R. Murty, Software-defined reconfigurability radios: smart,
agile, cognitive, and interoperable, Technology@Intel Mag-
azine, July 2003.
[48] Nautilus Project Website. Available from: <http://
www.cs.ucsb.edu/htzheng/cognitive/nautilus.html>.
[49] N. Nie, C. Comaniciu, Adaptive channel allocation spectrum
etiquette for cognitive radio networks, in: Proc. IEEE
DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 269–278.
[50] C. Peng, H. Zheng, B.Y. Zhao, Utilization and fairness in
spectrum assignment for opportunistic spectrum access, in:
ACM Mobile Networks and Applications (MONET), 2006.
[51] C. Raman, R.D. Yates, N.B. Mandayam, Scheduling vari-
able rate links via a spectrum server, in: Proc. IEEE
DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 110–118.
[52] B. Razavi, RF Microelectronics, Prentice Hall, 1997.
[53] A. Sahai, N. Hoven, R. Tandra, Some fundamental limits in
cognitive radio, Allerton Conf. on Commun., Control and
Computing 2004, October 2004.
[54] S. Sankaranarayanan, P. Papadimitratos, A. Mishra, S.
Hershey, A bandwidth sharing approach to improve licensed
spectrum utilization, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, Novem-
ber 2005, pp. 279–288.
[55] S. Shankar, Spectrum agile radios: utilization and sensing
architecture, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005,
pp. 160–169.
[56] J.A. Stine, Spectrum management: the killer application of
ad hoc and mesh networking, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005,
November 2005, pp. 184–193.
[57] H. Tang, Some physical layer issues of wide-band cognitive
radio system, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November
2005, pp. 151–159.
[58] R.W. Thomas, L.A. DaSilva, A.B. MacKenzie, Cognitive
networks, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005,
pp. 352–360.
[59] M.C. Vuran, I.F. Akyildiz, AMAC: adaptive medium access
control for next generation wireless terminals, IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking, in press.
[60] Q. Wang, H. Zheng, Route and spectrum selection in
dynamic spectrum networks, in: IEEE Consumer Commu-nications and Networking Conference (CNCC), January
2006.
[61] T.A. Weiss, J. Hillenbrand, A. Krohn, F.K. Jondral,
Efficient signaling of spectral resources in spectrum pooling
systems, in: Proc. 10th Symposium on Communications and
Vehicular Technology (SCVT), November 2003.
[62] T.A. Weiss, F.K. Jondral, Spectrum pooling: an innovative
strategy for the enhancement of spectrum efficiency, IEEE
Radio Communication Magazine 42 (March) (2004) 8–14.
[63] B. Wild, K. Ramchandran, Detecting primary receivers for
cognitive radio applications, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005,
November 2005, pp. 124–130.
[64] D. Willkomm, J. Gross, A. Wolisz, Reliable link mainte-
nance in cognitive radio systems, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN
2005, November 2005, pp. 371–378.
[65] IEEE 802.22 Working group, WRAN Reference Model, Doc
Num. 22-04-0002-12-0000.
[66] RAN Requirements, Doc Num. 22-05-0007-46-0000.
[67] DARPA XG WG, The XG Architectural Framework V1.0,
2003.
[68] DARPA XG WG, The XG Vision RFC V1.0, 2003.
[69] C. Xin, A novel layered graph model for topology formation
and routing in dynamic spectrum access networks, in: Proc.
IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 308–317.
[70] S.A. Zekavat, X. Li, User-central wireless system: ultimate
dynamic channel allocation, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005,
November 2005, pp. 82–87.
[71] J. Zhao, H. Zheng, G.-H. Yang, Distributed coordination in
dynamic spectrum allocation networks, in: Proc. IEEE
DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 259–268.
[72] Q. Zhao, L. Tong, A. Swami, Decentralized cognitive MAC
for dynamic spectrum access, in: Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005,
November 2005, pp. 224–232.
[73] H. Zheng, L. Cao, Device-centric spectrum management, in:
Proc. IEEE DySPAN 2005, November 2005, pp. 56–65.
[74] H. Zheng, C. Peng, Collaboration and fairness in opportu-
nistic spectrum access, in: Proc. IEEE ICC 2005, vol. 5, May
2005, pp. 3132–3136.
[75] L. Xu, R. Tonjes, T. Paila, W. Hansmann, M. Frank, M.
Albrecht, DRiVE-ing to the internet: dynamic radio for ip
services in vehicular environments, in: Proc. of 25th Annual
IEEE Conference on Local Computer Networks, November
2000, pp. 281–289.
Ian F. Akyildiz received the B.S., M.S.,
and Ph.D. degrees in Computer Engi-
neering from the University of Erlangen-
Nuernberg, Germany, in 1978, 1981 and
1984, respectively.
Currently, he is the Ken Byers Dis-
tinguished Chair Professor with the
School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology, Atlanta, and Director of
Broadband and Wireless Networking
Laboratory. He is an Editor-in-Chief of Computer Networks
Journal (Elsevier) as well as the founding Editor-in-Chief of the
AdHoc Network Journal (Elsevier). His current research interests
are in next generation wireless networks, sensor networks and
wireless mesh networks.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks 50 (2006) 2127–2159 2159He received the ‘‘Don Federico Santa Maria Medal’’ for his
services to the Universidad of Federico Santa Maria, in 1986.
From 1989 to 1998, he served as a National Lecturer for ACM
and received the ACM Outstanding Distinguished Lecturer
Award in 1994. He received the 1997 IEEE Leonard G. Abraham
Prize Award (IEEE Communications Society) for his paper
entitled ‘‘Multimedia Group Synchronization Protocols for
Integrated Services Architectures’’ published in the IEEE Journal
of Selected Areas in Communications (JSAC) in January 1996.
He received the 2002 IEEE Harry M. Goode Memorial Award
(IEEE Computer Society) with the citation ‘‘for significant and
pioneering contributions to advanced architectures and protocols
for wireless and satellite networking’’. He received the 2003 IEEE
Best Tutorial Award (IEEE Communication Society) for his
paper entitled ‘‘A Survey on Sensor Networks,’’ published in
IEEE Communications Magazine, in August 2002. He also
received the 2003 ACM Sigmobile Outstanding Contribution
Award with the citation ‘‘for pioneering contributions in the area
of mobility and resource management for wireless communica-
tion networks’’. He received the 2004 Georgia Tech Faculty
Research Author Award for his ‘‘outstanding record of publi-
cations of papers between 1999 and 2003’’. He also received the
2005 Distinguished Faculty Achievement Award from School of
ECE, Georgia Tech. He has been a Fellow of the Association for
Computing Machinery (ACM) since 1996.
Won-Yeol Lee received his B.S. and M.S.
degrees from Department of Electronic
Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul,
Korea in 1997 and 1999, respectively.
From 1999 to 2004, he was a research
engineer of Network R&D Center and
Wireless Multimedia Service Division at
LG Telecom, Seoul, Korea. Currently he
is a Graduate Research Assistant in the
Broadband and Wireless Networking
Laboratory, Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology, pursuing his Ph.D. degree under the supervision of Prof.Ian F. Akyildiz. His current research interests include cognitive
radio networks, next generation wireless networks, and wireless
sensor networks.
Mehmet C. Vuran received his B.Sc.
degree in Electrical and Electronics
Engineering from Bilkent University,
Ankara, Turkey, in 2002. He is currently
a Research Assistant in the Broadband
and Wireless Networking Laboratory
and pursuing his Ph.D. degree at the
School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Tech-
nology, Atlanta, GA under the guidance
of Prof. Ian F. Akyildiz. His current
research interests include adaptive and cross-layer communica-
tion protocols for heterogeneous wireless architectures, next
generation wireless networks, and wireless sensor networks.
Shantidev Mohanty received his B. Tech.
(Hons.) degree from the Indian Institute
of Technology, Kharagpur, India in
2000. He received his M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees from the Georgia Institute of
Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, in 2003
and 2005, respectively, both in electrical
engineering. He is currently working
with Intel Corporation, Portland, Ore-
gon. His current research interests
include wireless networks, mobile com-
munications, mobility management, ad-hoc and sensor networks,
and cross-layer protocol design. From 2000 to 2001, he worked as
a mixed signal design engineer for Texas Instruments, Bangalore,
India. He worked as a summer intern for Bell Labs, Lucent
Technologies, Holmdel, New Jersey, during the summers of 2002
and 2003 and for Applied Research, Telcordia Technologies,
Piscataway, New Jersey, during the summer of 2004.

