IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECT AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 8, OCTOBER 1998 1451
A Simple Transmit Diversity Technique
for Wireless Communications
Siavash M. Alamouti
Abstract— This paper presents a simple two-branch trans-
mit diversity scheme. Using two transmit antennas and one
receive antenna the scheme provides the same diversity order
as maximal-ratio receiver combining (MRRC) with one transmit
antenna, and two receive antennas. It is also shown that the
scheme may easily be generalized to two transmit antennas and
M receive antennas to provide a diversity order of 2M . The
new scheme does not require any bandwidth expansion any
feedback from the receiver to the transmitter and its computation
complexity is similar to MRRC.
Index Terms—Antenna array processing, baseband processing,
diversity, estimation and detection, fade mitigation, maximal-
ratio combining, Rayleigh fading, smart antennas, space block
coding, space–time coding, transmit diversity, wireless commu-
nications.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE NEXT-generation wireless systems are required tohave high voice quality as compared to current cellular
mobile radio standards and provide high bit rate data ser-
vices (up to 2 Mbits/s). At the same time, the remote units
are supposed to be small lightweight pocket communicators.
Furthermore, they are to operate reliably in different types of
environments: macro, micro, and picocellular; urban, subur-
ban, and rural; indoor and outdoor. In other words, the next
generation systems are supposed to have better quality and
coverage, be more power and bandwidth efficient, and be
deployed in diverse environments. Yet the services must re-
main affordable for widespread market acceptance. Inevitably,
the new pocket communicators must remain relatively simple.
Fortunately, however, the economy of scale may allow more
complex base stations. In fact, it appears that base station
complexity may be the only plausible trade space for achieving
the requirements of next generation wireless systems.
The fundamental phenomenon which makes reliable wire-
less transmission difficult is time-varying multipath fading [1].
It is this phenomenon which makes tetherless transmission a
challenge when compared to fiber, coaxial cable, line-of-sight
microwave or even satellite transmissions.
Increasing the quality or reducing the effective error rate in
a multipath fading channel is extremely difficult. In additive
white Gaussian noise (AWGN), using typical modulation and
coding schemes, reducing the effective bit error rate (BER)
from 10 to 10 may require only 1- or 2-dB higher signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR). Achieving the same in a multipath fading
Manuscript received September 1, 1997; revised February 1, 1998.
The author was with AT&T Wireless Services, Redmond, WA, USA. He is
currently with Cadence Design Systems, Alta Business Unit, Bellevue, WA
98005-3016 USA (e-mail: siavash@cadence.com).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(98)07885-8.
environment, however, may require up to 10 dB improvement
in SNR. The improvement in SNR may not be achieved by
higher transmit power or additional bandwidth, as it is contrary
to the requirements of next generation systems. It is therefore
crucial to effectively combat or reduce the effect of fading at
both the remote units and the base stations, without additional
power or any sacrifice in bandwidth.
Theoretically, the most effective technique to mitigate mul-
tipath fading in a wireless channel is transmitter power control.
If channel conditions as experienced by the receiver on one
side of the link are known at the transmitter on the other side,
the transmitter can predistort the signal in order to overcome
the effect of the channel at the receiver. There are two
fundamental problems with this approach. The major problem
is the required transmitter dynamic range. For the transmitter
to overcome a certain level of fading, it must increase its power
by that same level, which in most cases is not practical because
of radiation power limitations and the size and cost of the
amplifiers. The second problem is that the transmitter does
not have any knowledge of the channel experienced by the
receiver except in systems where the uplink (remote to base)
and downlink (base to remote) transmissions are carried over
the same frequency. Hence, the channel information has to be
fed back from the receiver to the transmitter, which results
in throughput degradation and considerable added complexity
to both the transmitter and the receiver. Moreover, in some
applications there may not be a link to feed back the channel
information.
Other effective techniques are time and frequency diversity.
Time interleaving, together with error correction coding, can
provide diversity improvement. The same holds for spread
spectrum. However, time interleaving results in large delays
when the channel is slowly varying. Equivalently, spread spec-
trum techniques are ineffective when the coherence bandwidth
of the channel is larger than the spreading bandwidth or,
equivalently, where there is relatively small delay spread in
the channel.
In most scattering environments, antenna diversity is a
practical, effective and, hence, a widely applied technique
for reducing the effect of multipath fading [1]. The classical
approach is to use multiple antennas at the receiver and
perform combining or selection and switching in order to
improve the quality of the received signal. The major problem
with using the receive diversity approach is the cost, size,
and power of the remote units. The use of multiple antennas
and radio frequency (RF) chains (or selection and switching
circuits) makes the remote units larger and more expensive.
As a result, diversity techniques have almost exclusively been
0733–8716/98$10.00  199 IEEE
1452 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECT AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 8, OCTOBER 1998
applied to base stations to improve their reception quality.
A base station often serves hundreds to thousands of remote
units. It is therefore more economical to add equipment to
base stations rather than the remote units. For this reason,
transmit diversity schemes are very attractive. For instance,
one antenna and one transmit chain may be added to a base
station to improve the reception quality of all the remote units
in that base station’s coverage area.1 The alternative is to add
more antennas and receivers to all the remote units. The first
solution is definitely more economical.
Recently, some interesting approaches for transmit diversity
have been suggested. A delay diversity scheme was proposed
by Wittneben [2], [3] for base station simulcasting and later,
independently, a similar scheme was suggested by Seshadri
and Winters [4], [5] for a single base station in which copies of
the same symbol are transmitted through multiple antennas at
different times, hence creating an artificial multipath distortion.
A maximum likelihood sequence estimator (MLSE) or a
minimum mean squared error (MMSE) equalizer is then
used to resolve multipath distortion and obtain diversity gain.
Another interesting approach is space–time trellis coding,
introduced in [6], where symbols are encoded according to the
antennas through which they are simultaneously transmitted
and are decoded using a maximum likelihood decoder. This
scheme is very effective, as it combines the benefits of forward
error correction (FEC) coding and diversity transmission to
provide considerable performance gains. The cost for this
scheme is additional processing, which increases exponentially
as a function of bandwidth efficiency (bits/s/Hz) and the
required diversity order. Therefore, for some applications it
may not be practical or cost-effective.
The technique proposed in this paper is a simple transmit
diversity scheme which improves the signal quality at the
receiver on one side of the link by simple processing across
two transmit antennas on the opposite side. The obtained
diversity order is equal to applying maximal-ratio receiver
combining (MRRC) with two antennas at the receiver. The
scheme may easily be generalized to two transmit antennas and
receive antennas to provide a diversity order of . This is
done without any feedback from the receiver to the transmitter
and with small computation complexity. The scheme requires
no bandwidth expansion, as redundancy is applied in space
across multiple antennas, not in time or frequency.
The new transmit diversity scheme can improve the error
performance, data rate, or capacity of wireless communications
systems. The decreased sensitivity to fading may allow the use
of higher level modulation schemes to increase the effective
data rate, or smaller reuse factors in a multicell environment
to increase system capacity. The scheme may also be used to
increase the range or the coverage area of wireless systems. In
other words, the new scheme is effective in all of the applica-
tions where system capacity is limited by multipath fading and,
hence, may be a simple and cost-effective way to address the
market demands for quality and efficiency without a complete
redesign of existing systems. Furthermore, the scheme seems
to be a superb candidate for next-generation wireless systems,
1 In fact, many cellular base stations already have two receive antennas for
receive diversity. The same antennas may be used for transmit diversity.
as it effectively reduces the effect of fading at the remote units
using multiple transmit antennas at the base stations.
In Section II, the classical maximal ratio receive diversity
combining is discussed and simple mathematical descriptions
are given. In Section III, the new two-branch transmit diversity
schemes with one and with two receive antennas are discussed.
In Section IV, the bit-error performance of the new scheme
with coherent binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation
is presented and is compared with MRRC. There are cost
and performance differences between the practical implemen-
tations of the proposed scheme and the classical MRRC. These
differences are discussed in detail in Section V.
II. CLASSICAL MAXIMAL-RATIO
RECEIVE COMBINING (MRRC) SCHEME
Fig. 1 shows the baseband representation of the classical
two-branch MRRC.
At a given time, a signal is sent from the transmitter.
The channel including the effects of the transmit chain, the
airlink, and the receive chain may be modeled by a complex
multiplicative distortion composed of a magnitude response
and a phase response. The channel between the transmit
antenna and the receive antenna zero is denoted by and
between the transmit antenna and the receive antenna one is
denoted by where
(1)
Noise and interference are added at the two receivers. The
resulting received baseband signals are
(2)
where and represent complex noise and interference.
Assuming and are Gaussian distributed, the maximum
likelihood decision rule at the receiver for these received
signals is to choose signal if and only if (iff)
(3)
where is the squared Euclidean distance between
signals and calculated by the following expression:
(4)
The receiver combining scheme for two-branch MRRC is as
follows:
(5)
Expanding (3) and using (4) and (5) we get
choose iff
(6)
ALAMOUTI: SIMPLE TRANSMIT DIVERSITY TECHNIQUE FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS 1453
Fig. 1. Two-branch MRRC.
or equivalently
choose iff
(7)
For PSK signals (equal energy constellations)
(8)
where is the energy of the signal. Therefore, for PSK
signals, the decision rule in (7) may be simplified to
choose iff
(9)
The maximal-ratio combiner may then construct the signal ,
as shown in Fig. 1, so that the maximum likelihood detector
may produce , which is a maximum likelihood estimate of
.
III. THE NEW TRANSMIT DIVERSITY SCHEME
A. Two-Branch Transmit Diversity with One Receiver
Fig. 2 shows the baseband representation of the new two-
branch transmit diversity scheme.
The scheme uses two transmit antennas and one receive
antenna and may be defined by the following three functions:
• the encoding and transmission sequence of information
symbols at the transmitter;
• the combining scheme at the receiver;
• the decision rule for maximum likelihood detection.
Fig. 2. The new two-branch transmit diversity scheme with one receiver.
1) The Encoding and Transmission Sequence: At a given
symbol period, two signals are simultaneously transmitted
from the two antennas. The signal transmitted from antenna
zero is denoted by and from antenna one by . During the
next symbol period signal ( ) is transmitted from antenna
zero, and signal is transmitted from antenna one where
is the complex conjugate operation. This sequence is shown
in Table I.
In Table I, the encoding is done in space and time
(space–time coding). The encoding, however, may also be
done in space and frequency. Instead of two adjacent symbol
periods, two adjacent carriers may be used (space–frequency
coding).
1454 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECT AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 8, OCTOBER 1998
TABLE I
THE ENCODING AND TRANSMISSION SEQUENCE FOR
THE TWO-BRANCH TRANSMIT DIVERSITY SCHEME
The channel at time may be modeled by a complex
multiplicative distortion for transmit antenna zero and
for transmit antenna one. Assuming that fading is
constant across two consecutive symbols, we can write
(10)
where is the symbol duration. The received signals can then
be expressed as
(11)
where and are the received signals at time and
and and are complex random variables representing
receiver noise and interference.
2) The Combining Scheme: The combiner shown in Fig. 2
builds the following two combined signals that are sent to the
maximum likelihood detector:
(12)
It is important to note that this combining scheme is different
from the MRRC in (5). Substituting (10) and (11) into (12)
we get
(13)
3) The Maximum Likelihood Decision Rule: These com-
bined signals are then sent to the maximum likelihood detector
which, for each of the signals and , uses the decision
rule expressed in (7) or (9) for PSK signals.
The resulting combined signals in (13) are equivalent to that
obtained from two-branch MRRC in (5). The only difference
is phase rotations on the noise components which do not
degrade the effective SNR. Therefore, the resulting diversity
order from the new two-branch transmit diversity scheme with
one receiver is equal to that of two-branch MRRC.
B. Two-Branch Transmit Diversity with Receivers
There may be applications where a higher order of diversity
is needed and multiple receive antennas at the remote units
are feasible. In such cases, it is possible to provide a diversity
order of 2 with two transmit and receive antennas. For
illustration, we discuss the special case of two transmit and two
receive antennas in detail. The generalization to receive
antennas is trivial.
Fig. 3. The new two-branch transmit diversity scheme with two receivers.
TABLE II
THE DEFINITION OF CHANNELS BETWEEN THE TRANSMIT AND RECEIVE ANTENNAS
TABLE III
THE NOTATION FOR THE RECEIVED SIGNALS AT THE TWO RECEIVE ANTENNAS
Fig. 3 shows the baseband representation of the new scheme
with two transmit and two receive antennas.
The encoding and transmission sequence of the information
symbols for this configuration is identical to the case of a
single receiver, shown in Table I. Table II defines the channels
between the transmit and receive antennas, and Table III
defines the notation for the received signal at the two receive
antennas.
Where
(14)
, , , and are complex random variables representing
receiver thermal noise and interference. The combiner in Fig. 3
builds the following two signals that are sent to the maximum
ALAMOUTI: SIMPLE TRANSMIT DIVERSITY TECHNIQUE FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS 1455
Fig. 4. The BER performance comparison of coherent BPSK with MRRC and two-branch transmit diversity in Rayleigh fading.
likelihood detector:
(15)
Substituting the appropriate equations we have
(16)
These combined signals are then sent to the maximum like-
lihood decoder which for signal uses the decision criteria
expressed in (17) or (18) for PSK signals.
Choose iff
(17)
Choose iff
(18)
Similarly, for using the decision rule is to choose signal
iff
(19)
or, for PSK signals,
choose iff
(20)
The combined signals in (16) are equivalent to that of four-
branch MRRC, not shown in the paper. Therefore, the resulting
diversity order from the new two-branch transmit diversity
scheme with two receivers is equal to that of the four-branch
MRRC scheme.
It is interesting to note that the combined signals from the
two receive antennas are the simple addition of the combined
signals from each receive antenna, i.e., the combining scheme
is identical to the case with a single receive antenna. We
may hence conclude that, using two transmit and receive
antennas, we can use the combiner for each receive antenna
and then simply add the combined signals from all the receive
antennas to obtain the same diversity order as -branch
MRRC. In other words, using two antennas at the transmitter,
the scheme doubles the diversity order of systems with one
transmit and multiple receive antennas.
An interesting configuration may be to employ two antennas
at each side of the link, with a transmitter and receiver chain
connected to each antenna to obtain a diversity order of four
at both sides of the link.
IV. ERROR PERFORMANCE SIMULATIONS
The diversity gain is a function of many parameters, includ-
ing the modulation scheme and FEC coding. Fig. 4 shows the
BER performance of uncoded coherent BPSK for MRRC and
the new transmit diversity scheme in Rayleigh fading.
It is assumed that the total transmit power from the two
antennas for the new scheme is the same as the transmit power
from the single transmit antenna for MRRC. It is also assumed
that the amplitudes of fading from each transmit antenna
to each receive antenna are mutually uncorrelated Rayleigh
distributed and that the average signal powers at each receive
antenna from each transmit antenna are the same. Further, we
assume that the receiver has perfect knowledge of the channel.
Although the assumptions in the simulations may seem
highly unrealistic, they provide reference performance curves
for comparison with known techniques. An important issue is
1456 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECT AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 8, OCTOBER 1998
whether the new scheme is any more sensitive to real-world
sources of degradation. This issue is addressed in Section V.
As shown in Fig. 4, the performance of the new scheme
with two transmitters and a single receiver is 3 dB worse
than two-branch MRRC. As explained in more detail later
in Section V-A, the 3-dB penalty is incurred because the
simulations assume that each transmit antenna radiates half
the energy in order to ensure the same total radiated power as
with one transmit antenna. If each transmit antenna in the
new scheme was to radiate the same energy as the single
transmit antenna for MRRC, however, the performance would
be identical. In other words, if the BER was drawn against
the average SNR per transmit antenna, then the performance
curves for the new scheme would shift 3 dB to the left
and overlap with the MRRC curves. Nevertheless, even with
the equal total radiated power assumption, the diversity gain
for the new scheme with one receive antenna at a BER of
10 is about 15 dB. Similarly, assuming equal total radiated
power, the diversity gain of the new scheme with two receive
antennas at a BER of 10 is about 24 dB, which is 3 dB
worse than MRRC with one transmit antenna and four receive
antennas.
As stated before, these performance curves are simple
reference illustrations. The important conclusion is that the
new scheme provides similar performance to MRRC, regard-
less of the employed coding and modulation schemes. Many
publications have reported the performance of various coding
and modulation schemes with MRRC. The results from these
publications may be used to predict the performance of the
new scheme with these coding and modulation techniques.
V. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES
So far in this report, we have shown, mathematically, that
the new transmit diversity scheme with two transmit and
receive antennas is equivalent to MRRC with one transmit
antenna and receive antennas. From practical implementa-
tion aspects, however, the two systems may differ. This section
discusses some of the observed difference between the two
schemes.
A. Power Requirements
The new scheme requires the simultaneous transmission of
two different symbols out of two antennas. If the system is
radiation power limited, in order to have the same total radiated
power from two transmit antennas the energy allocated to
each symbol should be halved. This results in a 3-dB penalty
in the error performance. However, the 3-dB reduction of
power in each transmit chain translates to cheaper, smaller,
or less linear power amplifiers. A 3-dB reduction in amplifiers
power handling is very significant and may be desirable in
some cases. It is often less expensive (or more desirable from
intermodulation distortion effects) to employ two half-power
amplifiers rather than a single full power amplifier. Moreover,
if the limitation is only due to RF power handling (amplifier
sizing, linearity, etc.), then the total radiated power may be
doubled and no performance penalty is incurred.
B. Sensitivity to Channel Estimation Errors
Throughout this paper, it is assumed that the receiver has
perfect knowledge of the channel. The channel information
may be derived by pilot symbol insertion and extraction [7],
[8]. Known symbols are transmitted periodically from the
transmitter to the receiver. The receiver extracts the samples
and interpolates them to construct an estimate of the channel
for every data symbol transmitted.
There are many factors that may degrade the performance of
pilot insertion and extraction techniques, such as mismatched
interpolation coefficients and quantization effects. The dom-
inant source of estimation errors for narrowband systems,
however, is time variance of the channel. The channel esti-
mation error is minimized when the pilot insertion frequency
is greater or equal to the channel Nyquist sampling rate, which
is two times the maximum Doppler frequency. Therefore, as
long as the channel is sampled at a sufficient rate, there is
little degradation due to channel estimation errors. For receive
diversity combining schemes with antennas, at a given time,
independent samples of the channels are available. With
transmitters and a single receiver, however, the estimates
of the channels must be derived from a single received
signal. The channel estimation task is therefore different. To
estimate the channel from one transmit antenna to the receive
antenna the pilot symbols must be transmitted only from the
corresponding transmit antenna. To estimate all the channels,
the pilots must alternate between the antennas (or orthogonal
pilot symbols have to be transmitted from the antennas). In
either case, times as many pilots are needed. This means
that for the two-branch transmit diversity schemes discussed in
this report, twice as many pilots as in the two-branch receiver
combining scheme are needed.
C. The Delay Effects
With branch transmit diversity, if the transformed copies
of the signals are transmitted at distinct intervals from all
the antennas, the decoding delay is symbol periods. That is,
for the two-branch diversity scheme, the delay is two symbol
periods. For a multicarrier system, however, if the copies are
sent at the same time and on different carrier frequencies, then
the decoding delay is only one symbol period.
D. Antenna Configurations
For all practical purposes, the primary requirement for
diversity improvement is that the signals transmitted from the
different antennas be sufficiently uncorrelated (less than 0.7
correlation) and that they have almost equal average power
(less than 3-dB difference). Since the wireless medium is
reciprocal, the guidelines for transmit antenna configurations
are the same as receive antenna configurations. For instance,
there have been many measurements and experimental results
indicating that if two receive antennas are used to provide
diversity at the base station receiver, they must be on the order
of ten wavelengths apart to provide sufficient decorrelation.
Similarly, measurements show that to get the same diversity
improvement at the remote units it is sufficient to separate the
ALAMOUTI: SIMPLE TRANSMIT DIVERSITY TECHNIQUE FOR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS 1457
antennas at the remote station by about three wavelengths.2
This is due to the difference in the nature of the scattering
environment in the proximity of the remote and base stations.
The remote stations are usually surrounded by nearby scatter-
ers, while the base station is often placed at a higher altitude,
with no nearby scatterers.
Now assume that two transmit antennas are used at the
base station to provide diversity at the remote station on the
other side of the link. The important question is how far apart
should the transmit antennas be to provide diversity at the
remote receiver. The answer is that the separation requirements
for receive diversity on one side of the link are identical to
the requirements for transmit diversity on the other side of
link. This is because the propagation medium between the
transmitter and receiver in either direction are identical. In
other words, to provide sufficient decorrelation between the
signals transmitted from the two transmit antennas at the base
station, we must have on the order of ten wavelengths of
separation between the two transmit antennas. Equivalently,
the transmit antennas at the remote units must be separated
by about three wavelengths to provide diversity at the base
station.
It is worth noting that this property allows the use of existing
receive diversity antennas at the base stations for transmit
diversity. Also, where possible, two antennas may be used
for both transmit and receive at the base and the remote units,
to provide a diversity order of four at both sides of the link.
E. Soft Failure
One of the advantages of receive diversity combining
schemes is the added reliability due to multiple receive chains.
Should one of the receive chains fail, and the other receive
chain is operational, then the performance loss is on the order
of the diversity gain. In other words, the signal may still be
detected, but with inferior quality. This is commonly referred
to as soft failure. Fortunately, the new transmit diversity
scheme provides the same soft failure. To illustrate this, we
can assume that the transmit chain for antenna one in Fig. 2
is disabled, i.e., . Therefore, the received signals may
be described as [see (11)]
(21)
The combiner shown in Fig. 2 builds the following two
combined signals according to (12):
(22)
These combined signals are the same as if there was no
diversity. Therefore, the diversity gain is lost but the signal
may still be detected. For the scheme with two transmit and
two receive antennas, both the transmit and receive chains are
protected by this redundancy scheme.
2 The separation required depends on many factors such as antenna heights
and the scattering environment. The figures given apply mostly to macrocell
urban and suburban environments with relatively large base station antenna
heights.
F. Impact on Interference
The new scheme requires the simultaneous transmission
of signals from two antennas. Although half the power is
transmitted from each antenna, it appears that the number of
potential interferers is doubled, i.e., we have twice the number
of interferers, each with half the interference power. It is
often assumed that in the presence of many interferers, the
overall interference is Gaussian distributed. Depending on the
application, if this assumption holds, the new scheme results
in the same distribution and power of interference within
the system. If interference has properties where interference
cancellation schemes (array processing techniques) may be
effectively used, however, the scheme may have impact on the
system design. It is not clear whether the impact is positive
or negative. The use of transmit diversity schemes (for fade
mitigation) in conjunction with array processing techniques
for interference mitigation has been studied for space-time
trellis codes [9]. Similar efforts are under way to extend these
techniques to the new transmit diversity scheme.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
A new transmit diversity scheme has been presented. It
is shown that, using two transmit antennas and one receive
antenna, the new scheme provides the same diversity order
as MRRC with one transmit and two receive antennas. It is
further shown that the scheme may easily be generalized to
two transmit antennas and receive antennas to provide a
diversity order of . An obvious application of the scheme
is to provide diversity improvement at all the remote units in
a wireless system, using two transmit antennas at the base
stations instead of two receive antennas at all the remote
terminals. The scheme does not require any feedback from
the receiver to the transmitter and its computation complexity
is similar to MRRC. When compared with MRRC, if the total
radiated power is to remain the same, the transmit diversity
scheme has a 3-dB disadvantage because of the simultaneous
transmission of two distinct symbols from two antennas.
Otherwise, if the total radiated power is doubled, then its
performance is identical to MRRC. Moreover, assuming equal
radiated power, the scheme requires two half-power amplifiers
compared to one full power amplifier for MRRC, which may
be advantageous for system implementation. The new scheme
also requires twice the number of pilot symbols for channel
estimation when pilot insertion and extraction is used.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank V. Tarokh, N. Seshadri, A.
Naguib, and R. Calderbank of AT&T Labs Research for their
critical feedback and encouragement; T. Lo of AT&T Wireless
Services for the investigation of the antenna pattern generated
by this scheme (not included in the paper but important for
validation purposes); and T. Alberty of Bosch Telecom for his
insightful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] W. C. Jakes, Ed., Microwave Mobile Communications. New York:
Wiley, 1974.
1458 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECT AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 16, NO. 8, OCTOBER 1998
[2] A. Wittneben, “Base station modulation diversity for digital SIMUL-
CAST,” in Proc. 1991 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf. (VTC 41st),
May 1991, pp. 848–853.
[3] A. Wittneben, “A new bandwidth efficient transmit antenna modula-
tion diversity scheme for linear digital modulation,” in Proc. 1993
IEEE International Conf. Communications (ICC’93), May 1993, pp.
1630–1634.
[4] N. Seshadri and J. H. Winters, “Two signaling schemes for improving
the error performance of FDD transmission systems using transmitter
antenna diversity,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf. (VTC
43rd), May 1993, pp. 508–511.
[5] J. H. Winters, “The diversity gain of transmit diversity in wireless
systems with Rayleigh fading,” in Proc. 1994 ICC/SUPERCOMM, New
Orleans, LA, May 1994, vol. 2, pp. 1121–1125.
[6] V. Tarokh, N. Seshadri, and A. R. Calderbank, “Space-time codes for
high data rate wireless communication: Performance criteria and code
construction,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Mar. 1998.
[7] J. K. Cavers, “An analysis of pilot symbol assisted modulation for
Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 40, pp.
686–693, 1991.
[8] S. Sampei and T. Sunaga, “Rayleigh fading compensation method for
16 QAM in digital land mobile radio channels,” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular
Technology Conf., San Francisco, CA, 1989, pp. 640–646.
[9] V. Tarokh, A. Naguib, N. Seshadri, and A. R. Calderbank, “Space-
time codes for wireless communication: Combined array processing and
space time coding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Mar. 1998.
Siavash M. Alamouti received the B.S. and the
M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada,
in 1989 and 1991, respectively.
He has been involved in research and develop-
ment activities in wireless communications since
1989. He is currently with the Alta Business Unit
of Cadence Design Systems, Sunnyvale, CA, where
he is a Senior Technical Leader involved in the
specification and design of electronic design au-
tomation (EDA) tools for next-generation wireless
communications systems. From 1995 to 1998, he was a Senior Scientist at
the Strategic Technology Group of AT&T Wireless Services, Redmond, WA,
where he was involved in air-link physical layer design of wireless systems.
Prior to that, he was with Mobile Data Solutions, Inc. (MDSI), Richmond,
Canada, and for three years was at MPR Teltech, Vancouver, Canada, where
he was a Member of the Technical Staff involved in the design of physical and
MAC layers for proprietary mobile data systems. His areas of interest include
smart antenna techniques, coding and modulation, and physical and MAC
layer design of narrowband and wideband wireless communication systems.

