388 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
The Capacity of Wireless Networks
Piyush Gupta, Student Member, IEEE, and P. R. Kumar, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—When identical randomly located nodes, each ca-
pable of transmitting at bits per second and using a fixed range,
form a wireless network, the throughput ( ) obtainable by each
node for a randomly chosen destination is 
log
bits per
second under a noninterference protocol.
If the nodes are optimally placed in a disk of unit area, traffic
patterns are optimally assigned, and each transmission’s range is
optimally chosen, the bit–distance product that can be transported
by the network per second is ( ) bit-meters per second.
Thus even under optimal circumstances, the throughput is only
 bits per second for each node for a destination nonva-
nishingly far away.
Similar results also hold under an alternate physical model
where a required signal-to-interference ratio is specified for
successful receptions.
Fundamentally, it is the need for every node all over the domain
to share whatever portion of the channel it is utilizing with nodes
in its local neighborhood that is the reason for the constriction in
capacity.
Splitting the channel into several subchannels does not change
any of the results.
Some implications may be worth considering by designers. Since
the throughput furnished to each user diminishes to zero as the
number of users is increased, perhaps networks connecting smaller
numbers of users, or featuring connections mostly with nearby
neighbors, may be more likely to be find acceptance.
Index Terms—Ad hoc networks, capacity, multihop radio net-
works, throughput, wireless networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
WIRELESS networks consist of a number of nodes whichcommunicate with each other over a wireless channel.
Some wireless networks have a wired backbone with only the
last hop being wireless. Examples are cellular voice and data
networks and mobile IP. In others, all links are wireless. One
Manuscript received December 3, 1998; revised July 1, 1999. This mate-
rial is based on work supported in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research under Contract AF-DC-5-36128, by EPRI and the U.S. Army Re-
search Office under Subcontract to Cornell University Contracts WO8333-04
and 35352-6086, by the U.S. Army Research Office under Contract DAAH
04-95-1-0090, the Office of Naval Research under Contract N00014-99-1-0696,
and the Joint Services Electronics Program under Contract N00014-96-1-0129.
Any opinions, findings, and conclusions are those of the authors and do not nec-
essarily reflect the views of the above agencies.
P. Gupta is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and
the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana, IL 61801
USA.
P. R. Kumar is with the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Coordi-
nated Science Laboratory, Urbana, IL 61801 USA.
Communicated by V. Anantharam, Associate Editor for Communication Net-
works.
Publisher Item Identifier S 0018-9448(00)01358-4.
example of such networks is multihop radio networks or ad
hoc networks. Another possibly futuristic example, see [1], may
be collections of “smart homes” where computers, microwave
ovens, door locks, water sprinklers, and other “information ap-
pliances” are interconnected by a wireless network.
It is to these types of all wireless networks that this paper
is addressed. Such networks consist of a group of nodes which
communicate with each other over a wireless channel without
any centralized control; see Fig. 1. Nodes may cooperate in
routing each others’ data packets. Lack of any centralized con-
trol and possible node mobility give rise to many issues at the
network, medium access, and physical layers, which have no
counterparts in the wired networks like Internet, or in cellular
networks.
At the network layer, the main problem is that of routing,
which is exacerbated by the time-varying network topology,
power constraints, and the characteristics of the wireless
channel; see Ramanathan and Steenstrup [2] for an overview.
The choice of medium access scheme is also difficult in ad hoc
networks due to the time-varying network topology and the lack
of centralized control. Use of TDMA or dynamic assignment of
frequency bands is complex since there is no centralized control
as in cellular networks, FDMA is inefficient in dense networks,
CDMA is difficult to implement due to node mobility and
the consequent need to keep track of the frequency-hopping
patterns and/or spreading codes for nodes in the time-varying
neighborhood, and random access appears to be the current
favorite. The access problem when many nodes transmit to
the same receiver has been much studied in the literature ever
since the genesis of the ALOHA network, and bounds on the
throughput of successful collision-free transmissions as well
as transmission protocols have been devised; see Gallager [3].
Sharing channels in networks does lead to some new problems
associated with “hidden” terminals and “exposed” terminals.
The protocols MACA and its extension MACAW, see Karn [4]
and Bhargavan et al. [5] respectively, use a series of handshake
signals to resolve these problems to a certain extent. This has
been standardized in the IEEE 802.11 protocol, see [6]. At the
physical layer, an important issue is that of power control. The
transmission power of nodes needs to be regulated so that it
is high enough to reach the intended receiver while causing
minimal interference at other nodes. Iterative power control
algorithms have been devised, see Bambos, Chen, and Pottie
[7] and Ulukus and Yates [8].
In this paper we analyze the capacity of wireless networks.
We scale space and suppose that nodes are located in a region
of area 1 m2. Each node can transmit at bits per second over
a common wireless channel. We shall see that it is immaterial
0018–9448/00$10.00 © 2000 IEEE
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 389
Fig. 1. An ad hoc wireless network.
to our results1 if the channel is broken up into several subchan-
nels of capacity bits per second, as long as
Packets are sent from node to node in a mul-
tihop fashion until they reach their final destination. They can
be buffered at intermediate nodes while awaiting transmission.
Due to spatial separation, several nodes can make wireless
transmissions simultaneously, provided there is no destructive
interference of a transmission by others. We will describe in
the sequel under what conditions a wireless transmission over
a subchannel is received successfully by its intended recipient.
We will consider two types of networks, Arbitrary Networks,
where the node locations, destinations of sources, and traffic
demands, are all arbitrary, and Random Networks, where the
nodes and their destinations are randomly chosen.
A. Arbitrary Networks: Arbitrarily Located Nodes and Traffic
Patterns
In the arbitrary setting we suppose that nodes are arbitrarily
located in a disk of unit area in the plane. Each node has an arbi-
trarily chosen destination to which it wishes to send traffic at an
arbitrary rate; thus the traffic pattern is arbitrary. Each node can
choose an arbitrary range or power level for each transmission.
We need to describe when a transmission is received success-
fully by its intended recipient. We will allow for two possible
models for successful reception of a transmission over one hop,
called the Protocol Model and the Physical Model, described
below. Let denote the location of a node; we will also use
to refer to the node itself.
1) The Protocol Model: Suppose node transmits over the
th subchannel to a node Then this transmission is success-
fully received by node if
(1)
for every other node simultaneously transmitting over the
same subchannel.
The quantity models situations where a guard zone
is specified by the protocol to prevent a neighboring node from
1We are grateful to Kimberly King for asking us to be more explicit about the
prospects for routing through multiple technologies.
transmitting on the same subchannel at the same time. It also
allows for imprecision in the achieved range of transmissions.
Another model which is more related to physical layer con-
siderations is
2) The Physical Model: Let be the subset of
nodes simultaneously transmitting at some time instant over a
certain subchannel. Let be the power level chosen by node
for Then the transmission from a node , ,
is successfully received by a node if
(2)
This models a situation where a minimum signal-to-interference
ratio (SIR) of is necessary for successful receptions, the am-
bient noise power level is , and signal power decays with dis-
tance as We will suppose that , which is the usual
model outside a small neighborhood of the transmitter.
3) The Transport Capacity of Arbitrary Networks: Given
any set of successful transmissions taking place over time and
space, let us say that the network transports one bit-meter when
one bit has been transported a distance of one meter toward
its destination. (We do not give multiple credit for the same
bit carried from one source to several different destinations as
in the multicast or broadcast cases). This sum of products of
bits and the distances over which they are carried is a valuable
indicator of a network’s transport capacity. (It should be noted
that when the area of the domain is square meters rather
than the normalized 1 m2, then all the transport capacity results
presented below should be scaled by Our main results
are the following. Recall Knuth’s notation:
denotes that as well as .
Main Result 1.: The transport capacity of an Arbitrary Net-
work under the Protocol Model is bit-meters per
second if the nodes are optimally placed, the traffic pattern is op-
timally chosen, and if the range of each transmission is chosen
optimally.
Specifically, an upper bound is bit-meters per
second for every Arbitrary Network for all spatial and temporal
390 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
scheduling strategies, while bit-meters per
second (for a multiple of four) can be achieved when the
nodes and traffic patterns are appropriately chosen, and the
ranges and schedules of transmissions are appropriately chosen.
If this transport capacity were to be equitably divided between
all the nodes, then each node would obtain bit-me-
ters per second. If, further, each source has its destination about
the same distance of 1 m away, then each node would obtain a
throughput capacity of bits per second.
The upper bound on transport capacity does not depend on
the transmissions being omnidirectional, as implied by (1), but
only on there being some dispersion in the neighborhood of the
receiver; see Assumption (A.vi) in Section II.
Main Result 2: For the Physical Model, bit-meters
per second is feasible, while bit-meters per seconds
is not, for appropriate Specifically,
bit-meters per second (for a multiple of ) is feasible when
the network is appropriately designed, while an upper bound is
bit-meters per second.
We suspect that an upper bound of order bit-meters
per second may actually hold. In the special case where the ratio
between the maximum and minimum powers that trans-
mitters can employ is bounded above by , then an upper bound
is in fact
bit-meters per second.
It is worth noting that both bounds suggest that transport ca-
pacity improves when is larger, i.e., when the signal power
decays more rapidly with distance.
B. Random Networks: Randomly Located Nodes and Traffic
Patterns
In a random scenario, nodes are randomly located, i.e.,
independently and uniformly distributed, either on the surface
of a three-dimensional sphere of area 1 m2, or in a disk
of area 1 m2 in the plane. Our purpose in studying is to
separate edge effects from other phenomena. Each node has a
randomly chosen destination to which it wishes to send
bits per second. The destination for each node is independently
chosen as the node nearest to a randomly located point, i.e., uni-
formly and independently distributed. (Thus destinations are on
the order of 1 m away on average.)
In this random setting, we will assume that the nodes are
homogeneous, i.e., all transmissions employ the same nominal
range or power. As for Arbitrary Networks, we will allow for
both a Protocol Model as well as a Physical Model for interfer-
ence.
1) The Protocol Model: All nodes employ a common range
for all their transmissions. When node transmits to a node
over the th subchannel, this transmission is successfully
received by if
i) The distance between and is no more than , i.e.,
(3)
ii) For every other node simultaneously transmitting over
the same subchannel
(4)
2) The Physical Model: All nodes choose a common power
level for all their transmissions. Let be the
subset of nodes simultaneously transmitting at some time instant
over a certain subchannel. A transmission from a node ,
, is successfully received by a node if
(5)
3) The Throughput Capacity of Random Networks: The no-
tion of throughput is defined in the usual manner as the time
average of the number of bits per second that can be transmitted
by every node to its destination.
Definition: Feasible Throughput: A throughput of bits
per second for each node is feasible if there is a spatial and
temporal scheme for scheduling transmissions, such that by op-
erating the network in a multihop fashion and buffering at in-
termediate nodes when awaiting transmission, every node can
send bits per second on average to its chosen destination
node. That is, there is a such that in every time in-
terval every node can send bits to its cor-
responding destination node.
Whether a particular throughput level is feasible may depend
on the locations of the nodes. These locations are random. So
is the destination for the traffic entering each node. As in PAC
Learning Theory (see Valiant [9]), given the randomness in-
volved in the problem statement, we allow for vanishingly small
probabilities when defining the “throughput capacity.”
Definition: The Throughput Capacity of Random Wireless
Networks: We say that the throughput capacity of the class of
Random Networks is of order bits per second if there
are deterministic constants and such that
is feasible
is feasible
Our main results are the following.
Main Result 3.: In the case of both the surface of the sphere
and a planar disk, the order of the throughput capacity is
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 391
bits per second for the Protocol Model. For the upper bound we
actually prove the sharp cutoff phenomenon that for some
is feasible
Specifically, there are deterministic constants and not
depending on or such that
bits per second is feasible, and
bits per second is infeasible, both with probability approaching
one as Since routing hot spots may form at the center
in the case of a disk on the plane, and yet the order of throughput
capacity is the same as on the surface of the sphere, it shows that
the cause of the throughput constriction is not the formation of
hot spots, but is the pervasive need for all nodes to share the
channel locally with other nodes.
Main Result 4: For the Physical Model a throughput of
bits per second is feasible, while
bits per second is not, for appropriate both with prob-
ability approaching one as Specifically, there are
deterministic constants and not depending on
or such that
bits per second is feasible with probability approaching one as
If is the mean distance between two points indepen-
dently and uniformly distributed in the domain (either surface of
sphere or planar disk of unit area), then there is a deterministic
sequence not depending on or such that
bit-meters per second is infeasible with probability approaching
one as
C. Some Possible Implications
The results in this paper allow for a perfect scheduling al-
gorithm which knows the locations of all nodes and all traffic
demands, and which coordinates wireless transmissions tempo-
rally and spatially to avoid collisions which would otherwise
result in lost packets. Also, the nodes are not mobile. If such
perfect node location information is not available, or if nodes
move, or traffic demands are not known, then the capacity can
only be even smaller.
There are some implications of these results which designers
may want to consider. The decrease in throughput with may be
regarded as unacceptable by users when the number of nodes
is large. Perhaps designers should target their efforts at networks
for smaller numbers of users, rather than try to develop large
wireless networks.
A feasible scenario is where nodes need to communicate only
with nearby nodes. Then the scaled distance between sources
and destinations is only meters. Thus all nodes can
transmit data to nearby neighbors at a bit rate that does not de-
crease with Such a scenario can arise, for example, in collec-
tions of “smart homes,” each home having sensors and actuators
communicating by wireless means.
Another implication concerns the power consumption by
each node for transmission. Consider Random Networks. The
fraction of time that a modem is busy, whether relaying traffic
or sending packets originating at the node, is only
Not only that, the scaled range of each transmission is about
The bounds for the Physical Model suggest that
a faster rate of decay of signal power with distance, i.e., a larger
, allows greater transport and throughput capacity.
One more implication follows from the constructive proof
of capacity. It shows that one can group the nodes into small
clusters or “cells,” where in each cell one can designate one
specific node to carry all the burden of relaying multihop
packets, if so desired. Thus a division of labor is possible, were
this to be found profitable. Moreover, it would further reduce
the transmission power consumed by the vast majority of other
nodes. This may offer some suggestive guidelines for designers
of routing protocols.
It should be noted that dividing the channel into subchannels
does not change any of the results.
Yet another issue concerns the use of relay nodes.2 Consider a
Random Network with source nodes. Then the throughput that
can be furnished to each of them is only under the
Protocol Model. Suppose additional homogeneous nodes are
deployed as pure relays in random positions, with no indepen-
dent traffic needs of their own, i.e., they are not sources. Then
the throughput that can be furnished to each of the sources is
There is, however, a severe cost of
providing this increase in throughput. The number of additional
relay nodes that need to be deployed to gain an appreciable in-
crease in capacity for the source nodes may be very large. When
there are active nodes, to make
equal to five times its value at , will have to be equal
to at least . The addition of nodes to serve as pure relays
provides a less than -fold increase in this term.
One way to overcome the barrier of wireless networks is to
do what is done in cellular telephony—connect the base stations
by a wired network. If, however, nondirected wireless links are
used for connecting the base stations, then the capacity limita-
tion of wireless networks remains with us, though in less ob-
vious ways. For example, suppose a high-power base station
is chosen in each cell, which communicates with other distant
base stations by a wireless channel. Then the set of base sta-
tions inherits the same capacity limitation. A set of wire-
2We are grateful to Chip Elliott for raising this issue.
392 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
lessly connected base stations can provide a throughput of only
for each base station.
D. A Discussion of the Tradeoffs Involved
Why does the throughput capacity diminish as the number of
nodes increases? For an insight into some of the tradeoffs in-
volved, consider Random Networks. Let the mean distance to
be traversed by a packet be , and denote by the common
range of all transmissions. Then the mean number of hops taken
by packets is no less than Thus each node generates at least
bits per second of traffic for other nodes. Since the total
number of nodes is , the total traffic is no less than bits
per second. This has to be served by nodes each capable of
bits per second. Thus one needs An upper bound
on the throughput is therefore Since the term on
the right side grows linearly in , it might appear that to in-
crease the throughput by reducing the number of hops traversed
by each packet, and thus the burden on other nodes serving as
relays, one should increase the range of each node. How-
ever, the expression above is not an achievable upper bound as
a function of The reason is that we have neglected the re-
duction in capacity due to spatial concurrency constraints, since
nodes close to a receiver are required to be idle to avoid col-
lisions which cause the loss of packets. In fact, the loss from
increasing is quadratic due to the area of the conflict in-
volved. Therefore, the desire to reduce the multihop burden and
the desire to increase spatial concurrency and frequency reuse
are in conflict. It turns out that when we consider both issues to-
gether, we find that one really needs to reduce the value of
to as small a value as possible. However, there is a limit to how
small one can make When the range of transmissions
is too small, the wireless network loses connectivity. In a pre-
cursor result, see [10], the critical range for connectivity of net-
works formed by randomly located nodes on a disk in the plane
has been determined. Consider the graph with random vertices
uniformly and independently distributed in a disk of unit area.
Join two vertices by an edge whenever they are within a dis-
tance from each other. The critical radius for connectivity
is in the sense that the graph with is
connected with probability approaching one as if and
only if
For Arbitrary Networks under the Protocol model, just three
constraints—the length of routes, the consumption of valuable
two-dimensional area by transmissions, and the total number of
nodes—are enough to force the transport capacity to be no more
than bit-meters per second.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section
II we exhibit upper bounds on the transport capacity of the
form bit-meters per second and bit-meters
per second, under the Protocol and Physical Models, respec-
tively, for Arbitrary Networks. In Section III we show that a
transport capacity of bit-meters per second is also
feasible for Arbitrary Networks. In Section IV we construct a
scheduling and routing scheme which achieves a throughput of
bits per second for Random Networks on
In Section V we show that bits per second and
bits per second are upper bounds on the throughput
for Random Networks on under the Protocol and Physical
Models, respectively. In Section VI we show that the above
results for Random Networks also hold for a disk in the plane.
II. ARBITRARY NETWORKS: AN UPPER BOUND ON TRANSPORT
CAPACITY
We consider the setting on a planar disk of unit area. Consider
the following (nearly) minimal set of assumptions:
(A.i) There are nodes arbitrarily located in a disk of unit
area on the plane. (The results carry over to any domain
of unit area in which is the closure of its interior.)
(A.ii) The network transports bits over seconds.
(A.iii) The average distance between the source and destination
of a bit is Note that, together with (A.ii), this implies
that a transport capacity of bit-meters per second is
achieved.
(A.iv) Each node can transmit over any subset of subchan-
nels with capacities bits per second, ,
where .
(A.v) Transmissions are slotted into synchronized slots of
length seconds. (This assumption can be eliminated,
but makes the exposition easier.)
(A.vi) While retaining the restriction (2) for the case of the
Physical Model, we can either retain (1) in the Protocol
Model or consider an alternate restriction as follows: If
a node transmits to another node located at a dis-
tance of units on a certain subchannel in a certain slot,
then there can be no other receiver within a radius of
around on the same subchannel in the same slot. This
alternate restriction addresses situations where the trans-
missions are not omnidirectional, but nevertheless there
is some dispersion in the neighborhood of the receiver.
Theorem 2.1:
i) In the Protocol Model, the transport capacity is
bounded as follows:
bit-meters per second
ii) In the Physical Model
bit-meters per second
iii) If the ratio between the maximum and minimum
powers that transmitters can employ is strictly bounded above
by , then
bit-meters per second
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 393
iv) When the domain is of square meters rather than 1 m2,
then all the upper bounds above are scaled by
Proof: Consider bit , where Let us sup-
pose that it moves from its origin to its destination in a sequence
of hops, where the th hop traverses a distance of Then
from (A.iii)
(6)
Note now that in any slot at most nodes can transmit.
Hence for any subchannel and any slot
(The th hop of bit is over
subchannel in slot )
Summing over the subchannels and the slots, and noting that
there can be no more than slots in seconds, yields
(7)
Consider now the Protocol Model. Suppose that is re-
ceiving a transmission from over the th subchannel at the
same time that is receiving a transmission from over the
same subchannel. Then from the triangle inequality and (1)
Similarly,
Adding the two inequalities, we obtain
Hence disks of radius times the lengths of hops centered
at the receivers over the same subchannel in the same slot are
essentially disjoint. (Note that this conclusion directly follows
when (1) is replaced by the alternate restriction of Assumption
(A.vi)). Allowing for edge effects where a node is near the pe-
riphery of the domain, and noting that a range greater than the
diameter of the domain is unnecessary, we see that at least a
quarter of such a disk is within the domain. Since at most
bits can be carried in slot from a receiver to a transmitter over
the th subchannel, we have
(The th hop of bit is over
subchannel in slot ) (8)
Summing over the subchannels and the slots gives
This can be rewritten as
(9)
Note now that the quadratic function is convex. Hence
(10)
Combining (9) and (10) yields
(11)
Now substituting (6) in (11) gives
(12)
Substituting (7) in (12) yields the result.
Now turn to the Physical Model. The difference stems from
the need to replace (8) by a different expression. Suppose
is transmitting to over the th subchannel at power level
at some time, and let denote the set of all simultaneous
transmitters over the th subchannel at that time. Including the
signal power of also in the denominator, the signal-to-inter-
ference requirement (2) for can be written as
Hence
since
Summing over all transmitter-receiver pairs
Summing over all slots and subchannels gives
394 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
The rest of the proof proceeds along lines similar to the Protocol
Model, invoking the convexity of instead of
For the consideration of the special case where ,
we start with (2). From it, it follows that if is transmitting to
at the same time that is transmitting to , both over the
same subchannel, then
Thus
where Thus the same upper bound as for
the Protocol Model carries over with defined as above.
III. ARBITRARY NETWORKS: A CONSTRUCTIVE LOWER
BOUND ON TRANSPORT CAPACITY
We will now show that the order of the upper bound in the
previous section is sharp for the Protocol Model, by exhibiting
a scenario where it is achieved. This scenario is also feasible for
the Physical Model.
Theorem 3.1: There is a placement of nodes and an as-
signment of traffic patterns such that the network can achieve
bit-meters per second under the Protocol Model,
and
bit-meters per second under the Physical Model, both whenever
is a multiple of
Proof: Consider the Protocol Model. Define
Recall that the domain is a disk of unit area, i.e., of radius in
the plane. With the center of the disk located at the origin, place
transmitters at locations
and
where is even. Also place receivers at
and
where is odd. Each transmitter can transmit to its nearest
receiver, which is at a distance away, without interference from
any other transmitter–receiver pair. It can be verified that there
are at least transmitter–receiver pairs all located within the
domain. (This is done by noting that for a tessellation of the
plane by squares of side , all squares intersecting a disk of
radius are entirely contained within a larger concentric
disk of radius The number of such squares is greater than
Now take and ) Restricting
attention to just these pairs, there are a total of simultaneous
transmissions, each of range , and each at bits per second.
This achieves the transport capacity indicated.
For the Physical Model, a calculation of the SIR shows that
it is lower-bounded at all receivers by Choosing
to make this lower bound equal to yields the result.
The above lower bounds on feasible transport capacity can be
sharpened. The following bounds may be useful in the design of
networks with small numbers of nodes.
Lemma 3.1: In the Protocol Model, there is a placement of
nodes and an assignment of traffic patterns such that the network
can achieve
bit-meters per second for
bit-meters per second for
bit-meters per second
for
and
bit-meters per second for all
Proof: With at least two nodes, clearly bit-meters per
second can be achieved by placing two nodes at diametrically
opposite locations. This verifies the formula for the bound for
With at least eight nodes, four transmitters can be placed
at the opposite ends of perpendicular diameters, and each can
transmit toward its receiver located at a distance to-
ward the center of the domain. This yields bit-meters
per second, verifying the formula up to
These bounds can be further improved slightly by tessellating
the domain into hexagons, at the expense of more unwieldy ex-
pressions.
IV. RANDOM NETWORKS: A CONSTRUCTIVE LOWER BOUND
ON THROUGHPUT CAPACITY
Now we turn to Random Networks. Even though the setting
of the problem is very different, the proof of throughput capacity
is somewhat reminiscent of traditional information-theoretic ar-
guments. We provide a constructive scheme to show that one
can spatially and temporally schedule transmissions in a random
graph so that when each randomly located node has a randomly
chosen destination, each source–destination pair can indeed be
guaranteed a “virtual channel” of capacity bits
per second with probability approaching as , for an
appropriate constant We will show how to route traffic
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 395
efficiently through the random graph so that no node is over-
loaded. The routing scheme will utilize a Voronoi tessellation of
with some special properties. The size of each Voronoi cell
is chosen carefully in relation to the number of nodes. Every
cell should also be neither too thin nor too fat. The routing will
be over nearly straight-line paths, which assures that it is effi-
cient. To show that the load is balanced uniformly over the entire
network, we calculate the Vapnik–Chervonenkis dimension for
certain geometrically defined random variables on the plane and
the sphere, which are connected with the tessellations and routes
used. We will need to ensure that the routes are independently
and identically distributed. This will require us to circumvent
the possible pitfall that knowledge of one route provides infor-
mation on the locations of the source, destination, and interme-
diate relay nodes, thus possibly introducing dependencies with
other routes which may depend on the locations of these nodes.
We begin the constructive proof of the lower bound on the
throughput capacity for Random Networks. Our treatment will
be directed at the Protocol Model. Where appropriate we will
comment on the arguments required for the Physical Model.
A. A Spatial Tessellation
We use a Voronoi tessellation of the surface of the sphere.
Recall the definition of a Voronoi tessellation, see Okabe, Boots
and Sugihara [11]. Let be a set of points on
(or any other set for that matter). The Voronoi cell is
the set of all points which are closer to than to any of the other
’s, i.e.,
Above and throughout, distances are measured on the surface
of the sphere by segments of great circles connecting two
points; see Stilwell [12]. The point is called the generator of
the Voronoi cell Fig. 2 shows an example of a tessellation
of Unfortunately, the surface of the sphere does not allow
any regular tessellation where all cells look the same, except for
the platonic solids; see Lyndon [13]. These latter tessellations
cannot be made as fine as we need to make them. Moreover, our
Voronoi tessellations will also need to be not too eccentrically
shaped. We exhibit tessellations with these two special proper-
ties in the following lemma, the proof of which is constructive.
Lemma 4.1: For every , there is a Voronoi tessellation
of with the property that every Voronoi cell contains a disk
of radius and is contained in a disk of radius .
Proof: Denote by a disk of radius centered at
Choose as any point in Suppose that have
already been chosen such that the distance between any two ’s
is at least . There are two cases to consider.
Suppose there is a point such that does not intersect
any Then can be added to the collection: Define
Otherwise, we stop.
This procedure has to terminate in a finite number of steps
since the addition of each removes the area of a disk of radius
from When we stop we will have a set of generators
such that they are at least units apart, and such that all other
points on are within a distance of from one of the genera-
Fig. 2. A tessellation of the surface S of the sphere.
tors. The Voronoi tessellation arising from this set of generators
has the desired properties.
In the sequel we will use a Voronoi tessellation for which
(V.i) Every Voronoi cell contains a disk of area
Let
radius of a disk of area on
(13)
(Note that the area of a disk of radius ρ on is less
than ).
(V.ii) Every Voronoi cell is contained in a disk of radius
We will refer to each Voronoi cell as simply a “cell.”
B. Adjacency and Interference
Note that all Voronoi cells are polygons since they are formed
as finite intersections of hemispheres on (or halfspaces in the
case of ).
Definition: Adjacent Cells: Say that two cells are adjacent,
if they share a common point. (Recall that every cell is a closed
set).
Let us choose the range of each transmission so that
(14)
This range allows direct communication within a cell and be-
tween adjacent cells.
Lemma 4.2: Every node in a cell is within a distance
from every node in its own cell or adjacent cell.
Proof: The diameter of cells is bounded by see
(V.ii). The range of a transmission is Thus the area cov-
ered by the transmission of a node includes adjacent cells.
Definition: Interfering Neighbors: We say that two cells are
interfering neighbors if there is a point in one cell which is
within a distance of some point in the other cell.
396 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
As the name implies, the interpretation is this: If two cells are
not interfering neighbors, then in the Protocol Model a trans-
mission from one cell cannot collide with a transmission from
the other cell.
C. A Bound on the Number of Interfering Neighbors of a Cell
An important property of the constructed Voronoi tessellation
is that the number of interfering neighbors of a cell is uni-
formly bounded. This will be exploited in the next section in
constructing a spatial transmission schedule which allows for
a high degree of spatial concurrency and thus frequency reuse.
From now on ’s will be used to denote deterministic constants
not depending on
Lemma 4.3: Every cell in has no more than interfering
neighbors. depends only on and grows no faster than lin-
early in
Proof: Let be a Voronoi cell. If is an interfering
neighboring Voronoi cell, there must be two points, one in
and the other in , which are no more than units
apart. From (V.ii), the diameter of a cell is bounded by
Hence , and similarly every other interfering neighbor in the
Protocol Model, must be contained within a common large disk
of radius
Such a disk cannot contain more than
disks of radius By (V.i), there can therefore be no more
than this number of cells within This therefore is an upper
bound on the number of interfering neighbors of the cell The
result follows from the magnitudes of and chosen as
in (14).
D. A Bound on the Length of an All-Cell Inclusive
Transmission Schedule
The bounded number of interfering neighbors for each cell
allows the construction of a schedule of bounded length which
allows one opportunity for each cell in the tessellation to
transmit.
Lemma 4.4:
i) In the Protocol Model there is a schedule for transmitting
packets such that in every slots, each cell in the tes-
sellation gets one slot in which to transmit, and such that all
transmissions are successfully received within a distance
from their transmitters.
ii) There is a deterministic constant not depending on , ,
, , or such that if is chosen to satisfy
then for a large enough common power level the above result
i) holds even for the Physical Model.
Proof: First we show the result for the Protocol Model.
This follows from a well-known fact about vertex coloring of
graphs of bounded degree: A graph of degree no more than
can have its vertices colored by using no more than
colors, with no two neighboring vertices have the same color;
see Bondy and Murthy [14]. One can therefore color the cells
with no more than colors such that no two interfering
neighbors have the same color. This gives a schedule of length
at most , where one can transmit one packet from each
cell of the same color in a slot.
For the Physical Model we will show that under the same
schedule as above, the required SIR of is obtained if each
transmitter chooses an identical power level that is high
enough, and is large enough.
Note first that any two nodes transmitting simultaneously are
separated by a distance of at least Hence disks of
radius around each transmitter are disjoint. The
area of each such disk is at least (In the case
of disks on the plane , but it is smaller for disks on the
surface of the sphere).
Consider a node transmitting to a node at a distance
less than The signal power received at is at least
Now we look at the interference power due to all the other si-
multaneous transmissions. Consider the annulus of all points
lying within a distance between and from A transmitter
within this annulus has the disk centered at itself and of ra-
dius entirely contained within a larger annulus
of all points lying between a distance and
The area of this larger annulus is no more than
Each transmitter above “consumes” an area of at least
, as noted earlier. Hence the annulus of points at a
distance between and from the receiver cannot contain
more than
transmitters. Furthermore, the received power at from each
such transmission is at most Noting that there can be no
other simultaneous transmitter within a distance of
, and taking and
for we see that the SIR at is lower-bounded
by
Since , the sum in the denominator converges, and is in
fact smaller than When is as specified
and , the lower bound on the SIR converges to a value
greater than .
E. The Source-Destination Pairs
Each node wishes to communicate with the node nearest to a
randomly chosen location. Let be a randomly chosen location
such that and are independently and uniformly distributed
(i.i.d.) on , and that the sequence is i.i.d. The
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 397
destination node for the traffic generated at node is
chosen as the node which is closest to
Denote by the straight-line segment connecting and
Above, and in the rest of the paper, by a “straight-line” segment
we actually mean a segment of the great circle on the surface
of the sphere; see [12]. There is one significant property enjoyed
by the sequence of straight lines
Lemma 4.5: The random sequence of straight-line segments
is i.i.d.
This has the powerful consequence of allowing us to apply the
law of large numbers to the i.i.d. straight-line segments. It will
be useful since the route followed by each origination–destina-
tion pair will approximate the corresponding straight-line seg-
ment, as described in the next section.
F. The Routes of Packets
We will choose the routes of packets to approximate these
straight-line segments. The straight-line segment will inter-
sect many cells in the tessellation Let denote the partic-
ular cell which contains , and the cell which contains
Packets originating at will be relayed from the cell to
the cell in a sequence of hops. In each hop, the packet is
transferred from one cell to another in the order in which they
intersect the line. (If two cells are both “next” cells, then either
can be chosen arbitrarily). Finally, after reaching the cell con-
taining , the packets will be sent on to their final destination,
which we shall show later in Section IV-G to be no more than
one hop away with high probability.
Note that this is a randomized algorithm for choosing routes.
It can be thought of as a load balancing scheme with some rather
powerful uniformity properties, as shown in Section IV-I.
G. Each Cell Contains at Least One Node
To make relaying of traffic from one cell to an adjacent cell
feasible, we need to first ensure that every cell in con-
tains at least one node. For this we use uniform convergence
in the weak law of large numbers. Note that uniformity is re-
quired over all cells in We recall the following definitions;
see Vapnik and Chervonenkis [15] and Vapnik [16]. Let be
a set of subsets. A finite set of points is said to be shattered
by if for every subset of there is a set such that
The VC-dimension of , denoted by VC- , is
defined as the supremum of the sizes of all finite sets that can
be shattered by For sets of finite VC-dimension, one has uni-
form convergence in the weak law of large numbers.
The Vapnik–Chervonenkis Theorem: If is a set of finite
VC-dimension VC- , and is a sequence of i.i.d.
random variables with common probability distribution , then
for every
whenever
VC-
Fig. 3. Proof that the vertices of a quadrilateral cannot be shattered by the set
of disks.
First we will consider the case where is the set of all disks
on the plane. Later we will consider the case where the disks
are located on In the planar case we can make use of results
from Euclidean geometry. The following result may perhaps be
known already, though we have been unable to find it in the
literature.
Lemma 4.6: The Vapnik–Chervonenkis dimension of the set
of disks in is .
Proof: It is easy to see that there is a three-point set that
can be shattered by the set of disks. An example is the set of
vertices of an equilateral triangle.
Suppose there is a set of four points that is
shattered by the set of disks. If any one of the ’s lies in the
convex hull of the other three points, then there is no disk which
can contain the others without containing too. Hence we can
assume without loss of generality that the convex hull of the four
points is a quadrilateral.
Again, we obtain a contradiction as follows. Without loss of
generality, suppose that the angles of the quadrilateral at and
sum to at least 180 , i.e.,
180
Suppose is a disk which contains and , but not or ;
see Fig. 3. Extend the diagonal outwards in both directions
till it meets the circumference of at the points and
Simultaneously, let and be the points of intersection of the
diagonal with the circumference of Then is
a cyclic quadrilateral. However,
180
This is a contradiction since the sum of the opposite angles of a
cyclic quadrilateral is exactly 180 .
Now we address the problem of determining the VC-dimen-
sion of disks on the surface of a sphere. It is sufficient for us to
restrict attention to disks strictly smaller than hemispheres.
To convert results from the plane to , we use a mapping
called the “inversion map” which maps the punctured surface
of the sphere onto the plane. Since the radius of the sphere is
398 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
Fig. 4. The inversion mapping maps disks on S into disks on R :
immaterial for the remainder of this discussion, we consider a
sphere of radius , centered at the point Let us refer
to it temporarily as Also let us refer to the plane
as Then the mapping
where is the Euclidean norm, has several useful properties
(see [11]).
(i) It maps the punctured surface (i.e., except for the
origin) onto the plane In fact, each point on is
mapped to the point obtained by extending the ray from
the origin to until it hits the plane
(ii)
(iii) It maps disks on not containing the origin into disks
on the plane See Fig. 4.
For our purposes, the last property is most important. It is used
in the following lemma.
Lemma 4.7: The VC-dimension of the set of disks on
strictly smaller than hemispheres is .
Proof: The proof parallels the contradiction argument
of Lemma 4.6. Suppose that there is a set of four points
which is shattered by such disks. They all have
to be contained in a disk smaller than a hemisphere. Let and
be opposite vertices of the quadrilateral formed. Since the
set is shattered, there are two disks, each of radius less than that
necessary to form a hemisphere, one of which contains and
but excludes and , while the other contains and
but excludes and Since each disk is strictly less than a
hemisphere, there is a point in the complement of their union.
Rotate the sphere so that this point is at the top.
Without loss of generality we can scale the sphere so that its
radius is , and then translate it so that its top is at the origin.
Applying the inversion map shows that there is a disk on the
plane which contains and and excludes
and , and another disk on which contains and
and excludes and However, we have seen
the impossibility of this happening on the plane in Lemma 4.6.
Since each cell in the tessellation contains a disk of area
(from V.i), we can appeal to uniform convergence
in the law of large numbers.
Lemma 4.8: There is a sequence such that
Every cell contains a node)
Proof: Let denote the class of disks of area
Note that the VC-dimension of is also . Hence
Number of nodes in
whenever
This is satisfied when
Since each cell in contains a disk of area ,
we have
Number of nodes in
for every
The result follows.
Hence every cell in contains at least one node to relay
the traffic (with probability exceeding ). More-
over, every such node has enough range to communicate with
all nodes in any adjacent cell (see Lemma 4.2). Hence packets
can be relayed from one cell intersecting a line to the next cell
intersecting the line. Hence the routing scheme given above can
indeed work as planned with probability exceeding
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 399
Fig. 5. Transforming great circles intersecting disks into points lying in equatorial bands.
From now on we will use the phrase “with high probability,”
abbreviated as whp to stand for “with probability approaching
as ” The multihop relaying scheme can therefore
function as planned whp.
H. The Mean Number of Routes Served by Each Cell
Recall that the straight line connects and , where
and are independently and uniformly distributed on By
our assumption (V.ii) on the tessellation , each cell is
contained in a disk of radius no more than (Note that
the area of a disk of radius on is less than This allows
us to bound the probability that a line intersects a given cell
in
Lemma 4.9: For every line and cell
intersects
Proof: As noted above, from property (V.ii) of the tes-
sellation, every cell is contained in a disk of radius
If lies at a distance from the disk, then the
angle subtended at by the disk is no more than
The area of the sector so formed is no more than If does
not lie in this sector, then the line joining and cannot
intersect the disk containing the cell Hence, for a point at
a distance from the disk of radius containing the
cell , the probability that the line connecting and inter-
sects the disk is no more than
Since is uniformly distributed on , the probability den-
sity that it is at a distance from the disk is bounded above by
Integrating, we obtain
intersects
Let denote the great circle containing the line , i.e., the
extension of the line so that it wraps around the sphere. The
same proof technique shows the following.
Lemma 4.10: For every great circle and cell
(Great circle intersects
There being a total of lines , one connecting each
with , the mean number of lines or great circles passing
through a cell is bounded as follows:
Number of lines in intersecting a cell
Number of great circles in intersecting a cell
I. The Actual Traffic Served by Each Cell
Above, since routes follow lines, we have bounded the mean
number of routes passing through each cell. However, what we
need to bound is the actual random number of routes served by
every cell.
To do this we make use of the critical property that the se-
quence is i.i.d. Hence, so are the straight lines
This allows us to exploit uniform convergence in the law of large
numbers.
Recall that each cell is contained in a disk of radius
We will bound the number of great circles intersecting
such disks of radius This is clearly an upper bound on the
number of lines passing through cells.
We transform the problem of counting “intersections” of
disks of radius with great circles into a “shattering” problem
as follows. For every point on let denote the (unique)
great circle containing all points equidistant from it. This is
akin to associating an equator with a pole.
Given a great circle , the inverse of this map is not well de-
fined since every equator has two poles. However, we arbitrarily
choose one of these two poles and designate it as the inverse
Consider a disk of radius centered at a point
on Let denote the set of all points
which are within a distance from ; it is a band of width
around the great circle See Fig. 5.
400 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
Let denote the set of all disks on It is easy to see the
following lemma and corollary.
Lemma 4.11: The great circle intersects the disk if and
only if the point is contained in the band .
Corollary 4.1: Let denote the set of all great circles
which intersect The VC-dimension of
is the same as the VC-dimension of
Let denote the set of all disks strictly smaller than
hemispheres. To appeal to uniform convergence in the law of
large numbers we only have to show that the VC-dimension of
is bounded. Note that for each
band is the intersection of two disks, each strictly larger
than a hemisphere. It is trivial that the VC-dimension of a class
of sets is the same as the VC-dimension of the class formed by
the complements of the sets. It is also known (see Vidyasagar
[17]) that if is a set of sets, and consists of sets which are
each obtained by intersecting two sets in , then
VC- VC-
Hence we obtain the following lemma.
Lemma 4.12: The VC-dimension of is
no more than ten times the VC-dimension of
In Lemma 4.7, we have already shown that the VC-dimension
of is . Hence uniform convergence in the weak law of large
numbers holds, and we obtain the following.
Lemma 4.13: There is a such that
(Number of lines intersecting )
Note that if a cell contains , it needs to forward the packet
to its final destination This final destination is at most
one hop away Else, if a cell does not contain , then the
traffic is relayed to the next cell. Hence the traffic handled by
a cell is proportional to the number of lines passing through it.
Since each line carries traffic of rate bits per second,
we have obtained the following bound.
Lemma 4.14: There is a such that
(Traffic needing to be carried by cell )
J. Lower Bound on Throughput Capacity of Random Networks
From Lemma 4.4 we know that there exists a schedule for
transmitting packets such that in every slots, each cell
in the tessellation gets one slot to transmit, and such that each
transmission is received within a range of the transmitter.
Thus the rate at which each cell gets to transmit is
bits per second.
On the other hand, the rate at which each cell needs to transmit
is less than whp. With high probability, this
rate can be accommodated by all cells if it is less than the rate
available, i.e., if
Moreover, within a cell, the traffic to be handled by the entire
cell can be handled by any one node in the cell, since each node
can transmit at rate bits per second whenever necessary. In
fact, one can even designate one node in each cell as a “relay”
node. This node can handle all the traffic needing to be relayed.
The other nodes can simply serve as sources or sinks.
We have proved the following theorem, noting the linear
growth of in in Lemma 4.3, and the choice of in
Lemma 4.4 for the Physical Model.
Theorem 4.1:
(i) For Random Networks on in the Protocol Model, there
is a deterministic constant not depending on , , or ,
such that
bits per second is feasible whp.
ii) For Random Networks on in the Physical Model, there
are deterministic constants and not depending on , , ,
, or , such that
bits per second is feasible whp.
It should be noted that these throughput levels have been at-
tained without subdividing the wireless channel into subchan-
nels of smaller capacity.
V. RANDOM NETWORKS: AN UPPER BOUND ON THROUGHPUT
CAPACITY
Now we turn to the proof of the upper bound on the capacity
for Random Networks.
First we will show that that when the range is too small not
every source will be able to communicate with its desired des-
tination.
A. Asymptotic Probability of an Isolated Node
From [10] we know that a necessary condition for connec-
tivity whp for the problem of nodes strewn on a disk of unit
area in the plane is , where The
setting here requires a slightly different treatment. The area
of a disk of radius on is not A saving grace in com-
parison to a disk on the plane is that there is no need to consider
the tedious issue of edge effects.
Another subtle issue is that we may not need connectivity
of the entire graph. Strictly speaking, we only need that every
source be able to communicate with its chosen destination. What
we will show below is that disconnectedness manifests itself by
the presence of isolated nodes. These nodes will then be unable
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 401
to communicate with any other node. Hence the absence of iso-
lated nodes is indeed a necessary condition for feasibility of any
throughput.
We recall two results from [10].
Lemma 5.1:
(i) For any
(ii) For any given , there exists , such that
for all
If , then
Lemma 5.2: If , then, for any fixed
and for all sufficiently large
Given the nodes, denote by the graph which
results from connecting nodes separated by a distance less than
by an edge. Let denote the
probability that a graph has at least one order-
component, i.e., a set of nodes which form a connected set,
but which are not connected with any other node. Also, let
denote the probability that is discon-
nected.
The main necessary condition for the absence of a single iso-
lated node, and consequently also for connectivity, is the fol-
lowing.
Lemma 5.3: If where
then
and
Proof: Consider first the case where
for a fixed Consider , the probability that
has at least one order- component. Then
is the only isolated node in
is an isolated node in
and are isolated nodes in
is isolated in
and are isolated in
(15)
Fig. 6. Computing A(r), the area of a disk of radius r on a sphere of unit
surface area.
Next we compute the area of a disk of radius on
Note that the radius of the sphere itself is From
as indicated in Fig. 6, we get
(16)
Hence
(17)
Now
is isolated in
(18)
Also
and isolated in
(19)
where the first term on the right-hand side above takes into ac-
count the case where the distance between and is between
and Substituting (18) and (19) in (15) and using
(17), we get
402 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
Using Lemmas 5.1 and 5.2, for , and any fixed
and we have
for all
Now, replace by where Then, for any
, for all Also, the probability of
an isolated node is monotone decreasing in . Hence
for Taking limits
Since this holds for all and and since
the results follow.
Corollary 5.1: The asymptotic probability that graph
has an isolated node and is disconnected is strictly
positive if and
B. Upper Bound on Throughput Capacity of Random Networks
The key to the upper bound, as in the case of Arbitrary Net-
works, is to note that each transmission consumes valuable area.
Lemma 5.4: The number of simultaneous transmissions on
any particular subchannel is no more than
in the Protocol Model.
Proof: Suppose node in Fig. 7 transmits successfully to
node on the th subchannel. Then no other node within
a distance of can be simultaneously receiving a sep-
arate transmission on the same subchannel due to the require-
ments (3) and (4) and the triangle inequality.
Hence disks of radius centered at each receiver on
the th subchannel are disjoint. Since the area of each such
disk is , it follows that the network can support no
more than simultaneous transmissions on the th
subchannel.
Noting that each transmission over the th subchannel is of
bits per second, by adding all the transmissions taking place
at the same time over all the subchannels, we see that they
cannot total more than
bits per second in the Protocol Model.
Now let denote the mean length of a line connecting two
independently and uniformly distributed points on Then the
Fig. 7. X cannot receive at the same time asX on the same subchannel.
mean length of the path of packets is at least since there
is always a node within a distance of a point on the sphere
whp. (This was shown in Lemma 4.8). Thus the mean number
of hops taken by a packet is at least Since each source
generates bits per second, there are sources, and each bit
needs to be relayed on the average by at least nodes, it
follows that the total number of bits per second served by the
entire network needs to be at least To ensure that
all the required traffic is carried, we therefore need
Thus
From the previous section we know that is nec-
essary to guarantee connectivity whp. Hence we obtain the fol-
lowing upper bound.
Theorem 5.1: For Random Networks on under the Pro-
tocol Model, there is a deterministic constant , not
depending on , , or , such that
is feasible
Note that just as in Theorem 4.1 the number of subchannels
is irrelevant.
For the Physical Model, the upper bound is as follows.
Theorem 5.2: For Random Networks on under the Phys-
ical Model, there is a deterministic sequence , not
depending on , , , or , such that
Prob is feasible
where is the mean distance between two points independently
and uniformly distributed on the unit area surface of the sphere.
Proof: In Section II we have shown that bit-
meters per second is an upper bound on the transport capacity
for an Arbitrary Network under the Protocol Model. We will
now show that any upper bound on the transport capacity for
Arbitrary Networks under the Protocol Model is also an upper
bound on the transport capacity for Random Networks under the
Physical Model. This will prove the assertion since there are
nodes, each having its destination at least meters away
on average.
GUPTA AND KUMAR: THE CAPACITY OF WIRELESS NETWORKS 403
Consider any set of successful simultaneous transmissions
under the Physical Model for Random Networks. If is suc-
cessfully transmitting to over a the th subchannel, at the
same time that is also successfully transmitting to over
the same subchannel, then from (5)
and so
where Hence any set of simultaneous transmis-
sions feasible for Random Networks under the Physical Model
is also feasible in the Protocol Model for Arbitrary Networks.
Thus the upper bound on the transport capacity for the latter also
holds for the former.
VI. THROUGHPUT CAPACITY OF RANDOM NETWORKS ON
PLANAR DISK
The reader may wonder if the capacity is much different
when the network is located on a disk in the two-dimensional
plane, rather than on the surface of a sphere. The key issue is
whether hot spots created at the center of the domain by several
origin–destination pairs routing their traffic through the center
will make it a bottleneck. The answer is no. The order of the
capacity is unchanged for the Protocol Model, and the earlier
orders for the lower and upper bounds for the Physical Model
continue to hold.
Clearly, the arguments for the earlier upper bounds still
hold, in view of the same necessary condition on the radius for
connectivity (see [10]) in Random Networks under the Protocol
Model, and the same reduction of Random Networks under
the Physical Model to Arbitrary Networks under the Protocol
Model.
The critical issue is to show that the earlier lower bounds
can still be achieved. We show this by using the same tessel-
lation-based scheme as on Let be the disk of unit area on
the plane on which the nodes are randomly located. Note that
just as on , the probability that a randomly chosen line on
intersects a disk of radius is no more than
This applies even to disks of radius in the center of
Thus no unduly hot spots are expected to occur at the center of
the domain The key result to show however is that with high
probability no hot spots are created anywhere. That is, we need
to show the analog of Lemma 4.13 that the number of lines in-
tersecting every cell is less than whp. Lemma 4.11
and Corollary 4.1 are not applicable any more since we are not
on However, we can circumvent this problem as follows.
We map into a large sphere of radius by using an inver-
sion map Consider a straight line on Let denote
the curve on which is the image of the line, and let de-
note the corresponding geodesic on connecting the two end
points. When is large enough, every such deviates from
by no more than a distance That is, the distortion be-
tween the images of straight lines on the disk and the geodesics
is very small.
Consider now a cell of the tessellation of It is
contained in a disk of radius This disk is mapped into
another disk Let be a disk in with
the same center as , but with a radius larger than that of
It follows that a straight on intersects the disk only if
the corresponding geodesic on intersects the disk
(The reason is that the enlargement of the radius of accounts
for the distortion involved in replacing the images of straight
line by geodesics). We have already shown in Section IV-I that
the uniform law of large numbers holds for the probability of
randomly chosen geodesics intersecting disks. Mapping back
into on the plane shows that the uniform upper bound on
the number of straight lines passing through the disks of radius
applies with high probability.
Thus the same results for the capacity continue to hold.
Theorem 6.1: For Random Networks on a planar disk of unit
area, the results of Theorems 4.1, 5.1, and 5.2 continue to hold,
except that in Theorem 5.2, is the mean distance between
two points independently and uniformly distributed in the planar
disk of unit area.
VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS
We have shown that under a Protocol Model of noninterfer-
ence, the capacity of wireless networks with randomly located
nodes each capable of transmitting at bits per second and em-
ploying a common range, and each with randomly chosen and
therefore likely far away destination, is This is
true whether the nodes are located on the surface of a three-di-
mensional sphere or on a planar disk. Even when the nodes are
optimally placed in a disk of unit area, and the range of each
transmission is optimally selected, a wireless network cannot
provide a throughput of more than bits per second
to each node for a distance of the order of 1 m away. In fact,
summing over all the bits transported, a wireless network on a
disk of unit area in the plane cannot transport a total of more
than bit-meters per second, irrespective of how the
load is distributed. Under a Physical Model of noninterference,
the lower bounds are the same as those above for the Protocol
Model, while the upper bounds on throughput are for
Random Networks and for Arbitrary Networks.
Splitting the channel into several subchannels does not
change any of these results.
These results have some implications that designers may want
to consider. Perhaps efforts should be targeted at designing net-
works with small numbers of nodes.
On the positive side, the results show that modulo further
medium access or adaptive routing restrictions, communication
with nearby neighbors at constant bit rates can be provided in a
dense clusters of nodes, since the source–destination distances
then shrink in scaled length as This shows that sce-
narios envisaged in collections of smart homes, or networks with
mostly close-range transactions and sparse long-range demands,
are feasible.
We have not considered in this paper the additional burden in
coordinating access to the wireless channel, and the additional
404 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 46, NO. 2, MARCH 2000
burden caused by mobility and link failures and the consequent
need to route traffic in a distributed and adaptive way. These
can only further throttle capacity. It would be useful to quantify
these additional burdens.
Another issue to be studied is delay. This will arise when the
traffic is bursty or when nodes are mobile. These two sources of
delay are markedly different.
Finally, spatial directivity in the antennas or beamforming
will be advantageous in increasing the spatial concurrency
of transmissions, since wireless networks can then behave
like wired ones. Ephremides [18] has analyzed the medium
access problem for a single channel and shown that when only
ternary feedback from the channel can be used to schedule
transmissions, the throughput of collision-free successful
transmissions is the same as in the usual omnidirectional case.
When node locations and demands are known and do not have
to be figured out purely from ternary feedback, transmissions
can be advantageously scheduled so that collisions are avoided,
and the throughput can consequently be increased. However,
this is a challenging proposition since transmissions from nodes
will have to be carefully orchestrated. Such schemes may pose
some technological challenges though for low-cost networks.
Finally, there is the challange of a more information-theoretic
formulation.
REFERENCES
[1] “What you will want next and the really smart house,” Newsweek, May
30, 1999.
[2] S. Ramanathan and M. Steenstrup, “A survey of routing techniques for
mobile communication networks,” Mobile Networks and Appl., vol. 1,
no. 2, pp. 89–104, 1996.
[3] R. Gallager, “A perspective on multiaccess channels,” IEEE Trans. In-
form. Theory (Special Issue on Random Access Communications), vol.
IT-31, Mar. 1985.
[4] P. Karn, “MACA: A new channel access method for packet radio,” in
Proc. 9th Computer Networking Conf., Sept. 1990, pp. 134–140.
[5] V. Bharghavan, A. Demers, S. Shenkar, and L. Zhang, “MACAW: A
media access protocol for wireless LANs,” in Proc. SIGCOMM’94
Conf. on Communications Architectures, Protocols and Applications,
Aug. 1994, pp. 212–225.
[6] Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY)
Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11–1997, IEEE Computer Society
LAN MAN Standards Committee, Ed., 1997.
[7] N. Bambos, S. Chen, and G. Pottie, “Radio link admission algorithms
for wirelessd networks with power control and active link quality pro-
tection,” in Proc. IEEE INFOCOM, Boston, MA, 1996.
[8] S. Ulukus and R. Yates, “Stochastic power control for cellular radio sys-
tems”, Preprint, 1996.
[9] L. Valiant, “A theory of the learnable,” Commun. ACM, vol. 27, pp.
1134–1142, Nov. 1984.
[10] P. Gupta and P. R. Kumar, “Critical power for asymptotic connectivity
in wireless networks,” in Stochastic Analysis, Control, Optimization and
Applications: A Volume in Honor of W. H. Fleming, W. M. McEneany, G.
Yin, and Q. Zhang, Eds. Boston, MA: Birkhauser, 1998, pp. 547–566.
[11] A. Okabe, B. Boots, and K. Sugihara, Spatial Tessellations Concepts and
Applications of Voronoi Diagrams. New York: Wiley, 1992.
[12] J. Stilwell, Geometry of Surfaces. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1992.
[13] R. C. Lynwood, Groups and Geometry. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
Univ. Press, 1985.
[14] J. A. Bondy and U. Murthy, Graph Theory with Applications. New
York: Elsevier, 1976.
[15] V. N. Vapnik and A. Chervonenkis, “On the uniform convergence of
relative frequencies of events to their probabilities,” Theory Probab. its
Applic., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 264–280, 1971.
[16] V. N. Vapnik, Estimation of Dependences Based on Empirical
Data. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1982.
[17] M. Vidyasagar, A Theory of Learning and Generalization. London,
U.K.: Springer-Verlag, 1997.
[18] A. Ephremides, “Some wireless networking problems with a theoretical
conscience,” in Codes, Curves, and Signals: Common Threads in Com-
munications, A. Vardy, Ed., Aug. 1998.

