IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2003 1927
User Cooperation Diversity—Part I:
System Description
Andrew Sendonaris, Member, IEEE, Elza Erkip, Member, IEEE, and Behnaam Aazhang, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Mobile users’ data rate and quality of service are lim-
ited by the fact that, within the duration of any given call, they
experience severe variations in signal attenuation, thereby necessi-
tating the use of some type of diversity. In this two-part paper, we
propose a new form of spatial diversity, in which diversity gains
are achieved via the cooperation of mobile users. Part I describes
the user cooperation strategy, while Part II focuses on implemen-
tation issues and performance analysis. Results show that, even
though the interuser channel is noisy, cooperation leads not only
to an increase in capacity for both users but also to a more ro-
bust system, where users’ achievable rates are less susceptible to
channel variations.
Index Terms—Code-division multiple access (CDMA), diversity,
fading, information rates, multiuser channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
NEXT-GENERATION wireless communications (thirdgeneration and beyond) will bear little resemblance to
first- and second-generation, mostly voice cellular systems.
In order to meet the demands of multirate multimedia com-
munications, next-generation cellular systems must employ
advanced algorithms and techniques that not only increase
the data rate, but also enable the system to guarantee the
quality of service (QoS) desired by the various media classes.
The techniques currently being investigated for meeting
next-generation goals include advanced signal processing,
tailoring system components (such as coding, modulation, and
detection) specifically for the wireless environment, departing
from classic dichotomies (such as between source and channel
coding), and using various forms of diversity [1]–[5]. Among
these techniques, diversity is of primary importance due to the
nature of the wireless environment.
The mobile radio channel suffers from fading, implying that,
within the duration of any given call, mobile users go through se-
vere variations in signal attenuation. By effectively transmitting
or processing (semi)independently fading copies of the signal,
diversity is a method for directly combating the effects of fading.
Paper approved by M.-S. Alouini, the Editor for Modulation and Diversity
Systems of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received September
22, 2000; revised April 22, 2002 and November 13, 2002. This paper was pre-
sented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory,
Boston, MA, August, 1998.
A. Sendonaris is with Qualcomm, Inc., Campbell, CA 95008 USA (e-mail:
sendos@qualcomm.com).
E. Erkip is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, NY 11201 USA (e-mail: elza@poly.edu).
B. Aazhang is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Rice University, Houston, TX 77005 USA (e-mail: aaz@rice.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2003.818096
Some well-known forms of diversity are spatial diversity, tem-
poral diversity, and frequency diversity [6]. Spatial diversity re-
lies on the principle that signals transmitted from geographi-
cally separated transmitters, and/or to geographically separated
receivers, experience fading that is independent.
Therefore, independently of whether other forms of diversity
are being employed, having multiple transmit antennas is desir-
able due to the spatial diversity they provide [7]–[10]. Unfortu-
nately, this is impractical, if not infeasible, in the uplink of a cel-
lular system, due to the size of the mobile unit. In order to over-
come this limitation, yet still emulate transmit antenna diversity,
we are proposing a new form of spatial diversity, whereby di-
versity gains are achieved via the cooperation of in-cell users.
That is, in each cell, each user has a “partner.” Each of the two
partners is responsible for transmitting not only their own in-
formation, but also the information of their partner, which they
receive and detect. We are, in effect, attempting to achieve spa-
tial diversity through the use of the partner’s antenna; however,
this is complicated by the fact that the interuser channel is noisy.
It is also complicated by the fact that both partners have infor-
mation of their own to send; this is not a simple relay [11], [12]
problem.
Apart from the cellular scenario, user cooperation diversity
has the potential to be successfully used in wireless ad hoc net-
works [13] also. The wireless ad hoc network does not con-
tain a fixed infrastructure and a central control unit such as the
base station (BS); the nodes communicate by forming a network
based on current channel conditions and mobile locations. This
involves mobile-to-mobile communication, and, in cases where
terminal-to-terminal communication is not reliable, relaying by
a third mobile. The user cooperation diversity suggested in this
paper can be used in lieu of relaying, enabling the relay mo-
bile to simultaneously transmit its own independent informa-
tion over the ad hoc network. This, as we will show, provides
higher throughput and robustness to channel variations for both
the transmitting and relaying mobiles.
There is no cost, in terms of transmit power, associated with
transmitting to both the ultimate receiver and your partner, since
mobile antennas are omnidirectional. However, there are two
other factors that affect the required transmit power. First, a user
will require more power in order to send both users’ informa-
tion. Second, a user will require less power because of the diver-
sity gains. It is not clear a priori which of the above two factors
will be dominant.
Part I of this two-part paper focuses on the system-level de-
scription of the user cooperation concept. In order to evaluate the
potential benefits of user cooperation, in Section III we consider
0090-6778/03$17.00 © 2003 IEEE
1928 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2003
Fig. 1. Channel model.
a capacity, outage, and coverage analysis involving the channel
model in Fig. 1, using information-theoretic concepts.1 Then, in
Section IV, we provide an example of how user cooperation can
be implemented in a conventional low-rate code-division mul-
tiple-access (CDMA) system.
Part II [14] investigates the cooperation concept further and
considers practical issues related to its implementation. In par-
ticular, we investigate the optimal and suboptimal receiver de-
sign, and present performance analysis for the low-rate CDMA
implementation proposed in Part I. We also present partnering
strategies for different scenarios: One for a high-rate CDMA
system that uses multiple codes per user; another incorporating
long-term shadow fading and the availability (or lack thereof)
of channel state information at the transmitter.
The capacity and throughput analysis of Parts I and II aid us
in evaluating if there are any capacity/transmit power gains as-
sociated with user cooperation diversity. Results show that the
net effects are higher data rates at the same power level, or alter-
natively, reduced required transmit power at the same data rate.
This gain in transmit power can also be translated into an in-
crease in cell coverage.
This paper and its sequel do not address higher protocol-level
issues that may arise from a potential implementation of user
cooperation. We concentrate on physical-layer issues, with the
anticipation that any higher level overhead will be negligible
compared to the gains reported herein.
II. PROBLEM SETUP
The basic premise in this paper is that both users have in-
formation of their own to send, denoted by for 1, 2,
and would like to cooperate in order to send this information
to the receiver at the highest rate possible. To distinguish this
main/final receiver from the receiving units of the mobiles, we
will refer to it as the BS, even though the user cooperation idea
is equally applicable to wireless systems other than cellular.
1Throughout this paper, we use terms such as “capacity analysis” and “ca-
pacity gains,” even though, for our proposed cooperative strategy, we derive in
Section III an achievable rate region, not a capacity region. Because the achiev-
able rate region is, by definition, smaller than or equal to the capacity region of
user cooperation, all comparisons between user cooperation and the noncooper-
ative strategy (for which the capacity region is known) are, in fact, favorable to-
ward the noncooperative strategy. This implies that any capacity gains reported
herein are a lower bound on the gains that can be achieved via user cooperation.
The channel model we use is depicted in Fig. 1. Each mobile
receives an attenuated and noisy version of the partner’s trans-
mitted signal and uses that, in conjunction with its own data, to
construct its transmit signal. The BS receives a noisy version of
the sum of the attenuated signals of both users. The mathemat-
ical formulation of our model is
(1)
(2)
(3)
where , , and are the baseband models of the re-
ceived signals at the BS, user 1, and user 2, respectively, during
one symbol period. Also, is the signal transmitted by
user , for 1, 2, and are the additive channel noise
terms at the BS, user 1, and user 2, for 0, 1, 2, respec-
tively. The fading coefficients, { }, remain constant over at
least one symbol period, and observed over time form indepen-
dent stationary ergodic stochastic processes, resulting in fre-
quency-nonselective fading.
Note that our model assumes there is no contribution from
in , even though they are actually both present at the
terminal belonging to user 2. Since does not go through
any fading before it reaches the antenna of user 2, unlike ,
it may appear that it will have a detrimental effect on the recep-
tion of . However, provided that user 2 knows the relevant
antenna gains, canceling the effects of on is pos-
sible, and thus our model gives an accurate representation. A
similar argument can be made in the case of user 1, regarding
the effects of on the reception of . Therefore, as in
[12] we assume that echo cancellation at the mobiles is possible.
This helps us identify benefits of cooperation in the most gen-
eral case. In practice, to isolate the transmitted signal from the
received one, it may be necessary to use two separate channels,
two colocated antennas, or some other means. For example, the
CDMA implementations of this paper and its sequel, Part II,
make use of spreading codes to create two separate channels,
thus eliminating the need for echo cancellation. Also, time divi-
sion among the mobiles has been investigated in [15], where it
was shown that cooperation continues to provide full diversity.
Our model further assumes the following: the transmitted
signals have an average power constraint of for 1,
2; the noise terms are white zero-mean complex Gaussian
random processes with spectral height for 0, 1, 2; and
the fading coefficients are zero-mean complex Gaussian
random variables with variance (which corresponds to
Rayleigh fading). We also assume that the BS can track the
variations in and , user 1 can track , and user 2
can track , implying that all the decoding is done with the
knowledge of the fading parameters [9]. Due to the reciprocity
of the channel, we assume that and are equal. Finally,
for simplicity of analysis and exposition, though with no loss
in generality, we assume a synchronous system.
Given the above model, the problem lies in finding the best
strategy for both users to construct their transmit signals, given
their own data and the received signal from their partner, and
for the BS to employ the optimal reception scheme so that both
users are able to maximize their data rates toward the BS. Note
SENDONARIS et al.: USER COOPERATION DIVERSITY—PART I: SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 1929
that the transmitted signal should be designed to carry informa-
tion not only to the BS but also to the partnering mobile, so that
cooperation is possible.
It should be pointed out that an important issue impacting the
solution to the above problem is the degree of channel state in-
formation available at the transmitters. Since the users are as-
sumed to know the interuser fading coefficient, the question
reduces to how much they know about the fading coefficient
between them and the BS. Specifically, how much does user
know about ? We consider three cases: User knows nothing
about besides its statistics; user knows the phase of
but not its amplitude; or user knows both the phase and am-
plitude of . The users may obtain information about in
two ways. First, there may be feedback from the BS. Second, the
system may be operating in time-division duplex (TDD) mode,
that is, the uplink and downlink share the same bandwidth and
are separated via time division. In this case, provided that the co-
herence time of the channel is large with respect to the symbol
duration, the uplink and downlink channel impulse responses
are the same, thus giving the mobiles the opportunity to know
the uplink fading coefficients ( ) by tracking the downlink
fading coefficients.
If the transmitters know the amplitude and phase of the
fading, they could theoretically employ some type of water-
filling, that is, allocate their power depending on the different
fading states, while still maintaining their average power
constraint [16]–[18]. However, the mobile unit has very limited
peak power capabilities, thus rendering power allocation into
different fading states implausible, if not infeasible. For this
reason, as well as trying to keep the mobile units as simple as
possible, for the purposes of this study, we will disregard the
case of user exploiting knowledge of the amplitude of .
When the transmitters have knowledge of only the phase of
the fading parameter between them and the BS, we argue that the
most they can do to exploit this knowledge is to transmit a signal
that offsets this phase. Hence, the signals transmitted by the part-
ners can be forced to add coherently at the receiver. This effec-
tively enables the users to take advantage of “beamforming” as
discussed in [19]. The same holds for the interuser fading pa-
rameter. As a result, the attenuation parameters { } may, in
this case, be treated as real random variables with a Rayleigh
distribution.
Phase knowledge at the transmitters is an assumption we will
use in the majority of this paper, in both Part I and Part II.
Demonstrating the benefits of user cooperation under the as-
sumption of no phase knowledge at the transmitters requires a
more complex system model which would hinder the clear ex-
position of the benefits of user cooperation. Nevertheless, for
completeness, in Section V of Part II, we show that cooperation
is still beneficial, even when the transmitters have no phase in-
formation.
It should be noted that, while we use a synchronous system
model to illustrate in a simple and clear way the potential bene-
fits of user cooperation, in practice, the two users will be asyn-
chronous. In a CDMA system, which is the main implementa-
tion focus of this paper, asynchronicity implies that the problem
of knowing the phase at the transmitter is not an issue, due to
the large time-bandwidth product of CDMA signals and the re-
sulting ability of the BS to track the phases of the users’ signals,
even when the two mobiles transmit the same signal. There-
fore, while the viability of phase feedback or the accuracy of the
phase estimate using the TDD method may be questioned, the
fact that they are not actually needed in an asynchronous system
justifies assuming them in our synchronous system model.
III. INFORMATION-THEORETIC ANALYSIS
In this paper, our primary goal, besides introducing the con-
cept of user cooperation, is to propose possible user cooperation
schemes and to analyze their throughput, the number of suc-
cessfully received bits/transmission, and overall performance.
First, however, we provide an analysis of user cooperation based
on information-theoretic concepts. This is important not only
for understanding the limits of any proposed user cooperation
scheme, but also for providing insight as to how a user cooper-
ation scheme should be structured. That is, during the process
of developing the various cooperation schemes proposed in this
paper, we observed that, within a given transmission framework,
the system that most closely emulated the signal structure of the
information-theoretic capacity-maximizing system, also had the
highest throughput. Therefore, for completeness and for a better
grasp of the subject of user cooperation, we present here the
most important results from the capacity analysis of user coop-
eration.2
A. An Achievable Rate Region
In this section, we present an achievable rate region for the
configuration in Fig. 1, described in Section II. The mathemat-
ical model we use is a discrete time version of the model de-
scribed in (1)–(3), and is given by
(4)
(5)
(6)
with , and .
In general, we assume that . The system is causal and
transmission is done through blocks of length , therefore the
signal of user 1 at time , , can be expressed as
, where is the mes-
sage that user 1 wants to transmit to the BS at that particular
block. Similarly, for user 2, we have
.
The cooperation strategy employed by the two users is based
on superposition block Markov encoding [20] and backward
decoding [23], [24]. The transmission is done for blocks
of length , where both and are large. Even though the
causality condition above suggests that the received signal at
mobile 1 ( ) could be used as a basis for cooperation only
with a delay of one symbol, we will consider a coarser time
scale for cooperation. The mobiles will cooperate based on the
signals they receive in the previous block.
2Information theory literature has investigated multiple-access channels with
varying degrees of cooperation between the encoders such as [20]–[23]. How-
ever, most of that work involves abstract settings-we illustrate how user coop-
eration can lead to higher rates and diversity in wireless systems.
1930 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2003
We assume mobile 1 divides its information into two
parts: , to be sent directly to the BS, and , to be sent
to the BS via mobile 2. Mobile 1 then structures its transmit
signal so that it is able to send the above information as well as
some additional cooperative information to the BS. This is done
according to
(7)
and divides its total power accordingly
(8)
where refers to the part of the signal that carries coopera-
tive information. Thus, is allocated power and is used
for sending at rate directly to the BS, is allocated
power and is used for sending to user 2 at rate , and
is allocated power and is used for sending cooperative
information to the BS. It should be noted that the transmission
rate of , i.e., , and the power allocated to , i.e., ,
should be such that can be perfectly decoded by mobile 2.
This perfect reconstruction at the partner forms the basis for co-
operation. Mobile 2 structures its transmit signal and divides
its total power in a similar fashion.
Recall that we transmit for blocks of length . Cooperation
in block is achieved by constructing signals and based
on ( ), both of which are now known at
mobile 1 and mobile 2. The receiver waits until all the blocks
have been received and starts decoding from the last block.
An achievable rate region with user cooperation is obtained
by first considering the above cooperative strategy with con-
stant attenuation factors, and then incorporating the randomness
using [25]. It is assumed that each block of length is long
enough to observe the ergodicity of the fading distributions.
Theorem 1: An achievable rate region for the system given in
(4)–(6) is the closure of the convex hull of all rate pairs ( )
such that and with
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
(14)
for some power assignment satisfying ,
. The function
is the capacity of an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
Fig. 2. Capacity region when the two users face statistically equivalent
channels toward the BS.
Fig. 3. Capacity region when the two users face statistically dissimilar
channels toward the BS.
channel with signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and denoted ex-
pectation with respect to the fading parameters .
Proof: The proof is akin to [22]. A sketch can be found in
the Appendix.
The achievable rate region under our proposed cooperative
strategy, together with the capacity region of the noncooperative
strategy, is shown in Figs. 2 and 3, for different scenarios of
channel quality. For the no-cooperation case, the users ignore
the signals and , hence, this is equivalent to the well-known
multiple-access channel capacity region. Also included in these
figures is the achievable rate region of cooperation under the
assumption of a noiseless interuser channel ( ).
This is referred to as ideal cooperation, and is used mostly as an
upper bound for the performance of any cooperation scheme.
From Fig. 2, we observe that when the channels from the
users to the BS have similar quality ( and have the
same mean) and the channel between the users is better (
SENDONARIS et al.: USER COOPERATION DIVERSITY—PART I: SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 1931
has larger mean),3 the cooperation scheme greatly improves the
achievable rate region. As the interuser channel degrades and
the severity of the interuser fading increases, performance ap-
proaches that of no cooperation.
When the user–BS links of the two users experience fading
with different means,4 cooperation again improves the achiev-
able rate region, as shown in Fig. 3. In this case, the user with
more fading benefits most from the cooperation. The equal rate
point ( ) or the maximum rate sum point ( ) is
increased considerably with cooperation.
It should be pointed out that, in Figs. 2 and 3, the point where
any achievable rate curve intersects the axis corresponds to
user 2 becoming a relay for user 1, and the point where the curve
intersects the axis corresponds to user 1 becoming a relay
for user 2. This demonstrates that the relay problem is a special,
degenerate case of user cooperation, since the latter corresponds
to an entire continuum of possible achievable rate pairs between
the two extremes ( , 0) and (0, ).
Before proceeding with a possible CDMA implementation of
the cooperation strategy, we investigate two more measures of
merit for wireless transmission schemes: probability of outage
and cell coverage. This will enable us to perform a more com-
plete comparison of our cooperative strategy with the noncoop-
erative case.
B. Probability of Outage
Consider a slowly fading system with delay requirements. If
the attenuation factors vary slowly and can be approximated
as constants over the blocks of length , then over these
blocks we can achieve rates dictated by the current values of
, , , and . We assume (the block length) and
(the number of blocks) are large enough to achieve capacity in
the case of constant attenuation factors. However, in order to talk
about the achievable rate region in Theorem 1, we need to have
even longer block lengths and observe different realizations of
our fading amplitudes. When the delay requirements prevent us
from having these longer block lengths, the rates achieved will
be random quantities based on the current realizations of the
fading amplitudes. Some wireless services have minimum re-
quirements on the supported data rates, below which the service
is unsustainable. Therefore, we observe an outage if the random
rates that we can achieve fall below a certain level, which we
will call the service sustainability rate, and consider the prob-
ability of outage as a performance criterion [26]. This scenario
can also be referred as “nonergodic fading.”
In particular, we consider the equal rate point (
) and calculate the probability of outage versus the service
sustainability rate for the cooperation and the no-cooperation
schemes. The probability of outage, , pro-
vides us with the probability that the current realization of our
slowly fading parameters , , , and will not be
3This scenario could occur, for example, if two users are walking on the same
street but neither has a direct line-of-sight link with the BS, thus making the
interuser channel of higher quality than the two user–BS links.
4As would occur, for example, if the two users were at different distances
from the BS.
Fig. 4. Probability of outage.
able to support an equal transmission rate of for the particular
scheme under consideration.
In Fig. 4, we consider a situation where users face statisti-
cally similar channels toward the BS, and we plot the proba-
bility of outage versus the service sustainability rate for the
equal rate point ( ), both for the cooperation
and the no-cooperation schemes. We observe that for all ser-
vice sustainability rates, the probability of outage for the coop-
eration scheme is smaller than the probability of outage under
no cooperation. This is true despite the fact that the increase in
achievable rate due to cooperation is moderate for the scenario
depicted in Fig. 4, as can be seen from Fig. 2 ( ).
This demonstrates that even in cases when it does not signifi-
cantly increase achievable rates, user cooperation is still able to
increase robustness against channel variations. We, of course,
expect the robustness to improve even more as the interuser
channel quality ( ) improves.
C. Cellular Coverage
In this section, we present a simple calculation relating the in-
crease in capacity that results from a cooperative scheme, to an
equivalent increase in cell coverage, in order to obtain a quanti-
tative measure of the alternative benefits of user cooperation.
We begin with a general calculation of the increase in cell
coverage given a reduction in the required average received
power. Assume the mobile is at a distance km from the BS.
Let denote the average power transmitted by the mobile
and denote the average power received at the BS (in
decibels). Then, in a typical wireless channel, we have (in
decibels)
where is the mean path loss at distance km. A common
model for is the Hata model [27]
1932 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2003
where and are functions of transmitter and receiver an-
tenna height, carrier frequency, and type of environment (e.g.,
urban versus rural). Therefore
For a fixed , the maximum is achieved when is at its
maximum, denoted by . This is the maximum power that
the mobile can transmit. So
(15)
The coverage of the cell is thus given by . The only quantity
of the right-hand side that is variable is . It can be seen
that coverage and required average received power are related
inversely to each other. That is, the higher the required average
received power, the lower the coverage, and vice versa.
Assume that two different transmission schemes require dif-
ferent received average powers in order to operate successfully.
That is, let scheme 1 require and scheme 2 require .
Define to be their ratio, that is in decibels
From (15) and the above, we have
resulting in
A typical set of values for and is and
(obtained for a medium-sized city environment [27], with
carrier frequency of 900 MHz, transmit antenna height of 50 m,
receive antenna height of 1 m, and a net antenna gain of 6 dB).
Thus, the ratio of the coverage of scheme 1 versus scheme
2, as a function of the ratio of the required received average
powers, is
(16)
Now, going back to fading channels and cooperation, when the
two mobiles face a statistically similar channel and use equal
powers, the noncooperative scheme achieves a sum capacity
obeying the following inequality:
(17)
Let denote the upper bound of , and let
. By numerically evaluating using
TABLE I
SAMPLE CASES OF AN INCREASE IN COVERAGE AREA DUE TO
USER COOPERATION
Rayleigh and , over the range ,
1, 2, it can be seen that a good approximation for is
(18)
where roughly equals 0.8 when is in the range 1.5–4.5
(which is roughly the range that covers the examples in this
paper). We should note that this is merely an approximation of
, but it is adequate for the purposes of this analysis, as the
results in Table I demonstrate.
Assume now that a cooperative strategy results in an increase
in sum capacity over the noncooperative strategy, for a given
power . We may choose to increase the power used under
a noncooperative scheme to in order to achieve the same
sum capacity as the cooperative scheme. So, if
with , we would like to find such that
. Here, the superscript denotes co-
operation, and denotes no cooperation. This can be written as
resulting in
Thus
Combining this with (16) and noting that now , we
get
where scheme 1 denotes cooperation, scheme 2 is no coopera-
tion, , , and is the average
received power for cooperation.
One scenario depicted in Fig. 2 considers a symmetric
channel with , , and ,
resulting in . This means that
. Thus, for these parameters, the increase in cell
coverage, as a function of , which is the ratio of cooperative
total rate to noncooperative rate, is given by
SENDONARIS et al.: USER COOPERATION DIVERSITY—PART I: SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 1933
The above refers to the increase in cell radius. The increase in
area coverage is given by the square of the increase in cell radius.
Therefore
Increase in area coverage
It can be shown, analytically, that for close to 1 (the situa-
tion observed in Fig. 2), the above expression is approximately
equal to . Numerical calculations show that, in fact, the above
finding roughly holds for any in the range 1.5–4.5. Hence,
a given percentage increase in capacity is equivalent to the same
percentage increase in area coverage, and to about half that per-
centage increase in cell radius. So, for example, a 20% increase
in capacity is equivalent to a 20% increase in area coverage and
a 10% increase in cell radius.
Even though the above calculations used some approxima-
tions, the results are fairly accurate. That is, we numerically
calculated the required increase in power for a noncooperative
scheme based on the exact form of the sum capacity in (17), not
using the approximation in (18), and calculated the resulting
increase in coverage without any further approximations. A
sample of such results is listed in Table I. For example, in Fig. 2,
when , the increase in sum capacity is 11.9%,
and we found (via numerical calculations) that a noncoopera-
tive scheme would have required 21.5% more power to achieve
the same sum capacity. This, in turn, results in a cooperative
coverage area that is 12.2% larger than the noncooperative
area. A similar result is obtained when . We
thus see that the resulting percent increase in area coverage is
indeed roughly equal to the percent increase in sum capacity
for the scenarios tested.
IV. A CDMA IMPLEMENTATION
Having seen the limits of any cooperation scheme, as pre-
sented in the information-theoretic analysis of the previous sec-
tion, we now turn our attention to some possible implementa-
tions of the user cooperation concept, under some practical wire-
less system framework such as CDMA. It should be pointed
out that, while we focus on CDMA, other frameworks, such
as frequency-division multiple access (FDMA) and time-divi-
sion multiple access (TDMA), may be equally suitable; each,
of course, with its own unique advantages and challenges.
In this section, we briefly motivate and describe a simple,
yet powerful, cooperation strategy for mobiles in a conven-
tional CDMA system. Part II will investigate both optimal
and low-complexity suboptimal receiver structures and will
provide an analytical expression for the probability of error and
throughput of our implementation. Throughput is defined as the
number of successfully received bits/symbol after error correc-
tion and is a decreasing function of the probability of error. The
functional relationship between throughput and probability of
error depends on the modulation and error-correction scheme
employed. We will restrict ourselves to binary modulation and
assume we have access to the “best” error-correction code in
Shannon sense. Thus, our throughput can be expressed as the
capacity of a binary symmetric channel (BSC) with crossover
probability equal to the particular probability of error. This will
allow us to study the fundamental advantages and limitations
of user cooperation. Part II will also present and discuss other
implementations of user cooperation, such as when we have
a high-rate (multicode) CDMA system, and when no phase
information is available to the transmitters.
Consider a CDMA system in which each user has one
spreading code, and modulates one bit onto it. Assume that the
users’ codes are orthogonal and that the coherence time of the
channel is symbol periods, that is, all the fading parameters
remain approximately unchanged for periods. In order to
facilitate the presentation, we begin with a simple example
( ) and then generalize to any . In the absence of
cooperation, during three (i.e., ) consecutive symbol periods,
the users would transmit
Period Period Period
(19)
where is user ’s th bit, is user ’s code, and
where is user ’s power, and is the symbol pe-
riod. Now, assume that the two partners decide to cooperate.
How will they do so? The cooperative strategy chosen should
satisfy some basic criteria. First, for a fair comparison with
the no-cooperation case, the total number of codes used by the
two users, as well as the modulation type, should remain the
same. Also, the strategy should not be overly complex. Given
the above conditions, the two partners should use a cooperative
strategy that maximizes throughput.
Our work has resulted in a cooperative strategy inspired
somewhat by the signal structure in Section III-A, that sat-
isfies the above criteria and provides a significant increase
in throughput over the no-cooperation case. Although not
necessarily optimal, the strategy we chose suffices for the
purpose of demonstrating the advantages of user cooperation.
Under the chosen cooperation scheme, the two users transmit
Period Period Period
(20)
where is the partner’s estimate of user ’s th bit. The pa-
rameters { } control how much power is allocated to a user’s
own bits versus the bits of the partner, while maintaining an av-
erage power constraint of for user , over periods. Since it
is assumed that the mobiles do not know the fading amplitudes
between their terminals and the BS, the { } do not depend on
the particular realization of the fading process.
Period 1 is used to send data to the BS only, akin to the sig-
nals , 1, 2 in Section III-A. On the other hand, period 2
is used to send data not only to the BS, but also to each user’s
partner, akin to the signals and in Section III-A. After
this data is estimated by each user’s partner, it is used to con-
struct a cooperative signal that is sent to the BS during period
1934 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2003
3. This is accomplished by each user utilizing both users’ codes
( and ), and is akin to the signal in Section III-A.
This is done in such a way as to enable the two partners to send a
cooperative signal while keeping the total number of codes used
by the two users constant.
Also, notice that period 3 is used in order to resend, in some
sense, the information originally sent during period 2. This im-
plies that the users only send two new bits per three symbol pe-
riods, whereas they would be sending three new bits per three
symbol periods if they were not cooperating [see (19)]. This may
seem counterproductive, but, under certain channel conditions,
“wasting” a few symbol periods for cooperation may be justi-
fied. The rationale behind this can be summarized as: It may be
better to receive 1 very high SNR bit per symbol period, than to
receive, say, 10 very low SNR bits per symbol period. This is be-
cause the performance criterion is the throughput, the number of
successfully received bits/transmission, rather than the number
of transmitted bits/symbol. In fact, the coding required to bring
the probability of error of the low SNR bits down the same level
as the high SNR bits, can bring the resulting number of infor-
mation bits to below one bit per symbol period, if the low SNR
is low enough. The in-depth analysis presented below will help
us gain a better understanding of this issue.
A. Rationale Behind Cooperative Strategy
Due to the fact that in our proposed cooperative scheme we
can control how power is allocated using the parameters { },
it is possible to allocate no power to the cooperative signal, that
is, transmit no power during period 3 [see (20)]. Even though
this is a degenerate case, studying it reveals some of the funda-
mental tradeoffs of our proposed cooperative scheme. In gen-
eral, allocating no power to the cooperative signal is equivalent
to having a transmitter that voluntarily decides to not transmit
during some of its allotted symbol periods. Since the trans-
mitter has an average power constraint, not transmitting during
some of the symbol periods allows it to boost its power during
the remaining periods. The throughput of this system, in bits per
symbol period, given that the transmitter employs binary phase-
shift keying (BPSK) modulation and decides to not transmit
during a fraction of its symbol periods, is given by
where is the capacity of a BSC with crossover prob-
ability , is complementary cumulative distribution func-
tion of a zero-mean unit-variance normal random variable, and
is the nominal SNR that would be in effect if the trans-
mitter were transmitting during all the symbol periods. Some
numerical results for versus under different are given
in Fig. 5. What we notice is that for low , the transmitter
may waste up to half of its symbol periods and still incur only
negligible loss in the overall throughput. As increases, the
fraction of symbol periods that can be left unused, while neg-
ligibly affecting overall throughput, decreases. Simple as they
may seem, these observations have an impact on the design of
our cooperative scheme.
Fig. 5. How the throughput () varies with  , the fraction of unused symbol
periods, under different values of SNR .
In order to translate the above observations to the case of
general user cooperation as given in (20), we need to consider
the following. As we begin to allocate power to the cooperative
signal, the power allocated to the remaining symbol periods is
reduced, thus potentially reducing their throughput. At the same
time, though, the cooperative signal is now able to enhance the
overall throughput due to diversity gains. Therefore, the issue is
whether the loss incurred by allocating some of the periods for
cooperation can be overcome by the additional throughput re-
sulting from the cooperative periods. Assume we would like to
see whether using a fraction of the total symbol periods for
cooperation is beneficial or not. If, as seen in Fig. 5, at the cur-
rent SNR the loss incurred due to sacrificing symbol periods
results in too great a decrease in throughput, then the additional
throughput provided by the cooperative periods will most likely
not be able to compensate for the great loss, thus resulting in
a net decrease in throughput. If, on the other hand, at the cur-
rent SNR the loss incurred due to sacrificing symbol periods
is insignificant, then the additional throughput provided by the
cooperative periods will most likely easily compensate for the
minor loss, resulting in a net increase in throughput. We there-
fore see that the fraction of symbol periods allocated for coop-
eration should be a function of the overall channel conditions.
This is precisely the idea that we used in order to arrive at our
generalized cooperation scheme, explained below.
B. Cooperative Strategy for Arbitrary
Equation (20) refers to cooperation for the special case of
. The generalization to arbitrary is as follows. In each
symbol periods, each of the two partners uses of the periods
for cooperation and the remaining periods for sending
noncooperative information, where is some integer between
0 and . When , the two users are not cooperating at
all. When , the two users are fully cooperating, that
is, cooperating during all symbol periods. For example, in the
scenario referred to by (20), and , whereas in the
scenario referred to by (19), and . In general, the
SENDONARIS et al.: USER COOPERATION DIVERSITY—PART I: SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 1935
Fig. 6. How cooperation is implemented.
value of does not have to remain constant over all time, a fact
which allows time sharing of different values of , in order to
achieve any point on the capacity region. This is discussed in
more detail in Part II.
The cooperative scheme just described may be expressed, for
a given and , as shown in (21) at the bottom of the page,
where , and where the { } are chosen to satisfy
the power constraints5 given by
(22)
A graphical illustration of this cooperative scheme is depicted
in Fig. 6 for the special case of , .
Receiver design, probability of error, throughput, and cov-
erage analysis will be investigated in Part II. The choice of the
parameters and { }, including the time sharing among dif-
ferent values of , does not depend on the instantaneous level
of fading, rather, they are chosen to satisfy a long-term rate con-
straint on the mobiles. This notion will be clarified in Part II.
We will observe that, as suggested by the information theoretic
analysis, cooperation not only leads to improved data rates, but
also results in a system that is more robust to variations in the
channel.
5As described in (22), we only require the power to be constant over L pe-
riods, not constant between each of the subperiods. The limited peak power
capabilities of the mobile do not affect these subperiod allocations very much,
because even if all but one of the subperiods has zero power (a degenerate and
very unlikely allocation), the remaining subperiod will have L times the av-
erage power. For example, forL = 6, this translates to 7.8 dB above the average
power. Not only is this rather small, but also, practical subpower allocations will
never degenerate to this case.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
We have presented a new method of transmit diversity for mo-
bile users: user cooperation. The type of cooperation we focused
on was the cooperation of active users, that is, users who have
information of their own to send, and thus, do not want to simply
be another user’s relay. Results indicate that user cooperation is
beneficial and can result in substantial gains over a noncooper-
ative strategy. These gains are two-pronged; a higher data rate
and a decreased sensitivity to channel variations. Furthermore,
these results hold in both an unrestricted system model as well
as when the transmission scheme is fixed, as we will demon-
strate in Part II.
The increased data rate with cooperation can also be trans-
lated into reduced power for the users. With cooperation, the
users need to use less total power to achieve a certain rate pair
than with no cooperation. The partner scheme can thus be used
to extend the battery life of the mobiles. Alternatively, the coop-
eration gains may be used to increase cell coverage in a cellular
system. We have presented an analytical study that demonstrates
how an increase in capacity/throughput can be traded for an in-
crease in cell coverage.
We should note that since the mobile now has to be able to
detect uplink signals, implementation of the proposed system
involves an increased-complexity mobile receiver. Complexity
is also increased because, for security purposes, users’ data now
has to be encrypted before transmission, in order for a mobile
to be able to detect its partner’s transmitted data without being
able to understand the information being sent. It can be argued,
though, that most future wireless systems will employ some
form of encryption anyway (especially for data transmissions),
since no modulation technique, even CDMA, can guarantee the
security of the information being transmitted. In addition, under
certain scenarios, the benefits of an increased and robust data
rate, and/or an extended battery life and/or extended cell cov-
erage will be worth the extra complexity that comes with user
cooperation.
In fact, the decreased sensitivity of the data rate to channel
variations is a significant enough advantage that it could warrant
user cooperation even if there were no other benefits, such as
increased data rate. This is because of the minimum data-rate
requirements of some real-time applications, such as voice or
video, and the resulting lower probability of outage, and thus
better QoS, due to cooperation.
The analysis presented in this paper represents one possible
evaluation of the user-cooperation concept, where one of the
main goals was to achieve a simple and clear exposition. There-
(21)
1936 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2003
fore, some of the assumptions and proposed implementations
may be modified in order to achieve greater performance and/or
implementability. First, in our CDMA implementations, we as-
sumed that the various spreading codes being used were or-
thogonal. This need not be the case. Any codes may be used,
along with multiuser detection, in order to have optimum per-
formance. Second, in Section IV, the cooperative strategy in-
volves resending, in some sense, information using a cooper-
ative signal. Another possibility is for the two users to always
transmit new information, even during the cooperative periods,
thus necessitating the use of sequence detection due to the in-
tersymbol interference that would result from such a strategy. It
is not clear at present if this strategy would result in increased
performance or not.
Third, even though we have analyzed only the case of each
user having one partner, it is clear that a generalization of this
concept would involve multiple partners, thus leading to even
better performance, especially more robust data rates. However,
the incremental gains from additional partners will diminish as
the number of partners grows. Fourth, although this paper fo-
cused on a cellular environment, user cooperation diversity may
also be employed in other situations, such as in ad hoc networks.
Finally, what we have presented here addresses only physical
layer issues, and presents us with what is achievable through
partnering. However, there are several higher layer issues which
we did not address but which, nevertheless, are interesting, chal-
lenging and difficult to resolve. These involve questions such as
who will partner with whom, under what conditions will they
partner, at which point on the achievable rate region will they
operate and why, and who decides which mobiles partner: the
mobiles themselves or the BS?
For example, when the two users face statistically similar
channels toward the BS, the issue is easy: both users benefit,
and therefore, would both like to cooperate. However, when the
two users face statistically dissimilar channels toward the BS,
as would occur if one mobile was near the outskirts of the cell
and the other was near the center of the cell, the situation be-
comes more complicated. Even though the achievable rate re-
gion with cooperation is always larger than the noncooperative
region, implying that we can always find a cooperative strategy
in which both users benefit from cooperation, the true benefits
of user cooperation stem from the fact that the mobile with the
better channel can help the other mobile achieve some accept-
able level of performance while sacrificing only a small fraction
of its own data rate. The question that thus arises is why would
any mobile be willing to give up some of its data rate. There
are two possible answers. First, if we look at long-term perfor-
mance, i.e., over the duration of an entire call, a user will, on
average, benefit from having a “partnering cell-phone.” This, of
course, assumes that the users are mobile. If they are not, the
problem becomes more complex. The second reason for part-
nering, which addresses the short-term performance of mobile
users, as well as the long-term needs of stationary users, can
be the possible existence of financial incentives for the higher
quality users, as well as a corresponding fee for the lower quality
users.
If multiple users are allowed to cooperate, the above approach
evolves into a very interesting and complex problem. That is, the
BS will have a group of users willing to pay varying amounts of
money for varying degrees of higher QoS, and a group of users
willing to receive varying amounts of monetary compensation
for reducing their QoS and assisting other users. The problem,
then, faced by the BS is how to use “market forces” and available
wireless resources to find an equilibrium that satisfies as many
users’ monetary and QoS demands as possible. This will be ac-
complished by finding how to best group the users into coop-
eration groups, and where on their respective multidimensional
achievable rate regions these groups should operate. Existing lit-
erature on the game theoretic approach to resource utilization in
wireless networks [28] could be instrumental in achieving this
goal. This problem is, of course, an entire research project in
itself.
APPENDIX
For completeness, we present here the sketch of the proof of
Theorem 1. We first assume that the fading coefficients ,
, , are fixed, we will incorporate randomness later
on. We also assume that the fading coefficients, whether fixed
or random, are tracked by the corresponding receivers.
The transmission is done for blocks of length each. Both
and are assumed to be large. Based on the arguments in
Section III-A, in block , mobile 1 transmits using (7) and
sets
where the powers satisfy (8). Note that is a vector of length
. Mobile 2 constructs its transmit signal similarly. Hence, the
signals in block depend not only on the current messages
( ) but also on the messages
( ) from the previous block. This previous
block cross-information ( ) forms the
basis of cooperation among mobiles. We will choose all the
constituent signals , , and from the independent and
identically distributed distribution.
Let us first consider how in any block , the mobiles decode
each other’s cooperative messages and . We start
from block 1 and set . The second
mobile receives as in (6), and wishes to de-
code that contains the desired information . How-
ever, the signal contains two other components: , a func-
tion of which will be treated as part of noise; and
which is known as it only depends on ( ). The
perfect reconstruction of is guaranteed by the condition
which forms the basis of (9) in Theorem 1. A similar condition
on in (10) ensures exact reproduction of at mobile
1. Moving sequentially from block to block , we extend
the above argument by noting that at the end of block ,
and are decoded perfectly at both mobile
locations.
SENDONARIS et al.: USER COOPERATION DIVERSITY—PART I: SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 1937
We now illustrate how (11)–(14) lead to reliable transmis-
sion of , , , and to the BS. The decoding
starts from the last block [23], [24] in which no new in-
formation is transmitted. Therefore, we can set
. Although this
reduces the overall information rate by the factor ,
the rate loss is negligible for large . In this block, the BS
wishes to decode and . Since ,
, , and are known, the condition
is sufficient for reliable reproduction. The factor re-
sults from the coherent addition of the cooperative signals
and .
Moving into block , the BS now has to decode (
). Following mul-
tiple-access channel capacity formulation [29], sufficient con-
ditions on , , , and for asymptotically error-free
transmission are
(23)
(24)
(25)
(26)
(27)
Dependency of all the signal components (namely, ,
, , , , and ) on the cooperation information
( ) leads to (26) and (27). Since (26)
is dominated by (27), it will be omitted in the final formulation.
The BS then proceeds backward in the same manner until all
the blocks are decoded.
In order to incorporate random fading of the amplitudes ,
, , and , we use [9] and [25] to replace all the bounds
on the rates by their expected values where expectation is over
the fading amplitudes. This leads to the region specified by
(9)–(14) of Theorem 1 and completes the proof.
REFERENCES
[1] A. R. Calderbank, “The art of signaling: Fifty years of coding theory,”
IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 2561–2595, Oct. 1998.
[2] S. Verdu, “Wireless bandwidth in the making,” IEEE Commun. Mag.,
pp. 53–58, July 2000.
[3] A. Naguib, N. Seshadri, and A. R. Calderbank, “Increasing data rate
over wireless channels,” IEEE Signal Processing Mag., pp. 76–92, May
2000.
[4] J. Hagenauer and T. Stockhammer, “Channel coding and transmission
aspects of wireless multimedia,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 87, pp. 1764–1777,
Oct. 1999.
[5] S. S. Hemami, “Robust image communication over wireless channels,”
IEEE Commun. Mag., pp. 120–124, Nov. 2001.
[6] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1995.
[7] I. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,” Eur. Trans.
Telecommun., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 585–595, Nov./Dec. 1999.
[8] G. Foschini and M. Gans, “On limits of wireless communications in
a fading environment when using multiple antennas,” Wireless Pers.
Commun., pp. 311–335, 1998.
[9] E. Biglieri, J. Proakis, and S. Shamai (Shitz), “Fading channels: In-
formation theoretic and communications aspects,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 44, pp. 2619–2692, Oct. 1998.
[10] V. Tarokh, N. Seshadri, and A. Calderbank, “Space–time codes for
high-data-rate wireless communication: Performance criterion and
code construction,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 744–765,
Mar. 1998.
[11] E. V. D. Meulen, “Three-terminal communication channels,” Adv. Appl.
Probability, vol. 3, pp. 120–154, 1971.
[12] T. Cover and A. E. Gamal, “Capacity theorems for the relay channel,”
IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT–25, pp. 572–584, Sept. 1979.
[13] IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun.: Issue on Wireless ad hoc Networks, vol.
17, Aug. 1999.
[14] A. Sendonaris, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “User cooperation diver-
sity—Part II: Implementation aspects and performance analysis,” IEEE
Trans. Commun., vol. 51, pp. 1939–1948, Nov. 2003.
[15] J. N. Laneman, G. W. Wornell, and D. N. C. Tse, “An efficient protocol
for realizing cooperative diversity in wireless networks,” in Proc. IEEE
ISIT, June 2001, p. 294.
[16] R. Knopp and P. Humblet, “Information capacity and power control in
single-cell multiuser communications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Com-
munications, 1995, pp. 331–335.
[17] A. J. Goldsmith and P. P. Varaiya, “Capacity of fading channels with
channel side information,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 43, pp.
1986–1992, Nov. 1997.
[18] D. Tse and S. Hanly, “Multiaccess fading channels—Part I: Polymatroid
structure, optimal resource allocation and throughput capacities,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 2796–815, Nov. 1998.
[19] A. Narula, M. Lopez, M. Trott, and G. Wornell, “Efficient use of
side information in multiple-antenna data transmission over fading
channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 1423–1436,
Oct. 1998.
[20] T. Cover and C. Leung, “An achievable rate region for the multiple-
access channel with feedback,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT–27,
pp. 292–298, May 1981.
[21] F. M. J. Willems, “The discrete memoryless multiple access channel with
partially cooperating encoders,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-29,
pp. 441–445, May 1983.
[22] F. M. J. Willems, E. C. van der Meulen, and J. P. M. Schalkwijk,
“Achievable rate region for the multiple access channel with general-
ized feedback,” in Proc. Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control,
Computing, 1983, pp. 284–292.
[23] F. Willems and E. V. D. Meulen, “The discrete memoryless multiple-
access channel with cribbing encoders,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,
vol. IT–31, pp. 313–327, May 1985.
[24] C. Zeng, F. Kuhlmann, and A. Buzo, “Achievability proof of some mul-
tiuser channel coding theorems using backward decoding,” IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theory, vol. 35, pp. 1160–1165, Nov. 1989.
[25] R. Gallager, “An inequality on the capacity region of multiaccess fading
channels,” in Communications and Cryptography-Two Sides of One
Tapestry. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 1994, pp. 129–139.
[26] L. Ozarow, S. Shamai, and A. Wyner, “Information theoretic considera-
tions for cellular mobile radio,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 43, pp.
359–377, May 1994.
[27] T. S. Rappaport, Wireless Communications: Principles and Practice.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1996.
[28] A. B. MacKenzie and S. B. Wicker, “Game theory and the design of
self-configuring, adaptive wireless networks,” IEEE Commun. Mag., pp.
126–131, Nov. 2001.
[29] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York:
Wiley, 1991.
[30] A. Sendonaris, “Advanced techniques for next-generation wireless sys-
tems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Rice Univ., Houston, TX, 1999.
[31] A. Sendonaris, E. Erkip, and B. Aazhang, “Increasing uplink capacity
via user cooperation diversity,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Aug. 1998, p. 156.
1938 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 51, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2003
Andrew Sendonaris (S’93-M’99) received the
B.S. (summa cum laude), M.S., and Ph.D. degrees
in electrical engineering from Rice University,
Houston, TX, in 1993, 1995, and 1999, respectively.
He is currently with Qualcomm Inc., where
he is leading the System Design effort on one of
Qualcomm’s latest chips implementing WCDMA,
a global third-generation code-division multiple-ac-
cess (CDMA) wireless telephony standard. His
research interests include multiple-access commu-
nications over fading multipath channels, CDMA
systems, the capacity of, and resource allocation for, cellular mobile radio
networks, and digital transmission over twisted-pair copper loops.
Elza Erkip (S’93–M’96) received the Ph.D. and
M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford
University, Stanford, CA, in 1996 and 1993,
respectively, and the B.S. degree in electrical and
electronic engineering from Middle East Technical
University, Ankara, Turkey, in 1990.
She joined Polytechnic University, Brooklyn, NY,
in the Spring of 2000, where she is currently an As-
sistant Professor of Electrical and Computer Engi-
neering. During 1996–1999, she was first a Visiting
Assistant Professor and then a Faculty Fellow in the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rice University, Houston,
TX. Her research interests are in wireless communications, information and
communication theory.
Dr. Erkip received the IBM Faculty Partnership Award in 2000 and the NSF
CAREER Award in 2001.
Behnaam Aazhang (S’82–M’82–SM’91–F’99)
received the B.S. (with highest honors), M.S., and
Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering
from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
in 1981, 1983, and 1986, respectively.
From 1981 to 1985, he was a Research Assistant
in the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University
of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. In August 1985, he
joined the faculty of Rice University, Houston, TX,
where he is now the J. S. Abercrombie Professor
in the Department of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, and the Director of the Center for Multimedia Communications.
He has been a Visiting Professor at IBM Federal Systems Company, Houston,
TX, the Laboratory for Communication Technology, Swiss Federal Institute of
Technology (ETH), Zurich, Switzerland, the Telecommunications Laboratory,
University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland, and at the U.S. Air Force Phillips Laboratory,
Albuquerque, NM. His research interests are in the areas of communication
theory, information theory, and their applications with emphasis on multiple
access communications, cellular mobile radio communications, and optical
communication networks.
Dr. Aazhang is a member of Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu, and is a recip-
ient of the Alcoa Foundation Award in 1993, the National Science Foundation
Engineering Initiation Award 1987–1989, and the IBM Graduate Fellowship
1984–1985. He is currently serving on the Houston, TX, Mayor’s Commission
on Cellular Towers. He has served as the Editor for Spread Spectrum Networks
of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS 1993–1998, as the Treasurer
of IEEE Information Theory Society 1995–1998, the Technical Area Chair of
the 1997 Asilomar Conference, Monterey, CA, the Secretary of the Informa-
tion Theory Society 1990–1993, the Publications Chairman of the 1993 IEEE
International Symposium on Information Theory, San Antonio, TX, and as the
Co-Chair of the Technical Program Committee of the 2001 Multidimensional
and Mobile Communication (MDMC) Conference, Pori, Finland.

