IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2000 535
Performance Analysis of the IEEE 802.11 Distributed
Coordination Function
Giuseppe Bianchi
Abstract—Recently, the IEEE has standardized the 802.11 pro-
tocol for Wireless Local Area Networks. The primary medium ac-
cess control (MAC) technique of 802.11 is called distributed coor-
dination function (DCF). DCF is a carrier sense multiple access
with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) scheme with binary slotted
exponential backoff. This paper provides a simple, but nevertheless
extremely accurate, analytical model to compute the 802.11 DCF
throughput, in the assumption of finite number of terminals and
ideal channel conditions. The proposed analysis applies to both the
packet transmission schemes employed by DCF, namely, the basic
access and the RTS/CTS access mechanisms. In addition, it also ap-
plies to a combination of the two schemes, in which packets longer
than a given threshold are transmitted according to the RTS/CTS
mechanism. By means of the proposed model, in this paper we pro-
vide an extensive throughput performance evaluation of both ac-
cess mechanisms of the 802.11 protocol.
Index Terms—802.11, collision avoidance, CSMA, performance
evaluation.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N recent years, much interest has been involved in thedesign of wireless networks for local area communication
[1], [2]. Study group 802.11 was formed under IEEE Project
802 to recommend an international standard for Wireless Local
Area Networks (WLAN’s). The final version of the standard
has recently appeared [3], and provides detailed medium access
control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specification for
WLAN’s.
In the 802.11 protocol, the fundamental mechanism to access
the medium is called distributed coordination function (DCF).
This is a random access scheme, based on the carrier sense mul-
tiple access with collision avoidance (CSMA/CA) protocol. Re-
transmission of collided packets is managed according to bi-
nary exponential backoff rules. The standard also defines an op-
tional point coordination function (PCF), which is a centralized
MAC protocol able to support collision free and time bounded
services. In this paper we limit our investigation to the DCF
scheme.
DCF describes two techniques to employ for packet transmis-
sion. The default scheme is a two-way handshaking technique
called basic access mechanism. This mechanism is character-
ized by the immediate transmission of a positive acknowledge-
ment (ACK) by the destination station, upon successful recep-
tion of a packet transmitted by the sender station. Explicit trans-
Manuscript received November 1998; revised July 25, 1999. this work was
supported in part by CNR and MURST, Italy.
The author is with the Universitá di Palermo, Dipartimento di Ingegneria Elet-
trica, Viale delle Scienza, 90128 Palermo, Italy (e-mail: bianchi@elet.polimi.it).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0733-8716(00)01290-7.
mission of an ACK is required since, in the wireless medium, a
transmitter cannot determine if a packet is successfully received
by listening to its own transmission.
In addition to the basic access, an optional four way hand-
shaking technique, known as request-to-send/clear-to-send
(RTS/CTS) mechanism has been standardized. Before transmit-
ting a packet, a station operating in RTS/CTS mode “reserves”
the channel by sending a special Request-To-Send short frame.
The destination station acknowledges the receipt of an RTS
frame by sending back a Clear-To-Send frame, after which
normal packet transmission and ACK response occurs. Since
collision may occur only on the RTS frame, and it is detected
by the lack of CTS response, the RTS/CTS mechanism allows
to increase the system performance by reducing the duration
of a collision when long messages are transmitted. As an
important side effect, the RTS/CTS scheme designed in the
802.11 protocol is suited to combat the so-called problem of
Hidden Terminals [4], which occurs when pairs of mobile
stations result to be unable to hear each other. This problem
has been specifically considered in [5] and in [6], which, in
addition, studies the phenomenon of packet capture.
In this paper, we concentrate on the performance evaluation
of the DCF scheme, in the assumption of ideal channel con-
ditions and finite number of terminals. In the literature, perfor-
mance evaluation of 802.11 has been carried out either by means
of simulation [7], [8] or by means of analytical models with sim-
plified backoff rule assumptions. In particular, constant or geo-
metrically distributed backoff window has been used in [5], [9],
[10] while [11] has considered an exponential backoff limited to
two stages (maximum window size equal to twice the minimum
size) by employing a two dimensional Markov chain analysis.
In this paper, which revises and substantially extends [12], we
succeed in providing an extremely simple model that accounts
for all the exponential backoff protocol details, and allows to
compute the saturation (asymptotic) throughput performance of
DCF for both standardized access mechanisms (and also for any
combination of the two methods). The key approximation that
enables our model is the assumption of constant and indepen-
dent collision probability of a packet transmitted by each station,
regardless of the number of retransmissions already suffered. As
proven by comparison with simulation, this assumption leads to
extremely accurate (practically exact) results, especially when
the number of stations in the wireless LAN is fairly large (say
greater than ten).
The paper is outlined as follows. In Section II we briefly re-
view both basic access and RTS/CTS mechanisms of the DCF.
In Section III we define the concept of Saturation Throughput,
and in Section IV we provide an analytical technique to com-
0733–8716/00$10.00 © 2000 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
536 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2000
pute this performance figure. Section V validates the accuracy
of the model by comparing the analytical results with that ob-
tained by means of simulation. Additional considerations on the
maximum throughput theoretically achievable are carried out in
Section VI. Finally, the performance evaluation of both DCF ac-
cess schemes is carried out in Section VII. Concluding remarks
are given in Section VIII.
II. 802.11 DISTRIBUTED COORDINATION FUNCTION
This section briefly summarizes the DCF as standardized by
the 802.11 protocol. For a more complete and detailed presen-
tation, refer to the 802.11 standard [3].
A station with a new packet to transmit monitors the channel
activity. If the channel is idle for a period of time equal to a dis-
tributed interframe space (DIFS), the station transmits. Other-
wise, if the channel is sensed busy (either immediately or during
the DIFS), the station persists to monitor the channel until it is
measured idle for a DIFS. At this point, the station generates a
random backoff interval before transmitting (this is the Colli-
sion Avoidance feature of the protocol), to minimize the prob-
ability of collision with packets being transmitted by other sta-
tions. In addition, to avoid channel capture, a station must wait
a random backoff time between two consecutive new packet
transmissions, even if the medium is sensed idle in the DIFS
time.1
For efficiency reasons, DCF employs a discrete-time backoff
scale. The time immediately following an idle DIFS is slotted,
and a station is allowed to transmit only at the beginning of each
slot time. The slot time size, , is set equal to the time needed
at any station to detect the transmission of a packet from any
other station. As shown in Table I, it depends on the physical
layer, and it accounts for the propagation delay, for the time
needed to switch from the receiving to the transmitting state
(RX_TX_Turnaround_Time), and for the time to signal to the
MAC layer the state of the channel (busy detect time).
DCF adopts an exponential backoff scheme. At each packet
transmission, the backoff time is uniformly chosen in the range
. The value is called contention window, and de-
pends on the number of transmissions failed for the packet. At
the first transmission attempt, is set equal to a value
called minimum contention window. After each unsuccessful
transmission, is doubled, up to a maximum value
. The values and reported in the
final version of the standard [3] are PHY-specific and are sum-
marized in Table I.
The backoff time counter is decremented as long as the
channel is sensed idle, “frozen” when a transmission is detected
on the channel, and reactivated when the channel is sensed idle
again for more than a DIFS. The station transmits when the
backoff time reaches zero.
Fig. 1 illustrates this operation. Two stations A and B share
the same wireless channel. At the end of the packet transmis-
1As an exception to this rule, the protocol provides a fragmentation mecha-
nism, which allows the MAC to split an MSDU (the packet delivered to the MAC
by the higher layers) into more MPDUs (packets delivered by the MAC to the
PHY layer), if the MSDU size exceeds the maximum MPDU payload size. The
different fragments are then transmitted in sequence, with only a SIFS between
them, so that only the first fragment must contend for the channel access.
TABLE I
SLOT TIME, MINIMUM, AND MAXIMUM
CONTENTION WINDOW VALUES FOR THE THREE PHY SPECIFIED BY THE
802.11 STANDARD: FREQUENCY HOPPING SPREAD SPECTRUM (FHSS), DIRECT
SEQUENCE SPREAD SPECTRUM (DSSS), AND INFRARED (IR)
sion, station B waits for a DIFS and then chooses a backoff time
equal to 8, before transmitting the next packet. We assume that
the first packet of station A arrives at the time indicated with an
arrow in the figure. After a DIFS, the packet is transmitted. Note
that the transmission of packet A occurs in the middle of the Slot
Time corresponding to a backoff value, for station B, equal to 5.
As a consequence of the channel sensed busy, the backoff time
is frozen to its value 5, and the backoff counter decrements again
only when the channel is sensed idle for a DIFS.
Since the CSMA/CA does not rely on the capability of the sta-
tions to detect a collision by hearing their own transmission, an
ACK is transmitted by the destination station to signal the suc-
cessful packet reception. The ACK is immediately transmitted
at the end of the packet, after a period of time called short inter-
frame space (SIFS). As the SIFS (plus the propagation delay) is
shorter than a DIFS, no other station is able to detect the channel
idle for a DIFS until the end of the ACK. If the transmitting sta-
tion does not receive the ACK within a specified ACK_Timeout,
or it detects the transmission of a different packet on the channel,
it reschedules the packet transmission according to the given
backoff rules.
The above described two-way handshaking technique for the
packet transmission is called basic access mechanism. DCF de-
fines an additional four-way handshaking technique to be op-
tionally used for a packet transmission. This mechanism, known
with the name RTS/CTS, is shown in Fig. 2. A station that wants
to transmit a packet, waits until the channel is sensed idle for a
DIFS, follows the backoff rules explained above, and then, in-
stead of the packet, preliminarily transmits a special short frame
called request to send (RTS). When the receiving station detects
an RTS frame, it responds, after a SIFS, with a clear to send
(CTS) frame. The transmitting station is allowed to transmit its
packet only if the CTS frame is correctly received.
The frames RTS and CTS carry the information of the length
of the packet to be transmitted. This information can be read
by any listening station, which is then able to update a network
allocation vector (NAV) containing the information of the period
of time in which the channel will remain busy. Therefore, when
a station is hidden from either the transmitting or the receiving
station, by detecting just one frame among the RTS and CTS
frames, it can suitably delay further transmission, and thus avoid
collision.
The RTS/CTS mechanism is very effective in terms of system
performance, especially when large packets are considered, as
it reduces the length of the frames involved in the contention
process. In fact, in the assumption of perfect channel sensing
by every station, collision may occur only when two (or more)
packets are transmitted within the same slot time. If both trans-
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BIANCHI: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE IEEE 802.11 DCF 537
Fig. 1. Example of basic access mechanism.
mitting stations employ the RTS/CTS mechanism, collision oc-
curs only on the RTS frames, and it is early detected by the
transmitting stations by the lack of CTS responses. A quanti-
tative analysis will be carried out in Section VII.
III. MAXIMUM AND SATURATION THROUGHPUT PERFORMANCE
In this paper we concentrate on the “Saturation Throughput”.
This is a fundamental performance figure defined as the limit
reached by the system throughput as the offered load increases,
and represents the maximum load that the system can carry in
stable conditions.
It is well known that several random access schemes exhibit
an unstable behavior. In particular, as the offered load increases,
the throughput grows up to a maximum value, referred to as
“maximum throughput.” However, further increases of the
offered load lead to an eventually significant decrease in the
system throughput. This results in the practical impossibility to
operate the random access scheme at its maximum throughput
for a “long” period of time, and thus in the practical mean-
ingless of the maximum throughput as performance figure
for the access scheme. The mathematical formulation and
interpretation of this instability problem is the object of a wide
and general discussion in [13].
Indeed, the 802.11 protocol is known to exhibits some form
of instability (see, e.g., [5], and [11]). To visualize the unstable
behaviour of 802.11, in Fig. 3 we have run simulations in which
the offered load linearly increases with the simulation time. The
general simulation model and parameters employed are summa-
rized in Section V. The results reported in the figure are obtained
with 20 stations. The straight line represents the ideal offered
load, normalized with respect of the channel capacity. The sim-
ulated offered load has been generated according to a Poisson
arrival process of fixed size packets (payload equal to 8184 bits),
where the arrival rate has been varied throughout the simulation
to match the ideal offered load. The figure reports both offered
load and system throughput measured over 20 s time intervals,
and normalized with respect to the channel rate.
From the figure, we see that the measured throughput follows
closely the measured offered load for the first 260 s of sim-
ulation, while it asymptotically drops to the value 0.68 in the
second part of the simulation run. This asymptotic throughput
value is referred to, in this paper, as saturation throughput, and
represents the system throughput in overload conditions. Note
than, during the simulation run, the instantaneous throughput
temporarily increases over the saturation value (up to 0.74 in
Fig. 2. RTS/CTS Access Mechanism.
Fig. 3. Measured Throughput with slowly increasing offered load.
the example considered), but ultimately it decreases and stabi-
lizes to the saturation value. Queue build-up is observed in such
a condition.
IV. THROUGHPUT ANALYSIS
The core contribution of this paper is the analytical evalu-
ation of the saturation throughput, in the assumption of ideal
channel conditions (i.e., no hidden terminals and capture [6]).
In the analysis, we assume a fixed number of stations, each al-
ways having a packet available for transmission. In other words,
we operate in saturation conditions, i.e., the transmission queue
of each station is assumed to be always nonempty.
The analysis is divided into two distinct parts. First, we study
the behavior of a single station with a Markov model, and we
obtain the stationary probability that the station transmits a
packet in a generic (i.e., randomly chosen) slot time. This prob-
ability does not depend on the access mechanism (i.e., Basic
or RTS/CTS) employed. Then, by studying the events that can
occur within a generic slot time, we express the throughput of
both Basic and RTS/CTS access methods (as well as of a com-
bination of the two) as function of the computed value .
A. Packet Transmission Probability
Consider a fixed number of contending stations. In satura-
tion conditions, each station has immediately a packet available
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
538 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2000
Fig. 4. Markov Chain model for the backoff window size.
for transmission, after the completion of each successful trans-
mission. Moreover, being all packets “consecutive,” each packet
needs to wait for a random backoff time before transmitting.
Let be the stochastic process representing the backoff
time counter for a given station. A discrete and integer time
scale is adopted: and correspond to the beginning of
two consecutive slot times, and the backoff time counter of each
station decrements at the beginning of each slot time. Note that
this discrete time scale does not directly relates to the system
time. In fact, as illustrated in Fig. 1, the backoff time decrement
is stopped when the channel is sensed busy, and thus the time
interval between two consecutive slot time beginnings may be
much longer than the slot time size , as it may include a packet
transmission. In what follows, unless ambiguity occurs, with
the term slot time we will refer to either the (constant) value ,
and the (variable) time interval between two consecutive backoff
time counter decrements.
Since the value of the backoff counter of each station depends
also on its transmission history (e.g., how many retransmis-
sion the head-of-line packet has suffered), the stochastic process
is non-Markovian. However, define for convenience
. Let , “maximum backoff stage,” be the value such
that , and let us adopt the notation ,
where is called “backoff stage.” Let be the sto-
chastic process representing the backoff stage of the
station at time .
The key approximation in our model is that, at each transmis-
sion attempt, and regardless of the number of retransmissions
suffered, each packet collides with constant and independent
probability . It is intuitive that this assumption results more
accurate as long as and get larger. will be referred to as
conditional collision probability, meaning that this is the prob-
ability of a collision seen by a packet being transmitted on the
channel.
Once independence is assumed, and is supposed to be a con-
stant value, it is possible to model the bidimensional process
with the discrete-time Markov chain depicted in
Fig. 4. In this Markov chain, the only non null one-step tran-
sition probabilities are2
(1)
The first equation in (1) accounts for the fact that, at the
beginning of each slot time, the backoff time is decremented.
The second equation accounts for the fact that a new packet
following a successful packet transmission starts with backoff
2We adopt the short notation:
Pfi ; k j i ; k g=Pfs(t+ 1)= i ; b(t+ 1)=k j s(t)= i ; b(t)=k g:
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BIANCHI: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE IEEE 802.11 DCF 539
stage 0, and thus the backoff is initially uniformly chosen in the
range . The other cases model the system after an
unsuccessful transmission. In particular, as considered in the
third equation of (1), when an unsuccessful transmission occurs
at backoff stage , the backoff stage increases, and the new
initial backoff value is uniformly chosen in the range .
Finally, the fourth case models the fact that once the backoff
stage reaches the value , it is not increased in subsequent
packet transmissions.
Let
be the stationary distribution of the chain. We
now show that it is easy to obtain a closed-form solution for this
Markov chain. First, note that
(2)
Owing to the chain regularities, for each , it is
(3)
By means of relations (2), and making use of the fact that
, (3) rewrites as
(4)
Thus, by relations (2) and (4), all the values are expressed
as functions of the value and of the conditional collision
probability . is finally determined by imposing the nor-
malization condition, that simplifies as follows:
(5)
from which
(6)
We can now express the probability that a station trans-
mits in a randomly chosen slot time. As any transmission occurs
when the backoff time counter is equal to zero, regardless of the
backoff stage, it is
(7)
As a side note, it is interesting to highlight that, when ,
i.e., no exponential backoff is considered, the probability re-
sults to be independent of , and (7) becomes the much simpler
one independently found in [9] for the constant backoff window
problem
(8)
However, in general, depends on the conditional collision
probability , which is still unknown. To find the value of
it is sufficient to note that the probability that a transmitted
packet encounters a collision, is the probability that, in a time
slot, at least one of the remaining stations transmit. The
fundamental independence assumption given above implies that
each transmission “sees” the system in the same state, i.e., in
steady state. At steady state, each remaining station transmits a
packet with probability . This yields
(9)
Equations (7) and (9) represent a nonlinear system in the two
unknowns and , which can be solved using numerical tech-
niques. It is easy to prove that this system has a unique solution.
In fact, inverting (9), we obtain .
This is a continuous and monotone increasing function in the
range , that starts from and grows up to
. Equation defined by (7) is also continuous in
the range : continuity in correspondence of the crit-
ical value is simply proven by noting that can be
alternatively written as
and, therefore, . Moreover,
is trivially shown to be a monotone decreasing function that
starts from and reduces up to
. Uniqueness of the solution is now proven noting that
and .
B. Throughput
Let be the normalized system throughput, defined as the
fraction of time the channel is used to successfully transmit pay-
load bits. To compute , let us analyze what can happen in a
randomly chosen slot time. Let be the probability that there
is at least one transmission in the considered slot time. Since
stations contend on the channel, and each transmits with proba-
bility
(10)
The probability that a transmission occurring on the channel
is successful is given by the probability that exactly one station
transmits on the channel, conditioned on the fact that at least
one station transmits, i.e.,
(11)
We are now able to express as the ratio
payload information transmitted in a slot time
length of a slot time
(12)
Being the average packet payload size, the average amount
of payload information successfully transmitted in a slot time
is , since a successful transmission occurs in a slot
time with probability . The average length of a slot time
is readily obtained considering that, with probability ,
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
540 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2000
Fig. 5. T and T for basic access and RTS/CTS mechanisms.
the slot time is empty; with probability it contains a suc-
cessful transmission, and with probability it con-
tains a collision. Hence, (12) becomes
(13)
Here, is the average time the channel is sensed busy (i.e.,
the slot time lasts) because of a successful transmission, and
is the average time the channel is sensed busy by each station
during a collision. is the duration of an empty slot time. Of
course, the values , and must be expressed with
the same unit.
Note that the throughput expression (13) has been obtained
without the need to specify the access mechanism employed.
To specifically compute the throughput for a given DCF ac-
cess mechanism it is now necessary only to specify the corre-
sponding values and .
Let us first consider a system completely managed via the
basic access mechanism. Let be
the packet header, and be the propagation delay. As shown
in Fig. 5, in the basic access case we obtain
(14)
where is the the average length of the longest packet
payload involved in a collision.
In the case all packets have the same fixed size,
. In the general case, the payload size of each col-
lided packet is an independent random variable . It is thus
necessary to assume a suitable probability distribution function
for the packet's payload size. Let be the maximum
payload size. Taking the conditional expectation on the number
of colliding packets, writes as follows:
(15)
When the probability of three or more packets simultaneously
colliding is neglected, (15) simplifies to
(16)
is the period of time during which the channel is sensed
busy by the noncolliding stations. We neglect the fact that the
two or more colliding stations, before sensing the channel again,
need to wait an ACK Timeout, and thus the for these col-
liding stations is greater than that considered here (the same ap-
proximation holds in the following RTS/CTS case, with a CTS
Timeout instead of the ACK timeout).
Let us now consider a system in which each packet is trans-
mitted by means of the RTS/CTS Access mechanism. As, in
such a case, collision can occur only on RTS frames, it is (see
Fig. 5)
(17)
and the throughput expression depends on the packet size dis-
tribution only through its mean.
Finally, (13) can be also adopted to express the throughput of
an “Hybrid” system in which, as suggested in the standard [3],
packets are transmitted by means of the RTS/CTS mechanism
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BIANCHI: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE IEEE 802.11 DCF 541
only if they exceed a given predetermined threshold on the
packet's payload size. More specifically, being, again, the
probability distribution function of the packet size, is the
probability that a packet is transmitted according to the basic
access mechanism (i.e., the packet size is lower than ), while
is the probability that a packet is transmitted via the
RTS/CTS mechanism. For convenience, let us indicate with
(18)
the RTS/CTS overhead for a successful packet transmission. It is
easy to recognize that, for the described hybrid access scheme,
it is
(19)
To compute in the case of the Hybrid Access
scheme, we rely on the simplifying assumption that the proba-
bility of a collision of more than two packets in the same slot
time is negligible. Hence, three possible collision cases may
occur: 1) collision between two RTS frames, with probability
; 2) collision between two packets transmitted via
basic access, with probability , and 3) collision between
a basic access packet and an RTS frame. Hence, indicating with
and the respective average collision
durations, we obtain
(20)
The average collision durations adopted in (20) detail as fol-
lows. Let be the extra
length of the packet header with respect of the RTS frame, and
let . The value has been already
computed in the case of (17), and can be rewritten with
new notation as
(21)
To compute the average length of a collision between an RTS
frame and a basic access packet, let us note that, according to
the numerical values provided by the standard [3], the length
of an RTS frame is always lower than the packet header size,
or, in other words, the value defined above is strictly
positive. Thus, the average length of such a collision is given
by the average amount of time the channel is kept busy by the
unsuccessful transmission of the basic access packet. Since
is the conditional probability distri-
bution function of the payload size of the packets transmitted
according to the basic access mechanism, we readily obtain
(22)
Finally, noting that in the case of collision between two basic ac-
cess packets, the probability distribution function of the length
of the longest packet payload involved in a collision is the square
of the conditional probability distribution function of the packet
size distribution
(23)
By substituting (21), (22), and (23) in (20), we finally obtain
(24)
For simplicity, in the rest of this paper we restrict our numer-
ical investigation to the case of fixed packet size, and therefore
we will evaluate the performance of systems in which all sta-
tions operate either according to the basic access mechanism or
according to the RTS/CTS mechanism (i.e., never operating in
the hybrid mode.)3
V. MODEL VALIDATION
To validate the model, we have compared its results with that
obtained with the 802.11 DCF simulator used in [9]. Ours is
an event-driven custom simulation program, written in the C++
programming language, that closely follows all the 802.11 pro-
tocol details for each independently transmitting station. In par-
ticular, the simulation program attempts to emulate as closely
as possible the real operation of each station, including propa-
gation times, turnaround times, etc.
The values of the parameters used to obtain numerical results,
for both the analytical model and the simulation runs, are sum-
marized in Table II. The system values are those specified for the
frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) PHY layer [3]. The
channel bit rate has been assumed equal to 1 Mbit/s. The frame
sizes are those defined by the 802.11 MAC specifications, and
the PHY header is that defined for the FHSS PHY. The values
of the ACK_Timeout and CTS_Timeout reported in Table II,
and used in the simulation runs only (our analysis neglects the
effect of these timeouts) are not specified in the standard, and
they have been set equal to 300 µs. This numerical value has
been chosen as it is sufficiently long to contain a SIFS, the ACK
transmission and a round trip delay.
Unless otherwise specified, we have used in the simulation
runs a constant packet payload size of 8184 bits, which is about
one fourth of the maximum MPDU size specified for the FHSS
PHY, while it is the maximum MPDU size for the DSSS PHY.
Fig. 6 shows that the analytical model is extremely accurate:
analytical results (lines) practically coincide with the simulation
3A detailed performance analysis of the hybrid mode requires to assume one
or more suitable probability distribution functions for the packet's payload size,
and also to determine the sensitivity of the throughput on the assumed distri-
butions. Such a straightforward, but lengthy, study is out of the scopes of the
present work.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
542 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2000
results (symbols), in both basic access and RTS/CTS cases. All
simulation results in the plot are obtained with a 95% confidence
interval lower than 0.002. Negligible differences, well below
1%, are noted only for a small number of stations (results for
the extreme case of as low as 2 and 3 stations are tabulated in
Table III).
VI. MAXIMUM SATURATION THROUGHPUT
The analytical model given above is very convenient to de-
termine the maximum achievable saturation throughput. Let us
rearrange (13) to obtain
(25)
As , and , are constants, the throughput is max-
imized when the following quantity is maximized:
(26)
where is the duration of a collision measured in slot
time units . Taking the derivative of (26) with respect to , and
imposing it equal to 0, we obtain, after some simplifications, the
following equation:
(27)
Under the condition
holds, and yields the following approximate solution:
(28)
Equation (27) and its approximate solution (28) are of funda-
mental theoretical importance. In fact, they allow to explicitly
compute the optimal transmission probability that each sta-
tion should adopt in order to achieve maximum throughput per-
formance within a considered network scenario (i.e., number of
stations ). In other words, they show that (within a PHY and
an access mechanism, which determine the constant value )
maximum performance can be, in principle, achieved for every
network scenario, through a suitable sizing of the transmission
probability in relation to the network size.
However, (7) and (9) show that depends only on the network
size and on the system parameters and . As is not a
directly controllable variable, the only way to achieve optimal
performance is to employ adaptive techniques to tune the values
and (and consequently ) on the basis of the estimated
value of .
This problem has been specifically considered in [9] for the
case of fixed backoff window size (i.e., ). In such a case,
TABLE II
FHSS SYSTEM PARAMETERS AND ADDITIONAL PARAMETERS USED TO
OBTAIN NUMERICAL RESULTS
Fig. 6. Saturation Throughput: analysis versus simulation.
TABLE III
ANALYSIS VERSUS SIMULATION: COMPARISON FOR A VERY LOW NUMBER OF
STATIONS—W = 32; m = 3
is given by (8), and therefore the backoff window that maxi-
mizes the system throughput is readily found as
Refer to [9] for an extensive discussion related to the problem
of estimating the value .
Unfortunately, in the 802.11 standard, the values and
are hardwired in the PHY layer details (see Table I for the stan-
dardized values), and thus they cannot be made dependent on
. As a consequence of this lack of flexibility, the throughput
in some network scenarios can be significantly lower than the
maximum achievable.
Figs. 7 and 8 show the maximum throughput theoretically
achievable by the DCF protocol in both the cases of basic access
and RTS/CTS mechanisms. The values reported in these figures
have been obtained assuming the system parameters reported in
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BIANCHI: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE IEEE 802.11 DCF 543
Fig. 7. Throughput versus the transmission probability  for the basic access
method.
Table II. The figure reports also the different throughput values
obtained in the case of exact and approximate solution for . As
the maximum is very smooth, even a nonnegligible difference in
the estimate of the optimal value leads to similar throughput
values. The accuracy of the throughput obtained by the approxi-
mate solution is better testified by the numerical values reported
in Table IV. Note that the agreement is greater in the basic ac-
cess case, as is greater.
A surprising result is that the maximum throughput achiev-
able by the basic access mechanism is very close to that
achievable by the RTS/CTS mechanism. Moreover, the max-
imum throughput is practically independent of the number
of stations in the wireless network. This is easily justified by
noting that the throughput formula can be approximated as
follows. Let , and let us use the approximate
solution . For sufficiently large
(29)
(30)
The maximum achievable throughput can thus be approx-
imated as
(31)
which results to be independent of . Using the numerical values
of Table V, we obtain for the basic access mecha-
nism, and for the RTS/CTS mechanism. The re-
sulting maximum throughput approximation values are reported
in Table IV under the label .
An advantage of the RTS/CTS scheme is that the throughput
is less sensitive on the transmission probability . In fact, we
see from Figs. 7 and 8 (note the different axis scale) that
a small variation in the optimal value of leads to a greater
Fig. 8. Throughput versus the transmission probability  for the RTS/CTS
mechanism.
TABLE IV
COMPARISON BETWEEN MAXIMUM THROUGHPUT AND THROGHPUT
RESULTING FROM APPROXIMATE SOLUTION (28)—THE CASE n = 1
IS OBTAINED FROM (31)
TABLE V
VALUES T AND T MEASURED IN BITS AND IN 50 s SLOT TIME UNITS,
FOR THE CONSIDERED SYSTEM PARAMETERS, FOR BOTH BASIC AND
RTS/CTS ACCESS METHODS
decrease in the throughput for the basic access case than for
the RTS/CTS case. Hence, we expect (see quantitative results
in the following Section VII) a much lower dependence of the
RTS/CTS throughput on the system engineering parameters
with respect of the basic access throughput.
VII. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
Unless otherwise specified, the following results have been
obtained assuming the parameters reported in Table II and, in
particular, assuming a constant payload size bits.
Fig. 6 shows that the throughput for the basic access scheme
strongly depends on the number of stations in the network. In
particular, the figure shows that, in most cases, the greater is the
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
544 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2000
Fig. 9. Saturation Throughput versus initial contention window size for the
basic access mechanism.
network size, the lower is the throughput. The only partial ex-
ception is the case . For such an initial contention
window size, the throughput is comparable in networks with
five to ten stations, although it smoothly decreases as the net-
work size increases. The same figure shows that performance
impairment does not occur for the RTS/CTS mechanism when
increases. In fact, the throughput is practically constant for
, and even increases with the number of mobile sta-
tions when .
To investigate the dependency of the throughput from the ini-
tial contention window size we have reported in Figs. 9 and
10 the saturation throughput versus the value for, respec-
tively, the basic access and the RTS/CTS mechanisms. In both
figures, we have assumed a number of backoff stages equal to 6,
i.e., . The figures report four different network
sizes, i.e., number of stations equal to 5, 10, 20, and 50.
Fig. 9 shows that the throughput of the basic access mecha-
nism highly depends on , and the optimal value of depends
on the number of terminals in the network. For example, an high
value of (e.g., 1024) gives excellent throughput performance
in the case of 50 contending stations, while it drastically penal-
izes the throughput in the case of small number (e.g., 5) of con-
tending stations. This behavior is seen also in Fig. 10, where the
RTS/CTS mechanism is employed. Large values of may, in
fact, limit the throughput of a single station, which, when alone
in the channel is bounded by
(32)
where and are the average packet payload and the av-
erage channel holding time in case of successful transmission.
Equation (32) is directly obtained from (13) of Section IV-B by
observing that, as there are no other stations which can collide
with the considered one, the probability of success is equal to
1. In addition, the probability that a transmission occurs on
the channel is equal to the probability that the station trans-
mits. Being the conditional collision probability equal to 0,
is given by (8).
Fig. 10. Saturation Throughput versus initial contention window size for the
RTS/CTS mechanism.
Of more practical interest is the case of small values of ,
and particularly in correspondence of the values ,
and (i.e., those standardized for the three PHY—see Table I).
Figs. 9 and 10 show that the two access mechanisms achieve
a significantly different operation. In the case of the basic ac-
cess mechanism, reported in Fig. 9, the system throughput in-
creases as long as gets closer to 64. Moreover, the throughput
significantly decreases as the number of stations increases. On
the contrary, Fig. 10 shows that the throughput obtained with
the RTS/CTS mechanism is almost independent of the value
, and, in this range, it is furthermore almost insensi-
tive on the network size.
This surprising independence is quantitatively explained as
follows. Dividing numerator and denominator of (13) by ,
we obtain
(33)
The denominator of (33) expresses the average amount of time
spent on the channel in order to observe the successful transmis-
sion of a packet payload. This time is further decomposed into
three components.
is the time spent in order to successfully transmit a packet.
Table V reports the numerical values for and , com-
puted according to (14) and (17), in the assumption of system
and channel parameters of Table II. The difference between
and (586 bits) is the additional overhead introduced by the
RTS/CTS mechanism.
The second term at the denominator of (33) does not depend
on the access mechanism employed, and represents the amount
of time the channel is idle, per successful packet transmission.
In fact, is the average number of slot times spent on
the channel in order to have a successful transmission. Of those
slot times, a fraction is empty, and each empty slot time
lasts . The average number of idle slot times per packet trans-
mission, i.e., , is plotted in Fig. 11 versus the
network size, for three different values of the initial contention
window . We see that, for and , the amount
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BIANCHI: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE IEEE 802.11 DCF 545
of idle slot times per packet transmission is very low, particu-
larly when compared with the values given in Table V. This
value becomes significant only when gets greater (the case
is reported in the figure) and the number of stations
in the network is small.
Finally, the third term at the denominator of (33) repre-
sents the time wasted on the channel because of collisions,
per successful packet transmission. In fact, is the
average number of collided transmissions per each successful
transmission, which is multiplied by , i.e., the amount of
time the channel is held by a collision. Table V shows that
the the RTS/CTS mechanism significantly reduces the time
spent during a collision, with respect to the basic access mech-
anism. This reduction is extremely effective when the system
parameter and the network size lead to a large collision
probability. This fact is graphically shown in Fig. 12. This
figure reports the average amount of time spent in collisions,
per successful packet transmission, normalized with respect
to the value . It shows that, for the basic access mechanism,
the amount of channel time wasted in collisions is extremely
large for a small value and a large number of stations in the
network. Conversely, the additional amount of time wasted in
collisions is negligible for the RTS/CTS mechanism, regardless
of the values and . This explains the surprising constant
RTS/CTS throughput in any practical system and network
operation conditions.
Fig. 13 shows that the dependence of the throughput from the
maximum number of backoff stages is marginal. The figure
reports the cases of both Basic and RTS/CTS access schemes,
with (similar behaviour is observed for other values of
the parameter ) and . The points in the box indicate
the throughput achieved when , i.e., in correspondence
of the standardized engineering parameters of the DSSS PHY
(Table I). We see that the choice of does not practically affect
the system throughput, as long as is greater than four or five.
The only case in which the throughput still grows, for rela-
tively large, is the basic access mechanism with a large network
size.
Our model allows to obtain other measures of interest. The
conditional collision probability is the probability, seen by the
station, that its transmitted packet collides. Owing to the model's
key assumption of independence at each retransmission, the av-
erage number of transmissions that each station must perform
in order to successfully complete a packet transmission is given
by . This value is reported in Fig. 14, obtained with the
same system parameters of Figs. 9 and 10. Fig. 14 shows that
the number of transmissions per packet significantly increases
as the initial backoff window reduces, and as the network
size increases.
At a first glance, it might seem that the throughput perfor-
mance of the 802.11 protocol strongly depends on the slot time
size . In particular, the lower is , the better is the expected per-
formance. Instead, we note that, as far as saturation throughput
performance is concerned, its dependence on the slot time size
is only marginal. Table VI reports results for three different
system configurations corresponding to the different PHY’s.
Results are obtained for both basic access and RTS/CTS mecha-
nism, and for two different network sizes of 10 and 50 stations.
Fig. 11. Average number of idle slot times per successful packet transmission.
Fig. 12. Average number of slot time units wasted on the channel because of
packet collision, per successful packet transmission.
Columns in boldface type correspond to the standardized slot
time length for the related PHY. The marginal dependence of
the throughput on the slot time size is related to the fact, com-
mented above by means of (33) and Fig. 11, that the number
of idle slot times per packet transmission is extremely small. A
change of has the only effect to multiply by a constant value
the amount of idle channel time per packet transmission. How-
ever, for any practical value of and , the amount of idle
channel time remains marginal with respect to the time spent in
transmission and collision. This result is of fundamental impor-
tance for the future development of higher bit rate physical layer
recommendations, as the slot time size is difficultly scalable.
Finally, let us add some considerations regarding the depen-
dence of the access method on the packet length. It is often
qualitatively stated that the RTS/CTS mechanism is effective
when the packet size increases. This is justified in Fig. 15. This
figure reports the system throughput for both basic access and
RTS/CTS cases, for two different network sizes ( and
), and for three different configuration parameters, re-
ferred to as FH, DS and IR, corresponding to the three PHY's
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
546 IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 18, NO. 3, MARCH 2000
Fig. 13. Throughput versus the maximum number of backoff stages:W = 32.
Fig. 14. Average number of transmissions per packet.
reference values and Slot time size reported
in Table I. It is no more a surprise that the RTS/CTS mechanism
achieves very similar performance in all the considered cases.
This is due to the fact that the throughput performance margin-
ally depends on the slot time, as shown in Table VI, and on the
fact that the RTS/CST scheme is negligibly dependent on the
network size and on the minimum contention window size.
In the assumption of fixed packet payload size, it is very easy
to quantify the threshold value for the packet size over which it
is convenient to switch to the RTS/CTS mechanism. In fact, let
us indicate with and the throughput achieved respec-
tively by the basic access and RTS/CTS mechanism in the same
system parameters and network size conditions. From (33), the
inequality
implies that
(34)
TABLE VI
DEPENDENCE OF THE SATURATION THROUGHPUT ON THE SLOT TIME
Fig. 15. Throughput versus packet size for the standardized configuration
parameters.
Let now the overhead introduced by the
RTS/CTS mechanism, and let be the extra
length of the packet header with respect of the RTS frame size
(according to the values of Table II, bits, and
bits). Indicating the packet payload with the variable ,
condition (34) yields
(35)
The threshold value over which it is convenient to switch
to the RTS/CTS scheme is plotted versus the network size in
Fig. 16, for the three possible sets of parameters specified for the
different PHY’s. This figure shows that the threshold is highly
dependent on the PHY employed. This is not a consequence of
the different slot time size , which does not affect (35). In-
stead, it is a direct consequence of the different initial contention
window sizes adopted (see Table I). The lower the value ,
the greater is the performance impairment of the basic access
scheme (see Fig. 9), and the greater (and thus for more packet
size cases, as shown in Fig. 15) is the advantage of the RTS/CTS
scheme.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
BIANCHI: PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS OF THE IEEE 802.11 DCF 547
Fig. 16. Packet payload threshold over which the RTS/CTS mechanism is
advantageous.
Moreover, Fig. 16 runs counter to the “known” fact that the
RTS/CTS mechanism should be employed when the packet size
exceeds a given (meaning fixed) threshold. Instead, it shows that
such a threshold strongly depends on the network size, and par-
ticularly it significantly decreases when the number of stations
in the network increases. For example, in the case of 50 stations,
the threshold is equal to about 1470 bits for the infrared PHY,
while it is as low as 820 bits for the frequency hopping PHY.
The same threshold raises, respectively, to about 10065 bits and
3160 bits when the network is composed by five stations only.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented a simple analytical model to
compute the saturation throughput performance of the 802.11
Distributed Coordination Function. Our model assumes a finite
number of terminals and ideal channel conditions. The model
is suited for any access scheme employed, i.e., for both basic
access and RTS/CTS Access mechanisms, as well as for a com-
bination of the two. Comparison with simulation results shows
that the model is extremely accurate in predicting the system
throughput.
Using the proposed model, we have evaluated the 802.11
throughput performance. We have shown that performance of
the basic access method strongly depends on the system pa-
rameters, mainly minimum contention window and number of
stations in the wireless network. Conversely, performance is
only marginally dependent on the system parameters when the
RTS/CTS mechanism is considered.
The RTS/CTS mechanism has proven its superiority in most
of the cases. Notable is the advantage of the RTS/CTS scheme
in large network scenarios, even with fairly limited packet
sizes. When the capability of the RTS/CTS scheme to cope with
hidden terminals is accounted, we conclude that this access
method should be used in the majority of the practical cases.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author wishes to thank the anonymous refereers for their
helpful comments that have significantly improved the quality
of the presentation.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Pahlavan and A. H. Levesque, “Wireless data communications,”
Proc. IEEE, vol. 82, pp. 1398–1430, Sept. 1994.
[2] A. De Simone and S. Nanda, “Wireless data: Systems, standards, ser-
vices,” J. Wireless Networks, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 241–254, Feb. 1996.
[3] IEEE Standard for Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and
Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, Nov. 1997. P802.11.
[4] L. Kleinrock and F. Tobagi, “Packet switching in radio channels, Part
II—The hidden terminal problem in carrier sense multiple access and
the busy tone solution,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-23, no. 12,
pp. 1417–1433, Dec. 1975.
[5] H. S. Chhaya and S. Gupta, “Performance modeling of asynchronous
data transfer methods of IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol,” Wireless Net-
works, vol. 3, pp. 217–234, 1997.
[6] K. C. Huang and K. C. Chen, “Interference analysis of nonpersistent
CSMA with hidden terminals in multicell wireless data networks,” in
Proc. IEEE PIMRC, Toronto, Canada, Sept. 1995, pp. 907–911.
[7] B. P. Crow, “Performance evaluation of the IEEE 802.11 Wireless Local
Area Network Protocol,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Electrical and Computer
Eng., Univ. Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 1996.
[8] J. Weinmiller, M. Schlager, A. Festag, and A. Wolisz, “Performance
study of access control in wireless LANs IEEE 802.11 DFWMAC and
ETSI RES 10 HIPERLAN,” Mobile Networks and Applicat., vol. 2, pp.
55–67, 1997.
[9] T. S. Ho and K. C. Chen, “Performance evaluation and enhancement
of the CSMA/CA MAC protocol for 802.11 wireless LAN’s,” in Proc.
IEEE PIMRC, Taipei, Taiwan, Oct. 1996, pp. 392–396.
[10] F. Cali, M. Conti, and E. Gregori, “IEEE 802.11 wireless LAN: Capacity
analysis and protocol enhancement,” presented at the INFOCOM'98,
San Francisco, CA, Mar. 1998.
[11] G. Bianchi, L. Fratta, and M. Oliveri, “Performance analysys of IEEE
802.11 CSMA/CA medium access control protocol,” in Proc. IEEE
PIMRC, Taipei, Taiwan, Oct. 1996, pp. 407–411.
[12] G. Bianchi, “IEEE 802.11—Saturation throughput analysis,” IEEE
Commun. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 318–320, Dec. 1998.
[13] D. Bertsekas and R. Gallager, Data Networks. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1987.
Giuseppe Bianchi received the “Laurea” degree in
electronic engineering from Politecnico di Milano,
Milano, Italy, in 1990, and the specialization degree
in information technology from CEFRIEL, Milano,
in 1991.
He was a Researcher at CEFRIEL from 1991 to
1993, and Assistant Professor at the Politecnico di
Milano from 1994 to 1998. He spent 1992 as a Visitor
Researcher at Washington University, St. Louis, MO,
and spent 1997 as a Visiting Professor at Columbia
University, New York. Since November 1998, he has
been Associate Professor at the University of Palermo, Italy. His research in-
terests include design and performance evaluation of broadband and wireless
networks and systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: National Chung Cheng University. Downloaded on March 10,2010 at 09:04:03 EST from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

