IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 4, APRIL 2000 679
Ultra-Wide Bandwidth Time-Hopping
Spread-Spectrum Impulse Radio for Wireless
Multiple-Access Communications
Moe Z. Win, Senior Member, IEEE, and Robert A. Scholtz, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—Attractive features of time-hopping spread-spectrum
multiple-access systems employing impulse signal technology are
outlined, and emerging design issues are described. Performance of
such communications systems in terms of achievable transmission
rate and multiple-access capability are estimated for both analog
and digital data modulation formats under ideal multiple-access
channel conditions.
Index Terms—Impulse radio, ultra-wide bandwidth.
I. INTRODUCTION TO IMPULSE RADIO SYSTEMS
THE TERM wideband, as applied to communication sys-tems, can have different meanings. In conventional sys-
tems, “wideband” implies a large modulation bandwidth and
thus a high data transmission rate. In this paper, a spread-spec-
trum (SS) system [1]–[4] is described in which the transmitted
signal occupies an extremely large bandwidth even in the ab-
sence of data modulation. In this case, a signal is transmitted
with a bandwidth much larger than the data modulation band-
width and thus with a reduced power spectral density. This ap-
proach has the potential to produce a signal that is more covert,
has higher immunity to interference effects, and has improved
time-of-arrival resolution.
The SS radio system described here is unique in another
regard: it does not use a sinusoidal carrier to raise the signal to
a frequency band in which signals propagate well, but instead
communicates with a time-hopping (TH) baseband signal com-
posed of subnanosecond pulses (referred to as monocycles).
Since the bandwidth ranges from near dc to several gigahertz,
this impulse radio signal undergoes distortions in the propa-
gation process even in benign propagation environments. On
the other hand, the fact that an impulse radio system operates
Paper approved by E. S. Sousa, the Editor for CDMA Systems of the IEEE
Communications Society. Manuscript received January 27, 1997; revised May
19, 1998. This work was supported in part by the Joint Services Electronics Pro-
gram under Contract F49620-94-0022, and in part by the Integrated Media Sys-
tems Center, a National Science Foundation Engineering Research Center with
additional support from the Annenberg Center for Communication at the Uni-
versity of Southern California and the California Trade and Commerce Agency.
The paper was presented in part at the IEEE Fourth International Symposium on
Spread-Spectrum Techniques and Applications, Mainz, Germany, September,
1996, and in part at the IEEE International Conference on Communications,
Montréal, Canada, June 1997.
M. Z. Win is with the Wireless Systems Research Department, Newman
Springs Laboratory, AT&T Laboratories–Research, Red Bank, NJ 07701-7033
USA (e-mail: win@research.att.com).
R. A. Scholtz is with the Communication Sciences Institute, Department
of Electrical Engineering-Systems, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90089-2565 USA (e-mail: scholtz@usc.edu).
Publisher Item Identifier S 0090-6778(00)03632-1.
in the lowest possible frequency band that supports its wide
transmission bandwidth means that this radio has the best
chance of penetrating materials that tend to be more opaque
at higher frequencies. Finally, it should be noted that the use
of signals with gigahertz bandwidths means that multipath is
resolvable down to path differential delays on the order of a
nanosecond or less, i.e., down to path length differentials on
the order of a foot or less. This significantly reduces fading
effects even in indoor environments [5], [6].
The capability to highly resolve multipath combined with the
ability to penetrate through materials makes impulse technology
viable for high-quality, fully mobile short-range indoor radio
systems. Lack of significant multipath fading may considerably
reduce fading margins in link budgets and allow low transmis-
sion-power operation. Low transmission-power and short-range
operation with ultra-wide bandwidth (UWB) results in an ex-
tremely low transmitted power spectral density, which insures
that impulse radios do not interfere with narrow-band radio sys-
tems operating in dedicated bands.
Modulation of TH-SS impulse radio is accomplished through
the time shifting of pulses. Antipodal modulation cannot be
achieved by this means because pulse inversion is not an op-
tion in this signaling format. Comparison with direct-sequence
code-division multiple-access (DS-CDMA) systems over com-
parable bandwidths indicates that comparable numbers of users
could also be supported by DS-CDMA signals although the
spectral shapes of these systems are quite different. However,
the authors are not aware of any DS-CDMA systems that op-
erate with gigahertz bandwidths. On the other hand, impulse
radios with gigahertz bandwidths have been implemented and
demonstrated in single-user links with data rates up to 150 kb/s,
and hence the basic principles of operation have been validated.
The key motivations for using TH-SS impulse radio are the
ability to highly resolve multipath and the availability of the
technology to implement and generate UWB signals with rela-
tively low complexity. The techniques for generating UWB sig-
nals have existed for more than three decades [7]. Perhaps it
is more readily known to the radar community under its time-
domain description as “baseband carrierless short pulse” tech-
niques. A comprehensive reference of early work in this area
can be found in [8].
This paper describes a modulation format that can be sup-
ported by current technology and presents receiver processing
and performance prediction for both analog and digital data
modulation formats under ideal multiple-access channel condi-
tions. Real indoor channel measurements and their implications
0090–6778/00$10.00 © 2000 IEEE
680 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 4, APRIL 2000
on signal design and Rake receiver design can be found in [5],
[6], [9]–[12].
II. TIME-HOPPING FORMAT USING IMPULSES
A typical TH format of the th impulse radio transmitter
output signal is given by
(1)
where is the transmitter clock time, represents the
transmitted monocycle waveform that nominally begins at time
zero on the transmitter clock, and the quantities associated with
are transmitter dependent.1 Hence, the signal emitted by the
th transmitter consists of a large number of monocycle wave-
forms shifted to different times, the th monocycle nominally
starting at time . The structure of each
time shift component is described as follows.
1) Uniform Pulse Train Spacing: A pulse train of the form
consists of monocycle pulses
spaced seconds apart in time. The frame time or pulse
repetition time typically may be a hundred to a thousand
times the monocycle width, resulting in a signal with a
very low duty cycle. Multiple-access signals composed
of uniformly spaced pulses are vulnerable to occasional
catastrophic collisions in which a large number of pulses
from two signals are received simultaneously, much as
might occur in spread ALOHA systems [13].
2) Random/Pseudorandom TH: To eliminate catastrophic
collisions in multiple accessing, each link (indexed by
) uses a distinct pulse-shift pattern called
a TH sequence. These hopping sequences
are pseudorandom with period , with each element
an integer in the range . The TH
sequence therefore provides an additional time shift to
each pulse in the pulse train, with the th monocycle
undergoing an added shift of seconds, which
are discrete values between 0 and seconds. Since
the pseudorandom TH sequence has period , the
waveform has
period and has a power spectral density with
line spacing .
It is assumed that , and hence the ratio
indicates the fraction of the frame time over
which TH is allowed. Since a short time interval may
be required to read the output of a monocycle correlator
and to reset the correlator, may be strictly less
than one. If is too small, then catastrophic col-
lisions remain a significant possibility. Conversely, with
a large enough value of and well-designed TH
sequences, the multiple-access interference in many situ-
ations can be modeled as a Gaussian random process [14].
1In this notation, u represents a point in the underlying probability sample
space, and hence random variables are distinguished in this notation by the fact
that they are functions of u. If a function does not depend on u, then it is not
random. A random process r(u; t) is a different function of t for each u and is
a random variable for each value of t.
Fig. 1. A typical idealized received monocycle w (t) at the output of the
antenna subsystem as a function of time in nanoseconds. The model used in this
plot is w (t + 0:35) = [1   4(t= ) ] exp[ 2(t= ) ] with  =
0:2877.
3) Modulation Schemes: The sequence is a
sample sequence from a wide-sense stationary random
process , with samples taken at a rate of .
Both analog and digital modulation formats are described
in this paper. For the analog impulse radio, analog sub-
carrier signaling is considered, where stabilization of the
tracking S-curve of the clock control loops can be accom-
plished with a relatively simple receiver design. This sig-
naling format is of particular interest for low power or
miniaturized applications. For the digital impulse radio,
a pulse position data modulation is considered. For sim-
plicity, it is assumed that the data stream is balanced
so that the clock-tracking loop S-curve can maintain a
stable tracking point. With more complicated modula-
tion schemes, pulse-shift balance can be achieved in each
symbol time.
When transmitters are active in the multiple-access
system, the composite received signal at the output of
this receiver antenna is modeled as
(2)
in which models the attenuation over the propagation path of
the signal received from the th transmitter.
The random variable represents the time asynchronism
between the clock of the signal received from transmitter and
the receiver clock, and represents other non-monocycle
interference (e.g., receiver noise) present at the correlator input.
Even an ideal channel and antenna system modifies the shape
of the transmitted monocycle to at the output
of the receiver antenna. A typical idealized model of the re-
ceived pulse shape is shown in Fig. 1. For purposes
of analysis, we assume that the true transformed pulse shape
is known to the receiver and can be used to determine
matched-filter receiving structures.
III. ANALOG IMPULSE RADIO MULTIPLE-ACCESS
RECEIVER (AIRMA)
A. Impulse Correlator Output Model
A simplified model describing a portion of the AIRMA re-
ceiver is shown in Fig. 2. We assume that the receiver is perfectly
WIN AND SCHOLTZ: UWB TH-SS IMPULSE RADIO FOR WIRELESS MULTIPLE-ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS 681
Fig. 2. Simplified model of the analog impulse radio multiple-access receiver front end.
locked to the signal from the first transmitter. That is, the re-
ceiver has a replica of the first transmitter’s TH sequence
running synchronously with the time hops received via the air-
waves from the first transmitter. The implication is that
and are no longer random variables from the viewpoint of the
receiver. Hence, the signal on the local reference arm of the re-
ceiver correlator, coming from the template generator, is simply
(3)
which looks formally like the received waveform from trans-
mitter 1 with no data modulation imposed on it, but with a dif-
ferent pulse shape in place of the monocycle.
The impulse correlator output is sampled to obtain the se-
quence and is held by the sample-and-hold (S/H) de-
vice at a rate of one sample per frame. The correlator output
corresponding to the th frame is
(4)
The range of integration here is actually determined mathemati-
cally by the time interval over which the locally generated pulse
is nonzero. The expression
can be simplified to
(5)
where is evaluated in Appendix I as
(6)
(7)
(8)
mod (9)
The notation represents rounded to the nearest integer.
Notice that is the cross correlation between the received
monocycle waveform and the signal present at the
Fig. 3. Cross correlation ~R () between the received waveform of Fig. 1
and the pulse correlator waveform w (t) (chosen equal to (d=dt)w (t)
of Fig. 1). In this example, the linear approximation (also shown) appears
reasonable as long as   0:03 nanoseconds.
output of the receiver template generator, and it is typically an
odd function. Assuming that the monocycle waveforms
and are nonzero only in the time interval , it
follows that for . The quantity is the
component of that affects the reception of signal 1, i.e.,
(10)
The desired signal sample has an especially simple form,
namely
(11)
where the latter approximation is valid when the data modu-
lation is constrained to be within the linear region of
the function, and represents the slope of
at . Fig. 3 shows exact and approximate expressions for
the cross-correlation function for the typical received
waveform given in Fig. 1. When the approximation is valid, the
sampled modulation is directly visible at the correlator output
with little or no distortion. Furthermore, since the modulation
is highly oversampled to provide spread-spectrum processing
gain, adjacent random variables in the desired signal sequence
are highly correlated.
B. Subcarrier Demodulator Input Model
As indicated in Fig. 2, the impulse correlator output values
are sampled to obtain the sequence and held to create
a signal
(12)
682 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 4, APRIL 2000
where is a delay on the order of , and the rectangle
function is defined by
for
otherwise
(13)
This signal is passed through a subcarrier filter to produce the
signal that is to be demodulated.
The convolution integral representation of the output of the
subcarrier filter with impulse response and input (12)
can be used to obtain the output representation
(14)
where .
When is much larger than any frequency passed by the
subcarrier filter, then .
As for the case of the correlator output signal in (5), the sub-
carrier filter output signal can be broken down into sep-
arate components in a similar fashion
(15)
where
(16)
and
(17)
The component of accounts for receiver
noise and all other non-monocycle interference.
Since the receiver correlation circuitry is set to receive the
signal from transmitter 1, the components for
in (15) represent the interference due to multiple-
access noise at the demodulator input. From (11) and (16), the
desired input signal to the demodulator can be written
as
(18)
We assume for simplicity that perfect signal reconstruction from
the samples takes place, i.e., is an ideal interpolating
function for reconstructing the waveform from samples. Under
this assumption of perfect signal reconstruction be-
comes
(19)
where represents the desired subcarrier signal before
sampling and accounts for propagation and processing de-
lays.
C. Single-User Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) Calculations
The single-user synchronous SNR for a single
monocycle at the output of the correlator is
(20)
The numerator of the above expression can be rewritten using
(11) as
(21)
where is the correlation function of the process
evaluated at zero shift and is also the
mean-squared value of . We assume in this
analysis that the random sequence is composed of
independent random variables with zero mean and variance
. This is a reasonable model for wide-band interference and
receiver noise. Then, using (21)
(22)
Notice that the stationarity assumption of implies that
has the same value for all choices of .
The single-user SNR at the output of the subcarrier filter is
defined to be
(23)
The notation is used to indicate a time average, in this case
over the duration of the “hold,” to make this measure insen-
sitive to time, i.e.,
(24)
Using (19), (24) reduces to
(25)
The quantity , the noise power at the output
of the subcarrier filter due to receiver noise, is calculated in (68)
of Appendix III. The filter used in this calculation is
otherwise
(26)
where is a measure of the modulated subcarrier bandwidth
and is the subcarrier frequency. Technically, since the band-
width will be used in evaluating the noise power in the output,
it should be equal to the noise equivalent bandwidth of the sub-
carrier filter .
Substituting (25) and (68) into (23) gives
(27)
Hence, is proportional to of (22) with
the proportionality factor being, as expected, approximately the
WIN AND SCHOLTZ: UWB TH-SS IMPULSE RADIO FOR WIRELESS MULTIPLE-ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS 683
ratio of the filter output bandwidth to input bandwidth
.
D. Multiple-User Interference Calculation
To calculate the effect of multiple-user interference, two as-
sumptions are made.
1) Random Sequence Selection: Assume a randomly chosen
sequence signal-set model, in which the hopping sequence
of each user is selected independently of the
selection of other user sequences. This is a conservative as-
sumption because one would expect to do somewhat better
by selecting the sequences to minimally interfere with each
other.
2) Independent Interference Sources: Assume that the signals
, for and are in-
dependently generated. Therefore, the received signals from
different users are totally asynchronous, and the delay vari-
ables are independent for different users. Further-
more, the intraframe delay variable and the frame
delay variable for each user are independent random
variables. Hence, the random variables , for
, and are independent random variables.
The -user SNR for a single monocycle at the output of the
correlator can be defined as
(28)
The numerator of this expression is calculated in (21). It is
shown in Appendix II that the random variables for
are zero mean. Therefore, each of the random
variables in the expression defined in (5) are independent
with zero mean, and hence
(29)
where is defined in (65) of Appendix II. Therefore
(30)
Note that when , the second term in the denominator of
the above expression is zero, and (30) reduces to (22).
The -user SNR at the output of the subcarrier filter is
(31)
The total noise power at the demodulator
input is evaluated in (69) of Appendix III. Substituting (25) and
(69) into (31) gives
(32)
When , the second term in the denominator is zero and
(32) is equivalent to (27).
IV. DIGITAL IMPULSE RADIO MULTIPLE-ACCESS
RECEIVER (DIRMA)
A. Receiver Signal Processing
The DIRMA receiver is based on the theory of hypothesis
testing for fully coherent data detection. The objective is to de-
termine a reasonable model for the signal processing neces-
sary to demodulate one symbol of the transmission from the
first transmitter with binary modulation. Specifically,
where the data sequence is a bi-
nary (0 or 1) symbol stream that conveys information in some
form, and the parameter is on the order of . Since this is
an oversampled modulation system with monocycles trans-
mitted per symbol, the modulating data symbol changes only
every hops. Assuming that a new data symbol begins with
pulse index , the index of the data symbol modulating
pulse is (here, the notation denotes the integer
part of ). In this modulation method, no additional time shift
is modulated on the monocycle when the data symbol is 0, but
a time shift of is added to a monocycle when the symbol is 1.
The DIRMA receiver must decide whether is 0 or 1,
based on an observation of the received signal in a time
interval of duration at the antenna terminals. This
corresponds to deciding between two hypotheses and ,
where
(33)
in which is either 0 or 1. The remaining signals, interference,
and noise have been lumped into the waveform
(34)
As with the analog impulse radio, it is assumed that the receiver
has achieved perfect clock and sequence synchronization for the
signal transmitted by the first transmitter.
If no other users were present, and if the data
was composed of independent random variables, then the op-
timum receiver is the correlation receiver [15]–[17], which can
be reduced to (35), shown at the bottom of the page, where
. Since is nonzero only in
the time interval , the support of is . The
statistic in (35) consists of summing the correlations of
the correlator’s template signal at various time shifts with
the received signal . The signal processing corresponding
to the decision rule (35) is shown in Fig. 4. A graph of the tem-
plate signal is shown in Fig. 5 using the typical received wave-
form given in Fig. 1.
Strictly speaking, the above decision rule is no longer op-
timum when other users are present. In the presence of mul-
tiple-access noise, which is not really Gaussian, the optimum
receiver makes use of the information that the receiver knows
about the structure of the multiple-access noise. This optimal
684 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 4, APRIL 2000
Fig. 4. Receiver block diagram for the reception of the first user’s signal. Clock pulses are denoted by Dirac delta functions  ().
Fig. 5. The template signal v(t) for the signal of Fig. 1. The parameter  was
chosen to be 0.156 nanoseconds in this example to approximately maximize
SNR (N ). Since the template is the difference of two pulses shifted by ,
the nonzero extent of the template signal is approximately  plus the pulsewidth,
i.e., about 0.86 nanoseconds.
detection in a multiuser environment leads to much more com-
plex receiver designs [18], [19]. However, if the number of users
is large and no such multiuser detector is feasible, then it is rea-
sonable to approximate the combined effect of the other users
as a Gaussian random process [14]. Under this approximation,
the total noise is a spectrally white Gaussian random
process and (35) is optimum. While the assumptions that make
the rule (35) optimal are not strictly valid, this decision rule
will be used in the following to evaluate the performance of the
DIRMA receiver as a simple suboptimal means of making de-
cisions because it is theoretically simple and suggests practical
implementations.
The test statistic can be rewritten as
(36)
where the quantities (under hypotheses ) and are given
by
(37)
and
(38)
respectively.
`` decide'' ''
u
(35)
WIN AND SCHOLTZ: UWB TH-SS IMPULSE RADIO FOR WIRELESS MULTIPLE-ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS 685
The quantity is evaluated in Appendix IV as
(39)
where is defined in (71) of Appendix IV.
The expression in (38) is further simplified in Appendix V as
(40)
where is caused by multiple-access noise from the th
transmitter and is caused by receiver noise and other
sources of non-monocycle interference. Their mathematical ex-
pressions can be found in (76) and (74) of Appendix V.
B. SNR of the DIRMA Receiver
The DIRMA receiver output SNR is defined to be
(41)
where the numerator of this expression is given in (39). It is
shown in Appendix VI that the random variables for
are zero mean. Since each of the random vari-
ables in the expression of defined in (40) are independent
with zero mean, the quantity becomes
(42)
The quantity is the variance of the receiver noise component
at the pulse train integrator output. The parameter is defined
in (79) of Appendix VI.
When only the desired transmitter is on the air, , and
the single-user output SNR is
(43)
Thus, is equivalent to the output SNR that one might
observe in single link experiments. This is a convenient param-
eter because it absorbs all of the scaling problems that one must
confront in handling receiver noise and non-monocycle forms
of interference. When more than one monocycle transmitter is
on the air, then can be written using (42) as
(44)
When , the second term in the denominator is zero and
(44) is reduced exactly to the expression in (43).
V. PERFORMANCE MEASURES OF MULTIPLE-ACCESS SYSTEMS
A. Analog/Digital Comparisons
The similarity of the structure of for analog and
digital receivers given in (32) and (44) suggests a generalized
expression of the form
(45)
The for the AIRMA and DIRMA are given in (27)
and (43), respectively. The values of for the AIRMA and
DIRMA receivers are given, respectively, by
(46)
(47)
Because all measures of the communication rate are hidden in
, we have defined the rates of the analog and digital systems
in (45) as and , respectively,
and shown them explicitly in the modulation index expressions.
The remaining factor in these expressions is denoted by .
The general form of (45) was developed originally in [20]
and was calculated specifically for a DS-CDMA system in
[21]. Since for the AIRMA and DIRMA are
identical with the exception of different modulation coefficients
and , the achievable transmission rate and
multiple-access capacity are derived for a general impulse radio
with parameter (without the subscripts). Then, performance
comparisons of specific receivers are equivalent to comparisons
of their modulation coefficients .
The basic performance measures of multiple-access systems
that we will relate are the number of users, the operating
SNR, for users, the modulation rate , the
modulation index , and the excess single-link SNR
required to support mul-
tiple-access operation for this number of users. In these terms,
(45) reduces to
(48)
where is for analog modulation or for
digital modulation.
Under perfect power control assumptions, i.e., for
all , (48) yields simple relations between the parameters of
interest as
(49)
(50)
both monotonically increasing functions of . The ultimate
limits to multiple-access communication with impulse radio
686 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 4, APRIL 2000
multiple-access receivers occur when is increased without
bound, i.e.,
(51)
(52)
Hence, for a specified level of performance as embodied in
, there are upper bounds on the modulation rate
(for a given number of users) and the number of users (for a
given modulation rate) that cannot be exceeded by the impulse
radio multiple-access receivers. Similar results for DS-CDMA
system can be found in [21].
VI. PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS AND CONCLUSIONS
The performance of the impulse radio multiple-access re-
ceiver will be evaluated for the analog receiver in which the data
signal is binary frequency-shift keyed (FSK) modulation on a
subcarrier that is subsequently detected to produce a received
bit stream, and for the fully digital receiver with pulse-position
modulation (PPM) (as described in Section IV). The basic pa-
rameters used to provide numerical results are shown in Table I.
In the AIRMA example
(53)
where the rectangle function is defined by (13). The scaling
constant is chosen such that the linear approximation in
(11) is reasonable. The random variable is uniformly
distributed on the interval . In the case of binary FSK,
the subcarrier frequency is shifted by or
depending upon whether the th data symbol is
zero or one, respectively. The frequencies for FSK signaling
are chosen to insure orthogonal signaling, and performance
evaluation of the data detection process is based on standard
results [15]–[17]. The quantity , the mean-squared
value of , is given by (81) of Appendix VII.
In DIRMA receivers, the PPM modulation parameter ,
which affects the shape of the template signal , appears
only in and implicitly and can be adjusted to maximize
under various conditions [14]. We have chosen
the value of that is optimum when receiver noise dominates
the multiple-access noise, e.g., when there is only one user or
when there is a strong external interferer. In this case, it follows
from (43) that the optimum choice of modulation parameter
is the one that maximizes . On the other hand, when the
receiver noise is negligible and is nearly infinite, the
optimum choice of suggested by (44) would be the one that
maximizes . The optimizing values of for these two
criteria are close in value and provide comparable performance.
Sample performance parameters for analog and digital radio
implementations are summarized in Table II. The number of
TABLE I
NUMERICAL EXAMPLE OF IMPULSE RADIO
BASIC OPERATING PARAMETERS
TABLE II
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS FOR ANALOG AND DIGITAL
RADIO IMPLEMENTATIONS
Fig. 6. Total number of users versus additional required power (decibels)
for AIRMA and DIRMA receivers. This figure is plotted for three different
performance levels with the data rate of 19.2 kb/s.
WIN AND SCHOLTZ: UWB TH-SS IMPULSE RADIO FOR WIRELESS MULTIPLE-ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS 687
users versus additional required power for AIRMA and DIRMA
receivers in an ideal additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN)
power-controlled channel are plotted in Fig. 6 for typical bit-
error rates. It is clear that the DIRMA receiver, which has been
optimized for digital transmission, outperforms the AIRMA re-
ceiver, which is given the task of transporting a subcarrier with
binary digital modulation. This follows from the fact that in the
digital receiver each transmitted monocycle provides maximum
discrimination between the two digital hypotheses that the re-
ceiver must test, while in the analog design, the constraint of
maintaining linearity in the receiver reduces the effectiveness
of the digital subcarrier detector. This comparison emphasizes
the fact that the AIRMA design is meant for truly analog data
waveforms.
Aside from these differences, it is interesting to note the
large numbers of users both of these systems can support in
an ideal power-controlled AWGN environment. These predic-
tions are simply a result of the bandwidth that this signaling
technology occupies in an ideal power-controlled aggregate
AWGN channel.
APPENDIX I
CORRELATOR OUTPUT EVALUATION
By substituting the expression in place
of in (4), the random signal variable can be
rewritten as a function of the TH sequences and the monocycle
cross correlation as
(54)
where was defined in (7). Since , only one term
from the sum in (54) can be nonzero. There are two large time
uncertainties in the argument of in (54), namely the trans-
mission reference times and (see Fig. 7). Since these
are related to the times when the radios begin transmission in
asynchronous operation, the uncertainty concerning their dif-
ference may span many frame times . This difference can be
modeled as
(55)
Here, is the value of the time uncertainty
rounded to the nearest frame time, and is the error in
this rounding process. The argument of can be rewritten
using (55) as
(56)
Assume for analytical convenience that the time interval over
which the monocycle can be time-hopped is less than half a
frame time so that
(57)
This implies that
, and (54) becomes
(58)
Since is nonzero only for , (58) is zero unless
. Therefore
(59)
On the other hand, if (57) is not satisfied, then the representa-
tion of above may contain more than one term, with the
actual values depending on the involved random variables.
APPENDIX II
EVALUATION OF THE MOMENTS OF
Since the intraframe delay variable is a round-off
error of a large random variable [see (55)], it is
reasonable to assume that is uniformly distributed over
its range. Therefore, the probability density of for
is
otherwise
(60)
The first moment of for each of is
calculated in two steps by first computing the conditional ex-
pectation over , given the sequence variables and sam-
pled-data variable, and then averaging over the sequence vari-
ables and sampled-data variable. By direct substitution of (59),
it is easy to verify via the change of variable technique that the
conditional expectation over is
(61)
Recall that only for . Furthermore, the con-
straint (57) on guarantees that the interval where
is nonzero is contained fully within the region of integration, re-
gardless of the sequence element values and sample data value.
Because of propagation effects, generally is the deriva-
tive of a function that begins and ends at zero, implying that
, the conditional expectation over
in (61) is zero, and therefore
for (62)
688 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 4, APRIL 2000
Fig. 7. Timing diagram, illustrating epochs and indexes for the signals received from user 1 and user k, with N = 5 (for this illustration only). The indexing
begins from the zero reference time of the each users.
The second moment of for each of
is calculated similarly and averaging over again is
enough to complete the calculation of the second moment of
. It can be shown that the conditional expectation of
over is
(63)
The domain of the above integral can be extended to cover the
whole real line, and the conditional expectation of
over does not depend on the sequence variables and
sampled-data variable. Therefore, using (7)
(64)
(65)
The quantity enters into the self-interference
terms in the signal-to-noise calculations and has been named
.
APPENDIX III
EVALUATION OF THE MOMENTS OF THE DEMODULATOR
INPUT NOISE
The total noise at the demodulator input is composed of
independently generated components and is defined by
(15). Now that it has been verified that and
, it follows immediately that:
(66)
The mean-squared value of each of these random processes
is a straight-forward evaluation which is annotated as
follows:
(67)
Here, is the result of substituting the representation (16) of
and uses the fact that the variables in are
uncorrelated with zero mean, substitutes the self interference
notation and the definition of the time average given in (24),
converts the infinite collection of contiguous finite-domain
integrals into a single integral, uses Parseval’s theorem for
Fourier transforms, and substitutes (26) and completes the
integration.
Using the fact that the variables in are uncorrelated
with zero mean, the mean-squared value of the receiver noise
can be calculated similarly to the calculation of (67)
as
(68)
Since the components of are all mean-zero
and independently generated, the total noise power into the sub-
carrier demodulator can now be reduced to
(69)
WIN AND SCHOLTZ: UWB TH-SS IMPULSE RADIO FOR WIRELESS MULTIPLE-ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS 689
APPENDIX IV
EVALUATION OF THE CONSTANT
By the change of variables technique, the quantity in (39) can
be rewritten as
(70)
But the support of
and the support of overlap only if . Therefore,
, where
(71)
APPENDIX V
EVALUATION OF
Substitution of (34) for into (38) gives
(72)
where is the component of caused by multiple-
access noise from the th transmitter, i.e.,
(73)
and is the component of that is
caused by receiver noise and other sources of non-monocycle
interference, i.e.,
(74)
It is assumed that mean and variance of are given by 0
and , respectively.
By the change of variables of integration and using the fact
that the support of is contained in the region of integration,
the quantity can be reduced to
(75)
Using steps similar to (55)–(57) of Appendix I, the relative
time shifts appearing in the argument of and can be
bounded to show that only one term in the sum over in (75) with
index is nonzero. Therefore, simplifies
to (76), shown at the bottom of the page.
APPENDIX VI
EVALUATION OF THE MOMENTS OF
Similar to the calculation of the first moment of in
Appendix II, it can be shown that . Therefore,
the first moment of is
for
(77)
The second moment of is
(78)
The first term in the above equation can be calculated similar to
the calculation of in (65) in Appendix II as
(79)
(76)
690 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 48, NO. 4, APRIL 2000
For the basic impulse radio operating parameters of interest, it
can be verified numerically that . Therefore
, and hence .
APPENDIX VII
EVALUATION OF THE MEAN-SQUARED VALUE OF
The mean-squared value of can be calculated as
for small values of (80)
For the analog FSK data subcarrier given in (53) and using the
fact that
can be reduced to
(81)
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank G. Chrisikos, R. J.-M.
Cramer, L. D. Garrett, A. M. Petroff, L. W. Fullerton, and P.
Withington for their encouragement and for several stimulating
and helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. A. Scholtz, “The spread-spectrum concept,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. COM-25, pp. 748–755, Aug. 1977.
[2] R. L. Pickholtz, D. L. Schilling, and L. B. Milstein, “Theory of
spread-spectrum communications—A tutorial,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. COM-30, pp. 855–884, May 1982.
[3] M. K. Simon, J. K. Omura, R. A. Scholtz, and B. K. Levitt, Spread Spec-
trum Communications Handbook, revised ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1994.
[4] R. L. Peterson, R. E. Ziemer, and D. E. Borth, Introduction to Spread
Spectrum Communications, 1st ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1995.
[5] M. Z. Win, R. A. Scholtz, and M. A. Barnes, “Ultra-wide bandwidth
signal propagation for indoor wireless communications,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 1, Montréal, Canada, June 1997, pp.
56–60.
[6] M. Z. Win and R. A. Scholtz, “On the robustness of ultra-wide band-
width signals in dense multipath environments,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 2, pp. 51–53, Feb. 1998.
[7] G. F. Ross, “The transient analysis of certain TEM mode four-post net-
works,” IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Tech., vol. MTT-14, p. 528,
Nov. 1966.
[8] C. L. Bennett and G. F. Ross, “Time-domain electromagnetics and its
applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 66, pp. 299–318, Mar. 1978.
[9] M. Z. Win and R. A. Scholtz, “Energy capture vs. correlator resources
in ultra-wide bandwidth indoor wireless communications channels,” in
Proc. Military Communications Conf., vol. 3, Monterey, CA, Nov. 1997,
pp. 1277–1281.
[10] M. Z. Win and R. A. Scholtz, “On the energy capture of ultra-wide band-
width signals in dense multipath environments,” IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 2, pp. 245–247, Sept. 1998.
[11] F. Ramírez-Mireles, M. Z. Win, and R. A. Scholtz, “Performance of
ultra-wideband time-shift-modulated signals in the indoor wireless im-
pulse radio channel,” in Proc. 31st Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and
Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 1997, pp. 192–196.
[12] M. Z. Win and R. A. Scholtz, “Infinite Rake and selective Rake re-
ceivers for ultra-wide bandwidth transmissions in multipath environ-
ments,” IEEE Commun. Lett., to be published.
[13] N. M. Abramson, “VSAT data networks,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 78, pp.
1267–1274, July 1990.
[14] R. A. Scholtz, “Multiple access with time-hopping impulse modula-
tion,” in Proc. Military Communications Conf., vol. 2, Boston, MA, Oct.
1993, pp. 447–450.
[15] J. M. Wozencraft and I. M. Jacobs, Principles of Communication Engi-
neering, 1st ed, London, U.K.: Wiley, 1965.
[16] M. K. Simon, S. M. Hinedi, and W. C. Lindsey, Digital Communication
Techniques: Signal Design and Detection, 1st ed. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall, 1995.
[17] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1995.
[18] H. V. Poor, “Signal processing for wideband communications,” IEEE
Information Theory Society Newsletter, June 1992.
[19] S. Verdu, “Recent progress in multiuser detection,” in Multiple
Access Communications: Foundations for Emerging Technolo-
gies. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press, 1993, pp. 164–175.
[20] G. R. Cooper and R. W. Nettleton, “A spread spectrum technique for
high-capacity mobile communications,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol.
VT-27, pp. 264–275, Nov. 1978.
[21] C. L. Weber, G. K. Huth, and B. H. Batson, “Performance considerations
of code division multiple-access systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.,
vol. VT-30, pp. 3–9, Feb. 1981.
Moe Z. Win (S’85–M’87–SM’97) received the
B.S. degree (magna cum laude) from Texas A&M
University, College Station, and the M.S. degree
from the University of Southern California (USC),
Los Angeles, in 1987 and 1998, respectively, in
electrical engineering. As a Presidential Fellow at
USC, he received both the M.S. degree in applied
mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical
engineering in 1998.
In 1987, he joined the Jet Propulsion Laboratory
(JPL), California Institute of Technology, Pasadena.
From 1994 to 1997, he was a Research Assistant with the Communication Sci-
ences Institute, where he played a key role in the successful creation of the Ultra-
Wideband Radio Laboratory at USC. Since 1998, he has been with the Wire-
less Systems Research Department, AT&T Laboratories-Research, Red Bank,
NJ, as a Senior Technical Staff Member. His main research interests include the
application of communication, detection, and estimation theories to a variety of
communications problems including time-varying channels, diversity, equaliza-
tion, synchronization, signal design, and ultrawide-bandwidth communication.
Dr. Win is a member of Eta Kappa Nu, Tau Beta Pi, Pi Mu Epsilon, Phi
Theta Kappa, and Phi Kappa Phi. He was a University Undergraduate Fellow
at Texas A&M University, where he received, among others awards, the
Academic Excellence Award. At USC, he received several awards including the
Outstanding Research Paper Award and the Phi Kappa Phi Student Recognition
Award. He was the recipient of the IEEE Communications Society Best Student
Paper Award at the Fourth Annual IEEE NetWorld+Interop’97 Conference.
He has been involved in chairing and organizing sessions in a number of IEEE
conferences. He served as a member of the Technical Program Committee
for the IEEE Communication Theory Symposium during GLOBECOM’99,
the 1999 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference, and
the 1999 IEEE 49th Annual International Vehicular Technology Conference.
He has also served as a member of the International Advisory Committee
for the 1999 IEEE 50th International Vehicular Technology Conference. He
currently serves as the Tutorial Chair for the 2001 IEEE International Vehicular
Technology Conference and the Technical Program Chair for the IEEE
Communication Theory Symposium during GLOBECOM 2000. Currently, he
is the Editor for Equalization and Diversity for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON
COMMUNICATIONS.
WIN AND SCHOLTZ: UWB TH-SS IMPULSE RADIO FOR WIRELESS MULTIPLE-ACCESS COMMUNICATIONS 691
Robert A. Scholtz (S’56–M’59–SM’73–F’80) was
born in Lebanon, OH, on January 26, 1936. He is a
Distinguished Alumnus of the University of Cincin-
nati, Cincinnati, OH, where, as a Sheffield Scholar, he
received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering in
1958. He was a Hughes Masters and Doctoral Fellow
while obtaining the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in elec-
trical engineering from the University of California
(USC), Los Angeles, and Stanford University, Stan-
ford, CA, in 1960 and 1964, respectively.
While working on missile radar signal processing
problems, he remained part-time at Hughes Aircraft Company from 1963 to
1978. In 1963, Dr. Scholtz joined the faculty at USC, where he is now Pro-
fessor of Electrical Engineering. From 1984 to 1989, he served as Director
of USC’s Communication Sciences Institute. In 1996, he founded the Ultra-
wide-Band Radio Laboratory as part of the Integrated Media Systems Center at
USC. Currently, he is Chairman of the Electrical Engineering-Systems Depart-
ment at USC. He has consulted for the LinCom Corporation, Axiomatix, Inc.,
the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Technology Group, TRW, Pulson Communica-
tions, and Qualcomm, as well as various government agencies. He has co-au-
thored Spread Spectrum Communications (Rockville, MD: Computer Science
Press, 1985), with M. K. Simon, J. K. Omura, and B. K. Levitt, and Basic Con-
cepts in Information Theory and Coding (New York: Plenum, 1984), with S. W.
Golomb and R. E. Peile. His research interests include communication theory,
synchronization, signal design, coding, adaptive processing, and pseudonoise
generation, and their application to communications and radar systems.
In 1980, Dr. Scholtz was elected to the grade of Fellow in the IEEE “for
contributions to the theory and design of synchronizable codes for communica-
tions and radar systems.” He has been an active member of the IEEE for many
years, manning important organizational posts, including Finance Chairman for
the 1977 National Telecommunications Conference, Program Chairman for the
1981 International Symposium on Information Theory, and Board of Governors
positions for the Information Theory Group and the Communications Society.
In 1983, he received the Leonard G. Abraham Prize Paper Award for the his-
torical article, “The Origins of Spread Spectrum Communications;” this same
paper received the IEEE 1984 Donald G. Fink Prize Award. His paper “Acqui-
sition of Spread-Spectrum Signals by an Adaptive Array” with D. M. Dlugos
received the 1992 Senior Award from the IEEE Signal Processing Society. His
paper “Strategies for minimizing the intercept time in a mobile communication
network with directive/adaptive antennas,” with J.-H. Oh received the Ellersick
Award for the best unclassified paper at Milcom’97. His paper “ATM-Based
Ultra-Wide Bandwidth (UWB) Multiple-Access Radio Network for Multimedia
PCS” with students M. Z. Win, J. H. Ju, X. Qiu, and colleague V. O. K. Li re-
ceived the Best Student Paper Award from the NetWorld+Interop’97 Program
Committee.

