www.cra.org/ccc  
The	  Future	  of	  Computer	  Architecture	  
	  
David	  Patterson	  
UC	  Berkeley	  
	  
Version	  3:	  	  December	  12,	  20081	  
	  
Computer	  Architecture	  is	  the	  field	  that	  designs	  computers,	  which	  sets	  the	  foundation	  for	  
the	  entire	  IT	  industry.	  	  
	  
Despite	  the	  tremendous	  resources	  at	  large	  companies	  such	  as	  IBM	  and	  Intel,	  there	  is	  a	  long	  
track-­‐record	  of	  breakthroughs	  from	  academic	  researchers	  in	  computer	  architecture	  that	  
have	  led	  to	  new	  multi-­‐billion-­‐dollar	  industries.	  	  One	  reason	  is	  simply	  that	  many	  of	  the	  
leading	  thinkers	  in	  computer	  architecture	  are	  in	  academia,	  as	  the	  number	  of	  awards,	  books,	  
and	  papers	  document.	  	  Another	  reason	  is	  that	  academic	  researchers	  are	  not	  bound	  the	  
business	  requirements	  of	  compatibility	  with	  legacy	  hardware	  and	  software.	  	  A	  third	  reason	  
is	  that	  when	  information	  technology	  is	  changing	  rapidly,	  decades	  of	  experience	  may	  not	  be	  
a	  huge	  asset,	  and	  bright	  young	  graduate	  students	  who	  don’t	  know	  what	  can’t	  be	  done	  are	  as	  
likely	  to	  make	  an	  important	  contribution	  as	  those	  considerably	  more	  senior.	  
	  
Thus,	  in	  areas	  where	  there	  is	  tremendous	  consensus	  on	  the	  guidelines	  on	  what	  to	  do,	  
computer	  architects	  at	  Intel	  and	  IBM	  usually	  lead	  the	  way.	  	  When	  the	  directions	  are	  less	  
clear,	  academics	  are	  often	  the	  path	  breakers	  even	  though	  they	  have	  fewer	  resources.	  
	  
Today,	  we	  have	  hit	  the	  wall	  as	  to	  the	  practical	  limit	  to	  the	  amount	  of	  power	  that	  a	  
microprocessor	  chip	  can	  dissipate;	  in	  the	  past	  each	  generation	  of	  chip	  used	  more	  power	  
while	  getting	  more	  performance.	  	  We	  need	  to	  invent	  a	  new	  way	  to	  get	  more	  performance	  
without	  more	  power.	  	  Moreover,	  the	  most	  interesting	  computers	  of	  the	  future	  are	  at	  the	  
extremes	  in	  scale:	  
	  
• The	  datacenter	  is	  the	  computer.	  	  Amazon,	  Google,	  Microsoft,	  and	  others	  are	  racing	  to	  
construct	  buildings	  with	  50,000	  computers	  to	  run	  software	  as	  a	  service	  (SaaS).	  	  
	  
• The	  cell	  phone	  is	  the	  computer.	  	  Millions	  of	  cell	  phones	  are	  shipped	  each	  day	  and	  they	  
are	  increasing	  in	  functionality.	  	  
	  
The	  “power	  wall”	  and	  the	  extremes	  in	  computer	  size	  mean	  that	  the	  old	  guidelines	  are	  out	  
the	  window,	  so,	  if	  history	  is	  any	  guide,	  we’re	  entering	  an	  era	  of	  increasing	  importance	  for	  
academic	  computer	  architecture.	  
	  
Note	  that	  in	  such	  an	  uncertain	  era	  there	  many	  chances	  for	  new	  multi-­‐billion-­‐dollar	  
industries,	  and	  these	  new	  industries	  are	  likely	  to	  flourish	  close	  to	  where	  the	  researchers	  do	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  For	  the	  most	  current	  version	  of	  this	  essay,	  as	  well	  as	  related	  essays,	  visit	  http://www.cra.org/ccc/initiatives	  
www.cra.org/ccc  
their	  work.	  	  We	  have	  seen	  the	  center	  of	  the	  IT	  universe	  shift	  geographically	  before	  during	  
eras	  of	  change:	  
	  
• New	  York	  in	  the	  mainframe	  era	  of	  the	  1950s	  and	  1960s;	  
• Boston	  in	  the	  minicomputer	  era	  of	  the	  1970s	  and	  early	  1980s;	  
• Silicon	  Valley	  in	  PC	  and	  Web	  era	  of	  the	  late	  1980s	  to	  today.	  
	  
Given	  the	  challenges	  mentioned	  above,	  other	  countries	  are	  investing	  tremendously	  in	  IT	  in	  
general	  and	  in	  computer	  architecture	  specifically,	  since	  they	  see	  the	  opportunity	  in	  this	  era	  
of	  change	  to	  shift	  the	  center	  of	  the	  IT	  universe	  and	  the	  jobs	  that	  come	  with	  it.	  	  Especially	  
given	  the	  cut	  to	  academic	  IT	  research	  in	  general	  and	  to	  computer	  architecture	  specifically	  
in	  the	  US,	  it’s	  not	  hard	  to	  imagine	  the	  IT	  center	  moving	  further	  west	  in	  the	  next	  decade	  –	  to	  
Beijing	  or	  Mumbai.	  
	  
One	  area	  of	  tremendous	  opportunity	  in	  computer	  architecture	  is	  the	  manycore	  challenge.	  	  
The	  goal	  is	  to	  invent	  computers	  that	  make	  it	  easy	  to	  write	  programs	  that	  are	  efficient,	  
portable,	  correct,	  and	  scale	  as	  the	  number	  of	  cores	  per	  microprocessor	  increases	  –	  as	  easy	  
as	  it	  has	  been	  to	  write	  programs	  for	  traditional	  computers.	  	  If	  this	  invention	  allows	  
software	  to	  use	  many	  simple	  power-­‐efficient	  cores	  instead	  of	  a	  single	  power-­‐hungry	  core,	  
this	  will	  reset	  the	  foundation	  for	  the	  IT	  industry	  for	  at	  least	  the	  next	  30	  years.	  
	  
A	  second	  opportunity	  is	  inventing	  a	  new	  computer	  architecture	  that	  improves	  computer	  
security	  and	  privacy,	  problems	  that	  plague	  the	  IT	  field.	  	  Architects	  could	  remove	  many	  of	  
the	  vulnerabilities	  of	  today’s	  computers	  if	  they	  were	  not	  bound	  by	  the	  legacy	  requirements	  
of	  compatibility	  with	  today’s	  computers.	  	  They	  could	  also	  provide	  new	  features	  to	  make	  it	  
easier	  to	  build	  fast,	  secure,	  low-­‐overhead	  virtual	  machines,	  making	  it	  easier	  and	  safer	  for	  
software	  to	  migrate	  between	  the	  datacenter	  and	  the	  cell	  phone.	  
	  
A	  third	  opportunity	  is	  invent	  computers	  that	  will	  remove	  the	  performance	  bottlenecks	  
from	  new,	  highly	  productive	  programming	  environments	  such	  Ruby	  or	  Python.	  	  For	  
example,	  the	  Ruby	  on	  Rails	  environment	  allows	  programmers	  to	  invent	  amazing	  new	  
computer	  applications	  in	  just	  1000	  to	  2000	  lines	  of	  code—factors	  of	  10	  to	  100	  less	  than	  
conventional	  approaches.	  	  Example	  application	  areas	  include	  personal	  health	  care,	  
personal	  memory	  assistants,	  and	  personal	  digital	  educators.	  	  Alas,	  Ruby	  on	  Rails	  
performance	  is	  factors	  of	  3	  to	  10	  worse	  than	  conventional	  systems.	  	  If	  we	  can	  invent	  
computers	  that	  allow	  new	  programming	  systems	  like	  Ruby	  or	  Python	  to	  scale	  up	  to	  
hundreds	  of	  cores	  while	  preserving	  their	  amazing	  programming	  productivity,	  we	  could	  
unleash	  a	  new	  round	  of	  exciting	  applications	  that	  will	  lead	  to	  new	  multi-­‐billion-­‐dollar	  
industries,	  just	  as	  we’ve	  done	  so	  many	  times	  in	  the	  past.	  
	  
Intel	  and	  Microsoft	  recently	  funded	  two	  major	  academic	  centers	  to	  tackle	  these	  critical	  
challenges	  –	  at	  UC	  Berkeley	  and	  the	  University	  of	  Illinois.	  	  Many	  other	  highly	  credible	  
proposals	  were	  received,	  from	  strong	  teams	  pursuing	  diverse	  approaches.	  	  A	  national	  
initiative	  would	  fund	  five	  more	  centers	  of	  excellence	  in	  computer	  systems	  and	  architecture,	  
positioning	  the	  United	  States	  to	  maintain	  its	  preeminence	  in	  the	  IT	  field.	  
www.cra.org/ccc  
For citation use: Patterson D. (2008). The Future of Computer Architecture: A white paper prepared for the 
Computing Community Consortium committee of the Computing Research Association. 
http://cra.org/ccc/resources/ccc-led-whitepapers/ 
	  

