Department of Computer Architecture
Regulations for the 
Doctoral Programme in Computer Architecture
October 2013
Table of contents
1. Admission.......................................................................3
1.1 Information required....................................................................3
1.2 Admission procedure...................................................................3
2. Evaluation of the research plan........................................4
2.1 Evaluation of the research plan for the first year of doctoral 
studies...............................................................................................4
2.2 Evaluation of the research plan for subsequent years................5
3. Requests for extension of doctoral studies........................5
4. Preliminary reading and defence......................................5
5. External reviewers...........................................................6
6. Selection of the examination panel...................................6
7. Thesis deposit.................................................................6
7.1 Acceptance of examination panel members...............................7
7.2 Appointment of the examination panel.......................................8
7.3 Request for the report on the quality of the thesis......................8
7.4 Request for the international doctorate certification...................8
8. Thesis defence................................................................9
1.Admission
Admission to the doctoral programme in Computer Architecture is governed by the Academic
regulations  for  doctoral  studies  at  the  UPC.  Information  on  access  requirements  and  the
admission  procedure  can  be  found  at
http://doctorat.upc.edu/new-students/access-requeriments?set_language=en.
Applications  for  admission  must  be  submitted  online  at
https://preinscripcio.upc.edu/home_candidat.php?idioma=3.  Candidates  will  be  asked  to
provide the information and supporting documentation required by law, which include degree
certificates, academic transcripts and curricula, duly legalised and translated, if necessary.
1.1 Information required
The candidate must upload copies of the supporting documentation at the time the application
for admission is submitted. If admitted, the candidate must complete the enrolment process and
provide  originals  copies  of  all  the  supporting  documentation  indicated  in  the  Academic
regulations  for  doctoral  studies  at  the  UPC,  as  shown  in  the  figure  below
(http://doctorat.upc.edu/new-students/admission).
If the original copies are not available at the time of enrolment, the candidate must sign and
submit the form Commitment to submit documents. Candidates will not be permitted to proceed
to the thesis deposit until they have submitted all of the supporting documentation stated in the
Academic regulations for doctoral studies.
1.2 Admission procedure
Applications  for  admission  are  considered  by  the  academic  committee  for  the  doctoral
programme on the basis of  the  candidate’s  academic record and any additional  information
provided.  Candidates  may  be  admitted,  rejected,  or  provisionally  admitted  subject  to  the
completion of  bridging courses  with a  total  value of  up to  36 ECTS credits.  The bridging
courses  will  be  subjects  from  master’s  degrees  taught  at  the  Department  of  Computer
Architecture, chosen in agreement with the academic committee for the doctoral programme. 
2.Evaluation of the research plan
In  accordance with the  provisions  made  in  Royal  Decree 99/2011,  on doctoral  studies,  the
assessment procedure for doctoral studies must include the annual evaluation of the candidate’s
research plan. The first of these annual evaluations is conducted in a public session before an
examination panel. 
2.1 Evaluation of the research plan for the first year of 
doctoral studies
The examination panel will be formed by two members of the teaching staff assigned to the
doctoral programme and one external to the programme, appointed by the academic committee.
The candidate must carry out the defence of the initial research plan during the first year of the
doctoral programme, either in the February examination session (autumn semester enrolment)
or the July examination session (spring semester enrolment). 
Candidates must submit a preliminary report and make a public presentation of the research
plan.  There  are  no  formal  requirements  governing  the  content  or  length  of  the  report,  but
candidates should ensure that it contains at least the following sections: 
• Justification for the research plan and definition of the research context
• State of the art
• Anticipated contribution to the field
• Methodology
• Potential collaborations with other research groups or institutions working in the same
area
• Plan for the dissemination of results (publications, patents, transfer agreements)
• Timeline and anticipated results 
The  report  must  be  approved  by  the  thesis  supervisor  and  sent  by  e-mail  to  the  doctoral
programme administrator  at  least  ten  days  before  the  date  of  the  preliminary  reading  and
defence.
For the public presentation,  the candidate will  have a maximum of 15 minutes in which to
explain the following aspects of the plan:
• Research justification and brief description of the state of the art
• Work plan
• Methodology
• Anticipated results
• Timeline
• Potential collaborations with other research groups or institutions
At the end of the presentation, the panel will have 15 minutes in which to ask any questions it
deems necessary.
A mark of “Pass” or “Fail” will be awarded. Candidates who are awarded a mark of “Fail” will
be given six months in which to submit a revised research plan that incorporates the suggestions
made by the examination panel. The revised plan will be evaluated by the academic committee
for the doctoral programme. If the candidate is again awarded a mark of “Fail”, he/she will be
required to withdraw from the doctoral programme in Computer Architecture.
In both cases, candidates must submit the supporting documentation stipulated in the Academic
regulations for doctoral studies at the UPC.
2.2 Evaluation of the research plan for subsequent 
years
The research plan for subsequent years will be evaluated by the academic committee for the
doctoral  programme  according  to  the  standard  procedure.  As  part  of  the  evaluation,  the
candidate must submit a preliminary report to the doctoral programme administrator within one
year of the previous evaluation. This report must provide updated information for each of the
sections in the initial research plan, indicated above. 
3.Requests for extension of doctoral studies
In accordance with the Academic regulations for doctoral studies at the UPC, the maximum
length of full-time doctoral programmes is three years from the time of admission. Candidates
may  request  an  extension  of  up  to  one  year,  which  must  be  authorised  by  the  academic
committee for the doctoral programme. Requests for an additional extension of one year may
also be submitted, but must be authorised by the rector of the UPC.
4.Preliminary reading and defence
The preliminary reading and defence of the doctoral thesis is an assessment procedure followed
by the Department to comply with the pre-assessment requirement established in the Academic
regulations  for  doctoral  studies  at  the  UPC.  Authorisation  for  the  preliminary  reading  and
defence  must  be  obtained  from  the  academic  committee  for  the  doctoral  programme,
represented for this purpose by the programme coordinator. The thesis supervisor must submit a
formal pre-assessment request by e-mail to the doctoral programme coordinator, at least 20 days
before the estimated date of the preliminary reading and defence. The request must include the
following details:
• Name of candidate
• Name of thesis supervisor
• Title of thesis
• Proposed members of the examination panel
• Proposed date and time
• Room reserved for the preliminary reading and defence
There are no specific conditions governing the affiliation of panel members, although examiners
should preferably be members of the teaching and research staff of the Department of Computer
Architecture or another UPC department. In addition, none of the panel members should be
co-authors of an article directly related to the thesis or with a potential bearing on its evaluation.
Once authorisation has been given by the programme coordinator, the candidate must provide 
copies of the following documents for each member of the examination panel. This can be done 
directly or by submitting three copies to the administration of the Department of Computer 
Architecture. 
• Thesis
• Thesis summary, of no more than 1,000 words
• List of published articles
The candidate must ensure that all of the pre-assessment documentation has been sent to the
members of the examination panel at least 15 days before the date of the preliminary reading
and defence. 
Once authorisation has been received from the programme coordinator, the administration of the
Department of Computer Architecture will generate the formal pre-assessment documentation 
and give official notice of the preliminary reading and defence.
The preliminary reading and defence is a public session in which the candidate is given 45
minutes  to  present  the  thesis  to  the  examination  panel.  The  examiners  may  then  ask  any
questions they deem necessary.
5.External reviewers
Once the pre-assessment has been successfully completed, the candidate may send copies of the
thesis to two external reviewers.
The reviewers will be chosen by the thesis supervisor and must not be directly involved in the
doctoral programme. The candidate and the thesis supervisor are responsible for ensuring that
copies of the thesis and the review template are sent to the external reviewers, together with full
instructions for the review process. The thesis supervisor must ensure that the original copies of
the reviewers’ reports are available on the date of the thesis defence.
Candidates who wish to receive the European Mention must ensure that the external reviewers’
reports are submitted on the headed paper of the issuing institution.
If either or of the external reviewers’ reports indicates that changes to the thesis are required, the
supervisor must provide a supplementary report confirming that the final thesis submitted for
deposit  will  incorporate  the  necessary  amendments  or  providing  clear  justification  for
overlooking the reviewer’s comments.
6.Selection of the examination panel
As  stipulated  in  the  Academic  regulations  for  doctoral  studies  governed  by  Royal  Decree
99/2011, the composition of the examination panel is subject to the following conditions:
• All examiners must be PhD holders and recognised experts in their fields. If they are
members of the UPC community,  they must have accredited research experience, as
established in chapter I.1 of the academic regulations.
As stated in the regulations, accredited research experience is defined in the manner outlined
below.
Lecturers  and  researchers  will  be  considered  to  have  the  necessary  research  capacity  and
experience if they meet any of the following requirements:
• Supervision of a doctoral thesis during the last five years.
• Direction of a current research area (approved during the last seven years).
• Researcher or principal  investigator of a project receiving competitive funding from
another public institution within the last five years.
7.Thesis deposit
The thesis deposit  is  the final  stage in the formal academic procedure leading to the thesis
defence. Candidates must allow for at least 40 calendar days between the thesis deposit and the
thesis defence. The administration of the Department of Computer Architecture complies fully
with the legal provisions on the length of the thesis deposit period and the public availability of
documentation during this period. As such, it will not accept any request that does not observe
the minimum period required by law. The thesis supervisor is responsible for ensuring that this
minimum period is observed.
The thesis deposit is an official academic act and is therefore governed by a formal procedure.
In order to proceed to the thesis deposit, the candidate and the thesis supervisor must submit the
following documentation:
• Acceptance of examination panel members (AM form).
• Proposal for the appointment of the examination panel (T form).
• Report on the quality of the thesis and authorisation by the academic committee for the 
programme for its submission (ADU form).
• Reports received from the two external reviewers (IE form).
• Request for thesis registration and deposit, signed by the candidate and the thesis 
supervisor.
• Two copies of the final version of the thesis, one of which should be bound and 
submitted together with the thesis assessment report or doctoral programme assessment 
report.
• Thesis summary, in Catalan or Spanish and in English, of no more than 4,000 characters
(thesis summary form). Signed originals of all documents are required. The UNESCO
codes for the thesis summary form can be found in the document [Cod. UNESCO  ‐
pdf].
• CD containing:
− the complete thesis (PDF);
− electronic copies (PDF and DOC/ODT) of the two thesis summaries, in Catalan or
Spanish and in English;
− electronic copies (PDF) of brief CVs (max. 200 words) for each of the proposed
examiners from outside the UPC, and any additional information requested (one file
per examiner).
• Authorisation by the thesis supervisor for the submission of the defence proposal (ADT
form).
• Doctoral student activity report (DAD), signed by the thesis supervisor.
• Two copies of the statement of commitment between the doctoral student and the thesis
supervisor (CDDT form), signed by the candidate and the thesis supervisor.
• TDX contract (TDX form), signed by the candidate.
• Request for the international doctorate certification, where appropriate.
The candidate must provide the doctoral programme administrator with the original copies of all
the above documents to be eligible to proceed to the thesis deposit (electronic copies of the two
external  reviewers’ reports may be submitted for the purposes of the thesis deposit,  but the
original copies must be made available to examiners on the day of the thesis defence).
The candidate must also provide the doctoral programme administrator with two copies of the
thesis document, to be archived (these copies are not returned to the candidate after the thesis
defence).
7.1 Acceptance of examination panel members
The thesis director is responsible for ensuring that the acceptance form is received from each of
the appointed examiners. As stated in the Academic regulations for doctoral studies at the UPC,
members of the examination panel cannot be co-authors of any article directly related to the
thesis and published by the candidate during the period of doctoral studies.
In  addition,  as  provided  for  in  the  regulations,  the  Department  of  Computer  Architecture
appoints examination panels composed of three members and two substitutes, as a result  of
which the majority of the panel should not be UPC staff.
7.2 Appointment of the examination panel
The candidate or thesis supervisor must send the doctoral programme coordinator the T form
listing the proposed members of the examination panel, which must include all of the required
information about each member.
Once this information has been verified, the coordinator signs the document and sends it to the
administration of the Department of Computer Architecture.
7.3 Request for the report on the quality of the thesis
To be eligible to receive the report on the quality of the thesis, candidates must have received
positive reports from the two external reviewers and have been awarded a mark of “Pass” for
the pre-assessment of the doctoral thesis. 
The candidate or thesis supervisor must send an e-mail to the doctoral programme coordinator
to  request  the  report.  Requests  are  processed  in  a  period  of  approximately  one  week.  The
following documents must be attached:
• Copy of the external reviewers’ reports (IE form).
• Signed declaration by the thesis supervisor confirming that none of the panel members
are co-authors of an article directly related to the thesis and published in conjunction
with the candidate.
• Signed declaration by the thesis supervisor to the effect that those doctors from the UPC
who  form  part  of  the  examination  panel  (if  any)  meet  the  legal  conditions  for
membership.
• Signed declaration by the thesis supervisor confirming that the candidate has received a
positive tutorial report for the preceding year.
• List of published work deriving from the thesis.
• List of research projects in which the candidate has participated.
• Funding received by the candidate, indicating the details of the corresponding contract
or grant.
• Research group in which the thesis has been carried out.
• Written confirmation from the thesis supervisor to the effect that the copy submitted for
deposit  incorporates  the necessary changes in  response to  observations  made in  the
external reviewers’ reports, if applicable. 
The coordinator will not issue the report on the quality of the thesis until all of the previous
steps have been completed.
7.4 Request for the international doctorate certification
Candidates  who  wish  to  request  the  international  doctorate  certification  must  complete  the
application form (form MI) and submit it together with the rest of the documentation required.
Candidates must submit: a letter of certification confirming that the candidate has completed a
research placement of at least three months at a research centre or university outside Spain,
signed by a designated representative and the thesis supervisor (the placement must have been
carried out  during the period of  the  doctoral  programme,  and the designated representative
cannot be a member of the examination panel); external reviewer reports from two PhD holders
based at  institutions outside Spain who are recognised experts  in the field in question;  and
authorisation to carry out the placement for the purposes of obtaining the international doctorate
certification, signed by the thesis supervisor.
8.Thesis defence
As stated above, the candidate is responsible for sending electronic or paper copies of the thesis
(without the thesis assessment report) to the three members of the examination panel (copies
may also be sent to the substitutes) allowing sufficient time for the thesis to be read (at least 20
days before the scheduled date of the thesis defence).
A complete description of the thesis defence procedure and the conditions that apply can be
found in the Academic regulations for doctoral studies at the UPC. 

