Location Systems for Ubiquitous Computing
Jeffrey Hightower and Gaetano Borriello
University of Washington, Computer Science and Engineering
Box 352350, Seattle, WA 98195
August 24, 2001
To serve us well, emerging mobile computing applications will need to know
the physical location of things so that they can record them and report them to
us: What lab bench was I standing by when I prepared these tissue samples?
How should our search-and-rescue team move to quickly locate all the avalanche
victims? Can I automatically display this stock devaluation chart on the large
screen I am standing next to?
Researchers are working to meet these and similar needs by developing sys-
tems and technologies that automatically locate people, equipment, and other
tangibles. Indeed, many systems over the years have addressed the problem
of automatic location-sensing. Because each approach solves a slightly differ-
ent problem or supports different applications, they vary in many parameters,
such as the physical phenomena used for location determination, the form fac-
tor of the sensing apparatus, power requirements, infrastructure versus portable
elements, and resolution in time and space.
To make sense of this domain, we have developed a taxonomy to help devel-
opers of location-aware applications better evaluate their options when choosing
a location-sensing system. The taxonomy may also aid researchers in identifying
opportunities for new location-sensing techniques.
1 Location System Properties
A broad set of issues arises when we discuss and classify location system im-
plementations. These issues are generally independent of the technologies or
techniques a system uses. Although certainly not all orthogonal, nor equally
applicable to every system, the classification axes we present do form a reason-
able approach to characterizing or evaluating location systems.
c©Copyright IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. However, permission to
reprint/republish this material for advertising or promotional purposes or for creating new
collective works for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or to reuse any copyrighted
component of this work in other works must be obtained from the IEEE.
1
The Global Positioning System is perhaps the most widely publicized location-
sensing system. GPS provides an excellent lateration framework for determin-
ing geographic positions. The worldwide satellite constellation has reliable and
ubiquitous coverage and, assuming a differential reference or use of the Wide
Area Augmentation System, allows receivers to compute their location to within
1 to 5 meters [11]. Aircraft, hikers, search-and-rescue teams, and rental cars all
currently use GPS. Given its celebrity, we use GPS as a running example to
introduce our classifiers.
1.1 Physical Position and Symbolic Location
A location system can provide two kinds of information: physical and symbolic.
GPS provides physical positions. For example, our building is situated at at
47◦39′17”N by 122◦18′23”W , at a 20.5-meter elevation. In contrast, symbolic
location encompasses abstract ideas of where something is: in the kitchen, in
Kalamazoo, next to a mailbox, on a train approaching Denver.
A system providing a physical position can usually be augmented to pro-
vide corresponding symbolic location information with additional information,
infrastructure, or both. For example, a laptop equipped with a GPS receiver
can access a separate database that contains the positions and geometric ser-
vice regions of other objects to provide applications with symbolic information
[6]. Linking real-time train positions to the reservation and ticketing database
can help locate a passenger on a train. Applications can also use the physical
position to determine a range of symbolic information. For example, one appli-
cation can use a single GPS physical position to find the closest printer, while
another may link it with calendar information to provide information about that
person’s current activity.
The distinction between physical position and symbolic location is more
pronounced with some technologies than others. GPS is clearly a physical-
positioning technology. Point-of-sale logs, bar code scanners, and systems that
monitor computer login activity are symbolic location technologies mostly based
on proximity to known objects. However, some systems such as Cricket can be
used in either mode, depending on their specific configuration.
The resolution of physical-positioning systems can have implications for the
definitiveness of the symbolic information they can be used to derive. For ex-
ample, knowing where a person is inside a building, to within 10 meters, may
be ineffective in placing that person in a specific room because of the position
of walls within that 10-meter range. Purely symbolic location systems typically
provide only very coarse-grained physical positions. Using them often requires
multiple readings or sensors to increase accuracy – such as using multiple over-
lapping proximity sensors to detect someone’s position within a room.
1.2 Absolute versus Relative
An absolute location system uses a shared reference grid for all located objects.
For example, all GPS receivers use latitude, longitude, and altitude – or their
2
equivalents, such as Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) coordinates – for
reporting location. Two GPS receivers placed at the same position will report
equivalent position readings, and 47◦39′17”N by 122◦18′23”W refers to the
same place regardless of GPS receiver.
In a relative system, each object can have its own frame of reference. For
example, a mountain rescue team searching for avalanche victims can use hand-
held computers to locate victims’ avalanche transceivers. Each rescuer’s device
reports the victims’ position relative to itself.
An absolute location can be transformed into a relative location – relative
to a second reference point, that is. However, a second absolute location is not
always available. In reverse, we can use triangulation to determine an absolute
position from multiple relative readings if we know the absolute position of the
reference points. But we often can’t know these positions if the reference points
are themselves mobile. Thus, the absolute versus relative distinction denotes
primarily what information is available and how the system uses it rather than
any innate capabilities.
1.3 Localized Location Computation
Some systems provide a location capability and insist that the object being
located actually computes its own position. This model ensures privacy by
mandating that no other entity may know where the located object is unless
the object specifically takes action to publish that information. For example,
orbiting GPS satellites have no knowledge about who uses the signals they trans-
mit. Online map servers such as Expedia [22] and old-fashioned road atlases
and print maps also fall into this category.
In contrast, some systems require the located object to periodically broad-
cast, respond with, or otherwise emit telemetry to allow the external infrastruc-
ture to locate it. The infrastructure can find objects in its purview without
directly involving the objects in the computation. Personal-badge-location sys-
tems fit into this category, as do bar codes and the radio frequency identification
tags that prevent merchandise theft, track shipments, and help identify livestock
in the field [13] [21]. Placing the burden on the infrastructure decreases the com-
putational and power demands on the objects being located, which makes many
more applications possible due to lower costs and smaller form factors.
The policy for manipulating location data need not be dictated by where
the computation is performed. For example, system-level access control can
provide privacy for a movement history in a personal-location system while still
allowing the infrastructure to perform the location computation. Doing so,
however, imposes a requirement of trust in the access control.
1.4 Accuracy and Precision
A location system should report locations accurately and consistently from mea-
surement to measurement. Some inexpensive GPS receivers can locate positions
3
to within 10 meters for approximately 95 percent of measurements. More expen-
sive differential units usually do much better, reaching 1- to 3- meter accuracies
99 percent of the time. These distances denote the accuracy, or grain size, of
the position information GPS can provide. The percentages denote precision,
or how often we can expect to get that accuracy.
Obviously, if we can live with less accuracy, we may be able to trade it for
increased precision. Thus, we really must place the two attributes in a common
framework for comparison. To arrive at a concise quantitative summary of accu-
racy and precision, we can assess the error distribution incurred when locating
objects, along with any relevant dependencies such as the necessary density of
infrastructural elements. For example, “Using five base stations per 300 square
meters of indoor floor space, location-sensing system X can accurately locate
objects within error margins defined by a Gaussian distribution centered at the
objects’ true locations and having a standard deviation of 2 meters.”
Sensor fusion seeks to improve accuracy and precision by integrating many
location or positioning systems to form hierarchical and overlapping levels of
resolution. Statistically merging error distributions is an effective way to assess
the combined effect of multiple sensors.
The ad hoc sensor networking and smart dust community [23] often addresses
the related issue of adaptive fidelity. A location system with this ability can
adjust its precision in response to dynamic situations such as partial failures or
directives to conserve battery power.
Often, we evaluate a location-sensing system’s accuracy to determine whether
it is suitable for a particular application. Motion-capture installations that sup-
port computer animation [10] feature centimeter-level spatial positioning and
precise temporal resolution, but most applications do not require this level of
accuracy. GPS tags might suffice for species biologists concerned about the po-
sition of a migrating whale pod to a precision of 1 square kilometer. A personal
location system for home or office applications might need enough accuracy to
answer the query, “Which room was I in around noon?” but not “Where, to
the nearest cubic centimeter, was my left thumb at 12:01:34 p.m.?”
1.5 Scale
A location-sensing system may be able to locate objects worldwide, within a
metropolitan area, throughout a campus, in a particular building, or within a
single room. Further, the number of objects the system can locate with a certain
amount of infrastructure or over a given time may be limited. For example, GPS
can serve an unlimited number of receivers worldwide using 24 satellites plus
three redundant backups. On the other hand, some electronic tag readers cannot
read any tag if more than one is within range.
To assess the scale of a location-sensing system, we consider its coverage
area per unit of infrastructure and the number of objects the system can locate
per unit of infrastructure per time interval. Time is an important consideration
because of the limited bandwidth available in sensing objects. For example,
a radio-frequency-based technology can only tolerate a maximum number of
4
communications before the channel becomes congested. Beyond this threshold,
either latency in determining the objects’ positions will increase or a loss in
accuracy will occur because the system calculates the objects’ positions less
frequently.
Systems can often expand to a larger scale by increasing the infrastructure.
For example, a tag system that locates objects in a single building can operate
on a campus by outfitting all campus buildings and outdoor areas with the
necessary sensor infrastructure. Hindrances to scalability in a location system
include not only the infrastructure cost but also middleware complexity – it may
prove difficult to manage the larger and more distributed databases required for
a campus-sized deployment.
1.6 Recognition
For applications that need to recognize or classify located objects to take a
specific action based on their location, an automatic identification mechanism
is needed. For example, a modern airport baggage handling system needs to
automatically route outbound and inbound luggage to the correct flight or claim
carousel. A proximity-location system consisting of tag scanners installed at key
locations along the automatic baggage conveyers makes recognition a simple
matter of printing the appropriate destination codes on the adhesive luggage
check stickers. In contrast, GPS satellites have no inherent mechanism for
recognizing individual receivers.
Systems with recognition capability may recognize only some feature types.
For example, cameras and vision systems can easily distinguish the color or
shape of an object but cannot automatically recognize individual people or a
particular apple drawn from a bushel basket.
A general technique for providing recognition capability assigns names or
globally unique IDs (GUID) to objects the system locates. Once a tag, badge,
or label on the object reveals its GUID, the infrastructure can access an external
database to look up the name, type, or other semantic information about the
object. It can also combine the GUID with other contextual information so
it can interpret the same object differently under varying circumstances. For
example, a person can retrieve the descriptions of objects in a museum in a
specified language. The infrastructure can also reverse the GUID model to emit
IDs such as URLs that mobile objects can recognize and use [4].
1.7 Cost
We can assess the cost of a location-sensing system in several ways. Time
costs include factors such as the installation process’s length and the system’s
administration needs. Space costs involve the amount of installed infrastructure
and the hardware’s size and form factor.
Capital costs include factors such as the price per mobile unit or infrastruc-
ture element and the salaries of support personnel. For example, GPS receivers
need an antenna of sufficient size for adequate satellite reception and may need a
5
second antenna to receive the land-based differential signal. Support personnel
at the US Air Force GPS command station must regularly monitor the status
of the GPS satellites. Further, building and launching the satellites required a
major capital investment by the US government.
A simple civilian GPS receiver costs around $100 and represents the incre-
mental cost of making a new object positionable independently of its global
location. A system that uses infrared beacons for broad-casting room IDs re-
quires a beacon for every room in which users want the system to find them. In
this case, both the infrastructure and the object the system locates contribute
to the incremental cost.
1.8 Limitations
Some systems will not function in certain environments. One difficulty with
GPS is that receivers usually cannot detect the satellites’ transmissions indoors.
This limitation has implications for the kind of applications we can build using
GPS. For example, because most wired phones are located indoors, even if its
accuracy and precision were high enough to make it conceivable, GPS does not
provide adequate support for an application that routes phone calls to the land-
line phone nearest the intended recipient. A possible solution that maintains
GPS interaction yet works indoors uses a system of GPS repeaters mounted at
the edges of buildings to rebroadcast the signals inside.
Some tagging systems can read tags properly only when a single tag is
present. In some cases, colocated systems that use the same operating fre-
quency experience interference. In general, we assess functional limitations by
considering the characteristics of the underlying technologies that implement
the location system.
2 A Survey of Location Systems
We can use our taxonomy to survey some of the research and commercial loca-
tion technologies that are representative of the location-sensing field. Tables 1
and 2 summarize the properties of these technologies. In Table 1, the open cir-
cles indicate that the systems can be classified as either absolute or relative, and
the checkmarks indicate that localized location computation (LLC) or recogni-
tion applies to the system. Physical-symbolic and absolute-relative are paired
alternatives, and a system is usually one or the other in each category.
2.1 Active Badge
The first and arguably archetypal indoor badge sensing system, the Active
Badge location system, which was developed at Olivetti Research Laboratory,
now AT&T Cambridge [28], consists of a cellular proximity system that uses
diffuse infrared technology. Each person the system can locate wears a small
infrared badge like that shown in Figure 1. The badge emits a globally unique
6
Technology Properties
Name Technique Phys Symb Abs Rel LLC Recognition
GPS Radio time-of-flight
lateration
• •
√
Active Badges Diffuse infrared cel-
lular proximity
• •
√
Active Bats Ultrasound time-
of-flight lateration
• •
√
MotionStar Scene analysis, lat-
eration
• •
√
VHF Omnidi-
rectional Rang-
ing (VOR)
Angulation • •
√
Cricket Proximity, latera-
tion
• ◦ ◦
√
MSR RADAR 802.11 RF scene
analysis & triangu-
lation
• •
√
PinPoint 3D-iD RF lateration • •
√
Avalanche
Transceivers
Radio signal
strength proximity
• •
Easy Living Vision, triangula-
tion
• •
√
Smart Floor Physical contact
proximity
• •
√
Automatic ID
Systems
Proximity • ◦ ◦
√
Wireless An-
drew
802.11 cellular
proximity
• •
√
E911 Triangulation • •
√
SpotON Ad hoc lateration • •
√
Table 1: Location system properties.
7
Technology Classification Criteria
Name Accu & Prec Scale Cost Limitations
GPS 1-5 meters (95-
99%)
24 satellites
worldwide
Expensive infras-
tructure, $100 re-
ceivers
Not indoors
Active Badges Room size 1 base per room,
badge per base
per 10 sec
Administration
costs, cheap tags
& bases
Sunlight &
fluorescent in-
terference with
infrared
Active Bats 9cm (95%) 1 base per 10m2,
25 computations
per room per sec
Administration
costs, cheap tags
& sensors
Required ceiling
sensor grids
MotionStar 1mm, 1ms, 0.1◦
(nearly 100%)
Controller per
scene, 108 sensors
per scene
Controlled
scenes, expensive
hardware
Control unit
tether, precise
installation
VHF Omnidi-
rectional Rang-
ing (VOR)
1◦ radial
(≈100%)
Several trans-
mitters per
metropolitan
area
Expensive in-
frastructure,
inexpensive
aircraft receivers
30-140 nautical
miles line of sight
Cricket 4x4 ft. regions
(≈100%)
≈ 1 beacon per
16 sq. ft.
$10 beacons & re-
ceivers
No central man-
agement, receiver
computation
MSR RADAR 3-4.3m (50%) 3 bases per floor 802.11 network
installation,
≈$100 wireless
NICs
Wireless NICs re-
quired
PinPoint 3D-iD 1-3m Several bases per
building
Infrastructure in-
stallation, expen-
sive hardware
Proprietary,
802.11 interfer-
ence
Avalanche
Transceivers
Variable, 60-80m
range
1 transceiver per
person
≈$200 per
transceiver
Short radio
range, unwanted
signal attenua-
tion
Easy Living Variable 3 cameras per
small room
Processing
power, installed
cameras
Ubiquitous pub-
lic cameras
Smart Floor Spacing of pres-
sure sensors
(100%)
Complete sensor
grid per floor
Installation of
sensor grid, cre-
ation of footfall
training dataset
Recognition may
not scale to large
populations
Automatic ID
Systems
Range of sens-
ing phenomenon
(RFID typically ¡
1m)
Sensor per loca-
tion
Installation, vari-
able hardware
costs
Must known sen-
sor locations
Wireless An-
drew
802.11 cell size
(≈100m indoor,
1km free space)
Many bases per
campus
802.11 deploy-
ment, ≈$100
wireless NICs
Wireless NICs re-
quired, RF cell
geometries
E911 150-300m (95%) Density of cellu-
lar infrastructure
Upgrading phone
hardware or cell
infrastructure
Only where cell
coverage exists
SpotON Depends on clus-
ter size
Cluster at least 2
tags
$30 per tag, no
infrastructure
Attenuation less
accurate than
time-of-flight
Table 2: Location system classification criteria.
8
Figure 1: Olivetti Active Badge (right) and a base station (left) used in the
system’s infrastructure.
identifier every 10 seconds or on demand. A central server collects this data
from fixed infrared sensors around the building, aggregates it, and provides an
application programming interface for using the data.
The Active Badge system provides absolute location information. A badge’s
location is symbolic, representing, for example, the room – or other infrared
constraining volume – in which the badge is located. The Cambridge group also
designed one of the first large software architectures for handling this type of
symbolic location data [18].
As with any diffuse infrared system, Active Badges have difficulty in loca-
tions with fluorescent lighting or direct sunlight because of the spurious infrared
emissions these light sources generate. Diffuse infrared has an effective range
of several meters, which limits cell sizes to small- or medium-sized rooms. In
larger rooms, the system can use multiple infrared beacons.
2.2 Active Bat
In more recent work, AT&T researchers have developed the Active Bat location
system, which uses an ultrasound time-of-flight lateration technique to provide
more accurate physical positioning than Active Badges [19]. Users and objects
carry Active Bat tags shown in Figure 2. In response to a request the con-
troller sends via short-range radio, a Bat emits an ultrasonic pulse to a grid
of ceiling-mounted receivers. At the same time the controller sends the radio
frequency request packet, it also sends a synchronized reset signal to the ceiling
sensors using a wired serial network. Each ceiling sensor measures the time in-
terval from reset to ultrasonic pulse arrival and computes its distance from the
Bat. The local controller then forwards the distance measurements to a cen-
tral controller, which performs the lateration computation. Statistical pruning
9
Figure 2: Mobile “Bat” of the At&T Cambridge Active Bat location system.
Image courtesy of AT&T Laboratories Cambridge.
eliminates erroneous sensor measurements caused by a ceiling sensor hearing
a reflected ultrasound pulse instead of one that traveled along the direct path
from the Bat to the sensor.
The system, as reported in 1999, can locate Bats to within 9cm of their true
position for 95 percent of the measurements, and work to improve the accuracy
even further is in progress. It can also compute orientation information given
predefined knowledge about the placement of Bats on the rigid form of an object
and allowing for the ease with which ultrasound is obstructed. Each Bat has a
GUID for addressing and recognition.
Using ultrasound time of flight this way requires a large fixed-sensor infras-
tructure throughout the ceiling and is rather sensitive to the precise placement of
these sensors. Thus, scalability, ease of deployment, and cost are disadvantages
of this approach.
2.3 Cricket
Complementing the Active Bat system, the Cricket Location Support System
uses ultrasound emitters to create the infrastructure and embeds receivers in the
object being located [25]. This approach forces the mobile objects to perform all
their own triangulation computations. Cricket uses the radio frequency signal
not only for synchronization of the time measurement, but also to delineate the
time region during which the receiver should consider the sounds it receives. The
system can identify any ultrasound it hears after the end of the radio frequency
packet as a reflection and ignore it. A randomized algorithm allows multiple
uncoordinated beacons to coexist in the same space. Each beacon also transmits
a string of data that describes the semantics of the areas it delineates using the
10
short-range radio.
Like the Active Bat system, Cricket uses ultrasonic time-of-flight data and a
radio frequency control signal, but this system does not require a grid of ceiling
sensors with fixed locations because its mobile receivers perform the timing and
computation functions. Cricket, in its currently implemented form, is much
less precise than Active Bat in that it can accurately delineate 4x4 square-foot
regions within a room, while Active Bat is accurate to 9cm. However, the
fundamental limit of range-estimation accuracy used in Cricket should be no
different than Active Bat, and future implementations may compete with each
other on accuracy.
Cricket implements both the lateration and proximity techniques. Receiv-
ing multiple beacons lets receivers triangulate their position. Receiving only
one beacon still provides useful proximity information when combined with the
semantic string the beacon transmits on the radio.
Cricket’s advantages include privacy and decentralized scalability, while its
disadvantages include a lack of centralized management or monitoring and the
computational burden – and consequently power burden – that timing and pro-
cessing both the ultrasound pulses and RF data place on the mobile receivers.
2.4 RADAR
A Microsoft Research group has developed RADAR, a building-wide tracking
system based on the IEEE 802.11 WaveLAN wireless networking technology [3].
RADAR measures, at the base station, the signal strength and signal-to-noise
ratio of signals that wireless devices send, then it uses this data to compute the
2D position within a building. Microsoft has developed two RADAR implemen-
tations: one using scene analysis and the other using lateration.
The RADAR approach offers two advantages: It requires only a few base
stations, and it uses the same infrastructure that provides the building’s general-
purpose wireless networking. Likewise, RADAR suffers two disadvantages.
First, the object it is tracking must support a wireless LAN, which may be im-
practical on small or power-constrained devices. Second, generalizing RADAR
to multifloored buildings or three dimensions presents a nontrivial problem.
RADAR’s scene-analysis implementation can place objects to within about
3 meters of their actual position with 50 percent probability, while the signal-
strength lateration implementation has 4.3-meter accuracy at the same prob-
ability level. Although the scene-analysis version provides greater accuracy,
significant changes in the environment, such as moving metal file cabinets or
large groups of people congregating in rooms or hallways, may necessitate re-
constructing the predefined signal-strength database or creating an entirely new
database.
Several commercial companies such as WhereNet [14] and Pinpoint [12] sell
wireless asset-tracking packages, which are similar in form to RADAR. Pin-
point’s 3D-iD performs indoor position tracking using proprietary base station
and tag hardware to measure radio time of flight. Pinpoint’s system achieves 1-
11
Figure 3: MotionStar DC magnetic tracker, a precision system used in motion
capture for computer animation, tracks the position and orientation of up to 108
sensor points on an object or scene. Key components include (left and right)
the magnetic pulse transmitting antennas and (center) the receiving antennas
and controller. Image courtesy of Ascension Technology Corporation.
to 3-meter accuracy and, by virtue of being a commercial product, offers easier
deployment and administration than many research systems.
The 3D-iD system suffers the disadvantage that each antenna has a narrow
cone of influence, which can make ubiquitous deployment prohibitively expen-
sive. Thus, 3D-iD best suits large indoor space settings such as hospitals or
warehouses. It has difficulty interoperating with the 802.11 wireless networking
infrastructure because of radio spectrum collision in the unregulated Industrial,
Scientific, and Medical (ISM) band.
2.5 MotionStar Magnetic Tracker
Electromagnetic sensing offers a classic position-tracking method [26]. The large
body of research and products that support virtual reality and motion capture
for computer animation often offer modern incarnations of this technology. For
example, Ascension offers a variety of motion-capture solutions, including Flock
of Birds and, shown in Figure 3, the MotionStar DC magnetic tracker [2]. These
tracking systems generate axial DC magnetic-field pulses from a transmitting
antenna in a fixed location. The system computes the position and orientation
of the receiving antennas by measuring the response in three orthogonal axes
to the transmitted field pulse, combined with the constant effect of the earth’s
magnetic field.
Tracking systems such as MotionStar sense precise physical positions relative
to the magnetic transmitting antenna. These systems offer the advantage of very
high precision and accuracy, on the order of less than 1mm spatial resolution,
12
Figure 4: Digiclops color 3D camera, made by Point Grey Research and used by
the Microsoft Research Easy Living group to provide stereo-vision positioning
in a home environment. Image courtesy of Point Grey Research Inc.
1ms time resolution, and 0.1◦ orientation capability. Disadvantages include
steep implementation costs and the need to tether the tracked object to a control
unit. Further, the sensors must remain within 1 to 3 meters of the transmitter,
and accuracy degrades with the presence of metallic objects in the environment.
Many other technologies have been used in virtual environments or in sup-
port of computer animation. A CDMA radio ranging approach has been sug-
gested [5], and many companies sell optical, infrared, and mechanical motion-
capture systems. Like MotionStar, these systems are not designed to be scalable
for use in large, location-aware applications. Rather, they capture position in
one precisely controlled environment.
2.6 Easy Living
Several groups have explored using computer vision technology to figure out
where things are. Microsoft Research’s Easy Living provides one example of
this approach. Easy Living uses the Digiclops real-time 3D cameras shown in
Figure 4 to provide stereo-vision positioning capability in a home environment
[27]. Although Easy Living uses high-performance cameras, vision systems typ-
ically use substantial amounts of processing power to analyze frames captured
with comparatively low-complexity hardware.
State-of-the-art integrated systems [15] demonstrate that multimodal pro-
13
cessing – silhouette, skin color, and face pattern – can significantly enhance
accuracy. Vision location systems must, however, constantly struggle to main-
tain analysis accuracy as scene complexity increases and more occlusive motion
occurs. The dependence on infrastructural processing power, along with public
wariness of ubiquitous cameras, can limit the scalability or suitability of vision
location systems in many applications.
2.7 Smart Floor
In Georgia Tech’s Smart Floor proximity location system [24], embedded pres-
sure sensors capture footfalls, and the system uses the data for position track-
ing and pedestrian recognition. This unobtrusive direct physical contact system
does not require people to carry a device or wear a tag. However, the system has
the disadvantages of poor scalability and high incremental cost because the floor
of each building in which Smart Floor is deployed must be physically altered to
install the pressure sensor grids.
2.8 E911
The US Federal Communications Commission’s E911 telecommunication initia-
tives require that wireless phone providers develop a way to locate any phone
that makes a 911 emergency call [9]. E911 is not a specific location-sensing
system, but we include it because the initiatives have spawned many companies
that are developing a variety of location systems to determine a cellular phone’s
location.
Location systems developed to comply with the E911 initiatives will also
support new consumer services. For example, a wireless telephone can use this
technology to find the nearest gas station, post office, movie theater, bus, or
automated teller machine. Data from many cellular users can be aggregated to
identify areas of traffic congestion. Many business speculators tout this model
of mobile consumerism, or mCommerce, as being the “next big thing.”
To comply with E911, vendors are exploring several RF techniques, includ-
ing antenna proximity, angulation using phased antenna arrays, lateration via
signal attenuation and time of flight, as well as GPS-enabled handsets that
transmit their computed location to the cellular system [1]. To meet the FCC
requirement, positioning must be accurate to within 150 meters for 95 percent
of calls with receiver-based handset solutions such as GPS, or to within 300
meters with network-transmitter-based approaches.
3 Research Directions
Location sensing is a mature enough field to define a space within a taxon-
omy that is generally populated by existing systems, as Tables 1 and 2 have
shown. As such, future work should generally focus on lowering cost, reduc-
ing the amount of infrastructure, improving scalability, and creating systems
14
that are more flexible within the taxonomy. This does not imply, however, that
location-sensing is a solved problem or that further advancements are simply a
matter of rote technology improvement. Rather, location-sensing is now enter-
ing an exciting phase in which cross-pollination with ideas from other computer
science and engineering disciplines motivates future research.
3.1 Sensor fusion
Defined as the use of multiple technologies or location systems simultaneously
to form hierarchical and overlapping levels of sensing, sensor fusion can provide
aggregate properties unavailable when using location systems individually.
For example, integrating several systems with different error distributions
may increase accuracy and precision beyond what is possible using an individual
system. The more independent the techniques, the more effectively they can be
combined.
An example of current sensor fusion research, multisensor collaborative robot
localization and map building presents a problem usually divided into two sub-
problems:
• tracking location as the environment changes or the robot moves, and
• determining robot location from a zero-knowledge start state.
Autonomous robots, such as those shown in Figure 5, employ a myriad of
on-board sensors including ultrasound and laser range finders, inertial trackers,
and cameras. The robots use Markov and Bayesian statistical techniques and
multi-robot collaboration to accomplish sensor fusion [17]. These techniques
provide important starting points for combining location systems for ubiquitous
computing.
3.2 Ad Hoc Location Sensing
This approach to locating objects without drawing on the infrastructure or
central control borrows ideas from the ad hoc networking research community.
In a purely ad hoc location-sensing system, all of the entities become mobile
objects with the same sensors and capabilities. To estimate their locations,
objects cooperate with other nearby objects by sharing sensor data to factor out
overall measurement error. In this way, a cluster of ad hoc objects converges
to an accurate estimate of all nearby objects’ positions. Objects in the cluster
are located relative to one another or absolutely if some objects in the cluster
occupy known locations.
The techniques for building ad hoc systems include triangulation, scene anal-
ysis, or proximity. The work of Doherty et al. [16] and Bulusu et al. [7] explores
ad hoc proximity systems that consider variants of the following question: Given
a set S of tiny sensor devices and a proximity model of radio connectivity, such
as a sphere or circle with a fixed radius, if we know that s0 . . . sn, si ⊂ S are
15
Figure 5: Robots have many on-board sensors for use in localization, multi-robot
collaboration, and zero-knowledge map building.
subsets of sensors in proximity to one another, how accurately can we infer the
relative location of all sensors in set S?
Doherty et al. present an algorithmic approach to this problem as well as a
framework for describing error bounds on the computed locations. Bulusu et
al. extend this basic connectivity notion by adding an ideal theoretical model of
outdoor radio behavior and a regular grid of reference nodes at known locations.
The SpotON system implements ad hoc lateration with low-cost tags. Spo-
tON tags use radio signal attenuation to estimate intertag distance [20]. They
exploit the density of tags and correlation of multiple measurements to improve
both accuracy and precision. Figure 6 shows a prototype SpotON tag.
Sensing object locations with no fixed infrastructure represents a highly scal-
able and low-cost approach. In the future, infrastructural systems could incor-
porate ad hoc concepts to increase accuracy or reduce cost. For example, it
might be possible for a system like Active Bat to use a sparser ceiling-mounted
ultrasound receiver grid if Bats could also accurately measure their distance
from other Bats and share this information with the infrastructure.
3.3 Location-Sensing-System Accuracy: A Challenge
Comparing the accuracy and precision of different location-sensing systems can
be an arduous task because many system descriptions lack a concise summary
of these parameters. We therefore suggest that future quantitative evaluations
of location-sensing systems include the error distribution, summarizing the sys-
tem’s accuracy and precision and any relevant dependencies such as the density
of infrastructural elements. For example, “Using five base stations per 300
16
Figure 6: Prototype SpotON radio tag. These tags use radio signal attenuation
to perform ad hoc lateration. Ad hoc clusters of tags cooperate to factor out
measurement errors for all tag positions.
square meters of indoor floor space, location-sensing system X can accurately
locate objects within error margins defined by a Gaussian distribution centered
at the objects’ true location and a standard deviation of 2 meters.” We strongly
encourage the location-sensing research and development community to inves-
tigate how to best obtain and represent such error distributions.
In addition to its comparison value, researchers could use a location-sensing
system’s accurately described error distribution as partial input for simulating
a system – even a hypothetical one. Prototyping an application with a sim-
ulator avoids the cost of purchasing, deploying, and configuring a hardware
infrastructure when the goal is simply to evaluate the suitability of a certain
location-sensing system. Preliminary work on this idea has begun. For example,
Bylund and Espinoza have built a simulator for a campus-sized position-sensing
system that uses a Quake III gaming arena [8].
4 Conclusion
Researchers can apply our taxonomy to evaluate the characteristics of the loca-
tion system a particular application needs, or they can use it to help determine
the suitability of an existing location system for that application. With de-
creasing costs of silicon and wireless connectivity, location systems will become
increasingly common. Increased attention and effort will foster improvements in
various aspects of the design space. We offer our approach to comparing these
systems to help researchers make better choices for the location systems they
use in ubiquitous applications.
17
5 Acknowledgments
The authors thank Trevor Pering from Intel Research and Ken Yasuhara, Neil
Spring, and Vibha Sazawal from the University of Washington for their editorial
feedback on this article. We also thank Dieter Fox and Larry Arnstein at UW
for providing valuable insights that helped clarify our presentation.
References
[1] Airbiquity. Website, 2001. http://www.airbiquity.com/.
[2] Ascension Technology Corporation, PO Box 527, Burlington, VT 05402.
Technical Description of DC Magnetic Trackers, 2001.
[3] Paramvir Bahl and Venkata Padmanabhan. RADAR: An in-building RF-
based user location and tracking system. In Proceedings of IEEE INFO-
COM, volume 2, pages 775–784, March 2000.
[4] John Barton and Tim Kindberg. The cooltown user experience. Technical
Report 2001-22, HP Laboratories, Palo Alto, CA, February 2001.
[5] Steven R. Bible, Michael Zyda, and Don Brutzman. Using spread-spectrum
ranging techniques for position tracking in a virtual environment. In Second
IEEE Workshop on Networked Realities, Boston, MA, October 1995.
[6] Barry Brumitt, John Krumm, B. Meyers, and S. Shafer. Ubiquitous com-
puting and the role of geometry. In Special Issue on Smart Spaces and
Environments, volume 7-5, pages 41–43. IEEE Personal Communications,
October 2000.
[7] Nirupama Bulusu, John Heidemann, and Deborah Estrin. GPS-less low
cost outdoor localization for very small devices. IEEE Personal Commu-
nications, 7(5):28–34, October 2000. Special Issue on Smart Spaces and
Environments.
[8] Markus Bylund and Fredrik Espinoza. Using quake III arena to simulate
sensors and actuators when evaluating and testing mobile services. In CHI
2001 Extended Abstracts, pages 241–242. ACM, March-April 2001. Short
Talk.
[9] Federal Communications Commission. Fcc wireless 911 requirements fact
sheet, January 2001. http://www.fcc.gov/e911/.
[10] Ascension Technology Corporation. Website, 2001. http://www.ascension-
tech.com/.
[11] Garmin Corporation. About GPS. Website, 2001.
http://www.garmin.com/aboutGPS/.
18
[12] PinPoint Corporation. Website, 2001. http://www.pinpointco.com/.
[13] Sensormatic Electronics Corporation. Website, 2001.
http://www.sensormatic.com/.
[14] WhereNet Corporation. Website, 2001. http://www.widata.com/.
[15] T. Darrell, G. Gordon, M. Harville, and J. Woodfill. Integrated person
tracking using stereo, color, and pattern detection. In Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 601–608. IEEE Computer So-
ciety, June 1998.
[16] Lance Doherty, Kristofer S. J. Pister, and Laurent El Ghaoui. Convex
position estimation in wireless sensor networks. In Proceedings of IEEE
Infocom 2001, volume 3, pages 1655–1663. IEEE, IEEE Computer Society
Press, April 2001.
[17] Dieter Fox, Wolfram Burgard, Hannes Kruppa, and Sebastian Thrun.
A probabilistic approach to collaborative multi-robot localization. Au-
tonomous Robots, 8(3):325–244, June 2000.
[18] Andy Harter and Andy Hopper. A distributed location system for the
active office. In IEEE Network, pages 62–70. IEEE Computer Society Press,
January/February 1994.
[19] Andy Harter, Andy Hopper, Pete Steggles, Any Ward, and Paul Webster.
The anatomy of a context-aware application. In Proceedings of the 5th
Annual ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking (Mobicom 1999), pages 59–68, Seattle, WA, August 1999. ACM
Press.
[20] Jeffrey Hightower, Roy Want, and Gaetano Borriello. SpotON: An indoor
3d location sensing technology based on RF signal strength. UW-CSE
00-02-02, University of Washington, Department of Computer Science and
Engineering, Seattle, WA, February 2000.
[21] Axcess Incorporated. Website, 2001. http://www.axsi.com/.
[22] Expedia Maps. Website, 2001. http://maps.expedia.com/.
[23] DARPA Information Technology Office. Sensor information technology.
Website, 2001. www.darpa.mil/ito/research/sensit/.
[24] Robert J. Orr and Gregory D. Abowd. The smart floor: A mechanism
for natural user identification and tracking. In Proceedings of the 2000
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2000), The
Hague, Netherlands, April 2000. ACM.
[25] Nissanka B. Priyantha, Anit Chakraborty, and Hari Balakrishnan. The
cricket location-support system. In Proceedings of MOBICOM 2000, pages
32–43, Boston, MA, August 2000. ACM, ACM Press.
19
[26] F. Raab, E. Blood, T. Steiner, and H. Jones. Magnetic position and ori-
entation tracking system. IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic
Systems, 15(5):709–717, September 1979.
[27] Microsoft Research. Easy living. Website, 2001.
http://www.research.microsoft.com/easyliving/.
[28] Roy Want, Andy Hopper, Veronica Falcao, and Jon Gibbons. The ac-
tive badge location system. ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
10(1):91–102, January 1992.
20

