 
www.ijecs.in 
International Journal Of Engineering And Computer Science ISSN:2319-7242 
Volume 3 Issue 3 March, 2014 Page No. 4057-4061 
 
 
G.Gayathri, IJECS Volume 3. Issue 3 March, 2014 Page No.4057-4061 Page 4057 
SMART WALKING STICK FOR VISUALLY 
IMPAIRED 
G.Gayathri
#1
, M.Vishnupriya
#2
, R.Nandhini
#3
, Ms.M.Banupriya
#4
 
1, 2, 3 
Department Of ECE, SNS College of Engineering, Coimbatore - 641107 
                                                       
4 
Assistant Professor, Dept of ECE, SNS College of Engineering, Coimbatore - 107 
Email ID: gayuganesh777@gmail.com, tovinu93@gmail.com, nandhini27.psg@gmail.com, 
banupriya.ece.snsce@gmail.com 
  
Abstract— In order to help the visually challenged people, a study that helps those people to walk more confidently is proposed. 
The study hypothesizes a smart walking stick that alerts visually-impaired people over obstacles, pit and water in front could help 
them in walking with less accident. It outlines a better navigational tool for the visually impaired. It consists of a simple walking 
stick equipped with sensors to give information about the environment. GPS technology is integrated with pre-programmed 
locations to determine the optimal route to be taken. The user can choose the location from the set of destinations stored in the 
memory and will lead in the correct direction of the stick. In this system, ultrasonic sensor, pit sensor, water sensor, GPS receiver, 
level converter, driver, vibrator, voice synthesizer, keypad, speaker or headphone, PIC controller and battery are used. The overall 
aim of the device is to provide a convenient and safe method for the blind to overcome their difficulties in daily life. 
 
Index Terms— Ultrasonic sensor, Pit sensor, global positioning 
system (GPS) and PIC. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
It is based on the use of new technologies to improve 
visually impaired person's mobility. Our research focuses on 
obstacle detection, pit detection, water detection and finding 
location in order to reduce navigation difficulties for visually 
impaired people. 
Moving through an unknown environment becomes a real 
challenge when we can’t rely on our own eyes. Since dynamic 
obstacles usually produce noise while moving, blind people 
develop their sense of hearing to localize them. A visionless 
person commonly uses a white cane or walking cane for 
navigation. The walking cane is a simple and purely 
mechanical device to detect static obstacles on the ground, 
uneven surfaces, holes and steps through simple tactile-force 
feedback. This device is light, portable, but its range is limited 
to its own size and is not usable for dynamic components. 
Another option that provides the best travel aid for the blind is 
the guide dogs. Based on the symbiosis between the blind 
owner and his dog, the training and the relationship to the 
animal are the keys to success. The dog is able to detect and 
analyze complex situations: cross walks, stairs, potential 
danger, know paths and more. Most of the information is 
passed through tactile feedback by the handle fixed on the 
animal. The user is able to feel the attitude of his dog, analyze 
the situation and also give him appropriate orders. But guide 
dogs are still far from being affordable, around the price of a 
nice car, and their average working time is limited, an average 
of 7 years. 
This system presents a concept to provide a smart electronic 
aid for blind people. The system is intended to provide overall 
measures artificial vision and object detection, real time 
assistance via global positioning system (GPS). The aim of the 
overall system is to provide a low cost and efficient navigation 
aid for blind which gives a sense of artificial vision by 
providing information about the environmental scenario of 
objects around them. 
In this system embedded system plays a major role. In this 
system we are using the Ultrasonic sensor, Pit sensor, Water 
sensor, GPS receiver, level convertor, Driver, Vibrator, Voice 
synthesizer, Keypad, speaker or headphone, Embedded system 
and Battery. 
Ultrasonic sensors works on a principle similar to radar or 
sonar which evaluates attributes of a target by interpreting the 
echoes from radio or sound waves respectively. Ultrasonic 
sensors generate high frequency sound waves and evaluate the 
echo which is received back by the sensor. Sensors calculate 
the time interval between sending the signal and receiving the 
echo to determine the distance to an object. That signal is send 
to the embedded systems. 
Pit sensor is used to analysis any dent or pit present in the 
path and this signal is also given to the embedded system and 
water sensor is used to sense any water present in the path. 
And this signal is also given to the embedded system. 
GPS receiver is used to track the position of the human and 
given to the level converter; the level converter is used to 
G.Gayathri, IJECS Volume 3. Issue 3 March, 2014 Page No.4057-4061 Page 4058 
change the logic of the signal from the GPS receiver which is 
acceptable by the embedded system. 
By using the keypad we can set the position of the 
destination and the voice synthesizer and speaker is used to 
produce the voice if the human goes out of the desired path.  
Battery present in the system is used to give power to all 
the units present in the system. 
II. EXISTING SYSTEM 
This section describes appropriate related works on the 
development of smart canes intended for visually-impaired 
people.  
According to, technology can help in reducing many barriers 
that people with disabilities face. These kinds of technologies 
are referred to as assistive technology (AT). There are many 
types of disabilities, including physical disabilities, hearing-
impaired, and visually-impaired. AT has been utilized in 
assisting them. However, developing an AT is expensive, 
making their selling price high.  
According to Mazo and Rodriguez  the blind Cane is one of 
the assisting tools for the visually-impaired and it is really 
important. According to Herman , one of the main problems of 
the visually-impaired, is that most of these people have lost 
their physical integrity. Also, they do not have confidence in 
themselves. This statement has been proven by Bouvrie, in 
which an experiment name ―Project Prakash‖ has been carried 
out. It was intended at testing the visually-impaired to utilize 
their brain to identify set of objects. According to Chang and 
Song , this can also be applied to different situation. When the 
visually-impaired walk into a new environment, they will find 
it difficult to memorize the locations of the object or obstacles. 
These examples demonstrate the difficulties of visually-
impaired people.  
The Guide Cane is designed to help the visually-impaired 
users navigate safely and quickly among obstacles and other 
hazards. Guide Cane is used like the widely used white cane, 
where the user holds the Guide Cane in front of the user while 
walking. The Guide Cane is considerably heavier than the 
white cane, because it uses a servo motor. The wheels are 
equipped with encoders to determine the relative motion. The 
servo motor, controlled by the built-in computer, can steer the 
wheels left and right relative to the cane. To detect obstacles, 
the Guide Cane is equipped with ten ultrasonic sensors. A mini 
joystick located at the handle allows the user to specify a 
desired direction of motion. Guide Cane is far heavier than the 
ordinary white cane and also it is hard to keep because it 
cannot be folded.  
Smart Cane is one invention which was originally the 
creation of a common blind cane but it is equipped with a 
sensor system. This invention resembles Guide Cane where 
this invention has a number of ultrasonic sensors and servo 
motors. This invention is designed with the aim at helping the 
blind in navigating. Ultrasonic sensors need to detect and 
avoid obstacles or objects located in front of the user. 
Meanwhile the fuzzy controller is required to determine the 
instructions that will be executed for example to turn right, left 
or stop. Like Guide Cane, this invention also has a control 
button on the handle, and the button has four different 
directions. This invention has the same weaknesses as the 
Guide Cane where there will be a problem to save space or to 
place the smart cane. Besides that, cost is also a weakness in 
this project as it uses ultrasonic sensors and a number of servo 
motors. If the cost is too high, users are not able to afford for it 
because the average income of the visually-impaired people is 
relatively small.  
Smart Cane has been designed by students from Central 
Michigan University where this invention uses Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID). RFID is used to detect 
objects or obstacles in front of the user and detects the RFID 
tag that has been placed in several areas to navigate the users. 
This invention is just like a normal stick but is equipped with a 
bag, worn by the user. The bag supplies electricity power to 
the invention and informs the user through speakers inside the 
bag. For users who do not have the ability to hear, there are 
special gloves that will vibrate at every finger, in which 
different vibrations in each finger have different meanings. 
However, this invention has several weaknesses and is only 
suitable for small areas. This is because it only detects the area 
with RFID tag otherwise this invention only works as a regular 
blind cane. In addition, this invention requires a high cost if it 
is used in the external environment because the larger area that 
need to be tagged, the higher cost is needed.  
Mechatronic Blind Stick is a guiding system, designed to 
facilitate the daily work among the visually-impaired people. 
This invention has many similarities with the Smart Blind 
Cane. In which this invention uses ultrasonic sensors and sound 
vibrations. However, this invention also has several 
weaknesses; it cannot be folded and difficult to keep. In 
addition, this invention is not equipped with sensors to detect 
the water areas. 
 
2.1 Software Techniques: 
MPLAB is software that is used to develop the source code 
of the PIC microcontroller. MPLAB is a Window based 
Integrated Development Environmental (IDE) for the 
Microchip Technology Incorporated PIC micro 
microcontroller families. It is allowed to write, debug and 
optimize the PIC micro applications’ for firmware product 
design. Besides that, this software includes a text editor, 
simulator, and project manager that makes programming 
becomes more schematic. MPLAB also support the MPLAB-
ICE and PICMASTER ® emulators, PICSTART ® PLUS, and 
PROMATE ® II programmers. Thus shows that MPLAB is 
compatible for various kinds of microchip development 
system tools. The reason of choosing MPLAB is because it is 
widely used and the language is easy to understand.  
 
 
2.2 Hardware requirement  
Ultrasonic sensors generate high frequency sound waves and 
evaluate the echo which is received back by the sensors. 
Sensors calculate the time interval between sending the signal 
G.Gayathri, IJECS Volume 3. Issue 3 March, 2014 Page No.4057-4061 Page 4059 
and receiving the echo to determine the distance to an object. 
Ultrasonic is like an infrared where it will reflect on a surface 
in any shape. However, the ultrasonic has a better range 
detection compared to infrared. In robotic and automation 
industry, ultrasonic has been accepted well because of its 
usage. Magori and Walker state that the endurance and 
accuracy of the sensor is not affected by physical contact. 
Comparing with other sensors, the ultrasonic is more accurate. 
Han and Hahn have proven that the distance and angle 
measurements of ultrasonic are highly reliable by proving that 
the relative errors and variances of the measurements are 
within a reasonably small range. These discussions explain 
that the ultrasonic is suitable for developing the Smart Blind 
Cane.  
Microcontroller is a single chip that contains the processor 
(CPU), non-volatile memory for the program (ROM or flash), 
volatile memory for input and output (RAM), a clock and an 
I/O control unit and time. It is designed for a small set of 
specific function to control a particular system. For example, 
microcontroller is used in wheelchair to controller the motion 
using remote control. The reason of using microcontroller is 
because the microcontroller has the ability to store and run 
unique programs make it extremely versatile. 
A water detector is a small electronic device that is designed 
to detect the presence of water. According Hamelain, by using 
water sensor, as soon as it touches the water, it will short the 
circuit and this will cause a closed circuit then obtain the 
output that we desired. The water sensor is useful in a 
normally occupied area near any appliance that has the 
potential to leak water.  
The aim of this paper is to discuss on a development work of 
an assistive tool for the visually-impaired people that alerts 
them of the obstacles in front, which is named Smart Cane. 
This section elaborates the background foundations of the 
works in this study. Related works are discussed in supports of 
this study. Next, the steps in developing the assistive cane are 
addressed in detail. Further, the experiment including results 
and findings are elaborated at length. Finally, this paper 
concludes by discussing some possible works for the future. 
 
III. PROPOSED SYSTEM 
The proposed system consists of two main units: 
 Sensor unit. 
 GPS unit. 
 
The figure above depicts the proposed design of an embedded 
smart walking stick. The system elements consist of various 
sub systems. 
 
 
 
FIG 2.1 PROPOSED BLOCK DIAGRAM 
 
1. SENSOR UNIT: 
The proposed device uses ultrasonic sensor and it can detect 
any object that lies on the ground, situated a distance of certain 
meters from the user. The minimum size of the object that can 
be detected should not be less than 3 cm width (or diameter). 
In operation a beam of ultrasound of 40 KHz frequency is 
transmitted at a regular interval in the forward direction. The 
ultrasound will be reflected from a nearby object, if any. The 
sensor will then detect the presence of any object that lies 
within that meters by detecting the reflected sound beam. The 
time intervals at which the transmitter will transmit ultrasound 
depend on the walking speed of the user. For water indication 
electrodes are fitted at the bottom of the stick these electrodes 
are sensing water and conveying information to blind people. 
And for pit indication infrared sensor is used. It informs the 
people about the pit found in their path. This diffused 
photoelectric beam sensors consist of a transmitter and a 
receiver together. These beam sensors look alike Inductive 
Proximity Sensors and hence also known as IR Proximity 
Sensors. The emitter emits Infra red rays which are reflected 
on the receiver through the object to be registered. 
2.GPS UNIT: 
The GPS based blind device with user input interfacing get 
alert the blind person when reaches destination by voice .It 
consists of microcontroller and GPS and one voice module to 
generate the voice.pic The Micro controller is the heart of the 
device. It stores the data of the current location which it 
receives from the GPS system. So that it can make use of the 
data stored to compare with the destination location of the 
user. By this it can trace out the distance from the destination 
and produce an alarm to alert the user in advance.  
The PIC16F877A CMOS FLASH-based 8-bit 
microcontroller is upward compatible with the PIC16C5x, 
PIC12Cxxx and PIC16C7x devices. It features 200 ns 
instruction execution, 256 bytes of EEPROM data memory, 
self programming, an ICD, 2Comparators, 8 channels of 10-bit 
G.Gayathri, IJECS Volume 3. Issue 3 March, 2014 Page No.4057-4061 Page 4060 
Analog-to-Digital (A/D) converter, 2 capture/ compare/ PWM 
functions, a synchronous serial port that can be configured as 
either 3-wire SPI or 2-wire I2C bus, a USART, and a Parallel 
Slave Port.  
The Global Positioning System (GPS) is a U.S. space-based 
radio navigation system that provides reliable positioning, 
navigation, and timing services to civilian users on a 
continuous worldwide basis -- freely available to all. For 
anyone with a GPS receiver, the system will provide location 
with time. GPS provides accurate location and time 
information for an unlimited number of people in all weather, 
day and night, anywhere in the world. The accurate timing 
provided by GPS facilitates everyday activities such as 
banking, mobile phone operations, and even the control of 
power grids. Farmers, surveyors, geologists and countless 
others perform their work more efficiently, safely, 
economically, and accurately using the free and open GPS 
signals. 
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The experiments were conducted to evaluate the performance 
of the proposed method. The results presented in this paper 
mark the beginning of our efforts to build a compact travelling 
aid that allows the visually impaired to negotiate everyday 
environment. As previously mentioned, the sensor circuits give 
information about the environment. The circuit that has been 
designed for the object detection has provided an accuracy of 1 
meter. The detection range for various objects in cm are as 
listed in the below table: 
 
Table 1. Response of stick for various objects (cm) 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The 
water 
senso
r 
functions fully and can detect if only the water is over 0.5 cm. 
The water sensor buzzer will be stopped once it is taken out 
from the water. The visually impaired person can travel only to 
four locations using this stick. The navigation system will need 
to convey information other than that needed for guidance, it is 
not feasible to provide guidance information at high 
intermittencies.  
 
V. CONCLUSION 
With the proposed architecture, if constructed with at most 
accuracy, the blind people will able to move from one place to 
another without others help. If such a system is developed, it 
will act as a basic platform for the generation of more such 
devices for the visually impaired in the future which will be 
cost effective. And as far as the localization is concerned it will 
be able to provide accurate details of the location of the blind if 
in case they lost with help from the GPS. It will be real boon 
for the blind. The developed prototype gives good results in 
detecting obstacles paced at distance in front of the user. 
The solution developed is a moderate budget navigational 
aid for the visually impaired. However minimizing cost leads to 
compromises in performance. It is advised that the design be 
improved before commercial production. Some improvements 
that could be made are as follows: 
 Increasing the range of the ultrasonic sensor and 
implementing a technology for determining the 
speed of approaching obstacles. 
 Synchronization with external memory to increase 
the number of routes stored. 
 Synchronization with various navigation software 
applications available on the internet so that new, 
un-programmed destinations can also be chosen. 
 Provision for voice control using speech 
recognition. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Mohd Helmy Abd Wahab, Amirul A. Talib, Herdawatie 
A.Kadir, Ayob Johari, A.Noraziah, Roslina M. Sidek, 
Ariffin A. ―Smart cane: assistive cane for  visually 
impaired people‖, IJCSI, Vol.8 Issue 4, July 2011. 
 
 [2] Yuan, D.; Manduchi, R.; ―Dynamic environment 
exploration using a virtual white cane‖, in Computer 
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005. CVPR 2005. IEEE 
Computer Society Conference. 
 
[3] F. van der Heijden, P.P.L. Regtien, ―Wearable navigation 
assistance - a tool for the blind‖ MEASUREMENT 
SCIENCE REVIEW, Volume 5, Section 2, 2005 
 
 
[4] Abhishek Choubey, Dattatray Patil, ―RFID Based 
Cognition Device for Assistance to Blind and Visually 
Challenged Persons for Indoor Use‖, International Journal 
of Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT) 
Volume 1, Issue 6, June 2012. 
 
[5] João José, Miguel Farrajota, João M.F. Rodrigues, J.M. 
Hans du Buf, ―The Smart Vision Local Navigation Aid 
 
Obstacle 
 
Test 1 
 
Test 2 
 
Test 3 
 
Test 4 
 
Concrete wall 
 
150 
 
210 
 
195 
 
190 
 
Human body 
 
100 
 
80 
 
160 
 
110 
 
Cardboard 
box 
 
210 
 
190 
 
270 
 
230 
 
Plastic 
 
90 
 
120 
 
145 
 
95 
G.Gayathri, IJECS Volume 3. Issue 3 March, 2014 Page No.4057-4061 Page 4061 
for Blind and Visually Impaired Persons‖ International 
Journal of Digital Content Technology and its 
Applications Vol.5 No.5, May 2011. 
 
[6] Amit Kumar, Rusha Patra, M. Mahadevappa, J. 
Mukhopadhyay and A. K. Majumdar, A technical note on 
―An embedded system for aiding navigation of visually 
impaired persons‖. 
 
[7]  Larisa Dunai, Guillermo Peris Fajarnes, Victor Santiago 
Praderas, Beatriz Defez Garcia, Ismael Lengua Lengua 
―Real–Time Assistance Prototype – a new Navigation Aid 
for blind people‖ 978-1-4244-5226-2/10/$26.00 ©2010 
IEEE. 
 
[8] Jack M. Loomis, Reginald G. Golledge and Roberta L. 
Klatzky, ―Navigation System for the Blind: Auditory 
Display Modes and Guidance‖ Vol. 7, No. 2, April 1998, 
193–203. 
 
[9] Lise A. Johnson and Charles M. Higgins, ―A Navigation 
Aid for the Blind Using Tactile-Visual Sensory 
Substitution‖. 
 
[10] Sylvain Cardin, Daniel Thalmann and Frederic Vexo, 
―Wearable Obstacle Detection System for visually 
impaired People‖. 
 
.
    

