Creative Education 
2012. Vol.3, Supplement, 141-144 
Published Online December 2012 in SciRes (http://www.SciRP.org/journal/ce)                                DOI:10.4236/ce.2012.37B037 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. 141 
Investigate on the Teaching Method for the Course 
“Embedded System” 
Shurui Fan1, Jianfei Liu1, Yanfei Zhao2 
1School of Information Engineering, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China 
2Office of Information Dissemination, Water Authority of Tianjin, Tianjin, China 
Email: fansr@hebut.edu.cn, jfliu@hebut.edu.cn, fansr0223@126.com 
 
Received 2012 
Embedded System is a course which has a close relationship with the embedded operating systems, em-
bedded software course and hardware for Electronic Information Engineering Specialty. We reform sub-
ject “Embedded System” with the rapid development of Internet of Things around the 32-bit ARM pro-
cessor and Linux operating systems, combined with the embedded industry and analysis of personnel 
training requirement. Practice has proved that we can obtain a significant effect by a variety of ways prac-
tice teaching methods such as formation of interest groups, the use of race to promote education, race and 
promote, to point to an area of practice teaching model, learning by doing. 
 
Keywords: Embedded System; Internet of Things; Curriculum Reform; Learning by Doing 
Introduction 
Since 1990s, under the traction of the huge demand for dis-
tributed control, flexible manufacturing, digital communica-
tions and digital home appliances, the embedded systems 
hardware and software technologies accelerate the development 
of further expansion of application fields. Mobile phones, digi-
tal cameras, VCD, digital televisions, routers, are embedded 
systems. The most luxury sedans each with about 50 embedded 
microprocessors. About 1000 microprocessors assembled in the 
latest Boeing 777 wide-body airliner. Tens to hundreds of em-
bedded system for you at home can be found in the near future. 
The development of IoT requires huge mass of microprocessor 
[1,2]. Powerful, highly integrated, a wide range of inexpensive, 
low-power 32-bit chips have been widely used in a variety of 
military and civilian equipment. 
The Requirement Analysis of Embedded  
Systems Industry 
At present, the embedded system has been widely used in 
consumer electronics, communications, automotive, defense, 
aerospace, industrial control, instrumentation, office automation 
and other fields. Embedded System has brought more than $ 1 
trillion [3] for industrial output value. 
The Basic Requirements of Embedded Systems on the 
Human Capacity 
Embedded systems application developers in the future work 
have to face a wide variety of development tools, all kinds of 
RTOS performance mixed a variety of unique application re-
quirements [4]. When developers face any specific application 
requirements, select the right platform from the existing prod-
ucts to cater for the final application and how to plan, design, 
and divide the hardware and software to shorten product de-
velopment cycle and improve product reliability, how to inte-
grate existing technologies and effective cooperation with other 
collaborative units, is the highest requirements of embedded 
systems developers. 
The basic requirement is skill C or C + + language and Java, 
assembly language programming for embedded application 
developers [5]. To deal with hardware, assembly language and 
C language should be mastered by programmers of embedded 
systems. Java is generally used to write applications. Java is 
cross-platform and easy to transplant which characteristics 
demonstrated unparalleled advantages in embedded applica-
tions. 
Classification Requirements of the Personnel 
Based on the embedded system personnel training, personnel 
can be divided into the following categories: 
1) System integration and design staff 
Such people must be familiar with the various RTOS and 
associated tools, and have deep research on the hardware, oper-
ating system and application software design. They should 
participate and presided over product development, who are 
familiar with the development process, skilled use of debugging 
tools with solving the debugging more experience. The basic 
requirement is a strong foundation of professional knowledge 
and clear thinking to solve problems. 
2) Driver writers 
Write device drivers, embedded software engineers will 
consume a lot of time. Because the embedded system is a tai-
lor-made system, the application may be faced with a different 
hardware environment, needs the different configuration what 
leads to the applied difference. You need to write the appropri-
ate driver when the system to add a device, so the workload is 
relatively huge. In the process of the development process, 
some companies do not assign dedicated driver programmer, 
but appeal to do related work by the company offering RTOS, 
its benefits are written procedures more professional and better 
co-ordination with the operating system, but this also takes a lot 
of money costs. In desktop applications, application software 
S. R. FAN  ET  AL. 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. 142 
programmers do not need this type of programmer, because the 
equipment used are mostly standard equipment and the equip-
ment for writing drivers is less because of that the driver have 
been provided by the manufacturer. The device driver is a spe-
cial class of programs which is hardware-oriented. Program-
ming methods also has its own characteristics and requirements, 
but also for programmers should be familiar with the hardware 
devices. 
3) Application writers 
They write applications in the embedded system develop-
ment platform. Access to relate equipment has also been im-
plemented by the device driver because of hardware layer has 
been managed by the embedded operating system. Application 
programmers only need to be familiar with the API functions 
provided by provided by the operating system and drivers by 
which can control and use the related hardware, and program-
ming in the desktop system is no more different. The main dif-
ference lies in the future code debugging. We nurture talent in 
this area, requiring the application requirements of different 
industries to the preparation of related application software. 
Status Quo of Nurturing the Talent of the  
Embedded System 
Defined by the IEEE (The Institute of Electrical and Elec-
tronic Engineers), embedded system is devices used to control, 
monitor or assist the operation of equipment, machinery or 
plants. At present, a widely recognized definition is: Applica-
tion-centric, based on computer technology, software and 
hardware can be cut to meet the stringent requirements of ap-
plication functionality, reliability, cost, size, power consump-
tion dedicated computer system. Embedded systems are gener-
ally composed by four parts of the embedded microprocessor, 
hardware peripherals, embedded operating system and user 
applications, roughly divided into hardware and software. 
Complete curriculum system of "embedded systems" should 
also contain an embedded processor, the processor interface 
design, embedded operating systems, application design, and 
software and hardware are closely related to guide program 
design. 
Analysis in Offered Courses 
The partial focus of the course in domestic colleges and uni-
versities is slightly different, divided into full-and focused type 
according to the professional background of the students. 
Course modular of Nanjing University Software College set 
of three modules: embedded hardware platforms (microproces-
sors, memory, I / O, ARM and XScale-command system and 
the system structure), embedded operating system (the charac-
teristics of process scheduling storage management, μC / OS, 
Linux porting, device drivers and application development, 
embedded application development (based on μC / OS, Linux, 
WinCE, etc.). Department of Computer Science of Tsinghua 
University divides the curriculum into five parts: an overview 
of embedded systems, hardware environment, software envi-
ronment, development tools and debugging techniques for em-
bedded applications. Two school curriculums can be seen as a 
comprehensive type. The holistic curriculum requires the stu-
dents be familiar with the principles of operating system, but 
also to have some knowledge of the processor interface, and a 
higher demand for teachers. However, in the view of embedded 
system courses afford mostly for electronic information and 
computer science students, relatively few comprehensive edu-
cation. Limiting course hours, more comprehensive under-
standing at the same time, they take the form of a slightly fo-
cused. 
"Embedded systems" courses in School of Software and Mi-
croelectronics of Beijing University include: embedded operat-
ing systems, embedded systems design, embedded software 
development, this is the type of a focus on software develop-
ment. More schools adopt a focus on embedded processor to 
carry out teaching, such as the Chengdu Institute of Information 
Engineering, Sichuan University, School of Electronic Infor-
mation, and Tongji University, Computer Science and Tech-
nology. 
Where the School of Electronics and Information students 
have a good hardware development background and have solid 
C programming language based, but relatively unknown oper-
ating system, so the curriculum to avoid the principle of the 
embedded operating system. The definition of an embedded 
system, which also determines the embedded systems courses 
also application-oriented curriculum development mode. The 
embedded systems course content includes four major compo-
nents of the embedded hardware, embedded software platform, 
embedded development tools and embedded application devel-
opment, content organization and selection can not only dem-
onstrate to the students the whole picture of the embedded 
technology and unique knowledge, and other professional 
courses complement each other, to avoid duplicate content. In 
addition to imparting knowledge, this course has special em-
phasis on training and individualized, the ability of students to 
practice in the course on the experimental aspects of the design 
contains more than the basic experiment, and optional big ex-
periment, so that students in one semester full contact with the 
actual system hardware and application software code to over-
come the current professional personnel training the application 
of the "principle of light" the outstanding problems, dig out the 
students courage to the potential for hands-on practice; This 
course is also individualized educational philosophy as a guide, 
students can choose from the creative big experiment a most 
interesting experiment, give full play to the wisdom and talents 
of all students, so students can get exercise and harvest. 
The Special Requirements of Embedded Systems  
Personnel Training 
The field of embedded systems is very large, it needs know-
ledge not only contains the microprocessor, computer architec-
ture, micro-computer theory, computer interface technology, 
circuit and electronics technology, integrated circuit technology, 
operating systems and RTOS, digital signal processing and 
human-type intelligent, firmware, and middleware design and 
integration of sensor technology is also included in the applica-
tion, data acquisition, detection, control technology and net-
work programming and other related professional knowledge. 
1) Embedded systems both software and hardware 
Research and development of embedded systems requires not 
only investment in software talents, but also need the hardware 
platform to achieve its function. This requires that the software 
talents have a certain hardware background, even more than the 
operating system's own research and development background 
of the hardware. From the current status of the domestic point 
of view, the real thinker and programming but also understands 
S. R. FAN  ET  AL. 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. 143 
the hardware really is rare . Some engineers active in this in-
dustry use 8-bit microcontroller a dozen years ago, but the 
knowledge of these engineers have also been aging, 32-bit mi-
crocontrollers for them or a new topic. At present, the applica-
tion stuff of embedded systems is very scarce, and many em-
bedded systems are also aware of this problem is restricting the 
development of the company are actively looking for such tal-
ent. 
2) Requirements of embedded systems course teachers 
Embedded systems R & D personnel need not only under-
stands programming but also understands the hardware and 
corresponding software and hardware combination of teachers 
needs. Curriculum for students of information engineering 
should be partial to hardware-oriented system and teachers also 
need to have some basis of the operating system, at least have 
engaged in the development of complete embedded systems. 
Otherwise, techers do not quite understand the process of em-
bedded development tools how the students play the role of 
teaching doubts. 
2) The special requirements of embedded systems laboratory 
building 
Desktop development in embedded systems development 
process is much more difficult, although the code generation 
process is not very different, but debugging there night and day 
points. Embedded systems programming is completed in the 
host, but the code running on the target platform. Download 
from the host after the completion of the program compiled and 
linked to the target platform to run on and debugging of the 
code must be by virtue of a variety of different tools and 
equipment to complete. Code debugging of embedded systems 
will account for most of the time of the entire development task, 
so a good development tools have a huge impact on students’ 
learning. In the laboratory building, enterprise-level debugging 
and development platform should be established so that the 
students are still on the job to be able to use out of the school 
development tools and development platforms after school. 
A Discussion on the Teaching Method 
The embedded system consists of computer software and 
hardware technology, communications technology and semi-
conductor microelectronics technology constitute and the cor-
responding computer directly embedded into the application 
system for the practical application of system requirements. 
Embedded system design requires designers with strong theo-
retical knowledge and practical ability, comprehensive ability 
of the designer, especially the innovative ability of the test. 
"Embedded systems" course is an extension of the ability of 
basic courses and specialized courses for undergraduate before 
three years. Embedded system is involved in a wide range of 
knowledge in particular. The more study, the more enigmatic 
students feel. In the traditional teaching mode that talk about 
the concept of that principle, you must have a wide range of 
expertise, especially need to know a lot of hardware and soft-
ware knowledge to learning, and students mistakenly think that 
embedded is an advanced course unattainable. Embedded sys-
tems cover a wide range of knowledge points. The pre-course 
requirements relatively higher, the practice teaching is an ex-
cellent carrier, which can improve the ability of the students' 
comprehensive application of knowledge and practical ability. 
Teachers can carry out the engineering practice project to in-
crease the interest of student learning embedded systems, de-
velop students' practical ability. Schools organize students to 
participate in the contest can enrich the campus academic at-
mosphere and develop students' ability to innovate and team 
spirit. School-enterprise cooperation," make the students learn 
more "targeted". Such three-dimensional practical teaching 
system trains talents to meet the needs of society, to enhance 
students' employability and competitiveness. 
4) The formation of interest groups, to guide students to par-
ticipate in the project of engineering practice 
This paper proposed the new mode of practice teaching that 
teacher guidance, students' participation in the project of engi-
neering practice which emblazes the students' enthusiasm. Em-
bedded system itself is a relatively comprehensive curriculum 
which requires a higher level of student software, hardware and 
hands-on ability. The students generally agreed that this course 
is difficult, so to change the concept of student learning to mo-
bilize their learning enthusiasm to make it active learning. In-
terest groups play an important role in personality growth of 
students with that classroom teaching can not be achieved or 
can not be well reflected in the role of the effect. Use of good 
quality teaching staff. The creation of interest groups, the 
school must take advantage of a good school teachers of teach-
ers to promote personality development of students, teacher 
personality. Observe, analyze, and take advantage of good stu-
dent's personality will enable students to get healthy and effec-
tive development in the creation of interest groups. Schools 
make external personnel as teachers of the interest groups and 
make good use of social advantage, open the world of the 
second class. 
5) Study and practice a new model "Race to promote educa-
tion, in order to point to race and promote learning,"of teaching  
"Embedded system" is a new course in recent years, emerg-
ing, domestic and foreign university in the embedded teaching 
is already in full swing. Ministry of Education attaches great 
importance to college students in theory courses in embedded 
systems and practice, especially in the National Undergraduate 
Electronic Design Contest set Embedded Systems Project Invi-
tational, and the strong support of the Intel Corporation, the 
National Development and Reform Commission also attaches 
great importance to teaching and training in embedded systems, 
and Microsoft Research Asia, jointly launched the "national 
Development and Reform Commission - Microsoft embedded 
system teaching package" program. In the international arena, 
some internationally renowned organizations, such as IEEE, 
Intel, Microsoft, are also introduced and embedded sys-
tems-related university programs and competitions. In accor-
dance with the requirements of the nationwide embedded com-
petition, they project development training. With new teaching 
models in the "religion, race and promote the game to promote 
learning, in order to point", they organize competitions and 
development of engineering practice projects. The basic pur-
pose of the contest is to promote teaching. Requiring students 
to master basic textbook knowledge can turn the knowledge 
into practice. 
The new teaching mode “race to promote education, race 
promote learning, in order to point” can give students enough 
space to develop their independent thinking, the ability to re-
solve and solidarity. 
6) “Learning by doing” 
“Learning by doing”[6]is first proposed by the U.S. Carne-
gie Mellon University, aiming to strengthen the engineering 
student practical ability and engineering literacy teaching mode. 
S. R. FAN  ET  AL. 
Copyright © 2012 SciRes. 144 
Learning by doing, the name suggests, is to enable students in 
the process of "doing" in their own hands-on experience, 
through their own knowledge acquisition, inductive and sum-
mary, to achieve the purpose of "learning" which is the biggest 
difference between the students' class attendance and the tradi-
tional classroom the teacher teaching. Advanced teaching con-
cepts "Learning by doing" is introduced into the teaching em-
bedded courses in traditional endorsement of teaching model 
for comprehensive reform and bold practice. Courses take a real 
embedded project development process and methods as the 
main line, "Project-driven, Case-oriented”[7] model as heuristic 
teaching. In this way, students not only to deepen the under-
standing of embedded concepts and principles of the original 
stay on the books, but in the end be able to complete a full, or 
even creative embedded software works. This makes embedded 
truly become a student tangible real lively courses. 
Conclusion 
Teaching of embedded systems reflects a basic, comprehen-
sive and practical characteristics and it is a combination of 
theory and practice of courses. There is no unified teaching 
system and norms because of domestic colleges and universities 
embedded system education courses in the initial stage of the 
newly opened and short multi-content class. Most teachers still 
follow the traditional teaching model that first on the theory 
class, and after the experiment instructions to experiment. 
Many areas of teaching need to be further research to explore 
and practice test. 
Acknowledgment 
Here and now, I would like to extend my sincere thanks to all 
those who have helped me make this thesis possible and better. 
Firstly, I am deeply grateful to my honorable dean, Liu Jianfei, 
who have encouraged the course improvement with patience 
and given me instructive suggestions, and he also played an 
important role in indicating a bright road in my career. Then 
thanks to the professors, Jia Zhicheng and Zhou yatong, who 
have helped me over the past decade years of working. Finally, 
I am very grateful to my lovely friends and colleagues who 
have offered me quiet situation to compose my thesis and dis-
cussed with me about my thesis. 
REFERENCES 
Song Jun, Wang Yixiong, Xu Feng. IoT Oriented Reform in Embedded 
System Experiment Teaching.Microcontrollers & Embedded Sys-
tems. 2011,4:1~2,22. 
SONG Jun, WANG Yi- xiong, XU Feng. Reform of embedded system 
expermients teaching oriented IoT. Laboratory Science. 2011, 1: 
20~22. 
He Limin. Embedded System for Internet of Things. Microcontrollers 
& Embedded Systems.2010,10:5~8. 
He Limin. Age of the Internet of Things: Opportunities for Embedded 
System. Microcontrollers & Embedded Systems.2011,3:1~3. 
SUN Jing-wu, FAN Xiu-ping, MA Ya-chao. Embedding teaching mode 
and the applications in the software major. JOURNAL OFHEBEI 
NORMAL UNIVERSITY/Educational Science Edition . 2009, 11(2): 
110~112. 
Zha Jianzhong. On CDIO Model under Learning by Doing Strategy. 
Research in Higher Education of Engineering.2008,3:1~6,9. 
Wang Wenfu. Rational thinking of teaching reformation based on re-
markable engineer training demands CDIO-oriented teaching refor-
mation conception of cartography. Science of Surveying and Map-
ping.2011,36,3(5):247~249. 
 

