 
Page 1 of 5 
CSCI 4287: Embedded System Programming 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
College of Engineering and Applied Sciences 
University of Colorado Denver 
Course Syllabus 
 
 
Instructor: Dr. Tam Vu Term: Spring, 2015 
Office: Lawrence Street, Room 816 Class Meeting Days: Monday and Wednesday 
Phone: 303-315-0050 Class Meeting Hours: 2:00pm – 3:30pm 
E-Mail: tam.vu@ucdenver.edu Class Location: MAC Lab 
Office Hours: Monday and Wednesday, 3:30pm-4:30pm 
Instructor Website: cse.ucdenver.edu/~tamvu    
 
 
COURSE OVERVIEW: 
I. Welcome to Embedded System Programming - an insight into the less visible side of computing.  
This course is designed to bring students to the design and analysis of computational systems that 
pervasively present in our everyday life. Applications of such systems include medical devices and 
systems, consumer electronics, toys and games, assisted living, traffic control and safety, 
automotive systems, process control, energy management and conservation, environmental control, 
aircraft control systems, communications systems, instrumentation, critical infrastructure control 
(electric power, water resources, and communications systems for example), robotics and 
distributed robotics (telepresence, telemedicine), defense systems, manufacturing, and smart 
structures. The course will focus on the interplay of practical design with models of systems and its 
analysis.  
II. University Course Catalog Description: This course will focus on two specific Embedded Systems 
Programming contexts.  Embedded Systems Programming in the Small (ESPiS) and Embedded 
Systems Programming in the Large (ESPiL). 
III. Course Goals and Learning Objectives: It is the goal of this course that at the completion of the 
semester you would have gained the following knowledge:  
• Skills in modeling a small cyber-physical system. 
• Skills in embedded system programming. 
• Skills in design a small cyber-physical system. 
• Skills using a shell that interacts with a kernel. 
• Skills in presenting completed work. 
The learning objectives of this course are:  
• Learning the basics of principles in modeling, designing, and analyzing an embedded system. 
• Learning the basics of design, code, and test embedded software with C, C++, Java and 
Python, where applicable, programming languages  
IV. Course Prerequisites: It is expected that at the beginning of this course that you have the 
knowledge of CSCI 3453 Operating Systems course or equivalents is required. Students should 
understand general mechanisms by which computer platforms and structured and manipulated. 
V. ABET Assessment Criteria: This course is designed to address ABET Assessment Criteria c and d. 
Criteria c is an ability to design and conduct software and/or hardware experiments, as well as an 
ability to analyze and interpret data. Criteria d is an ability to design software to meet desired needs.  
These Criteria will be addressed in an Embedded Systems context.  ABET Assessment Criteria c 
and map to Program Educational Outcome 1,2, and 3, which are “ 1- Advance professionally as 
productive, practicing professionals in computer science and related careers through the continued 
Course Syllabus 
CSCI 4287 – Spring 2015 
Dr. Tam Vu 
Page 2 of 5 
development of their expertise and skills”, “2- Further develop their knowledge, skill set, and career 
opportunities through graduate education and/or professional studies”, and “3 - Function effectively 
as a part of a team to succeed in their professional careers.” 
VI. Course Credits: This course has three (3) credits associated with it. 
VII. Required Texts and Materials: This course requires the following textbook: 
           Introduction to Embedded Systems, by E. A. Lee and S. A. Seshia, 2011-2012. 
          Downloadable version of the textbook is available without fee at http://leeseshia.org/ 
 
VIII. Course Schedule: The following is the tentative schedule for this course and it is subject to change. 
If there are any changes to this schedule they will be reflected on the course’ website. 
 
Week Topic 
1 Introduction to the course and logistics 
2 Sensors and Actuators 
3 Memory Architectures 
4 Interfacing to Sensors and Actuators 
5 Interrupts 
6 Multitasking 
7       Scheduling - Midterm 
8 Model-Based Design 
9 Dynamic modeling 
10 State Machines 
11 Quantitative analysis  
12 Reachability Analysis 
13 Execution Time Analysis  
14 Security Analysis - Final 
15 Project presentation and demo 
 
 
EVALUATION: 
I. Course Grade: Course grades are a weighted average of the grades earned on all graded material.  
The final grade is Min(100, actual grade). The weights for the different categories are: 
• Assignments:………………………………………40% 
• Quizzes ……………………...……………………  10%  
• Participation (in class and online discussion)…  5% 
• Attendance …………………………………………5%  
• Project presentation and report…………………  10% 
• Midterm: ............................................................... 20% 
• Final: ..................................................................... 20% 
Letter Grades are as follows: 
• 94% – 100%  ........ A 
• 90% – 93.9% ........ A-  
• 87% – 89.9% ........ B+ 
• 84% – 86.9%  ....... B 
• 80% – 83.9% ........ B- 
• 77% – 79.9% ........ C+ 
Course Syllabus 
CSCI 4287 – Spring 2015 
Dr. Tam Vu 
Page 3 of 5 
• 74% – 76.9%  ....... C 
• 70% – 73.9% ........ C- 
• 67% – 69.9% ........ D+ 
• 64% – 66.9%  ....... D 
• 60% – 63.9% ........ D- 
• 00% – 59.9%  ....... F 
 
II. Programming Assignments: The Programming Assignments will be in the C, C++, Java, Python, or 
combined depending on the project you select.   The grading of the Programming Assignments is a 
combination of completeness (all specifications are covered), correctness of results, and style.  All 
programming assignments are due at the beginning of class on the due date.  Submissions will be 
made via Canvas.  I do not allow late work to be submitted unless there is prior written approval by 
me based on special circumstances. 
III. Exams: Exams are closed book. One two-sided cheat sheet of hand-writing is allowed. Makeup 
exams are not normally given; in special circumstances, arrangements should be made prior to 
the exam date if at all possible. 
IV. Quizzes: There will be numerous in class quizzes, some of which will not be announced.  These 
quizzes will be brief, taking approximately ten minutes to complete.  The quizzes will be a 
combination of multiple-choice, short answer/fill in the blank, and short essay questions.   
V. Grade Dissemination: I will be utilizing the Canvas system to record your grades.  You can check 
on Canvas for all of your current grades. 
COURSE PROCEDURES: 
I. Attendance and participation: Attendance is required for this course.  As with all science courses, 
you will have easier time learning the material if you attend the lectures and participate in class. 
II. Late Work Policy: All programming assignments are due at the beginning of class on the due date.  
Submissions will be made via Canvas.  I do not allow late work to be submitted unless there is prior 
approval by me based on special circumstances.  Makeup exams and quizzes are not normally 
given; in special circumstances, arrangements should be made prior to the exam date if at all 
possible. 
III. Grades of “Incomplete”: The current university policy concerning incomplete grades will be 
followed in this course. Incomplete grades are given only in situations where unexpected 
emergencies prevent a student from completing the course and the remaining work can be 
completed the next semester. I am the final authority on whether you qualify for an incomplete. 
Incomplete work must be finished by the end of the subsequent semester or the “I” will 
automatically be recorded as an “F” on your transcript. 
IV. Canvas: I will be utilizing Canvas in this course to assign all of the course work and for you to 
submit your solutions.  I will also be utilizing it to communicate with you and to provide you with your 
current grade.  It is recommended that you check it frequently. 
V. Classroom Devices: Out of respect for everyone in the classroom, if you would like to record the 
lectures you must first receive my approval.  I generally will approve the request, but I first would like 
to speak with you concerning the scope of the recording. 
 
 
STUDENT EXPECTATIONS: 
I. Civility: My commitment is to create a climate for learning characterized by respect for each other 
and the contributions each person makes to class. I ask that you make a similar commitment. 
Course Syllabus 
CSCI 4287 – Spring 2015 
Dr. Tam Vu 
Page 4 of 5 
II. Professionalism: Since mobile devices can be a distraction during class, I ask that all devices be 
put into “silent” mode and not utilized during class; this includes checking Facebook, sending a 
Tweet, or checking email.  If I feel that your mobile device is becoming a distraction for either other 
students, you, or myself I will ask you to leave the classroom. 
III. Religious Observations: I understand that an individual’s religion plays a large part in their lives and 
I do not want this course to interfere with that aspect of their lives.  If you find that your religion’s 
holiday(s) falls on a class day and you can not attend due to this, please notify me within two weeks 
of that date by email (or Canvas mail) and we will work together to come to a mutually acceptable 
solution. 
COLLABORATION AND CHEATING: 
I encourage you to review material and discuss ideas together for projects and other assignments, 
and to work on problems you encounter.  It is a characteristic of computing that discussions often 
help to clarify problems and resolve difficulties — feel free to take advantage of this to improve your 
understanding of the material, and to complete projects, but make sure you then create your own 
work.  It’s important that you go through the program design, coding, and debugging processes 
yourself, or you will not be developing your own programming skills and understanding. “Working 
together” does not mean that one student does the majority of the work and other students put their 
names on it!  If you have any questions about what this means, please see me.  Every student must 
create their own work on their own!   
Any instances of cheating will result in either a zero for the assignment, a grade of zero in the 
course, or sanctions determined by the college (including suspension and expulsion). 
UNIVERSITY POLICIES: 
I. Access: The University of Colorado Denver is committed to providing reasonable accommodation 
and access to programs and services to persons with disabilities. Students with disabilities who 
want academic accommodations must register with Disability Resources and Services (DRS) in 
North Classroom 2514, Phone: 303-556-3450, TTY: 303-556- 4766, Fax: 303-556-4771. I will be 
happy to provide approved accommodations, once you provide me with a copy of DRS’s 
letter.  [DRS requires students to provide current and adequate documentation of their disabilities. 
Once a student has registered with DRS, DRS will review the documentation and assess the 
student’s request for academic accommodations in light of the documentation. DRS will then 
provide the student with a letter indicating which academic accommodations have been approved.] 
II. Academic Honesty and Student Code of Conduct: Students are expected to know, understand, 
and comply with the ethical standards of the university, including rules against plagiarism, cheating, 
fabrication and falsification, multiple submissions, misuse of academic materials, and complicity in 
academic dishonesty. For more information on Academic Honesty and the Student Code of Conduct 
please see: http://www.ucdenver.edu/academics/colleges/Engineering/student-services/policies-
forms/Documents/Student%20Honor%20Code.pdf 
 
III. Other University Policies:  
•  Academic Freedom: 
http://www.ucdenver.edu/policy/pages/academic-Freedom.aspx  
•  Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA): 
http://www.ucdenver.edu/student-
services/resources/registrar/students/policies/Pages/StudentPrivacy.aspx  
•  Attendance: 
http://www.ucdenver.edu/faculty_staff/employees/policies/Policies%20Library/OAA/ 
StudentAttendance.pdf  
•  Discrimination and Harassment Policy and Procedures: 
http://www.ucdenver.edu/about/WhoWeAre/Chancellor/ViceChancellors/Provost/Stu 
Course Syllabus 
CSCI 4287 – Spring 2015 
Dr. Tam Vu 
Page 5 of 5 
dentAffairs/UniversityLife/sexualmisconduct/DenverPolices/Pages/DenverWelcome.a spx  
•  Grade Appeal Policy: 
http://www.ucdenver.edu/policy/Documents/Process-for-Grade-Issues.pdf 
THE LAST WORD 
      Since you will be spending time on this class anyways (after all, it is a core course), why not make it 
an awesome experience during which you will create something worth mentioning? I am here to help 
you do well in this course and, more importantly, prepare you well for your career. More specifically, 
I want to help you to land a great engineering job in your dream company or get admitted to a 
graduate program of your choice even before you graduate from here. To that end, if you have any 
problems that interfere with your academic work, see me as soon as possible so we can look for a 
solution. 

