 451
College information system research based on data mining 
An-yi Lan 1, Jie Li 2 
1 Hebei North University Hebei, China 
2 Agricultural University of Hebei Hebei, China 
Abstract.In this paper, the existing data mining algorithms are improved through the research on them. 
And through the mentioned data mining algorithm, the student information management module in college 
information management system was implemented. According to the data of students’course and pre-course 
selection in course selection management database, using the data mining algorithm presented in this paper, it 
mines the association rules of the courses, identifies the relationship of students’ selected courses and provide 
basis for planning and curriculum classification.  
The experiment shows that the data mining algorithm presented in this paper can not only achieve the 
function of data mining, the mining speed is also improved for a certain degree, and finally this method is 
simple and easy to implement. 
Keywords:Data mining; association rules; information system 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, with the development of database and information technology to be technical support, 
the rapid popularization of network technology to be development channel, the volume supply of computer 
hardware, data collection equipment and the storage medium to be material basis, people’s data-collection 
capabilities have been significantly increased, all sectors of society have stored a lot of information such as 
the types of production, management and research, and the global data storage capacity is being increased 
dramatically. However, in sharp contrast with this is that the people's understanding of large-scale data 
capacity has not been effectively increased, and only relying on the traditional data search and statistical 
analysis methods is such as far from enough to meet the needs of others, resulting in a "data rich, but 
information poor "situation [3] . 
In order to extract mode from the mass data storage, find the rule of the data changes and the relationship 
between data, fully explore the potential of data to guide decision-making and scientific discovery works, the 
needs of people for data analysis and even translating it into the knowledge which can be understood easily 
is more and more imminent. The knowledge discovery technology of data mining met the needs of people, 
provided a powerful mean to automatically and intelligently translate the mass data into useful information 
knowledge, which spanned a convenient bridge for the gulf between data and knowledge. As a new 
technology which can automatically and efficiently extract the valuable information and knowledge from the 
mass data to effectively support the decision-making, data mining has a very important theoretical and 
practical significance and wide application prospects. The data mining theory has aroused the interest of 
researchers in many fields, so data mining is not only the leading issues of information science, but also a 
theoretical and practical issue combining multi research areas such as machine learning, pattern recognition, 
statistics, intelligent databases, knowledge acquisition and expert system. At present, data mining technology 
has been initially used in business, finance, agriculture and other areas,and also has obtained good results [1] . 
2. DATA MINING 
 
  2009 International Conference on Machine Learning and Computing  
IPCSIT vol.3 (2011) © (2011) IACSIT Press, Singapore 
 452
Data mining is a process to extract the implicit information and knowledge which is potentially useful 
and people do not know in advance, and this extraction is from the mass, incomplete, noisy, fuzzy and 
random data [2] . 
The essential difference between the data mining and the traditional data analysis (such as query, 
reporting and on-line application of analysis) is that the data mining is to mine information and discover 
knowledge on the premise of no clear assumption [4] . The gained information from data mining should has 
unknown, effective and available characteristics. The previously unknown information is that the 
information had not been anticipated in advance, that is, data mining is to find the information or knowledge 
which can not be found relying on intuition, even the information or knowledge which is contrary to intuition, 
and the more unexpected the mined information is, the more valuable it may be. The validity of the 
information requests that the data to be mined should be checked carefully, only the validity of the 
information (or data) to be mined is ensured the validity of the extracted information will be ensured. Most 
importantly, the information received must be practical, that is, the information or knowledge is valid, 
practical and achievable for the discussed business or research area. 
2.1. Data mining process 
Generally, data mining process is composed by data preparation, data mining, information expression 
and analysis decision-making phases, the specific process as shown in fig.1[5] . 
 
Fig.1:data mining general process 
1) Data preparation 
Data preparation generally consists of two processes: data collection and data collation. Data collection 
is the first step of data mining, and the data can come from the existing transaction processing systems, also 
can be obtained from the data warehouse; data collation is to eliminate noise or inconsistent data, it is the 
necessary link of data mining. The data obtained from the phase of the data collection may have a certain 
degree of "pollution", which refers to that in the data may be its own inconsistency, or some missing data, so 
the collation of the data is essential [9] . At the same time, through data collation the data can be done on a 
simple generalization processing, thus on the basis of the original data more rich data information will be 
obtained, which will facilitate the next data mining step. 
2) Data mining 
Data mining is the core stage of the entire process, it mainly uses the collected mining tools and 
techniques to deal with the data, thus the rules, patterns and trends will be found. 
3) Information expression 
Information expression is to use visualization and knowledge information expression technology to 
provide the mined knowledge information for users, is an important means to show the data mining results. 
Clear and effective mining result information expression will greatly facilitate the accuracy and efficiency of 
the decision-making. 
 453
4) Analysis and decision-making 
The ultimate goal of data mining is to assist the decisionmaking.Decision-makers can analyze the results 
of data mining and adjust the decision-making strategies combining with the actual situation. 
2.2. Data mining classification 
There are many classification methods of data mining technology. According to the mining tasks it can 
be divided into association rule mining, data classification rules mining, clustering rules mining, model-
dependent analysis and discovery, as well as the concept description, deviation analysis, trend analysis and 
pattern analysis; According to the mined database it can be divided into relational database, object-oriented 
database, spatial database, time-based databases, multimedia databases and heterogeneous databases; 
According to the technology used it can be divided into artificial neural networks, decision trees, genetic 
algorithm, the neighborhood principle and vision, and so on [3] . 
2.3. Association rule mining 
In the knowledge modes data mining discovered, association rule mode is a very important and also the 
most active branch. Association rule refers to the rules of certain association relationship between groups of 
objects in the database. It can be used to find the contact among the different commodities (terms) in the 
transaction database, and so that the behavior patterns of customer purchases will be found. Fining that rules 
can be applied for merchandise shelf design, inventory arrangements and users classification according to the 
purchase patterns. 
Association rule mining can be described as following: assuming 
 1 2I= , , , ni i i is n aggregates with 
different terms, then for a transaction database D , each element T inD is a set composed by some terms in I, 
T I .The association rule is expressed as X Y ,hereinto, X I , Y I and X Y  .The 
association rule mining is to discover all condition implicative expression meeting the minimum degree of 
confidence and support users given, that is, association rules. The confidence and support degree of these 
rules are all greater than or equal to the minimum degree of confidence and support [7] . 
The confidence and support degree of the association rules respectively reflects the correct degree and 
the support rate of them. Analyzing from semantic perspective, the degree of confidence refers to the 
trustworthiness of the rules; support degree refers to the possibility of the rule mode appearance, reflects the 
importance of the antecedent to the consequent. 
In general, the user can define two thresholds which is respectively set as minimum support threshold 
and minimum confidence threshold, the support and confidence degree the data mining system generated are 
required to be not less than the two given thresholds, then we can say that this rule is valid, otherwise it is 
null and void. Thus a specific association rules can be uniquely identified by using a implication expression 
and two thresholds. 
3. ASSOCIATION RULE MINING ALGORITHM IMPROVEMENT 
After analyzing the characteristics of the association rules in relational database and the two basic ideas 
of mining association rules in the current relational database, in order to help the "seamless" connectivity 
between the mining algorithm and the existing relational database management system and improve the 
mining efficiency, in this paper the technical idea of aggregate operation based on SQL language is adopted, 
and through the process of generating the search table with smaller data scale than the mining source table 
and the key technology which uses generating attribute combinations to support the connection query 
between the aggregation operations and the frequent relation item tables in the search replace, a high-
performance association rule mining algorithm in relational database is presented. 
The whole algorithm is divided into frequent item set search and the generation of strong association 
rules two steps. The search of frequent relationship item set is still the core of the whole mining algorithm, 
and its efficiency has a great influence to the overall efficiency of the algorithm. 
Through collecting the support count of all the relationship item sets in the search replace table, the 
algorithm can adopt the minimum support threshold to select out all the frequent relationship item sets. The 
generation method of the strong association rules has the same principle with Boolean association rules, 
 454
which adopted the packet processing methods to improve the overall operation efficiency, and therefore in 
this paper the search process of the frequent item set will be focused on. 
3.1. Algorithm idea 
The relation database contains complex multi-valued, multi-dimensional association rules, if analyzed 
from Boolean-based mining idea, the mining process is bound to be complex and cumbersome than the one-
dimensional Boolean rule in affair database; but if analyzed from the view of SQL-based operation 
technology, the mining algorithm of the association rules in relational database is more easily understood and 
realized. SQL language only needs to use its nine verbs to meet users’ operation request on the database. 
One of the main reasons is that its commands contain some simple and efficient operate clauses and 
functions. And using it the discovery process of the frequent relational item set will become simple and 
intuitive. Therefore, using all the nonempty sub sets which have associated attributes with the mining task in 
the relational database to be the grouping attributes of SELECT statement, all the unions of the 
implementation results are the implied all frequent relational item sets which can meet the minimum support 
users appointed, the specific algorithm process as shown in Fig.2. 
 
Fig.2:algorithm process figure 
4. DATA MINING ALGORITHM APPLICATION IN COLLEGE 
INFORMATION MANAGEMENT 
Due to space limitations, in this paper only the application of data mining algorithm in student 
information management module will be introduced. In student information management module, the goal 
should be achieved is to identify the relationship of students’ selected courses and provide basis for planning 
and curriculum classification according to the data of students’ course and pre-course selection in course 
selection management database. 
4.1. Application of Data mining algorithm in college information management 
Assuming that macrocosm is the course aggregate the distance education provider can provide, and then 
each course has a Boolean variable to show the availability of the course. Each elective sequence can be 
expressed by using a Boolean vector. The Boolean vectors can be analyzed to obtain the elective mode 
reflected the course frequent association. These modes can be expressed in the form of between the 
curriculums students selected can be found through mining the association rules of the elective course in 
student elective management database. Because that only the one-dimensional data of the courses the 
students selected, in this paper the data mining algorithm introduced above should be adopted to generate 
association rules from the frequent item sets, the realized process as shown in figure 3. 
 455
4.2. Mining test results 
1) Experiment circumstance 
This experiment uses HP Pavilion g3628cx PC machine with storage of 2G, the database circumstance is 
Visual FoxPro 6.0, SPSS Clementine 10.0. 
2) Experiment data 
Assuming the course macrocosm is: {I1=software engineering, I2=data structure, I3=database 
principle,I4=object-oriented program design, I5=C language,I6=college English, I7=higher mathematics, 
I8=computer principle, I9=computer network}. From the student course management database and through 
relationship query the related group set will be achieved, and the specific content as shown in table 1. 
TABLE 1. STUDENT COURSE DATA GROUP SET 
Group ide ntifier Data item list
1 14,15,16 
2 13,14,19 
3 13,18,19 
4 17,18 
5 12,13,19 
6 11,13,14 
7 12,13,14 
8 11,12 
Assuming that the minimum affair support is 2, the output rule is: I3> I4, I9> I3. That is, the students 
selected the course of  “database principle”  are also apt to select the course of  “object-oriented program 
design” ; the students selected the course of  “computer network”  are also apt to select the course of  
“database principle”. 
5. CONCLUSION 
Data mining is a hot topic of the computer science research in recent years, and it has a extensive 
applications in various fields. Data mining technology is an applicationoriented technology. It not only is a 
simple search, query and transfer on the particular database, but also analyzes, integrates and reasons these 
data to guide the solution of practical problems and find the relation between events, and even to predict 
future activities through using the existing data [8] . In this paper, through the mentioned data mining 
algorithm, the student information management module in college information management system was 
implemented. 
According to the data of students’ course and pre-course selection in course selection management 
database, using the data mining algorithm presented in this paper, it mines the association rules of the 
courses, identifies the relationship of students’ selected courses and provide basis for planning and 
curriculum classification. The experiment shows that the data mining algorithm presented in this paper can 
not only achieve the function of data mining, the mining speed is also improved for a certain degree, and 
finally this method is simple and easy to implement. 
6.   REFERENCES 
[1] Ming-Syan Chen, Jiawei Han, Philip S yu. Data Mining: An Overview from a Database Perspective[J]. IEEE 
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, l996, 8(6):866-883. 
[2] R Agrawal ,T 1 mielinski, A Swami. Database Mining: A Performance Perspective[J]· IEEE Transactions on 
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 1993,12:914-925. 
[3] Vasant Dhat. Data Mining In Finance: Using Counterfactuals to generate knowledge from organizational 
information 
[4] system[J].Information System,1998,23(7):423-437. 
[5] Rakesh Agrawal, Sakti Ghosh, Tomasz Imielinski, Bala lyer, Aran Swami. An Interval Classifier for Database 
Mining Applications[M]. CLDB92. Vancouver, British Coumbia, Vanada, 1992:560～573. 
 456
[6] J Han, Y Cai, N Cercone. Knowledge Discovery in Database: An Attribute-Oriented Approach [M]. VLDB-92, 
Vancouver, British Columbia,Canada,1992:547-559. 
[7] J.Hipp, U.Guntzer, G.Nakhaeizadeh. Algorithms for association generation. In Proc ACM-SIGMOD. Dallas, TX, 
May 2000. 1-12. 
[8] Agrawal R, Srikant R. Privacy-Preserving Data Mining. ACM SIGMOD Conference on Management of 
Data.Dallas,Texas,2000.439-450. 
[9] Hand D, Mannila H, Smyth P. Principle of Date Mining, Cambridge, CA. MIT Press, 2001:1-2. 
[10] Han J W, Kamber M. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques. San Francisco: CA. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers. 
2001:2-4. 

