NoSQL storage and management of geospatial data with emphasis on 
serving geospatial data using standard geospatial web services 
Pouria Amirian, Adam Winstanley, Anahid Basiri 
 
Department of Computer Science, National University of Ireland Maynooth  
Tel. (+353) 1 7083853  Fax (+353) 1 7083848 
amirian@cs.nuim.ie, adam.winstanley@nuim.ie, anahid.basiri@nuim.ie 
 
KEYWORDS: BIG GEOSPATIAL DATA, NOSQL, GEOSPATIAL WEB SERVICE 
1. Introduction  
Today a huge amount of geospatial data is being created, collected and used more than ever 
before. The ever increasing observations and measurements of geo-sensor networks, satellite 
imageries, point clouds from laser scanning, geospatial data of Location Based Services 
(LBS) and location-based social networks has become a serious challenge for data 
management and analysis systems. Traditionally, Relational Database Management Systems 
(RDBMS) were used to manage and to some extent analyse the geospatial data. Nowadays 
these systems can be used in many scenarios but there are some situations when using these 
systems may not provide the required efficiency and effectiveness. In these situations, 
NoSQL solutions can provide the efficiency necessary for applications using geospatial data. 
It is important to differentiate between the physical way a NoSQL product is implemented, 
and the interfaces, coding and access methods they use for the abstraction of data. This paper 
provides an overview of the major types of NoSQL solutions, their advantages and 
disadvantages and the challenges they present in managing geospatial data. Then the paper 
elaborates on serving geospatial data using standard geospatial web services with a NoSQL 
database as a backend. 
2. Why Use a NoSQL Database for Management of Geospatial Data? 
It has been more than thirty years since relational DBMSs became the major solution for 
storing all kinds of data in many types of applications. They manage data using relational 
algebra and relational calculus as their theoretical foundation. They use tables, relationships, 
keys and Structured Query Language (SQL) to perform all sorts of functions with data. They 
usually are the best solutions when the schema of data is fixed and predefined. In other 
words, RDBMSs are ideal solutions to managing structured data.  
RDBMS can be effectively used in many common GIS workflows. Since they support 
transaction and locking features, they provide robust backends for enterprise GIS systems. 
Usually geospatial data have a fixed schema and in most cases they are not used in isolation. 
That is a join of two or more datasets and connecting data through spatial operations is 
needed in most GIS workflows. For this reason managing fixed schema geospatial data and 
using them in GIS workflows can usually be done effectively through RDBMS systems. 
However, today unstructured and semi-structured data are becoming mainstream. 
Observation and measurements from diverse kinds of sensors, geospatial data of Location 
Based Services (LBS) and social networks are three examples of semi-structured and 
unstructured data in the geospatial world. In addition, there are also some methods that 
generate massive geospatial data, for example remote sensing (RS) and laser scanning. In 
some situations when high availability and scalability is needed, RDBMSs provide very 
expensive solutions for managing such data even if it has a fixed schema. For example, in an 
Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL) application, an RDBMS cannot easily handle the 
possibly massive read and write operations. In these situations NoSQL databases can provide 
a highly accessible and scalable way of managing semi-structured or unstructured geospatial 
data efficiently.  
In addition, some problems arise with RDBMS systems when scalability is needed by adding 
more servers and technologies to bind them together. In addition with more load on the 
system, vertical partitioning, denormalization and removal of the relational constraints comes 
into play. In summary, to achieve high scalability in RDBMS systems the normalized 
relational model of data storage has to be compromised and deviated from relational model.    
3. What is a NoSQL Database? 
The NoSQL DBMSs are a broad class of DBMSs identified by non-adherence to the 
RDBMS model. In general, the most significant difference is the lack of SQL. There are 
different types of NoSQL databases, each with distinct set of characteristics but they all can 
deal with large amounts of (semi-structured and unstructured) data and are able to support a 
large set of read and write operations. For this reason NoSQL and relational models are not 
in contrast with each other rather they complement each other. The most widely accepted 
taxonomy of NoSQL databases are: key-value, document, tabular or columnar and graph. 
The key-value database is the simplest type of NoSQL databases. As the name implies, this 
type of database stores schema-less data using keys. The key is usually a string and the stored 
values can be any valid type such as a primitive programming data type (string, integer etc) 
or a BLOB (Binary Large Object) without any predefined schema. It provides a simple API 
to access stored data (Fowler and Sadalage). In most cases, this type of NoSQL database 
solution provides very little functionality beyond key-value storage. There is no support for 
relationships (Fowler and Sadalage). In terms of concurrency, they usually provide eventual 
consistency but don’t provide optimistic concurrency especially in highly scalable 
environments. Queries are just limited to accessing values using keys but since there is one 
request to access the value, the queries are executed quickly. Transactions are limited to a 
single key. The database contains no semantic model. In other words, the client is in charge 
of interpreting and understanding values. 
Key-value databases can be utilized to store geospatial data but their complexity hinders 
spatial searches especially for polylines and polygons. For this reason, it needs to be spatially 
indexed for fast data retrieval which, in most cases, gives lower performance than a relational 
database. Many researchers and developers recommend using indexing techniques such as 
grids or tiles (Schwartz), quadkeys, space filling curves (Fuller) and similar approaches. In 
summary, key-value data stores are ideal for inserting, deleting and searching huge amount 
of data items using their unique identifiers (keys). If spatial searches are needed however 
they are not good solutions.  
A document database in its simplest form is a key-value database in which the database 
understands its values (Hecht and Jablonski). In other words, values inside the database are 
based on predefined formats such as XML, JSON or BSON (Binary JSON). This feature of 
document databases provides many advantages over key-value databases. Instead of putting 
too much logic in the application tier, many operations can be done by the database itself. 
Queries in this type of NoSQL databases are quite flexible and some document databases 
even have their own query languages. Similar to key-value databases, there is no need to 
adhere to a predefined schema to insert data. There is only limited support for relationships 
and joins as each document is stand alone. However, more concurrency options, such as 
optimistic concurrency and eventual consistency are available (Tiwari). Transaction integrity 
is supported for one document or document fragment.  
The document databases can be used for managing geospatial data more effectively than key-
value databases. Since geospatial data inside the document database can be retrieved using 
flexible queries, they can be used for storing and managing geospatial data in multiple use 
cases. In fact many document databases support geospatial data natively or through 
extensions (Schutzberg). Some applications of LBS such as proximity queries can be 
efficiently implemented using these document databases. As mentioned before, relationships 
and joins are not supported the way they are supported in relational databases. Often in 
common GIS workflows relationships and joins have to be used. Special kinds of document 
database can partially handle relationships. Native XML databases can be configured to 
enforce adherence to set of predefined XML schemas. In addition to all the advantages of 
document databases, native XML databases are able to utilize many XML technologies to 
provide further functionality. For example, they can use XQuery and XPath to perform 
various queries and create flexible result sets, they can make use of XPointer to reference 
other documents thus modelling a relationship and they can use XSD and RelaxNG to 
enforce schema validation. Geography Markup Language (GML), as a standard mechanism 
for storing, modelling and exchanging geospatial data, is an XML-based grammar and so 
Native XML databases are an ideal choice for managing geospatial data in GML format.  
The tabular or columnar (or column family) database stores data in columns. This is in 
contrast to the row-oriented format in relational databases (Tiwari). The column is the 
smallest unit of data and it is a triplet that contains a key, value and timestamp (Hecht and 
Jablonski). Columnar databases store all values beside the name of the columns and stores 
null values simply by ignoring the column. Usually, related columns compose a column-
family. All the data in a single column family will be stored on the same physical set of files 
(Xiang, Hou and Zhou). This feature provides higher performance for search, data retrieval 
and replication operations. A super column is a column that contains other columns but it 
cannot contain other super columns (Tiwari). Most columnar databases use a distributed file-
system to store data to disk and so provide a horizontally scalable system. In fact columnar 
databases are designed to run on a large number of machines. Queries in this type of NoSQL 
databases are limited to keys and in most cases they don’t provide a way to query by column 
or value. By limiting queries to just keys, columnar databases ensure that procedure to find 
the machine containing actual data is quite fast. There is no join capability and, as in other 
types of NoSQL databases, there is limited support for transactions. 
Columnar databases are ideal for storing huge amounts of data when high availability is 
needed. Similar to document databases, there are many columnar databases which support 
the management and simple analysis of geospatial data. Any GIS related application which 
needs heavy data insertion and fast data retrieval with simple queries can efficiently make 
use of columnar databases. As an example, an Automatic Vehicle Location (AVL) 
application which needs to track the location of many vehicles simultaneously can store the 
incoming data from vehicles in a columnar database and respond to queries efficiently. 
As the name implies graph databases are based on graph theory and employ nodes, properties 
and edges as their building blocks. In the graph databases various nodes might have different 
properties. The graph databases are well suited for data which can be modelled as networks 
such as road networks, social networks, biological networks and semantic webs. Their main 
feature is the fact that each node contains a direct pointer to its adjacent node and no index 
lookups are necessary for traversing data. As a result they can manage huge amount of data 
as long as the data do not require expensive join operations. Some of graph databases support 
transactions in the way that relational databases support them (Perdue). In other words the 
graph database allows the update of a section of the graph in an isolated environment, hiding 
changes from other processes until the transaction is committed.   
Geospatial data can be modelled as graphs. Since graph databases support topology natively, 
topological relationship between geospatial data can be easily managed by this type of 
NoSQL databases. In most GIS workflows, topological relationships play a major role. In 
addition, since graph databases are ideal for managing data with evolving schema, they can 
be effectively used in Volunteered Geographic Information (VGI) and crowd sourcing 
applications. Also, graph databases are the best choice for managing huge linear networks 
(such as roads) and for routing and navigation applications. 
4. Using an SQL Database in a NoSQL Manner 
In an inter-organizational and intra-organizational business intelligence environment with 
many software infrastructures, data models, data exchange patterns and policies, 
interoperability is a major concern. It is common practice to resort to Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA) and Service Orientation (SO) principles to provide the interoperability 
needed for all components participating in every work process that has potential for 
reusability. These services are often implemented using web service technologies. In 
geospatial workflows, reusable services are usually implemented based on Open Geospatial 
Consortium (OGC) specifications.   
However, geospatial services based on OGC specification and web services are not the same 
(Amirian, Alesheikh and basiri, Sample, Shaw, Tu and Abdelgurfi) but both are in line with 
the idea of SOA. As part of an enterprise architecture and closely related to the quality of 
service parameters of SOA, the most effective and efficient solution to manage data must be 
selected and implemented. In many situations, NoSQL databases are ideal solutions which 
provide high availability and horizontal scalability with less effort and complexity. However, 
the most important barrier to adapting a NoSQL solution is the lack of organisational agility. 
In a survey conducted by Information Week, 44% of business IT professionals had not heard 
of NoSQL (Babcock). 
In other words, many organizations for different reasons are not agile enough to change their 
software infrastructure and switch to NoSQL databases. In this situation, one of the best 
strategies to gradually adapt NoSQL solutions is to use RDBMSs in a NoSQL fashion. This 
means using tables to store data, denormalize and vertical partitioning of data inside tables. 
6. Acknowledgements 
Research presented in this paper was funded by a Strategic Research Cluster grant 
(07/SRC/I1168) by Science Foundation Ireland under the National Development Plan. The 
authors gratefully acknowledge this support. 
References  
Fowler, M. and Sadalage, P. 2012. NoSQL distilled: a brief guide to the emerging world of 
polyglot persistence. Addison-Wesley. 
Schwartz, J. 2009. Tiles of BingMap. http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/bb259689.aspx 
Fuller, A. 2010, Space filling curves. 
http://www.google.com/intl/ga/events/io/2010/sessions/next-gen-queries-appengine.html 
Hecht, R. and Jablonski. S. 2011. NoSQL Evaluation A Use Case Oriented Survey. 
International Conference on Cloud and Service Computing, 336-341. 
Tiwari, S. 2011. Professional NoSQL. Wrox publication. 
Schutzberg, A. 2011. NoSQL databases: What Geospatial Users Need to Know.  
Chang, F., Dean, J., Ghemawat, S., Hsieh, W. and Gruber. R. 2006. Bigtable: A distributed 
storage system for structured data. seventh symposium on operating system design and 
implementation. 
Xiang, P., Hou, R. and Zhou, Z. 2010. Cache and consistency in NoSQL. 3rd IEEE 
international conference on computer science and information technology, 117-120. 
Amirian, P., Alesheikh, A. and Basiri, A. 2010. Standard-based, interoperable services for 
accessing urban services data, Computer Environment and Urban Systems, 34 (4), 309-321. 
Sample, J., Shaw, K., Tu , S. and Abdelguerfi, M. 2008. Geospatial Services and 
Applications for the Internet, SpringerScience. 
Perdue, T. 2011. http://newtech.about.com/od/databasemanagement/a/Nosql.htm 
Babcock, C. 2010. http://www.informationweek.co.uk/software/information-
management/surprise-44-of-business-it-pros-never-he/227500077?queryText=nosql+survey 
 
Biography 
Pouria Amirian holds a PhD of Geospatial Information Systems (GIS). He is a PostDoctoral 
Research Fellow in the Department of Computer Science at National University of Ireland 
Maynooth on the Strategic Research in Advanced Geotechnologies (StratAG) project. His 
areas of interest includes spatial interoperability, spatial databases, NoSQL, Service 
Oriented Architecture and Web Services Technologies.  
Adam Winstanley is Head of Computer Science at NUI Maynooth and co-PI on StratAG. He 
is also a Senior Research Associate in the National Centre for Geocomputation in Maynooth  
Anahid Basiri is a PostDoctoral Research Fellow in the Department of Computer Science, 
NUI Maynooth. Her current research interests include navigation services, uncertainty in 
GIS and spatio-temporal objects. 

