International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
1 
A Survey of Issues in Multimedia Databases 
 
Madiha Waris 
National University of Sciences 
and Technology, Islamabad, 
Pakistan 
 
Farooque Azam 
National University of Sciences 
and Technology, Islamabad, 
Pakistan 
 
Abdul Wahab Muzaffar 
National University of Sciences 
and Technology, Islamabad, 
Pakistan 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Multimedia Database Security is a challenging concept in 
Database Management Systems. The use of Multimedia 
DBMS technology has increased terrifically over the last few 
years on the web as well as in several software applications. A 
multimedia communication system facilitates basic functions 
of Multimedia Database i.e. generation of multimedia data, its 
storage, and management, distribution, receiving, consuming, 
editing, and sharing, and so on. In this paper the different 
issues related to Multimedia Database Management System 
(MMDBMS) have been discussed. The challenges discussed 
by each paper reviewed in the field of Multimedia Database 
Management Systems have been analyzed. An empirical 
analysis has been done in the end to compare the issues stated 
by each author in literature. Due to this analysis it will help 
the technical people and research workers to avoid the 
indicated challenges while working in the field of Multimedia 
Database Management System (MMDBMS). 
Keywords 
Multimedia Database Management System, Database 
Management System.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the recent world everyone is dealing with multimedia 
everywhere. We have multimedia around us everywhere. Due 
to the evolution of information technology the importance of 
multimedia has enhanced. So, this is the reason that we have 
to structure the multimedia information in a structured order 
so that we may have information access whenever we require. 
The multimedia data is not protected from unauthorized 
access. So, to cater for these security issues possible measures 
should been taken e.g. Data Analysis, Storage Management 
and Data Integrity should be checked to see how much the 
data in multimedia database is secure. While doing Data 
Analysis, Meta data management has to be done in order to do 
pattern matching. For Storage Management, the issues to be 
handled are access criteria for multimedia data types, and 
special index development. Data integrity checking includes 
maintenance of data by sustaining data quality, controlling 
concurrency, and multimedia updates recovery. 
 
To keep multimedia databases secure and safe; is a difficult 
process e.g. command and control applications. In order to 
have a system secure completely and end to end security is 
needed i.e. there should be 100% secure multimedia database 
management system, secure networks, secure middle wares, 
and secure applications. 
A comprehensive structure of Multimedia database 
information system has been shown in Figure 1 which depicts 
the flow of Multimedia data objects while processing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1: A Generalized Architecture of Multimedia 
Database Information System 
 
1.1. Multimedia Data: 
The objects of Multimedia data include texts, images, 
graphics, animations, video, sound recordings, music, signals 
etc. which are converted from different formats into digital 
media.  
1.2. Database and Multimedia Database: 
A database constitutes a controlled collection of data related 
to a given entity, and a Multimedia database is a controlled 
collection of multimedia data. They deal with such a huge 
amount of data which a simple DBMS is unable to deal. 
1.2.1. DBMS and Multimedia Database 
Management System: 
Database Management Systems constitute an organized set of 
data with the programs which are helpful for the definition, 
creation, storage, access, and querying of database. 
Multimedia Database Management System lies under 
multimedia information systems. A multimedia DBMS 
maintains multimedia data types, and provides services for the 
multimedia database creation, storage, access, query, and 
management. These are used when we have to deal with a 
huge amount of multimedia data objects of different types of 
data media.  
A multimedia DBMS must provide basic functions of DBMS: 
 Data independence 
 Data modeling 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Multimedia 
Content 
Generation 
Multimedia 
Content 
Storage 
Multimedia 
Content 
Distribution 
Multimedia 
Content 
Receiving 
Networks 
(Wired or 
Wireless) 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
2 
 Data Creation 
 Data organization 
 Data retrieval 
 Data Access [1] 
 
1.3. Security of multimedia databases: 
For editing and browsing the multimedia databases has a great 
security issue. While a person is editing or browsing a link; he 
should be properly checked that if he is authorized to do it or 
not e.g. films are edited and some portions of films are 
deleted, so, it should be taken into consideration properly to 
cater for security issues in this sense. 
Similarly, multimedia transaction is another issue; in which 
the data from various locations is carried and is combined or 
simultaneously updated or edited. 
Inference problem is also one of the major issues in 
MMDBMS indicated in this paper in which the user can see 
even those objects to which he is not authorized. 
 
2. PROBLEM DEFINITION AND 
SCOPE OF SURVEY 
A lot of problems are faced today due to multimedia security 
issues. In human being’s life multimedia information 
applications have gained so much importance due to the large 
scale usage of mobile TV, digital libraries, video conferences 
and on-line chatting [7][8]. In general, the characteristics 
provided by a multimedia communication system are creation, 
organization, communication and consumption of multimedia 
data which includes images, texts, videos, audios, and 
animations, etc. 
In this paper all the issues and problems which have been 
presented in different research papers in literature will be 
discussed and analyzed.  A survey will be conducted to do a 
comparative analysis of the issues discussed by different 
authors focusing on the security and other emerging issues in 
Multimedia Database Technology. 
 
3. RELATED WORK 
There are various issues discussed related to Multimedia 
Databases in the research papers to be surveyed here [2, 3, 4]. 
Thuraisingham during a study [2] discussed Security and 
Privacy issues related to MMDBMS. The access control, 
security policies, security architecture and privacy problems 
which are being emerged from Multimedia Data Mining have 
also been explained in the paper. Also the security challenges 
being faced by the text, images, audio and videos have been 
discussed.  
Security Policy: 
The two kinds of security policies have been discussed by the 
author i.e. the security rules which are specific to some 
applications and secondly the security rules which are 
independent of any kind of applications. For these two kinds 
the security policy is such that, any user which is operating on 
a certain level is never authorized to access the multimedia 
data i.e. images, audio, and videos contained by any second 
user if the second user is at more sensitive level. The policy 
described is for multilevel purposes.   
Architectures for secure MMDBMS: 
The author has described certain architectures of secure 
multimedia database management system which is shown in 
Figure 2. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
          Fig 2: Architectures for secure Multimedia Database 
Management System 
The architectures shown in Figure 2 are described as follows: 
 Integrity Lock Architecture: 
In this technique; in order to have a communication between 
multimedia data collector and multimedia data manager, a 
trusted agent at first calculates a cryptographic checksum for 
each multimedia data object which can be any kind of image, 
video or an audio. These data objects and checksums are 
stored in the database. Now, if the retrieved data is same as 
the data stored in the multimedia database then it means that it 
is the data without any kind of modification. It shows that the 
multimedia data manager is trust worthy.  
 Distributed Architecture: 
In this architecture; the data received by multimedia trusted 
agent can be either classified or unclassified data. If it is 
classified data then it is sent to classified data manager and if 
it unclassified data then it is sent to unclassified data manager.  
 Access control Architecture: 
The multimedia data is partitioned in this technique and 
operating system controls the access to this multimedia data 
i.e. unclassified and secret data are stored in their respective 
files. While querying this data is then recombined by the data 
manager. The data manager is not trusted in this technique.  
 Trusted Architecture: 
In this architecture the multimedia data manager is trusted in 
order to check the performance of above described 
architectures. The security issues related to Multimedia 
databases have been discussed by the author as stated in the 
next section. 
Security issues: 
For multimedia data base management information systems 
there is a need of secure system because this system has a 
huge effect on the applications like multimedia data mining, 
digital libraries, document publishing, and e-commerce etc.  
 
Integrity Lock 
Architecture 
Distributed 
Architecture 
Access Control 
Architecture 
Trusted 
Architecture 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
3 
The security issues related to above stated applications have 
been discussed in the paper; which are shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 3: Security Issues of Multimedia Databases 
The author presents the security issues shown in Figure 3 as 
the major issues faced by multimedia database management 
system and their description is as follows: 
 Secure Digital Libraries: 
These libraries contained digital documents which can be 
added, deleted, modified, and processed as required. The issue 
is that these documents which can be in the form of audio, 
video, text or images; can be accessed via traversing of the 
links. Therefore, safe and secure processing of queries, 
storage of data and management of this data is a big issue in 
digital libraries. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 E-Commerce Security: 
In MMDBMS e-commerce is called multimedia commerce. 
The issue here is to have a secure process of interchanging the 
documents and transaction data. For that purpose XML and 
SMIL i.e. Synchronized Multimedia Language, have been 
suggested in order to have secure transaction and it is assured 
that this data will be examined by authorized users only. 
 Secure Publishment of Multimedia documents: 
The user should always get data to which he is authorized and 
also that some encryption technique should be adopted in 
order to forward exact data to the authorized user. So, the 
issue is to publish XML documents on web in the presence of 
un trusted third parties which may have unauthorized access 
to data and may modify it. 
Yu and Brandenburg et. al [3] proposed the issues related to 
Multimedia DBMS in teaching in the classroom environment 
and the challenges faced by multimedia DBMS have also 
been proposed. Due to the large quantity of multimedia data 
being used by everyone now a days; it has also become a 
challenge for educators to do the best use of this data while 
teaching i.e. to efficiently access, browse, search and store 
data.  
The problems associated with the applications used in 
classroom environment as discussed by the author are as 
follows: 
 Face to Face courses 
 E-Learning 
 Distant education courses  
The challenges faced by multimedia DBMS proposed in the 
paper are shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The issues which author has summarized in Figure 4 are as 
follows: 
 Temporality: 
The multimedia databases which have time related 
requirements may have problems in storage, and presentation 
of data in contrast to spatial data. 
 Logistics: 
 
Digital       
Library 
Security 
 
      Ecommerce         
        Security         
  Documents 
      Security 
 
Challenges 
Temporality Logistics Teacher’s 
Technological Skills  
Lack of 
Structure 
Massive 
Volume 
Data 
Availability 
Data Storage 
and Retrieval 
File Format 
and Retrieval 
Fig 4: Challenges faced by MMDBMS 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
4 
The processing of multimedia databases can be problematic if 
non standard media is used, but if some kinds of compression 
algorithms are used then security is assured.  
 Teacher’s Technological Skills: 
Due to the increase in the development of multimedia 
databases it is very much required that he should have latest 
upgraded knowledge according to the advancement in media. 
 Massive Volume: 
Multimedia databases need a device having huge capacity for 
storage of data.  
 Lack of Structure: 
There is the structure lack in multimedia databases due to 
which there is problem in searching and retrieval of data from 
multimedia databases. 
The author concludes that if a teacher uses an efficient method 
for using applications of multimedia information then he will 
be able to achieve the goals required. 
A. Natsev, J. R. Smith et.al [4] explained the problems 
associated with high level querying of multimedia data types. 
The problems have been identified by checking the 
multimedia data objects by applying certain conditions on that 
data. The author presented a model which was based on 
querying by concept method, where there was no criterion for 
searching in search engines. 
Some key factors and challenges faced by the multimedia 
frameworks have also been suggested by the author which are 
as follows: 
 Multimedia Querying 
 Knowledge Representation 
 Fuzzy Joining 
 Extraction 
 Storage and 
 Matching  
S. Lian et.al in the paper [5] provided a comprehensive 
evaluation of security of multimedia information system. A 
general architecture of multimedia information systems has 
been introduced, and also a mechanism for investigation of 
security issues for these systems has been provided.  
In the first phase the security issues have been described in 
the paper, and in the second phase the latest security solutions 
have been provided to handle those problems. According to 
author in multimedia database systems the major factor is to 
handle the security protection. It has been proposed to do the 
protection in multimedia contents, service interaction and 
privacy must be ensured.  
Security Issues: 
The issues discussed in this paper are as follows: 
 Confidentiality i.e. Security protection. 
 Eavesdropping which may be active or passive 
 Intrusion i.e. Unauthorized access (Access control) 
 Forgery i.e. Modification of multimedia data 
 Piracy i.e. Unauthorized use of material 
 Privacy i.e. Traitor tracing (when data is sent to an 
un authorized customer) 
 Ownership protection i.e. Watermarking 
 Secure User Interfaces 
The above described issues have been shown in Figure 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 5: Security Issues 
A general architecture of multimedia information system has 
also been proposed in this paper and also the solutions to 
above problems have been discussed in detail. 
H. Kosch et.al explained during the study [6] a list of open 
issues that have developed due to the progression of 
Multimedia Database System. According to author, two main 
issues regarding Multimedia Databases should be taken into 
consideration which is as follows: 
 Issues on Multimedia Data modelling 
It comprises of storage mechanism, Querying and 
Representation for logical media structure, Meta data storage 
in database, and Interoperability for data sharing. 
 Issues on Multimedia Indexing, Querying and 
Presentation 
It comprises of Data storage and retrieval i.e. exchange of 
information, access control, efficient search, temporality, 
large volume. 
The aim was to highlight the importance for a multimedia 
database system to use multiple representations of data for 
different Users and profiles, for Intellectual Property 
Management and for adaptation purposes. 
Ozsu et.al [9] proposed the problems which a multimedia 
database might have while managing a huge amount of 
multimedia data. The multimedia data requires completely 
different kinds of specifications as compared to traditional 
database application requirements. In this paper some issues 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
5 
related to MMDBMS have been discussed and a detailed 
overview of all the issues described is proposed. 
Some of the challenges discussed in this paper are as follows: 
 Access requirements of multimedia data and storage 
issue 
 Huge volume of multimedia data 
 Structure complexity 
 Temporality 
 Extensible Database management system 
requirement 
 Access Control 
 Shared Transaction handing competence 
The author argued that the above mentioned required 
characteristics from multimedia databases were difficult to be 
maintained by relational database management systems due to 
a number of architectural issues. These architectural issues 
faced  are as follows: 
 Interoperability 
 Scalability 
 Integrity 
 Querying and Fuzziness in querying 
 Distributed databases functionality 
 Quality of support 
In the paper the concluded remarks were given representing 
that multimedia databases are rich of a lot of problems to be 
catered. 
Adjeroh et al.  during a research [10] proposed the 
requirements and challenges faced by multimedia databases 
during their management. The basic nature of multimedia data 
has first been described, and then the need for MMDBMS has 
been illustrated. After that the basic issues which are vital for 
the development of these MMDBMSs have been discussed in 
detail. 
Security Issues: 
The issues which should be taken into consideration while 
developing MMDBMS explained by the author are as follows: 
 Temporality 
 High volume of data 
 Integration 
 Privacy 
 Integrity control 
 Query Support 
 Information retrieval capabilities 
 Interface interactivity 
 Quality of support 
 Distributed architecture 
The author concluded that the above mentioned issues are to 
be solved efficiently in near future so that there remains no 
data manipulation fault. 
4. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS 
In this section the different issues and challenges faced during 
Multimedia Databases Management will be focused. These 
issues and problems are listed one by one and their frequency 
in the reviewed literature is also given in the tabular form.  
 Frequency: 
The frequency is calculated in such a way that the paper 
which has an issue not common in some other paper is 
evaluated as having frequency “1” whereas the papers which 
have the common issues have been given frequency equal to 
the number of papers having that issue. The frequency 
calculation has been shown in Table 1. 
 Percentage: 
The percentage of the challenges has been founded out of 7 
research papers reviewed as shown in Table 1.  
 Criticality [11]: 
To find the measure of frequency of occurrence of an issue 
the Criticality factor is divided into four parts i.e. Medium, 
Moderate, High and Very High. The percentage range for 
criticality is defined in Table 1: 
Table 1: Percentage of Criticalatity 
Percentage Criticality 
10-20 % Medium 
20%-50% Moderate 
51%-80% High 
81%-100% Very High 
The detail of the MMDBMS Challenges is shown in the Table 
2 with the frequency of occurrence. The Percentage out of 7 
papers, frequency and criticality has been shown in Table 3. 
Table 2: Frequency of occurrence 
MULTIMEDIA DATABASE 
MANAGEMENT 
CHALLENGES 
Paper [2] Paper [3] Paper [4] Paper [5] Paper [6] Paper [9] Paper 
[10] 
1. Security Protection  
 
  
 
   
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
6 
2. Privacy 
 
  
 
  
 
3. Access Control 
 
  
    
4. Integrity 
 
    
 
 
5. Distributed 
Architecture  
    
  
6. Lack of Structure  
 
   
 
 
7. Temporality  
 
  
   
8. Massive Volume  
 
   
  
9. Logistics   
 
     
10. Interoperability     
  
 
11. Data Storage and 
Retrieval 
 
  
 
   
12. Query Support   
 
 
   
13. Quality of Service      
  
14. Interface interactivity    
 
  
 
15. Efficiency     
 
  
16. Eavesdropping    
 
   
17. Intrusion    
 
   
18. Forgery    
 
   
19. Piracy    
 
   
20. Ownership    
 
   
21. Fuzzy Joining    
 
  
 
 
22. Extraction   
 
    
23. Knowledge 
representation 
  
 
    
24. Teacher’s 
technological skills 
 
 
     
 
The Table 2 presents the papers which have common and 
uncommon issues related to multimedia databases. 
 
With the help of data obtained in Table 2 we can calculate the 
percentage and criticality also as shown in Table 3. 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
7 
Table 3: Empirical Analysis of Multimedia Database Management Issues 
 
MULTIMEDIA DATABASE 
MANAGEMENT CHALLENGES 
FREQUENCY 
Out of 7 papers 
PERCENTAGE CRITICALTIY 
1. Security Protection  2 28.57 %  Moderate 
2. Privacy 3 42.86% Moderate 
3. Access Control 5 71.43 % High 
4. Integrity 2 28.57 % Moderate 
5. Distributed Architecture 3 42.86 % Moderate 
6. Lack of Structure 2 28.57 % Moderate 
7. Temporality 4 57.14 % High 
8. Massive Volume 3 42.86 % Moderate 
9. Logistics  1 14.28 % Medium 
10. Interoperability 2 28.57 % Moderate 
11. Data Storage and Retrieval 5 71.43 % High 
12. Query Support 4 57.14 % High 
13. Quality of Service 2 28.57 % Moderate 
14. Interface interactivity 2 28.57 % Moderate 
15. Efficiency 1 14.28 % Medium 
16. Eavesdropping 1 14.28 % Medium 
17. Intrusion 1 14.28 % Medium 
18. Forgery 1 14.28 % Medium 
19. Piracy 1 14.28 % Medium 
20. Ownership 1 14.28 % Medium 
21. Fuzzy Joining  2 28.57 % Moderate 
22. Extraction 1 14.28 % Medium 
23. Knowledge representation 1 14.28 % Medium 
24. Teacher’s technological skills 1 14.28 % Medium 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
8 
4.1. Graphical Representation: 
Fig 6: Frequency of Occurrence of the Issues 
 
Fig 7: Frequency of Occurrence of the Issues 
The frequency statistics obtained in Table 2 have been shown 
graphically in Figure 6 and Figure 7. 
5. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we analyzed some typical important security 
issues from various research papers. An empirical analysis has 
been done for measuring the frequency, percentage and 
criticality of the issues in the literature. It is concluded that 
there are various issues which have been discussed in most of 
the papers and must not be touched again in future thus, 
preventing from reinvention of wheels. There are a lot of 
security issues which might be missed because all of them 
cannot be contained in one paper. This paper is a guideline for 
those researchers who want to do work in the field of 
multimedia database security so that they can have the 
knowledge of majority papers merged in this one. 
In Future this survey can be modified by adding more recent 
issues. The survey of the solutions provided by the researchers 
can also be done so that it may be useful for catering those 
problems which arise in Multimedia database management. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] http://mif.vu.lt/cs2/en/courses/infsyst/files/infos4.pdf 
[2] Shiguo Lian, Dimitris Kanellopoulos, Giancarlo Ruffo, 
Recent advances in Multimedia Information System 
Security, Informatics Vol 33, Issue 1, March 2009, pp3-
24 
[3] H. Kosch and M. D¨oller, “Multimedia database systems: 
Where are we now?,” Special Session Talk to be given at 
the IASTED DBA-Conference in Innsbruck, February 
2005.Available: http://www-itec.uni-
klu.ac.at/~harald/MMDBoverview.pdf 
[4] B. Thuraisingham. Security and privacy for multimedia 
database management systems, Multimedia Tools and 
Applications, 33(1): 13-29, April 2007. 
[5] Multimedia Database Applications: Issues and Concerns 
for Classroom Teaching, The International Journal of 
Multimedia & Its Applications (IJMA) Vol.3, No.1, 
February 2011 
[6] A. Natsev, J. R. Smith, Y.-C. Chang, C.-S. Li, and J. 
S.Vitter. Constrained querying of multimedia databases: 
Issues and approaches. In Proc. SPIE Electronic Imaging 
2001: Storage and Retrieval for Media Databases, San 
Jose, CA, Jan. 2001. 
[7] M. C. Angelides and S. Dustdar. Multimedia Information 
Systems (The Springer International Series in 
Engineering and Computer Science), by Publisher: 
Springer, June 30, 1997. 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887) 
Volume 46– No.7, May 2012 
9 
[8] S. M. Rahman. Design and Management of Multimedia 
Information Systems: Opportunities and Challenges, 
Publisher: IGI Global, April 16, 2001. 
[9] Tamer Ozsu, M.; , "Issues in multimedia database 
management," Database Engineering and Applications, 
1999. IDEAS '99. International Symposium Proceedings, 
pp.452-459, Aug 1999 
[10] Adjeroh, D.A.; Nwosu, K.C.; , "Multimedia database 
management-requirements and issues," Multimedia, 
IEEE , vol.4, no.3, pp.24-33, Jul-Sep 1997 
[11] www.fmea-fmeca.com/criticality-analysis-milstd1629-
approach 
 
 

