41© Springer-Verlag London 2015
J.M. Kizza, Guide to Computer Network Security, Computer Communications 
and Networks, DOI 10.1007/978-1-4471-6654-2_2
 2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals 
2.1  Introduction 
 Before we talk about network security, we need to understand in general terms what 
security is. Security is a continuous process of protecting an object from unauthor-
ized access. It is a state of being or feeling protected from harm. That object in that 
state may be a person, an organization such as a business, or property such as a 
computer system or a fi le. Security comes from secure which means, according to 
 Webster Dictionary , a state of being free from care, anxiety, or fear [ 1 ]. 
 An object can be in a  physical state of security or a  theoretical state of security. 
In a physical state, a facility is secure if it is protected by a barrier like a fence, has 
secure areas both inside and outside, and can resist penetration by intruders. This 
state of security can be guaranteed if the following four protection mechanisms are 
in place: deterrence, prevention, detection, and response [ 1 ,  2 ].
•  Deterrence is usually the fi rst line of defense against intruders who may try to 
gain access. It works by creating an atmosphere intended to frighten intruders. 
Sometimes this may involve warnings of severe consequences if security is 
breached. 
•  Prevention is the process of trying to stop intruders from gaining access to the 
resources of the system. Barriers include fi rewalls, demilitarized zones (DMZs), 
and the use of access items like keys, access cards, biometrics, and others to 
allow only authorized users to use and access a facility. 
•  Detection occurs when the intruder has succeeded or is in the process of gaining 
access to the system. Signals from the detection process include alerts to the 
existence of an intruder. Sometimes these alerts can be real time or stored for 
further analysis by the security personnel. 
•  Response is an aftereffect mechanism that tries to respond to the failure of the 
fi rst three mechanisms. It works by trying to stop and/or prevent future damage 
or access to a facility. 
42
 The areas outside the protected system can be secured by wire and wall fencing, 
mounted noise or vibration sensors, security lighting, closed-circuit television 
(CCTV), buried seismic sensors, or different photoelectric and microwave systems 
[ 1 ]. Inside the system, security can be enhanced by using electronic barriers such as 
fi rewalls and passwords. 
 Digital barriers – commonly known as fi rewalls, discussed in detail in Chap.  12 – 
can be used. Firewalls are hardware or software tools used to isolate the sensitive 
portions of an information system facility from the outside world and limit the 
potential damage by a malicious intruder. 
 A theoretical state of security, commonly known as pseudosecurity or security 
through obscurity (STO), is a false hope of security. Many believe that an object can 
be secure as long as nobody outside the core implementation group has knowledge 
about its existence. This security is often referred to as “bunk mentality” security. 
This is virtual security in the sense that it is not physically implemented like build-
ing walls, issuing passwords, or putting up a fi rewall, but it is effectively based 
solely on a philosophy. The philosophy itself relies on a need to know basis, imply-
ing that a person is not dangerous as long as that person doesn’t have knowledge 
that could affect the security of the system like a network, for example. In real sys-
tems where this security philosophy is used, security is assured through a presump-
tion that only those with responsibility and who are trustworthy can use the system 
and nobody else needs to know. So, in effect, the philosophy is based on the trust of 
those involved assuming that they will never leave. If they do, then that means the 
end of security for that system. 
 There are several examples where STO has been successfully used. These include 
Coca-Cola, KFC, and other companies that have, for generations, kept their secret 
recipes secure based on a few trusted employees. But the overall STO is a fallacy 
that has been used by many software producers when they hide their codes. Many 
times, STO hides system vulnerabilities and weaknesses. This was demonstrated 
vividly in Matt Blaze’s 1994 discovery of a fl aw in the Escrowed Encryption 
Standard (Clipper) that could be used to circumvent law enforcement monitoring. 
Blaze’s discovery allowed easier access to secure communication through the 
Clipper technology than was previously possible, without access to keys [ 3 ]. The 
belief that secrecy can make the system more secure is just that, a belief – a myth in 
fact. Unfortunately, the software industry still believes this myth. 
 Although its usefulness has declined as the computing environment has changed 
to large open systems, new networking programming and network protocols, and as 
the computing power available to the average person has increased, the philosophy 
is in fact still favored by many agencies, including the military, many government 
agencies, and private businesses. 
 In either security state, many objects can be thought of as being secure if such a 
state, a condition, or a process is afforded to them. Because there are many of these 
objects, we are going to focus on the security of a few of these object models. These 
will be a computer, a computer network, and information. 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
43
2.1.1  Computer Security 
 This is a study, which is a branch of computer science, focusing on creating a secure 
environment for the use of computers. It is a focus on the “behavior of users,” if you 
will, required and the protocols in order to create a secure environment for anyone 
using computers. This fi eld, therefore, involves four areas of interest: the study of 
computer ethics, the development of both software and hardware protocols, and the 
development of best practices. It is a complex fi eld of study involving detailed 
mathematical designs of cryptographic protocols. We are not focusing on this in 
this book. 
2.1.2  Network Security 
 As we saw in Chap.  1 , computer networks are distributed networks of computers 
that are either strongly connected meaning that they share a lot of resources 
from one central computer or loosely connected, meaning that they share only 
those resources that can make the network work. When we talk about computer 
network security, our focus object model has now changed. It is no longer one 
computer but a network. So computer network security is a broader study of 
computer security. It is still a branch of computer science, but a lot broader than 
that of computer security. It involves creating an environment in which a 
computer network, including all its resources, which are many; all the data in it 
both in storage and in transit; and all its users, is secure. Because it is wider than 
computer security, this is a more complex fi eld of study than computer security 
involving more detailed mathematical designs of cryptographic, communica-
tion, transport, and exchange protocols and best practices. This book focuses on 
this fi eld of study. 
2.1.3  Information Security 
 Information security is even a bigger fi eld of study including computer and 
computer network security. This study is found in a variety of disciplines, 
including computer science, business management, information studies, and 
engineering. It involves the creation of a state in which information and data are 
secure. In this model, information or data is either in motion through the 
communication channels or in storage in databases on server. This, therefore, 
involves the study of not only more detailed mathematical designs of crypto-
graphic, communication, transport, and exchange protocols and best practices 
but also the state of both data and information in motion. We are not discussing 
these in this book. 
2.1 Introduction
44
2.2  Securing the Computer Network 
 Creating security in the computer network model we are embarking on in this book 
means creating secure environments for a variety of resources. In this model, a 
resource is secure, based on the above defi nition, if that resource is protected from 
both internal and external unauthorized access. These resources, physical or not, 
are objects. Ensuring the security of an object means protecting the object from 
unauthorized access both from within the object and externally. In short, we protect 
objects. System objects are either tangible or nontangible. In a computer network 
model, the tangible objects are the hardware resources in the system, and the 
intangible object is the information and data in the system, both in transition and 
static in storage. 
2.2.1  Hardware 
 Protecting hardware resources include protecting:
•  End-user objects that include the user interface hardware components such as all 
client system input components, including a keyboard, mouse, touch screen, 
light pens, and others 
•  Network objects like fi rewalls, hubs, switches, routers, and gateways which are 
vulnerable to hackers 
•  Network communication channels to prevent eavesdroppers from intercepting 
network communications 
2.2.2  Software 
 Protecting software resources includes protecting hardware-based software, oper-
ating systems, server protocols, browsers, application software, and intellectual 
property stored on network storage disks and databases. It also involves protecting 
client software such as investment portfolios, fi nancial data, real estate records, 
images or pictures, and other personal fi les commonly stored on home and business 
computers. 
2.3  Forms of Protection 
 Now, we know what model objects are or need to be protected. Let us briefl y, 
keep details for later, survey ways and forms of protecting these objects. Prevention 
of unauthorized access to system resources is achieved through a number of 
services that include access control, authentication, confi dentiality, integrity, and 
nonrepudiation. 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
45
2.3.1  Access Control 
 This is a service the system uses, together with a user pre-provided identifi cation 
information such as a password, to determine who uses what of its services. Let us 
look at some forms of access control based on hardware and software. 
2.3.1.1  Hardware Access Control Systems 
 Rapid advances in technology have resulted in effi cient access control tools that are 
open and fl exible while at the same time ensuring reasonable precautions against 
risks. Access control tools falling in this category include the following:
•  Access terminal. Terminal access points have become very sophisticated, and now 
they not only carry out user identifi cation but also verify access rights, control 
access points, and communicate with host computers. These activities can be done 
in a variety of ways including fi ngerprint verifi cation and real-time anti-break- in 
sensors. Network technology has made it possible for these units to be connected 
to a monitoring network or remain in a stand-alone off-line mode. 
•  Visual event monitoring. This is a combination of many technologies into one 
very useful and rapidly growing form of access control using a variety of 
real- time technologies including video and audio signals, aerial photographs, 
and global positioning system (GPS) technology to identify locations. 
•  Identifi cation cards. Sometimes called proximity cards, these cards have become 
very common these days as a means of access control in buildings, fi nancial 
institutions, and other restricted areas. The cards come in a variety of forms, 
including magnetic, bar coded, contact chip, and a combination of these. 
•  Biometric identifi cation. This is perhaps the fastest growing form of control access 
tool today. Some of the most popular forms include fi ngerprint, iris, and voice 
recognition. However, fi ngerprint recognition offers a higher level of security. 
•  Video surveillance. This is a replacement of CCTV of yester year, and it is 
gaining popularity as an access control tool. With fast networking technologies 
and digital cameras, images can now be taken and analyzed very quickly and 
action taken in minutes. 
2.3.1.2  Software Access Control Systems 
 Software access control falls into two types: point of access monitoring and remote 
monitoring. In  point of access (POA), personal activities can be monitored by a 
PC-based application. The application can even be connected to a network or to a 
designated machine or machines. The application collects and stores access events 
and other events connected to the system operation and download access rights to 
access terminals. 
 In remote mode, the terminals can be linked in a variety of ways, including 
the use of modems, telephone lines, and all forms of wireless connections. Such 
terminals may, sometimes if needed, have an automatic calling at preset times if 
desired or have an attendant to report regularly. 
2.3 Forms of Protection
46
2.3.2  Authentication 
 Authentication is a service used to identify a user. User identity, especially of remote 
users, is diffi cult because many users, especially those intending to cause harm, may 
masquerade as the legitimate users when they actually are not. This service provides 
a system with the capability to verify that a user is the very one he or she claims to 
be based on what the user is, knows, and has. 
 Physically, we can authenticate users or user surrogates based on checking one 
or more of the following user items [ 2 ]:
•  User name (sometimes screen name) 
•  Password 
•  Retinal images : The user looks into an electronic device that maps his or her eye 
retina image; the system then compares this map with a similar map stored on the 
system. 
•  Fingerprints : The user presses on or sometimes inserts a particular fi nger into a 
device that makes a copy of the user fi ngerprint and then compares it with a simi-
lar image on the system user fi le. 
•  Physical location : The physical location of the system initiating an entry request is 
checked to ensure that a request is actually originating from a known and authorized 
location. In networks, to check the authenticity of a client’s location a network or 
Internet protocol (IP) address of the client machine is compared with the one on the 
system user fi le. This method is used mostly in addition to other security measures 
because it alone cannot guarantee security. If used alone, it provides access to the 
requested system to anybody who has access to the client machine. 
•  Identity cards : Increasingly, cards are being used as authenticating documents. 
Whoever is the carrier of the card gains access to the requested system. As is the 
case with physical location authentication, card authentication is usually used as 
a second-level authentication tool because whoever has access to the card auto-
matically can gain access to the requested system. 
2.3.3  Confidentiality 
 The confi dentiality service protects system data and information from unauthorized 
disclosure. When data leave one extreme of a system such as a client’s computer in 
a network, it ventures out into a nontrusting environment. So, the recipient of that 
data may not fully trust that no third party like a cryptanalysis or a man-in-the 
middle has eavesdropped on the data. This service uses encryption algorithms to 
ensure that nothing of the sort happened while the data was in the wild. 
 Encryption protects the communications channel from sniffers.  Sniffers are 
programs written for and installed on the communication channels to eavesdrop on 
network traffi c, examining all traffi c on selected network segments. Sniffers are easy 
to write and install and diffi cult to detect. The encryption process uses an encryption 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
47
algorithm and key to transform data at the source, called  plaintext ; turn it into an 
encrypted form called  ciphertext , usually unintelligible form; and fi nally recover it at 
the sink. The encryption algorithm can either be  symmetric or  asymmetric . Symmetric 
encryption or secret key encryption, as it is usually called, uses a common key and the 
same cryptographic algorithm to scramble and unscramble the message. Asymmetric 
encryption commonly known as public-key encryption uses two different keys: a public 
key known by all and a private key known by only the sender and the receiver. Both 
the sender and the receiver each has a pair of these keys, one public and one private. 
To encrypt a message, a sender uses the receiver’s public key which was published. 
Upon receipt, the recipient of the message decrypts it with his or her private key. 
2.3.4  Integrity 
 The integrity service protects data against active threats such as those that may alter 
it. Just like data confi dentiality, data in transition between the sending and receiving 
parties is susceptible to many threats from hackers, eavesdroppers, and cryptanalysts 
whose goal is to intercept the data and alter it based on their motives. This service, 
through encryption and  hashing algorithms , ensures that the integrity of the 
transient data is intact. A hash function takes an input message M and creates a code 
from it. The code is commonly referred to as a hash or a message digest. A one-way 
hash function is used to create a signature of the message – just like a human 
fi ngerprint. The hash function is, therefore, used to provide the message’s integrity 
and authenticity. The signature is then attached to the message before it is sent by 
the sender to the recipient. 
2.3.5  Nonrepudiation 
 This is a security service that provides proof of origin and delivery of service and/
or information. In real life, it is possible that the sender may deny the ownership of 
the exchanged digital data that originated from him or her. This service, through 
 digital signature and encryption algorithms, ensures that digital data may not be 
repudiated by providing proof of origin that is diffi cult to deny. A digital signature 
is a cryptographic mechanism that is the electronic equivalent of a written signature 
to authenticate a piece of data as to the identity of the sender. 
 We have to be careful here because the term “nonrepudiation” has two meanings, 
one in the legal world and the other in the cryptotechnical world. Adrian McCullagh 
and William Caelli defi ne “nonrepudiation” in a cryptotechnical way as follows [ 4 ]:
•  In authentication, a service that provides proof of the integrity and origin of data, 
both in a forgery-proof relationship, which can be verifi ed by any third party at 
any time 
•  In authentication, an authentication that with high assurance can be asserted to 
be genuine and that cannot subsequently be refuted 
2.3 Forms of Protection
48
 However, in the legal world, there is always a basis for repudiation. This basis, 
again according to Adrian McCullagh, can be as follows:
•  The signature is a forgery. 
•  The  signature is not a forgery but was obtained via:
 –  Unconscionable conduct by a party to a transaction 
 –  Fraud instigated by a third party 
 –  Undue infl uence exerted by a third party 
 We will use the cryptotechnical defi nition throughout the book. To achieve 
nonrepudiation, users and application environments require a  nonrepudiation 
service to collect, maintain, and make available the irrefutable evidence. The best 
services for nonrepudiation are digital signatures and encryption. These services 
offer trust by generating unforgettable evidence of transactions that can be used for 
dispute resolution after the fact. 
2.4  Security Standards 
 The computer network model also suffers from the standardization problem. Security 
protocols, solutions, and best practices that can secure the computer network model 
come in many different types and use different technologies resulting in incom-
patibility of interfaces (more in Chap.  16 ), less interoperability, and uniformity among 
the many system resources with differing technologies within the system and between 
systems. System managers, security chiefs, and experts, therefore, choose or prefer 
standards, if no de facto standard exists, that are based on service, industry, size, or 
mission. The type of service offered by an organization determines the types of secu-
rity standards used. Like service, the nature of the industry an organization is in also 
determines the types of services offered by the system, which in turn determines the 
type of standards to adopt. The size of an organization also determines what type of 
standards to adopt. In relatively small establishments, the ease of implementation 
and running of the system infl uence the standards to be adopted. Finally, the mission 
of the establishment also determines the types of standards used. For example, 
government agencies have a mission that differs from that of a university. These two 
organizations, therefore, may choose different standards. We are, therefore, going to 
discuss security standards along these divisions. Before we do that, however, let us 
look at the bodies and organizations behind the formulation, development, and 
maintenance of these standards. These bodies fall into the following categories:
•  International organizations such as the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), the 
Institute of Electronic and Electric Engineers (IEEE), the International Standards 
Organization (ISO), and the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) 
•  Multinational organizations like the European Committee for Standardization 
(CEN), the Commission of European Union (CEU), and the European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI) 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
49
•  National governmental organizations like the National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), the American National Standards Institute (ANSI), and the 
Canadian Standards Council (CSC) 
•  Sector-specifi c organizations such as the European Committee for Banking 
Standards (ECBS), the European Computer Manufacturers Association (ECMA), 
and the Institute of Electronic and Electric Engineers (IEEE) 
•  Industry standards such as the RSA, the Open Group (OSF+X/Open), the Object 
Management Group (OMG), the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)), and the 
Organization for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS) 
•  Other sources of standards in security and cryptography 
 Each one of these organizations has a set of standards. Table  2.1 shows some of 
these standards. In the table, x is any digit between 0 and 9.
2.4.1  Security Standards Based on Type of Service/Industry 
 System and security managers and users may choose a security standard to use 
based on the type of industry they are in and what type of services that industry 
provides. Table  2.2 shows some of these services and the corresponding security 
standards that can be used for these services.
 Let us now give some details of some of these standards. 
2.4.1.1  Public-Key Cryptography Standards (PKCS) 
 In order to provide a basis and a catalyst for interoperable security based on 
public- key cryptographic techniques, the Public-Key Cryptography Standards 
(PKCS) were established. These are recent security standards, fi rst published in 
 Table 2.1  Organizations and their standards 
 Organization  Standards 
 IETF  IPSec, XML Signature XPath Filter2, X.509, Kerberos, S/MIME 
 ISO  ISO 7498–2:1989 Information processing systems – Open Systems 
Interconnection, ISO/IEC 979x, ISO/IEC 997, ISO/IEC 1011x, ISO/IEC 11xx, 
ISO/IEC DTR 13xxx, ISO/IEC DTR 14xxx 
 ITU  X.2xx, X.5xx, X.7xx, X.80x, 
 ECBS  TR-40x 
 ECMA  ECMA-13x, ECMA-20x 
 NIST  X3 Information Processing, X9.xx Financial, X12.xx Electronic Data Exchange 
 IEEE  P1363 Standard Specifi cations, For Public-Key Cryptography, IEEE 802.xx, 
IEEE P802.11 g, Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical 
Layer (PHY) Specifi cations 
 RSA  PKCS #x – Public-Key Cryptographic Standard 
 W3C  XML Encryption, XML Signature, exXensible Key Management Specifi cation 
(XKMS) 
2.4 Security Standards
50
1991 following discussions of a small group of early adopters of public-key 
technology. Since their establishment, they have become the basis for many formal 
standards and are implemented widely. 
 In general, PKCS are security specifi cations produced by RSA Laboratories in 
cooperation with secure systems developers worldwide for the purpose of acceler-
ating the deployment of public-key cryptography. In fact, worldwide contributions 
from the PKCS series have become part of many formal and de facto standards, 
including ANSI X9 documents, PKIX, SET, S/MIME, and SSL. 
2.4.1.2  The Standards for Interoperable Secure MIME (S/MIME) 
 S/MIME ( Secure Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions ) is a specifi cation for 
secure electronic messaging. It came to address a growing problem of e-mail inter-
ception and forgery at the time of increasing digital communication. So, in 1995, 
several software vendors got together and created the S/MIME specifi cation with 
the goal of making it easy to secure messages from prying eyes. 
 It works by building a security layer on top of the industry standard MIME pro-
tocol based on PKCS. The use of PKCS avails the user of S/MIME with immediate 
privacy, data integrity, and authentication of an e-mail package. This has given the 
 Table 2.2  Security standards based on services 
 Area of application  Service  Security standard 
 Internet security  Network authentication  Kerberos 
 Secure TCP/IP communications 
over the Internet 
 IPSec 
 Privacy-enhanced electronic mail  S/MIME, PGP 
 Public-key cryptography standards  3-DES, DSA, RSA, MD-5, SHA-1, 
PKCS 
 Secure hypertext transfer protocol  S-HTTP 
 Authentication of directory users  X.509/ISO/IEC 9594–8:2000: 
 Security protocol for privacy 
on Internet/transport security 
 SSL, TLS, SET 
 Digital signature 
and encryption 
 Advanced encryption standard/PKI/ 
digital certifi cates, XML digital 
signatures 
 X509, RSA BSAFE SecurXML-C, 
DES, AES, DSS/DSA, EESSI, 
ISO 9xxx, ISO, SHA/ SHS, XML 
Digital Signatures (XMLD- SIG), 
XML Encryption (XMLENC), 
XML Key Management 
Specifi cation (XKMS) 
 Login and 
authentication 
 Authentication of user’s right 
to use system or network 
resources 
 SAML, Liberty Alliance, FIPS 112 
 Firewall and 
system security 
 Security of local, wide, and 
metropolitan area networks 
 Secure Data Exchange (SDE) 
protocol for IEEE 802, 
ISO/IEC 10164 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
51
standard a wide appeal, leading to S/MIME moving beyond just e-mail. Already 
vendor software warehouses, including Microsoft, Lotus, Banyan, and other online 
electronic commerce services, are using S/MIME. 
2.4.1.3  Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) 
 Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS) are National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST)-approved standards for advanced encryption. These are US 
federal government standards and guidelines in a variety of areas in data processing. 
They are recommended by NIST to be used by US government organizations and 
others in the private sector to protect sensitive information. They range from FIPS 
31 issued in 1974 to current FIPS 198. 
2.4.1.4  Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) 
 SSL is an encryption standard for most Web transactions. In fact, it is becoming the 
most popular type of e-commerce encryption. Most conventional intranet and 
extranet applications would typically require a combination of security mechanisms 
that include:
•  Encryption 
•  Authentication 
•  Access control 
 SSL provides the encryption component implemented within the TCP/IP protocol. 
Developed by Netscape Communications, SSL provides secure Web client and 
server communications, including encryption, authentication, and integrity checking 
for a TCP/IP connection. 
2.4.1.5  Web Services Security Standards 
 In order for Web transactions such as e-commerce to really take off, customers will 
need to see an open architectural model backed up by a standard-based security 
framework. Security players, including standards organizations, must provide 
that open model and a framework that is interoperable, that is, as vendor-neutral as 
possible, and able to resolve critical, often sensitive, issues related to security. The 
security framework must also include Web interoperability standards for access 
control, provisioning, biometrics, and digital rights. 
 To meet the challenges of Web security, two industry rival standards companies 
are developing new standards for XML digital signatures that include XML 
Encryption, XML Signature, and exXensible Key Management Specifi cation 
(XKMS) by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and BSAFE SecurXML-C 
software development kit (SDK) for implementing XML digital signatures by rival 
RSA Security. In addition, RSA also offers a SAML Specifi cation (Security 
Assertion Markup Language), an XML framework for exchanging authentication 
and authorization information. It is designed to enable secure single sign-on across 
portals within and across organizations. 
2.4 Security Standards
52
2.4.2  Security Standards Based on Size/Implementation 
 If the network is small or it is a small organization such as a university, for example, 
security standards can be spelled out as either the organization’s security policy or 
its best practices on the security of the system, including the physical security of 
equipment, system software, and application software.
•  Physical security. This emphasizes the need for security of computers running 
the Web servers and how these machines should be kept physically secured in a 
locked area. Standards are also needed for backup storage media like tapes and 
removable disks. 
•  Operating systems. The emphasis here is on privileges and number of accounts, 
and security standards are set based on these. For example, the number of users 
with most privileged access like  root in UNIX or  Administrator in NT should be 
kept to a minimum. Set standards for privileged users. Keep to a minimum the 
number of user accounts on the system. State the number of services offered to 
clients computers by the server, keeping them to a minimum. Set a standard for 
authentication such as user passwords and for applying security patches. 
•  System logs. Logs always contain sensitive information such as dates and times 
of user access. Logs containing sensitive information should be accessible only 
to authorized staff and should not be publicly accessible. Set a standard on who 
and when logs should be viewed and analyzed. 
•  Data security. Set a standard for dealing with fi les that contain sensitive data. For 
example, fi les containing sensitive data should be encrypted wherever possible 
using strong encryption or should be transferred as soon as possible and practical 
to a secured system not providing public services. 
 As an example, Table  2.3 shows how such standards may be set.
2.4.3  Security Standards Based on Interests 
 In many cases, institutions and government agencies choose to pick a security standard 
based solely on the interest of the institution or the country. Table  2.4 below shows 
some security standards based on interest, and the subsections following the table also 
show security best practices and security standards based more on national interests.
 Table 2.3  Best security practices for a small organization 
 Application area  Security standards 
 Operating systems  Unix, Linux, Windows, etc. 
 Virus protection  Norton 
 Email  PGP, S/MIME 
 Firewalls 
 Telnet and FTP terminal applications  SSH (secure shell) 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
53
2.4.3.1  British Standard 799 (BS 7799) 
 The BS 7799 standard outlines a code of practice for information security manage-
ment that further helps to determine how to secure network systems. It puts forward 
a common framework that enables companies to develop, implement, and measure 
effective security management practice and provide confi dence in intercompany 
trading. BS 7799 was fi rst written in 1993, but it was not offi cially published until 
1995, and it was published as an international standard BS ISO/IEC 17799:2000 in 
December 2000. 
2.4.3.2  Orange Book 
 This is the US Department of Defense  Trusted Computer System Evaluation Criteria 
(DOD-5200.28-STD) standard known as the  Orange Book . For a long time, it has 
been the de facto standard for computer security used in government and industry, 
but as we will see in Chap.  15 , other standards have now been developed to either 
supplement it or replace it. First published in 1983, its security levels are referred to 
as “Rainbow Series.” 
2.4.3.3  Homeland National Security Awareness 
 After the September 11, 2001, attack on the United States, the government created 
a new cabinet department of Homeland Security to be in charge of all national 
security issues. The Homeland Security department created a security advisory 
system made up of fi ve levels ranging from green (for low security) to red (severe) 
for heightened security. Figure  2.1 shows these levels. 
2.4.4  Security Best Practices 
 As you noticed from our discussion, there is a rich repertoire of standards security 
tools on the system and information security landscape because as technology 
evolves, the security situation becomes more complex, and it grows more so every 
day. With these changes, however, some trends and approaches to security remain 
the same. One of these constants is having a sound strategy of dealing with the 
changing security landscape. Developing such a security strategy involves keeping 
an eye on the reality of the changing technology scene and rapidly increasing 
security threats. To keep abreast of all these changes, security experts and security 
managers must know how and what to protect and what controls to put in place and 
at what time. It takes security management, planning, policy development, and the 
design of security procedures. It’s important to remember and defi nitely understand 
that there is no procedure, policy, or technology, however much you like it and trust 
 Table 2.4  Interest-based security standards 
 Area of application  Service  Security standard 
 Banking  Security within banking IT systems  ISO 8730, ISO 8732, ISO/TR 17944 
 Financial  Security of fi nancial services  ANSI X9.x, ANSI X9.xx 
2.4 Security Standards
54
it, that will ever be 100 %, so it is important for and company, preferably to have a 
designated security person, a security program offi cer, and chief security offi cer 
(CSO), under the chief information offi cer (CIO), to be responsible for the security 
best practices. Here are some examples of best practices: 
 Commonly Accepted Security Practices and Regulations ( CASPR ): Developed 
by the CASPR Project, this effort aims to provide a set of best practices that can be 
 Fig. 2.1  Department of Homeland Security Awareness Levels [ 7 ] 
 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
55
universally applied to any organization regardless of industry, size, or mission. Such 
best practices would, for example, come from the world’s experts in information 
security. CASPR distills the knowledge into a series of papers and publishes them 
so they are freely available on the Internet to everyone. The project covers a wide area, 
including operating system and system security, network and telecommunication 
security, access control and authentication, infosecurity management, infosecurity 
auditing and assessment, infosecurity logging and monitoring, application security, 
application and system development, and investigations and forensics. In order to 
distribute their papers freely, the founders of CASPR use the open source movement 
as a guide, and they release the papers under the GNU Free Document License to 
make sure they and any derivatives remain freely available. 
 Control Objectives for Information and ( Related )  Technology ( COBIT ): Developed 
by IT auditors and made available through the Information Systems Audit and 
Control Association, COBIT provides a framework for assessing a security program. 
COBIT is an open standard for control of information technology. The IT Governance 
Institute has, together with the worldwide industry experts, analysts, and academics, 
developed new defi nitions for COBIT that consist of maturity models, critical 
success factors (CSFs), key goal indicators (KGIs), and key performance indicators 
(KPIs). COBIT was designed to help three distinct audiences [ 5 ]:
•  Management who need to balance risk and control investment in an often 
unpredictable IT environment 
•  Users who need to obtain assurance on the security and controls of the IT services 
upon which they depend to deliver their products and services to internal and 
external customers 
•  Auditors who can use it to substantiate their opinions and/or provide advice to 
management on internal controls 
 Operationally Critical Threat ,  Asset ,  and Vulnerability Evaluation ( OCTAVE ) 
by Carnegie Mellon’s CERT Coordination Center: OCTAVE is an approach for 
self- directed information security risk evaluations that [ 6 ].
•  Puts organizations in charge 
•  Balances critical information assets, business needs, threats, and vulnerabilities 
•  Measures the organization against known or accepted good security practices 
•  Establishes an organization-wide protection strategy and information security 
risk mitigation plans 
 In short, it provides measures based on accepted best practices for evaluating 
security programs. It does this in three phases:
•  First, it determines information assets that must be protected. 
•  Evaluates the technology infrastructure to determine if it can protect those assets 
and how vulnerable it is and defi nes the risks to critical assets. 
•  Uses good security practices and establishes an organization-wide protection 
strategy and mitigation plans for specifi c risks to critical assets. 
2.4 Security Standards
56
 General Best Practices – Matthew Putvinski, in his article “IT Security Series 
Part 1: Information Security Best Practices” [ 7 ], discusses under the following 
general categories:
•  Chief information security offi cer or designate – establish the need for a security 
designated offi cer to oversee security-related issues in the enterprise because the 
lack of a person responsible for security in any organization means the organiza-
tion does not give information security priority. 
•  Ender user – the security guidelines here must be contained in the organization’s 
security policy of what the organization’s end users must and must not do as far 
as dealing with organization’s information in general and computing services in 
particular. As we move into miniature mobile devices and if a policy is to use a 
bring your own device (BYOD), specifi c data handling policies must be in place. 
•  Software updates and patches – specifi c guidelines in the organization security 
policy book must specifi cally take a stance on how the organization will use 
software security patches and upgrades and the frequency of updates. 
•  Vendor management – if the organization is using software provided by third 
party individuals or organizations as vendors, care must be taken to ensure that 
any organization’s confi dential information provided to vendors to help identify 
a suitable software tool is well documented and indicate to who. 
•  Physical Security – this is squarely a security policy issue specifi cally spelling 
out the physical specifi cation required to safeguard the organization’s informa-
tion and data. These include access to offi ces and digital equipment, when and 
where information is stored and when and where information is destroyed. We 
will discuss more of this in the coming chapters. 
•  The following guidelines are also a security policy issues:
 –  Data classifi cation and retention 
 –  Password requirements and guidelines 
 –  Wireless networking 
 –  Mobile device usage and access 
 –  Employee awareness training 
 –  Incident response 
 Exercises 
  1.  What is security and Information security? What is the difference? 
  2.  It has been stated that security is a continuous process; what are the states in 
this process? 
  3.  What are the differences between symmetric and asymmetric key systems? 
  4.  What is PKI? Why is it so important in information security? 
  5.  What is the difference between authentication and nonrepudiation? 
  6.  Why is there a dispute between digital nonrepudiation and legal nonrepudiation? 
  7.  Virtual security seems to work in some systems. Why is this so? Can you apply 
it in a network environment? Support your response. 
  8.  Security best practices are security guidelines and policies aimed at enhancing 
system security. Can they work without known and proven security mechanisms? 
2 Computer Network Security Fundamentals
57
  9.  Does information confi dentiality infer information integrity? Explain your 
response. 
 10.  What are the best security mechanisms to ensure information confi dentiality? 
 Advanced Exercises 
  1.  In the chapter, we have classifi ed security standards based on industry, size, and 
mission. What other classifi cations can you make and why? 
  2.  Most of the encryption standards that are being used such as RSA and DES 
have not been formally proven to be safe. Why then do we take them to be 
secure – what evidence do we have? 
  3.  IPSec provides security at the network layer. What other security mechanism is 
applicable at the network layer? Do network layer security solutions offer 
better security? 
  4.  Discuss two security mechanisms applied at the application layer. Are they 
safer than those applied at the lower network layer? Support your response. 
  5.  Are there security mechanisms applicable at transport layer? Is it safer? 
  6.  Discuss the diffi culties encountered in enforcing security best practices. 
  7.  Some security experts do not believe in security policies. Do you? Why or 
why not? 
  8.  Security standards are changing daily. Is it wise to pick a security standard 
then? Why or why not? 
  9.  If you are an enterprise security chief, how would you go about choosing a 
security best practice? Is it good security policy to always use a best security 
practice? What are the benefi ts of using a best practice? 
 10.  Why it is important to have a security plan despite the various views of security 
experts concerning its importance? 
 References 
 1.  Kizza JM (2003) Social and ethical issues in the information age, 2nd edn. Springer, New York 
 2.  Scherphier A CS596 client-server programming security.  http://www.sdsu.edu/cs596/security.
html 
 3.  Mercuri R, Peter N (2003) Security by obscurity. Commun ACM 46(11):160 
 4.  McCullagh A, Caelli W Non-repudiation in the digital environment .  http://www.fi rstmonday.dk/
issues/issue5_8/mccullagh/index.html#author 
 5.  CobiT a practical toolkit for IT governance.  http://www.ncc.co.uk/ncc/myitadviser/archive/
issue8/business_processes.cfm 
 6.  OCTAVE: information security risk evaluation.  http://www.cert.org/octave/ 
 7.  Putvinski M IT security series part 1: information security best practices.  http://www.cor-
poratecomplianceinsights.com/information-security-best-practices 
References
http://www.springer.com/978-1-4471-6653-5

