AgeUKIL4
Internet security
Staying safe online
Work & 
learning
Information and  
advice you need to  
help you love later life. 
We’re Age UK and our goal is to enable  
older people to love later life. 
We are passionate about affirming that your 
later years can be fulfilling years. Whether 
you’re enjoying your later life or going through 
tough times, we’re here to help you make the 
best of your life.
This information guide has been prepared by Age UK and contains general advice only, 
it should not be relied on as a basis for any decision or action and cannot be used as 
a substitute for professional medical advice.
Neither Age UK nor any of its subsidiary companies or charities accepts any liability arising 
from its use and it is the reader’s sole responsibility to ensure any information is up to date 
and accurate.
Please note that the inclusion of named agencies, websites, companies, products, services 
or publications in this information guide does not constitute a recommendation or 
endorsement by Age UK or any of its subsidiary companies or charities.
Date of publication: December 2015 © Age UK 2015
Our network includes Age Cymru, Age NI, Age Scotland,  
Age International and more than 160 local partners.
1 Internet security
Contents
What this guide is about 2
Email encounters 3
Computer scams 6
Passwords 8
Online shopping and banking 11
Social networking 14
Protect your computer 17
Protect your tablet and your phone 20
Glossary 22
Useful organisations 24
2 Internet security
What this guide is about
You may not realise it, but you already have a lot of the 
skills and intuition to stay safe online. All you have to do is 
apply the same common sense you use in everyday life. 
For example, you wouldn’t open your front door and invite 
a stranger into your home, so it makes sense not to open 
email attachments from someone you don’t know. Being 
aware of the risks that come with using the internet and 
taking the steps to avoid them means you can enjoy the 
internet safely. 
This guide looks at how to protect yourself online and how  
to protect your computer. Words in bold may be unfamiliar 
to you, so we’ve included a glossary on pages 22–23. 
Age UK offers computer and internet training for older 
people. Visit our website at www.ageuk.org.uk and click 
‘Technology & internet’ in the ‘Work & learning’ section, or 
ask your local Age UK about training opportunities near you. 
To find your nearest Age UK call 0800 169 65 65. 
As far as possible, the information given in this guide is 
applicable across the UK.
Key
 This symbol indicates who to contact  
 for the next steps you need to take.
what 
next?
3 Internet security
Email encounters 
Have you received a suspicious email? It may claim to 
be from your bank, asking you to update your security 
information. Or maybe it’s offering you something that 
sounds too good to be true. If you have received emails  
like these, you may have been the target of a common  
scam called ‘phishing’. 
Phishing is where criminals send bogus emails to thousands 
of people, in an attempt to get you to disclose private 
information. These emails may look as though they come 
from reputable organisations, such as banks, credit-card 
companies, online shops, and IT companies, but they are 
actually from fraudsters.
Common types of phishing scams:
• From your ‘bank’ asking you to update your information  
or your account will be closed.
• From a well-known software company asking you to 
update your account details or install a programme  
on your computer.
• An email saying you have won some kind of lottery or 
inherited a large amount of money.
• An email supposedly from someone that you may know 
asking for money because they are stranded somewhere  
or need medical assistance.
You may also get unsolicited emails with a link or document 
attached for you to open or click on. These are called ‘spam’ 
or ‘junk mail’. These may even come from an email address 
that you recognise, such as a friend or family member, as 
sometimes accounts can be hacked into and fake emails 
sent out to all of that person’s contacts.
4 Internet security
How to recognise phishing and spam emails:
• The sender’s email address may look official but it is not the 
actual email address of the bank or company. Always check 
with your bank if you are unsure what address they use.
• The email does not use your proper name, but instead 
starts with a general greeting like ‘Dear customer’. 
• There’s a sense of urgency, for example, threatening that 
unless you act immediately, your account will be closed. 
• It may contain a link to a website that looks very similar 
to the company’s real one but is actually a fake site asking 
for your personal details. The link or site may be slightly 
different to the official website, so check it carefully. Be 
aware that you can be taken to a fake website even if the 
link appears to be correct.
• There will be a request for personal information, such as 
your username, password or bank details.
• There may be a request for money, for example, for 
processing your prize, or for helping someone in need.
• There may be a document or link to open and either no 
message or some short text saying “Check this out” or 
“See what I found” without further explanation. 
5 Internet security
Top things to remember:
• Banks and other financial institutions never ask for personal 
information in an email. If you receive a suspicious email 
claiming to be from your bank, contact your bank directly 
by phoning them or typing their web address into your 
browser (not by following the link in the email).
• Do not open a link or document in an unsolicited email. 
• Do not reply to unsolicited emails, even to say no, as this 
demonstrates that your email address is active and they 
may contact you again. 
• If in doubt – delete it without opening it.
• If it is about account information, phone the organisation 
directly to ask them, using the phone number found on the 
official website.
• Don’t panic if you get an email that has a sense of urgency 
and threatens to close your account. Take your time to 
check the details first before reacting.
Most email packages, including free email accounts from 
providers such as Yahoo! Mail, Hotmail or Gmail, have spam 
filters built in which can block unwanted emails. 
You can report phishing emails to your email provider or 
Action Fraud (see page 25). You could also forward the email 
to the organisation it claims to be from so they can take note 
of it.
See our free information guide Avoiding scams for more 
information on different types of scams and how to  
avoid them. 
what 
next?
6 Internet security
Computer scams 
Beware of a common scam. The fraudsters phone you 
claiming to be from a well-known IT firm, asking you to 
follow a few simple instructions to get rid of a virus or 
update your software. If you do as they ask, they will upload 
software called spyware onto your computer, which will 
allow them to access any personal details you have stored 
on your computer. Never respond to a phone call from 
someone claiming that your computer has a virus. If you 
get a call like this, hang up straight away. Legitimate IT 
companies never contact customers in this way. 
 You can find out more about other scams in our free guide 
Avoiding scams.
what 
next?
Never respond to a phone call from 
someone claiming that your 
computer has a virus.
8 Internet security
Passwords 
Passwords are the most common way to prove your identity 
online, so it’s very important to make sure you have strong 
passwords that can’t be easily guessed.
Weak passwords are made up of very common sets of 
letters or numbers. Examples of weak passwords that are 
used a lot include:
• password
• 123456
• password123
A strong password should:
• be at least 8 characters long
• include a combination of upper and lower case letters
• include some numbers and keyboard symbols such as 
& or !
Follow these tips to create a strong password:
• Avoid using personal information, such as your name, date 
of birth or common words like ‘password’.
• Make sure that you don’t make your password too difficult 
to remember.
• Use different passwords for different websites. Using one 
password for all accounts is a potential security risk because 
if someone hacks into your account on one site, they will be 
able to log in to all the accounts that share that password.
• Recent advice suggests that using three random words 
together can make a stronger password, as long as those 
words don’t contain your personal information.
9 Internet security
For useful tips on how to create a strong password, see 
www.microsoft.com/en-GB/security/online-privacy/
passwords-create.aspx
It used to be advised never to write down your password. 
But as people get more online accounts with different and 
complex passwords they can become harder to recall. If 
you need to write down your passwords, try to write only 
a reminder or hint rather than the actual and complete 
password itself.
If you do write anything down, keep that information 
somewhere safe away from your computer. It’s best to keep 
it in an unmarked notebook so it won’t be obvious to other 
people what information is inside.
Password managers
Some internet browsers have built-in password managers. 
This is a tool that remembers your passwords for different 
sites and fills them in automatically for you.
When you log in to a website for the first time the password 
manager will ask if you want it to remember the password. 
You have the choice if you want it to or not. It can be time-
saving to use this function, but it will only work on your 
computer. If you use someone else’s computer, you will need 
to remember your passwords for any accounts you want 
to access. 
If you use a password manager and you share your 
computer with someone else, they will be able to access all 
your log-in details through the password manager. Make 
sure that your computer is only used by people you trust.
If you make purchases or bank 
online, make sure you protect your 
financial information.
11 Internet security
Online shopping and banking 
The internet can offer a useful way to do your shopping and 
manage your money from home. More and more people are 
discovering that it’s quick and convenient, and can even lead 
to some savings.
If you make purchases or bank online, make sure you protect 
your financial information. Use a secure website when 
entering card information. This ensures that the information 
you send can’t be read by anyone else.
Here are some ways to spot a secure website:
• The website address should begin with https:// The ‘s’ 
stands for ‘secure’.
• If the address bar is green, this is an additional sign that 
you’re using a safe website.
• Look for a padlock symbol in the browser where the website 
address is. Don’t be fooled by a padlock that appears on the 
web page itself.
• Websites that offer secure payments and other financial 
transactions, such as banking, need a security certificate.  
To view it, click on the padlock symbol to check that the 
seller is who they say they are and that their certificate is 
current and registered to the right address. However, the 
padlock isn’t an absolute guarantee of safety, so err on the 
side of caution if you have any doubts.
12 Internet security
Try these tips for shopping and banking online safely:
• Be aware that you will never be asked for your card pin 
number but you may be asked to provide the security 
number for your debit or credit card. This is also referred to 
as a ‘CVV2 code’ and can be found on the reverse of your 
card where the signature box is. It’s the last 3 digits of the 
number on the back.
• If you get a pop-up message warning you about a website’s 
security certificate, be very cautious indeed. If you continue, 
you may be redirected to a fake website, designed to let 
somebody else read the information you are sending, such 
as log-in details.
• Use a strong password that can’t easily be guessed by 
others (see page 8).
• Use online retailers that have a good reputation, either as 
high-street shops or established online stores.
• If a deal looks too good to be true, it probably is. Be 
cautious of anything offered in an unsolicited email. You 
could do an internet search to see whether anyone else  
has had problems or if it’s a well-known scam.
• Check where the seller is located. Don’t assume that a seller 
is based in the UK just because their web address has ‘uk’ in 
it. The law says that the seller must provide you with their 
full contact details. If you buy from a seller or company 
based outside the EU, it can be harder to enforce your rights 
and problems can be harder to sort out.
There may also be added or hidden costs, such as VAT 
or additional postage for overseas transactions. To find 
more information on buying from sellers based in other EU 
countries, visit the website of the UK European Consumer 
Centre (see page 26).
13 Internet security
• Always use a credit card for internet transactions, or check 
to see if your debit card provider offers any protection. 
If your purchase costs more than £100 and you use a 
credit card, the seller and your card company are equally 
responsible if anything goes wrong. (Be aware that there 
is sometimes a card handling fee when you pay with 
your credit card. Always check how much this is before 
completing your transaction.)
• Many banks offer free anti-virus software or browser 
security products – check if your bank offers this.
• After you’ve finished using a secure site always make sure 
you log out. That way anyone using the computer after  
you can’t access your personal information.
See our free guide Avoiding scams for information on  
how to protect yourself or visit www.getsafeonline.org  
for more information. 
what 
next?
14 Internet security
Social networking
Social networking websites are online communities where 
you can connect with people who share your interests. You 
can create a profile describing yourself, exchange public and 
private messages and join groups that interest you.
They are a great way to keep in touch with family and 
friends, make new friends, share your photos, find out about 
events and much more. Facebook (www.facebook.com) and 
Twitter (www.twitter.com) are among the most popular sites. 
Social networking sites can be targets for people who want 
to steal personal information, but it’s easy to stay safe by 
following a few sensible guidelines.
• Be aware of who can see your profile. Most social networks 
allow you to choose who can see your profile, but you may 
have to change your settings to make it private.
• Be wary of publishing any information that identifies you, 
such as your phone number, photos of your home, your 
address, date of birth or full name.
• Pick a username that doesn’t include any personal 
information. For example, ‘joe_glasgow’ or ‘annajones1947’ 
would both be bad choices.
• Set up a separate email account that doesn’t use your 
real name to register with the site. If you don’t want to 
use the site any more, you can simply stop using that 
email account.
15 Internet security
• Use a strong password that is different from the passwords 
you use for other accounts (see page 8).
• Be cautious of people you have just met online who ask  
you to reveal personal information or who want to meet 
you very quickly.
• Be on your guard against phishing scams (see page 3).
For more information on relationship scams see our free 
guide Avoiding scams.
what 
next?
Social networking websites 
are a great way to keep  
in touch with family  
and friends.
It may seem like you need a lot of 
software to protect yourself from 
online risks, but it’s actually 
very easy.
17 Internet security
Protect your computer 
Protecting your computer from malware is simple, just 
follow the tips below.
Install anti-virus software 
Viruses are malicious programs that can spread from one 
computer to another by email or through websites. They can 
display unwanted pop-up messages, slow your computer 
down and even delete files. Remember to check which 
type of software you need, as it may vary depending on 
whether your computer uses Windows software or is an 
Apple computer.
Anti-virus software helps to find, stop and remove these 
malicious viruses.
Install anti-spyware software
Spyware is an unwanted program that runs on your 
computer. It allows unwanted adverts to pop up, tracks 
your online activities and can even scan your computer for 
private data such as credit card numbers. It can make your 
computer slow and unreliable and make you a target for 
online criminals.
Installing anti-spyware software helps to protect your 
computer from these threats.
18 Internet security
It may seem like you need a lot of software to protect 
yourself from online risks, but it’s actually very easy. You 
can buy a complete package that includes everything you 
need, or get effective free software such as AVG (http://
free.avg.com) or Avast (www.avast.com/free-antivirus-
download). These work on both Windows computers and 
Apple computers.
For computers that use Windows 7 or above, there is built-in 
anti-spyware software called Windows Defender.
Once your software is installed, keep it up to date when 
prompted. Online threats evolve constantly so this ensures 
that you have the highest level of protection.
Turn on your firewall 
A firewall is a protective barrier between your computer and 
the internet. It will stop some viruses getting through and 
will prevent anyone connecting to your computer without 
your permission. Most computers come with a firewall which 
is usually switched on automatically, but check to make sure 
that it is running. 
Keep your operating system updated 
The operating system is the main software program on 
your computer which manages all the other programs on 
it. Whichever operating system you have, keep it updated 
as this will give you stronger protection. You should receive 
notifications when new updates are available, but you can 
also update your software manually.
If you use Windows, go to the Windows Update site at 
http://windowsupdate.microsoft.com. There are instructions 
on the site that will enable your computer to automatically 
download and install updates as they become available. 
These are free.
19 Internet security
Protect your wireless network
If you use wireless internet at home, you will have a wireless 
router. You need to protect your wireless network so that 
people living nearby can’t access it. Read the instructions 
that come with your router to find out how to set up a ‘key’ 
– a type of password – so that no one else can access the 
internet through your router.
You can find step-by-step explanations and advice on all of 
the above at www.getsafeonline.org
what 
next?
Once your software is  
installed, keep it up to  
date when prompted.
20 Internet security
Protect your tablet and 
your phone
Mobile phones and tablets can now be used to do things like 
check emails, shop and bank online or explore the internet. 
Tablets are small handheld devices with a touchscreen, 
although you can get a keyboard to attach to them if you 
prefer to type on one. Smartphones are mobile phones 
that have touchscreens and the ability to connect to the 
internet. A lot of people now use tablets or phones instead 
of computers.
Tablets and smartphones need protecting just like 
computers do. That’s because they can still be infected with 
viruses or spyware. Just like on computers, viruses on your 
tablet or smartphone could be used to get your personal 
details, slow your device down or spread viruses to other 
tablets or computers. 
You can download anti-virus and anti-spyware protection 
for tablets and phones. These are often referred to as ‘apps’ 
(applications), which is just another term for software. The 
best protection for your device may vary depending on what 
type of phone or tablet you have. If you’re unsure about 
which is best, you could ask your mobile phone provider, pop 
into a local phone shop or look online for more information. 
A lot of good anti-virus protection for phones and tablets is 
free and can be downloaded online. 
21 Internet security
Some highly rated anti-virus apps, which are free, are:
• Avast mobile security
• Kaspersky internet security
• Norton mobile security.
These apps work on phones and tablets that use Windows, 
as well as on Apple products. 
You should also consider password-protecting your phone 
or tablet, to make sure that only you, or people you trust, 
can use it. Password access is easy to set up, just follow the 
instructions that come with your device. 
Find more information on protecting your smartphone or 
tablet at www.getsafeonline.org 
what 
next?
22 Internet security
Glossary 
Anti-spyware 
Helps protect your computer against pop-ups, slow 
performance and security threats caused by spyware and 
other unwanted software. 
Anti-virus 
Software that detects and prevents known viruses from 
attacking your computer. 
Apps (applications)
A type of software program that you can download for 
your computer, tablet or phone. There are hundreds of 
different apps available, some for free, which do lots of 
different things. 
Browser 
The computer software or app you use to access the 
internet. Examples include Internet Explorer, Google Chrome 
and Safari (for Apple products).  
Firewall 
Firewalls prevent unauthorised access to your computer over 
the internet. 
Malware 
A general term used to refer to hostile or intrusive software. 
Malware is short for malicious software. 
Operating system 
The software that manages different programs on 
a computer. 
Phishing 
An attempt at identity theft in which criminals direct users 
to a counterfeit website to trick them into disclosing private 
information, such as usernames or passwords. 
23 Internet security
Router 
A device that connects your computers to a broadband-
enabled telephone line and emits your home internet signal. 
Smartphone
A mobile phone which, as well as making calls and sending 
texts, can be used to browse the internet, send emails, and 
do a number of other functions like a computer. 
Social networking website 
An online community where you can connect with friends, 
family and other people who share your interests. 
Spam 
Unsolicited commercial email, also known as junk mail. 
Spyware 
An unwanted program that runs on your computer, which 
can make it slow and unreliable or even make you a target 
for online criminals. 
Tablet
A handheld device with a touchscreen which can be used as 
a portable computer.
Viruses 
Programs that spread from one computer to another by 
email or through malicious websites. They can slow your 
computer down, display unwanted pop-up messages and 
even delete files. 
Wireless network 
Usually shortened to wi-fi, this is a way for your computer to 
connect to the internet without using wires or cables. 
24 Internet security
Useful organisations 
Age UK 
We provide advice and information for people in later life 
through our Age UK Advice line‚ publications and online. 
Age UK Advice: 0800 169 65 65  
Lines are open seven days a week from 8am to 7pm.  
www.ageuk.org.uk 
Call Age UK Advice to find out whether there is 
a local Age UK near you, and to order free copies 
of our information guides and factsheets. 
In Wales, contact 
Age Cymru: 0800 022 3444  
www.agecymru.org.uk 
In Northern Ireland, contact  
Age NI: 0808 808 7575  
www.ageni.org 
In Scotland, contact Age Scotland by calling  
Silver Line Scotland: 0800 470 8090 (This is a partnership 
between The Silver Line and Age Scotland)  
www.agescotland.org.uk 
25 Internet security
Action Fraud 
Investigates reports of phishing emails and online fraud. 
Tel: 0300 123 2040  
www.actionfraud.police.uk 
BBC Webwise 
Free online information and training about using the internet. 
www.bbc.co.uk/webwise 
Citizens Advice Consumer Service 
Provides information and advice on consumer issues by 
telephone and online. Offers tips on recognising email scams. 
Tel: 0345 404 0506  
(or 0345 404 0505 for a Welsh-speaking adviser)  
www.adviceguide.org.uk 
In Northern Ireland, contact Consumerline  
Tel: 0300 123 6262 
www.nidirect.gov.uk/consumerline
Computer Courses Wales
A website run by Digital Communities Wales that you can 
search to find local computer courses.
http://computercourses.wales/ 
Digital Unite 
Helps older people learn about computers and the internet. 
It has a network of tutors across the UK who offer one-to-
one tuition for a fee. There is also useful information on 
its website. 
Tel: 0800 228 9272  
www.digitalunite.com 
26 Internet security
Get Safe Online 
Free advice about using the internet safely. 
www.getsafeonline.org 
Gov.uk 
Government website offering practical information and 
advice to the public. 
www.gov.uk 
In Northern Ireland, visit NI Direct at www.nidirect.gov.uk 
UK European Consumer Centre 
The UK European Consumer Centre provides advice 
on sorting out problems with traders based in other 
EU countries. 
Tel: 01268 886 690  
www.ukecc.net 
UK Online Centres 
Use the ‘find a centre’ facility to locate your nearest UK 
online centre for access to computers and the internet. 
Tel: 0800 771 234 
www.ukonlinecentres.com
M
XX
X1
5C
A
07
C0
09
The Age UK Group may use the information you have supplied to tell you about our other charitable services 
or to ask you to support our work. Age UK (registered charity no 1128267) comprises the Charity, its group of 
companies and national partners (Age Cymru, Age Scotland & Age NI). If you would prefer not to hear from us 
do let us know by phoning 0800 107 8977 or by writing to us at our registered address. The registered address is 
Tavis House, 1–6 Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9NA.
Can you help Age UK?
Please complete the donation form below with a gift of whatever 
you can afford and return to: Age UK, Tavis House, 1–6 Tavistock 
Square, LONDON WC1H 9NA. Alternatively, you can phone  
0800 169 87 87 or visit www.ageuk.org.uk/donate. If you prefer, you 
can donate directly to one of our national or local partners. Thank you.
Personal details 
Title:  Initials:  Surname:
Address:
 Postcode:
Tel:  Email:
By providing your email address and/or mobile number you are agreeing to us contacting you in these ways. 
You may contact us at any time to unsubscribe from our communications.
Your gift 
I would like to make a gift of:
 
£
 I enclose a cheque/postal order made payable to Age UK
Card payment 
I wish to pay by (please tick)   MasterCard   Visa   CAF CharityCard
  Maestro  American Express
 (Maestro only)
Expiry date /  Issue no. (Maestro only)  
Signature X
Gift aid declaration 
 (please tick) Yes, I want Age UK and its partner organisations*  
to treat all donations I have made for the four years prior to this year,  
and all donations I make from the date of this declaration until I notify  
you otherwise, as gift aid donations. I confirm I pay an amount of  
income tax and/or capital gains tax at least equal to the tax that the  
charity will reclaim on my donations in the tax year. Date: / /   
(please complete). *Age Cymru, Age Scotland and Age NI

29 Internet security
Supporting the work of Age UK
Age UK aims to enable all older people to love 
later life. We provide vital services, support, 
information and advice to thousands of older 
people across the UK. 
In order to offer free information guides like this one, Age UK 
relies on the generosity of its supporters. If you would like 
to help us, here are a few ways you could get involved: 
1 Make a donation To make a donation to Age UK, simply complete the enclosed donation form, call us on 0800 169 8787 or visit www.ageuk.org.uk/get-involved
2  Donate items to our shops By donating an unwanted item to one of our shops, you can help generate vital funds to support our work. To find your nearest Age UK shop, visit 
www.ageuk.org.uk and enter your postcode into 
the ‘What does Age UK do in your area?’ search 
function. Alternatively, call us on 0800 169 8787
3 Leave a gift in your will Nearly half the money we receive from supporters come from gifts left in wills. To find out more about how you could help in this way, please call the 
Age UK legacy team on 020 3033 1421 or email 
legacies@ageuk.org.uk
Thank 
you!
Age UK is a charitable company limited by guarantee and registered in England and Wales (registered charity number 1128267 
and registered company number 6825798). Registered address: Tavis House, 1–6 Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9NA. Age UK and 
its subsidiary companies and charities form the Age UK Group, dedicated to helping more people love later life. ID202637 12/15
What should I do now?
For more information on the issues covered in this guide, or to  
order any of our publications, please call Age UK Advice free on  
0800 169 65 65 or visit www.ageuk.org.uk/workandlearning
Our publications are also available in large print and audio formats.
The following Age UK information guides may be useful: 
• Avoiding scams
• Save energy, pay less
• Staying safe
The Age UK Group offers a wide range of products and services  
specially designed for people in later life. For more information,  
please call 0800 169 18 19.
If contact details for your local Age UK are not in the box below,  
call Age UK Advice free on 0800 169 65 65.

