Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
Digital Disaster, Cyber Security and the Copenhagen School1 
 
By 
 
Lene Hansen and Helen Nissenbaum 
 
Abstract: 
 
This article is devoted to an analysis of cyber security, a concept that arrived on the post-
Cold War agenda in response to a mixture of technological innovations and changing 
geopolitical conditions. Adopting the framework of securitization theory, the article 
theorizes cyber security as a distinct sector with a particular constellation of threats and 
referent objects. It is held that „network security‟ and „individual security‟ are significant 
referent objects, but that their political importance arises from connections to the collective 
referent objects of „the state‟, „society‟, „the nation‟, and „the economy‟. These referent 
objects are articulated as threatened through three distinct forms of securitizations: 
hypersecuritization, everyday security practices, and technifications. The applicability of the 
theoretical framework is then shown through a case-study of what has been labeled the 
first war in cyber space against Estonian public and commercial institutions in 2007. 
 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 1 
Digital Disaster, Cyber Security and the Copenhagen School 
 
 
This article is devoted to an analysis of „cyber security‟, a concept that arrived on the post-
Cold War agenda in response to a mixture of technological innovations and changing 
geopolitical conditions. Cyber security was first used by computer scientists in the early 
1990‟s to underline a series of insecurities related to networked computers, but it moved 
beyond a mere technical conception of computer security when proponents urged that 
threats arising from digital technologies could have devastating societal effects 
(Nissenbaum 2005). Throughout the 1990‟s these warnings were increasingly validated by 
prominent American politicians, private corporations and the media who spoke about 
„electronic Pearl Harbors‟ and „weapons of mass disruption‟ thereby conjuring grave threats 
to the Western world (Bendrath 2003, 50-53; Nissenbaum 2005, 67; Yould 2003, 84-88). 
The events on September 11 further spurred the attention given to computers, information 
technology and security, not least to questions of digital infrastructure protection, 
electronic surveillance, the terrorist use of hacking, and the Internet as a networked 
platform for communication across and against states (Latham 2003, 1). Outside the 
United States, non-democratic regimes, most conspicuously China, have repeatedly sought 
to block their citizens‟ access to those parts of the Internet considered threatening to 
political and societal stability. More recently, the 2007 large-scale digital attacks on Estonian 
public and private institutions in response to the government‟s removal of a World War II 
memorial were labeled the first war in cyberspace and NATO replied by declaring the 
protection of information systems a crucial component of its force transformation (North 
Atlantic Council 2007; The New York Times 2007).  
 
Constituting something as a „security problem‟ while simultaneously defining something as 
not has significant consequences in that it endows „the problem‟ with a status and priority 
that „non-security problems‟ do not have. Normatively it is therefore crucial that Security 
Studies engage the conceptualizations of security that are mobilized within policy discourse 
– be those environmental, health, or cyber security - even if the conclusion is to argue that 
the implications of such security discourses are problematic (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 
1998, 29; Deudney 1990; Huysmans 2006, 124-144). Yet, in spite of the widespread 
references to cyber insecurities in policy, media and Computer Science discourses there has 
been surprisingly little explicit discussion within Security Studies of what hyphenating 
„security‟ with „cyber‟ might imply. To take a recent example the broadly conceived 
textbook, Contemporary Security Studies edited by Alan Collins has no entries for „cyber 
security‟, „computers‟, „critical infrastructure‟, „information security‟, or „networks‟ (Collins 
2007). Those Security Studies scholars who do address cyber related themes employ 
„adjacent concepts‟ - „cyber war‟ (Arquilla and Ronfeldt 1993; Der Derian 1992), „netwar‟ 
and „network security‟ (Arquilla and Ronfeldt 1996, 2001; Deibert and Stein 2002; Der 
Derian 2003), „critical infrastructure protection‟ (Bendrath 2003), and „information security‟ 
and „information warfare‟ (Deibert 2003; Denning 1999; Der Derian 2003, 453; Latham 
2003) – terms that overlap, but also have distinctive meanings that separate them from 
cyber security. 
 
This article seeks to address this gap in Security Studies adopting the Copenhagen School‟s 
theory of securitization as its starting point. 2 The Copenhagen School has won wide 
acclaim as „the most thorough and continuous exploration‟ and „Among the most 
prominent and influential‟ approaches to the widening agenda in Security Studies 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 2 
(Huysmans 1998, 480; Williams 2003, 511) and its understanding of security as a discursive 
modality with a particular rhetorical structure and political effect makes it particularly suited 
for a study of the formation and evolution of cyber security discourse. The Copenhagen 
School argues that security is a speech act that securitizes, that is constitutes one or more 
referent objects, historically the nation or the state, as threatened to their physical or 
ideational survival and therefore in urgent need of protection (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 
1998; Wæver 1995; Wæver et al. 1993). Yet the Copenhagen School has dealt with cyber 
security as an example of an attempted securitization - Pentagon securitizing the 
catastrophic impact of hacking on critical infrastructures - that is ruled out on the grounds 
that it has „no cascading effects on other security issues‟ (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 
25). Hence, holds the Copenhagen School in its seminar study Security: A New Framework for 
Analysis from 1998, there is no need to theorize cyber security as a distinct sector akin to 
the military, the political, the environmental, the societal, the economic and the religious 
ones (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998; Laustsen and Wæver 2000). 
 
Much however has changed since the Copenhagen School made this assessment: cyber 
security is successfully securitized as evidenced by such institutional developments as the 
establishment of the Commission on Critical Infrastructure Protection by President 
Clinton in 1996, the prominent location of cyber security within the Department of 
Homeland Security, President Bush‟s formulation of The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace 
in 2003, and the creation of a NATO backed cyber defense centre in Estonia in 2008. Nor 
is it plausible to maintain the view of cyber security as insulated from other sectors of 
security. Indeed, in Rachel Yould‟s words (2003, 78) „it appears that IT may be the 
common underlying factor upon which all security sectors are destined to converge.‟ The 
link to military security is fairly straightforward with digital technologies forming the 
backbone of the Revolution in Military Affairs (Cavelty 2008; Gray 1997), the securitization 
of Internet access in countries such as China, Singapore and Myanmar is legitimized 
through references to national-cultural as well as regime security (Deibert 2002), and the 
intricate connections between the commercial interests in seamless digital transactions, 
concerns for privacy protection, and governmental calls for surveillance and data-mining 
throw up crucial battles between multiple actors speaking on behalf of political, private, 
societal and corporate security (Saco 1999). This wealth of referent objects, competing 
securitizing actors, and multiple threat constellations may at first give the impression of a 
disjointed sector made up by incompatible discourses (Deibert 2002). Yet as this article will 
show it is indeed possible to develop a theoretical framework that facilitates an 
understanding of the connections between these discourses as well as of the political and 
normative implications of constructing cyber issues as security problems rather than as 
political, economic, criminal or „purely‟ technical ones.3  
 
The main goal of this article is thus to identify and locate cyber security as a particular 
sector on the broader terrain of Security Studies. 4 Sectors are, hold the Copenhagen School 
lenses or discourses rather than objectively existing phenomena and they are defined by 
particular constitutions of referent objects and types of threats as well as by specific forms 
or „grammars‟ of securitization (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 27). Theorizing the 
cyber security sector therefore requires that we address the following questions: What 
threats and referent objects characterize cyber security; what distinguishes it from other 
security sectors; how may concrete instances of cyber securitizations be analyzed; and what 
may critical security scholars learn from taking cyber discourse seriously? The article 
answers these questions by proceeding through four steps. The first part of the article 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 3 
introduces securitization theory with a particular emphasis on the relationship between 
individual and collective referent objects and on the relationship between public and 
private spheres of society. The second part of the article investigates the genesis of cyber 
security discourse showing competing articulations of threats and referent objects. The 
third part lays out three distinct security modalities that further specify the cyber security 
sector: hypersecuritization, which identifies large-scale instantaneous cascading disaster 
scenarios; everyday security practices, that draws upon and securitizes the lived experiences a 
citizenry may have; and technifications, that captures the constitution of an issue as reliant 
upon expert, technical knowledge for its resolution and hence as politically neutral or 
unquestionably normatively desirable. The fourth part of the paper addresses the 
applicability of the suggested theoretical framework through a case-study of the attacks on 
Estonian public and private digital structures in 2007 and the subsequent discursive and 
institutional responses. The case-study indicates the applicability of the framework beyond 
the American context and is furthermore a critical case for when and how securitizations 
may succeed as the attacks were widely described as the first war in cyber space.  
 
The conclusion sums up what expanding the Copenhagen School to include cyber security 
entails with a particular view to the implications of our study for the wider debates over the 
normative and conceptual implications of securitization theory.5 Although this paper takes 
the Copenhagen School‟s securitization theory as its starting point its ambition is not 
merely to add a cyber security sector to the existing framework, but to speak to critical 
debates over how to theorize the referent object, the politics and epistemology of who can 
securitize and who cannot, and whether desecuritization – the move out of a logic of 
security and into a political or a technical one – is desirable. Critical engagements with the 
Copenhagen School framework are therefore introduced throughout the article as the case 
of cyber security throws critical and in several respects new light upon contemporary 
securitization debates.   
 
 Securitization Theory 
 
Over the past 15 years, the Copenhagen School has been successful in capturing the middle 
ground of the widening debate in Security Studies. Known most prominently for its 
concepts of securitization and societal security (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998; Wæver 
1995; Wæver et al. 1993), it has been applied to a number of empirical contexts and 
problems including ethnic conflict (Roe 2005), HIV/AIDS (Elbe 2006) and trafficking 
(Jackson 2006). It has become the focal point for important theoretical debates on the 
normative implications of security discourse (Erikson 1999; Huysmans 2006; Williams 
2003), the consequences of speech act epistemology (Bigo 2002; Balzacq 2005; Hansen 
2000), the Western-centric status of security (Bubandt 2005; Kent 2006; Wilkinson 2007), 
and the importance of the media and visual representations (Hansen 2008; Williams 2003).  
 
The Copenhagen School has three main theoretical roots, one in debates in Security Studies 
over whether to widen the concept beyond its traditional state-centric, military focus, one 
in speech act theory, and one in a classical, Schmittian understanding of the state and 
security politics (Huysmans 2006, 124-44; Williams 2003). Combining these influences, the 
general concept of „security‟ is drawn from its constitution within national security 
discourse, which implies an emphasis on authority, the confronting – and construction - of 
threats and enemies, an ability to make decisions and the adoption of emergency measures. 
Security has a particular discursive and political force and is a concept that does something 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 4 
– securitize - rather than an objective (or subjective) condition. „Thus the exact definition and 
criteria of securitization is constituted by the intersubjective establishment of an existential 
threat with a saliency sufficient to have substantial political effects‟ (Buzan, Wæver and de 
Wilde 1998, 25). „Saying‟ security defines something as threatening and in need of urgent 
response, and securitization should therefore be studied in discourse, „When does an 
argument with this particular rhetorical and semiotic structure achieve sufficient effect to 
make an audience tolerate violations of rules that would otherwise have to be obeyed?‟ 
(Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 25) Security „frames the issue either as a special kind of 
politics or as above politics‟ and a spectrum can therefore be defined ranging public issues 
from the nonpoliticized („the state does not deal with it and it is not in any other way made an 
issue of public debate and decision‟), through politicized („the issue is part of public policy, 
requiring government decision and resource allocations or, more rarely, some other form 
of communal governance‟) to securitization (in which case an issue is no longer debated as a 
political question, but dealt with at an accelerated pace and in ways that may violate normal 
legal and social rules) (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 23). This however effectively 
constitutes the nonpoliticized as an empty category (for an issue to be public rather than 
private it must presumably be either the subject of public policy, or it must be brought to 
the attention of the public) and since virtually all public issues are subjected to some form 
of regulation we find it more appropriate to redefine nonpoliticized issues as those which 
do not command political and/or media attention and which are regulated through 
consensual and technical measures; and politicized issues as those which are devoted close 
media and political scrutiny, generating debate and usually multiple policy approaches, 
while not commanding the threat-urgency modality of securitization. 
 
Having emphasized the urgency requirement of security, the Copenhagen School argues 
that security discourse may constitute other referent objects than the state/nation as 
threatened and bring in other sectors than the military as long as this happens with the 
drama and saliency of national/international security and is accepted by the relevant 
audience. This broadening led to an explicit theorization of „societal security‟ as „the ability 
of a society to persist in its essential character under changing conditions and possible or 
actual threats‟, an expansion that allowed for the identification of security problems where 
national, religious, ethnic or racial groups feel threatened rather than protected by „their‟ 
state (Wæver et al. 1993, 23-26). The discursive articulation of urgency and extreme 
measures is thus central to the Copenhagen School‟s delineation of the boundary between 
„security proper‟ and concepts that bear only a semantic semblance to „security‟ and hence 
also to how referent objects are defined. Thus „social security‟ is for instance defined as 
„about individuals‟ (and thus not about collective referent objects as in „international 
security‟) and „largely economic‟ (rather than „security‟) (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 
120) – neither are „investment securities‟, or insecurities related to crime or unemployment 
„real‟ securities (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 104).6 Methodologically, there is a 
certain ambiguity in securitization theory as it argues that the utterance of the word 
„security‟ is not the decisive criteria and that a securitization might consist of „only a 
metaphorical security reference‟ (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 27). Yet what this 
entails has not been further explored, and the majority of the theory leans in the direction 
of a more explicit verbal speech act methodology.  
 
The Copenhagen School has modified its earlier refusal of a concept of individual security, 
but it still privileges collective security concepts and tends to replicate Security Studies‟ 
traditional juxtaposition of individual and collective security (Hansen 2000; McSweeney 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 5 
1996). „In practice, the middle scale of limited collectivities has proved the most amenable 
to securitization of durable referent objects‟, and „Security is an area of competing actors, 
but it is a biased one in which the state is still generally privileged as the actor historically 
endowed with security tasks and most adequately structured for this purpose‟ (Buzan, 
Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 36-37). This state/nation-individual dichotomy does however 
lock the Copenhagen School - and Security Studies - into a ritualized debate which 
downplays how political thought from the mid 17th century onwards has constituted 
security as a „relationship between individuals and states or societies‟ not as an either-or 
(Rothschild 1995, 61). The individual and the state are united in that the principle of state 
sovereignty implies that the individual allocates authority and power to the state in 
exchange for the state‟s protection of her/his security (Walker 1990; Williams 1998). To 
define security as „national security‟ is thus implicitly to articulate an abstract conception of 
individual security as provided by the (idealized) state. On the other hand, to articulate 
security as „individual security‟ – as most of Human Security, Critical Security Studies, and 
Feminist approaches still do - necessitates a collective conception of how and by whom the 
securities of individuals are going to be negotiated. Since „individuals‟ do not appear in 
political discourse as free-standing entities, but with gendered, racial, religious, class and 
other collective identities, there is always going to be a tension between the different forms 
in which the individual can be constituted. A call for individual security against the 
atrocities - or even, merely overreaching - of the state is thus always also implicitly a call for 
an alternative political community and authority. 
 
The concept of national security has proved remarkably stable precisely because it is linked 
to the principle of state sovereignty which offers a powerful resolution to questions of 
identity, order and authority (Walker 1990). Yet, while „security‟ in the form of the political 
modality of national security (that is as threats, dangers, and emergency decisions) is as 
resilient as the state, neither the state nor „security‟ is uncontested or incontestable. Both 
depend on political and academic practices for the reproduction of their status, and the 
question thus becomes whether the discourse on cyber security reinforces the state/nation 
as a referent object, how individual responsibility is articulated to support (or challenge) 
collective security and authority, and whether this rearticulates the understanding of 
„security politics‟ itself.  
 
 Securitizing digital systems: the referent objects of cyber security 
 
The history of cyber security as a securitizing concept begins with the disciplines of 
Computer and Information Science. One, if not the first usage of cyber security was in the 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board‟s (CSTB) report from 1991, Computers at 
Risk: Safe Computing in the Information Age which defined „security‟ as the „protection against 
unwanted disclosure, modification, or destruction of data in a system and also [to] the 
safeguarding of systems themselves‟ (CSTB 1991, 2). Security comprised technical as well 
as human aspects and „it has significant procedural, administrative, physical facility, and 
personnel components‟ (CSTB 1991, 17). Crucially, threats to cyber security do not only 
arise from (usually) intentional agents, but also from systemic threats. These systemic threats, 
defined by Hundley and Anderson (1995/96, 232) as „cyberspace safety‟ stems from the 
inherent unpredictability of computers and information systems which by themselves 
„create unintended (potentially or actually) dangerous situations for themselves or for the 
physical and human environments in which they are embedded‟. Threats arise from 
software as well as hardware failures and cannot be corrected through perfecting digital 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 6 
technology and programming, there is in short an inherent ontological insecurity within 
computer systems (Denning 1999, 12; Edwards 1996, 290-292).  
 
„Computer security‟ would not however in most cases by itself qualify as a security concept 
according to the Copenhagen School. As Helen Nissenbaum points out, the majority of 
computer scientists adopt a technical discourse that is focused on developing good 
programs with a limited number of (serious) bugs and systems that are difficult to penetrate 
by outside attackers. In the move from „computer security‟ to „cyber security‟, this technical 
discourse is however linked to the securitizing discourse „developed in the specialized arena 
of national security‟ (Nissenbaum 2005, 65). „Cyber security‟ can in short be seen as 
„computer security‟ plus „securitization‟. In the 1991 CSTB report it is argued that „We are 
at risk‟ and in a remarkable mobilization of securitizing prose that „Tomorrow‟s terrorist 
may be able to do more damage with a keyboard than with a bomb‟. No major attacks have 
been launched so far, but it is a key element of securitizing discourse to argue that if action 
is not undertaken then serious incidents will materialize in the near future, thus „there is 
reason to believe that our luck will soon run out‟ (CSTB 1991, 7-8). The constitution of a 
much too complacent audience that does not realize the magnitude of these dangers is 
another key staple of securitizing discourse, and the CSTB laments that „Very few 
individuals not professionally concerned with security … have ever been directly involved 
in or affected by a computer security incident. … most people have difficulty relating to 
the intricacies of malicious computer actions‟ (CSTB 1991, 159-61). 11 years later most 
Americans have been exposed to (scares of) computer viruses, worms and hackers, yet the 
Board complains that in spite of the reports produced over the past years, „not much has 
changed with respect to security as it is practiced‟. As the threats to cyber security have 
increased while the countermeasures have not, „our ability and willingness to deal with 
threats have, on balance, changed for the worse‟ (CSTB 2002, 2). In another attempt to 
stress the urgency and wake up policy makers and the broader public the report is titled 
Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: Pay Now or Pay Later. A similar tone is struck a year later in 
the so far most authoritative and comprehensive statement of US cyber security policy, 
President Bush‟s The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace which opens by asserting that „In 
the past few years, threats in cyberspace have risen dramatically‟. Although a large-scale 
cyber attack has not yet taken place, this is no time to „be too sanguine‟ as „the attack tools 
and methodologies are becoming widely available, and the technical capability and 
sophistication of users bent on causing havoc or disruption is improving‟ (The National 
Strategy 2003, viii).  
 
Key to understanding the potential magnitude of cyber threats is the networked character 
of computer systems. These networks „control physical objects such as electrical 
transformers, trains, pipeline pumps, chemical vats, and radars‟ (The National Strategy 2003, 
6-7) and attacks – or „cyberdisasters‟ - would „compromise systems and networks in ways 
that could render communications and electric power distribution difficult or impossible, 
disrupt transportation and shipping, disable financial transactions, and result in the theft of 
large amounts of money‟ (CSTB 2002, 6). Although not necessarily directly connected the 
magnitude and simultaneity of these attacks would have cascading effects and thus 
networked consequences for referent objects beyond networks themselves. Networked 
computers have also dissolved the traditional boundary protecting the territorial nation 
state, „the infrastructure that makes up cyberspace – software and hardware – is global in its 
design and development‟ and cyber attacks may operate at a distance obfuscating „their 
identities, locations, and paths of entry‟ (The National Strategy 2003, 7; Yould 2003). To give 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 7 
an indication of how an attack transgresses territorial boundaries, RAND‟s „The Day 
After… in Cyberspace II‟ exercise in 1996 drew up a list (Anderson and Hearn 1996, 4-5) 
including electronic looting of European and American banks by (unspecified) Russians, 
software computer viruses causing financial havoc and plane and train crashes, power grid 
fall outs at airbases, malfunctioning of ATMs and news broadcasts, and stock market 
manipulation. 
 
RAND‟s scenario shows aptly how cyber security discourse moves seamlessly across 
distinctions normally deemed crucial to Security Studies: between individual and collective 
security, between public authorities and private institutions, and between economic and 
political-military security. The private sector‟s fear of hackers stealing large sums of money, 
intellectual property owner‟s worry that file sharing compromises their rights and revenues 
(Nissenbaum 2005, 68), and public, private, and civil society scares that bugged software 
and computer viruses will have damaging consequences produce a powerful blending of 
private-economic and public-national security concerns. Not only are large parts of the 
networks, the hardware, and software privately produced and owned and thus governed by 
financial considerations, but the security logics of the economic and the cyber sector have 
crucial similarities. The economic sector is also „rich in referent objects, ranging from 
individuals through classes and states to the abstract and complex system of the global 
market itself‟ (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 100) and in liberal economies instability 
and risk taking is built into the logic of capitalism itself. The modern economic system is, 
like the cyber network, constituted by trans-border flows, and authority and sovereignty is 
more ambiguously located than in traditional national-military security. It is in both sectors 
often difficult to identify where an attack originated, and with the global reach of the 
Internet/world economy, tricky questions of responsibility and enforcement are 
continuous sources of fraught cross-border and international treaty negotiations. That said, 
cyber security does not fully mirror the economic sector either: its securitizing potential 
exceeds that of the economic sector as strictly defined (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 
116-7) and this in turn allows – or is an indication of – a much stronger link to national 
military security. Cyber security is not left to the liberal market, but implies a complex 
constellation of public-private responsibility and governmental authority.  
 
Drawing upon the individual-collective resolution laid out above, the government 
consistently holds the private sector co-responsible for cyber security: not only does the 
latter own major parts of the computer network, it also possesses the knowledge – „In 
general, the private sector is best equipped and structured to respond to an evolving cyber 
threat‟ (The National Strategy 2003, ix). Mobilizing civil liberties discourse further invokes a 
crucial balance between the public and the private that should not be violated: „The federal 
government should likewise not intrude into homes and small businesses, into universities, 
or state and local agencies and departments to create secure computer networks‟ (The 
National Strategy 2003, 11). To the government this allows for a distribution of the financial 
and political burden and it strategically engages critics who point to privacy violations. To 
the private sector, these securitizations boost its calls for the protection of intellectual 
property rights, for vigilant prosecution of cyber crimes, and for combating digital 
anonymity (Nissenbaum 2005, 68). Negotiation of the boundaries between the public and 
the private and between the economic and the political thus couples the network-
fragmentation implied by „cyber‟ with an understanding of business and government as 
sharing the same goal. At the same time the political center still constitutes the private 
sector as responsible for major parts of the digital realm.  
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 8 
 
This academic and policy discourse articulates in sum a wide array of threats to 
government, business, individuals, and society as a whole perpetuated by hackers, criminals, 
terrorists, commercial organizations, and nations that adopt cyber strategies for financial, 
ideological, political or military gain (Hundley and Anderson 1995/1996, 232). Yet 
obviously not all political or societal actors concur with the manner in which official 
American cyber security discourse has attempted to keep the public-private and individual-
state resolutions in place. As Ronald J. Deibert (2002) and Diana Saco (1999) have argued 
cyber security is a terrain on which multiple discourses and (in)securities compete.7 Privacy 
advocates and cyber libertarians point to governmental violations of personal security (Saco 
1999), and authoritarian (and not so authoritarian) regimes securitize transborder 
information flows as threats to regime/state security and national (societal) identity in a 
way that expands the threat-referent object constellation considerably (Deibert 2002). The 
question is therefore how we incorporate this complexity into our theoretical framework 
without loosing the sense of cyber security discourse as a distinct phenomenon? Deibert 
(2002) argues that cyber security is constituted through four separate discourses with 
distinct referent objects, threats, policy options, and world orders: national security, state 
security (comprising external threats to state sovereignty as well as internal threats to 
regime security), private security, and network security and Saco holds that national and 
personal security compete (Saco 1999, 270, 286).  
 
We agree with Deibert and Saco that cyber security should be theorized as a sector where 
multiple discourses may be found, yet we think that understanding this multi-discursivity as 
arising from competing articulations of constellations of referent objects, rather than separate 
referent objects, better captures the securitizing and political dynamic of the field. To see 
cyber security discourse as fragmenting along the lines of distinct referent objects 
downplays the ways in which cyber security discourse gains its coherence from making 
connections between referent objects rather than operating at separate tracks. Particularly 
crucial in the case of cyber security is the linkage between „networks‟ and „individual‟ and 
human collective referent objects. Thus it is not the case that a private security discourse 
constitutes the individual as its referent object, but rather that „the individual‟ of this 
discourse is linked to societal and political referent objects. Take the example of post-
September 11 battles between governmental discourses legitimizing digital surveillance and 
data-mining through securitizing reference to the War on Terror and citizens groups 
fighting this legislation through reference to basic civic liberties and privacy issues. These 
are not two separate discourses with unrelated referent objects, but competing articulations of 
the appropriate individual-state contracts of the liberal state (Saco 1999, 290). Moreover, it 
is not fully clear from Deibert‟s and Saco‟s accounts whether private security discourse 
operates through the political rather than the semantic modality of security. This does not 
mean that cyber „privacy‟ cannot be securitized, but this has to be mediated through a 
collective referent object, either a political-ideological one, questioning the appropriateness 
of the individual-state balance, and/or a national-societal one, mobilizing the values held to 
be the core of the community‟s identity.  Similarly, a securitization of the network cannot, 
and does not, stop at the network itself: it is the implications of network break-downs for 
other referent objects, „society‟, „the regime‟, or „the economy‟ (which is again in turn linked 
to „state‟ and „society‟) that makes cyber securitization a plausible candidate for political and 
media attention. Securitization works in short by tying referent objects together, particularly 
by providing a link between those that do not explicitly invoke a bounded human 
collectively, such as „network‟ or „individual‟, with those that do. Contestation and multi-
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 9 
discursivity is thus found between competing articulations of linked referent objects as well 
as by tracing the potential internal instability of each discourse. 
 
 The specific grammar of the cyber security sector 
 
The Copenhagen School has argued that sectors are defined by the specific ways in which 
distinct „sub-forms‟ or grammars of securitization tie referent objects, threats and 
securitizing actors together (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 27). This section delineates 
three security modalities that are specific to the cyber sector. As the discussion below lays 
out in more detail, even though other sectors may exhibit features that resonate with these 
to some extent, their acuteness is distinct to the cyber sector as is, crucially, their interplay. 
 
 Hypersecuritization 
 
The first concept, hypersecuritization, has been introduced by Buzan (2004, 172) to describe 
an expansion of securitization beyond a „normal‟ level of threats and dangers by defining „a 
tendency both to exaggerate threats and to resort to excessive countermeasures‟ (Buzan 
2004, 172).  This definition has an objectivist ring to it in that to identify „exaggerated‟ 
threats implies that there are „real‟ threats that are not exaggerated. Moreover, the question 
of whether a securitization is seen as „exaggerating‟ concerns the degree to which it is 
successful (unsuccessful securitizations are seen as „exaggerating‟) and is not part of the 
grammatical specificities of sectors. Thus we suggest to drop the „exaggerated‟ from the 
definition of hypersecuritization and to apply it to the cyber sector to identify the striking 
manner in which cyber security discourse hinges on multi-dimensional cyber disaster 
scenarios that pack a long list of severe threats into a monumental cascading sequence and 
the fact that neither of these scenarios has so far taken place.  
 
All securitizations do of course have an element of the hypothetical in that they constitute 
threats that must be countered, and thus mobilize an „if-then‟ logic, but what distinguishes 
hypersecuritizations from „mere‟ securitization is their instantaneity and inter-locking 
effects (Denning 1999, xiii; The National Strategy 2003, 29). This combination draws critically 
from the securitization of the network (Deibert 2002), yet the power of hypersecuritization 
stems not only from a securitization of the network itself, but from how a damaged 
network would cause societal, financial, and military break-down hence bringing in all other 
referent objects and sectors. 
  
Securitizations always mobilize the specter of the future to some extent, but most 
nevertheless articulate the past as a legitimating reference that underscores the gravity of 
the situation. Looking to the Cold War, the logic of nuclear deterrence relied upon 
projections of a nuclear exchange that had not taken place, yet there were the devastations 
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki to be used as a yardstick for what nuclear war would imply. 
Cyber securitizations on the other hand have no similar history of founding incidents to 
base themselves on but try to conjure historical analogies such as „electronic Pearl Harbors‟ 
(Bendrath 2003, 50).8 The combination of cascading disasters and the absence of a prior 
incident of that magnitude creates a crucial ambiguity within cyber security discourse. The 
extreme reliance on the future and the enormity of the threats claimed at stake makes the 
discourse susceptible to charges of „exaggeration‟, yet the scale of the potential catastrophe 
simultaneously raises the stakes attached to ignoring the warnings.9 Turning the absence of 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 10 
prior incidences in the opposite direction, the difficulty of saying that it could not happen 
also creates a powerful space for the projection of the (im)possible. 
 
 The hypersecuritization of the entire network in cyber security creates an obvious 
resemblance to environmental security discourse where the fate of the planet is claimed at 
stake. Both discourses also emphasize irreversibility: once a species is extinct or a digital 
system gone, they can never be recreated in full. Yet, there are also crucial differences 
between the two discourses. First, the speed of the threat scenarios differ with cyber 
security gaining its power from the instantaneity of the cascading effects whereas 
environmental security usually allows for a gradual accumulation of threats and dangers 
until a certain threshold may be reached and events accelerate. This establishes different 
modalities of urgency and hence different spaces for political intervention.10 Second, there 
is a crucial difference in terms of the possibility of visualizing threats, and hence for how 
securitizing actors communicate to their audiences (Williams 2003). The digital, networked 
character of cyber security – and the absence of prior disasters – is hard to represent 
through images, whereas environmental security discourse may mobilize for example 
endangered and extinct species as well as melting ice caps and forests devastated by acid 
rain or clear-cutting. 
 
 Everyday security practice 
 
The second grammar of cyber security, everyday security practices, points to the way in which 
securitizing actors, including private organizations and businesses, mobilize „normal‟ 
individuals‟ experiences in two ways: to secure the individual‟s partnership and compliance 
in protecting network security and to make hypersecuritization scenarios more plausible by 
linking elements of the disaster scenario to experiences familiar from everyday life.11 
Everyday security practices do not reinstall a de-collectivized concept of individual security, 
but underscore that the acceptance of public security discourses may be facilitated by a 
resonance with an audience‟s lived, concrete experiences. The concept of audience is only 
briefly defined by Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde (1998, 41) as „those the securitizing act 
attempts to convince‟ and Thierry Balzacq has in a further development of the concept 
suggested that „the success of securitization is highly contingent upon the securitizing 
actor‟s ability to identify with the audience‟s feelings, needs and interests‟, and that „the 
speaker has to tune his/her language to the audience‟s experience‟ (Balzacq 2005, 184). 
Audiences do not exist „out there‟ but are constituted in discourse and security discourses 
draw boundaries around the „we‟ on whose behalf they claim to speak, and the „you‟s‟ who 
are simultaneously addressed by the linking of fears and threats to „feelings, needs and 
interests‟. As Althusser‟s concept of interpellation underscores, subject positions are 
simultaneously constituted and individuals are called upon to identify with these. Yet, 
although the audience is discursively constituted, securitizing actors are not at liberty to 
construct independently of institutionalized subject formations.  
 
Although elements of everyday securizations may be found in other sectors as well, they 
come out particularly strikingly in the case of cyber security. There is for example a marked 
difference between Cold War military securitizations of nuclear Holocaust which implied 
the obliteration of everyday life, and the securitizations of everyday digital life with its 
dangers of credit card fraud, identity theft and email scamming. Those few who do not 
own or have computers at work are nevertheless subjected to the consequences of 
digitization. For example, on June 4-5, 2007 20.000 Danes did not receive their medication 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 11 
due to a server breakdown at the Danish Medicines Agency which routes all prescriptions 
from doctors to pharmacies. Even the sector with closest resemblance, the environmental 
one, still is unable to conjure and capitalize on a similar sense of immediate individual 
danger and experience (depleting the ozone layer while accumulating frequent flyer miles as 
opposed to downloading software that inadvertently provides outsider access to one‟s 
Internet banking) – and thus responsibilities. These experiences of threats are not, as the 
Copenhagen School might have it, cases of „individual security‟ or „crime‟, but are 
constituted as threats to the network and hence to society. 
 
Cyber securitizations of everyday life are distinct furthermore in their constitution of the 
individual not only as a responsible partner in fighting insecurity, but also as a liability or 
indeed a threat. Hence both public and private actors mobilize expert positions and 
rhetoric constituting „its‟ audience as one who should be concerned with its security. 
Adopting a simultaneously educational and securitizing discourse, OnGuard Online, set up 
by the Federal Trade Commission, warns for instance that through peer-to-peer file sharing 
„You may download material that is protected by the copyright laws and find yourself 
mired in legal issues. You may download a virus or facilitate a security breach. Or you may 
unwittingly download pornography labeled as something else‟ (OnGuard 2008). The 
constitution of the digital as a dangerous space and the „ordinary‟ individual as an 
ambiguous partner and a potential threat is supported by medical metaphors like „viruses‟ 
and „infected computers‟ that underscore the need for „caution‟ and „protection‟. As in 
discourses of epidemics and contagion, cyber insecurities are generated by individuals who 
behave irresponsibly thus compromising the health of the whole. The National Strategy 
(2003, 11) proclaims that „Each American who depends on cyberspace, the network of 
information networks, must secure the part that they own or for which they are 
responsible‟ and FBI officials have suggested driver licenses for computer-owners (The 
Economist 2007a). A particular concern stems from the fact that computers may be infected 
with software that allows them to be used by attackers to route emails or launch denial of 
service attacks with no immediate effect to the owner. Connecting everyday security 
practices with hyper cascading scenarios, it is this inadvertent or careless behavior within a 
networked system that move cyber security out of the realm of „corporate security‟ or 
„consumer trust‟ and into the modality of „proper‟ national/societal security. Moreover, 
there is a further link between hypersecuritizations and everyday practices in that the claim 
about the possibilities of disasters happening may be substantiated by the reference to 
individuals‟ everyday experiences: the looting of Western banks by Russians and/or 
terrorists hackers in RAND‟s scenarios described above may seem much more credible if 
one‟s own credit card has been abused on-line. 
 
The challenges generated by the securitization of digital everyday life for governmental 
authorities as well as private businesses are thus quite significant. Neither wishes the 
broader public to become so petrified that it evacuates the digital, but they simultaneously 
install an individual moral responsibility that may easily move the subject from helpless to 
careless to dangerous. The broad institutional support behind initiatives such as OnGuard 
Online, which is set up by the Federal Trade Commission and a long series of partners, 
including the Department for Homeland Security, the National Consumers League and a 
series of other nonprofit nongovernmental organizations may furthermore be one that 
makes resistance difficult. Linking back to the critical argument of securitization theory, 
namely that „security‟ provides governments with the discursive and political legitimacy to 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 12 
adopt radical measures, the question becomes at which point and how these strategies, and 
their harmonious constitution of state-society relations, can become contested. 
 
 Technification 
 
The strong emphasis on the hypothetical in cyber securitizations create a particular space 
for technical, expert discourse. As Nissenbaum (2005, 72) points out, the knowledge 
required to master the field of computer security is daunting and often not available to the 
broader public, including Security Studies scholars. The breathtaking pace at which new 
technologies and hence methods of attacks are introduced (Denning 1999, xvi) further adds 
to the legitimacy granted to experts and the epistemic authority which computer and 
information scientists hold allow them the privileged role as those who have the authority 
to speak about the unknown. In the case of cyber security, experts have been capable of 
defying Huysmans‟ (2006, 9) description of the invisible role of security experts as they 
have transcended their specific scientific locations to speak to the broader public in a move 
that is both facilitated by and works to support cyber securitizations claimed by politicians 
and the media.  
 
As in most academic fields, computer scientists have disagreed on the likelihood of 
different forms of attacks, and since the field is also cloaked in military or business secrecy, 
the „normal‟ follower of these debates learns that „that much is withheld or simply not 
known, and estimates of damage strategically either wildly exaggerated or understated‟ 
(Nissenbaum 2005, 72). These fluctuations also facilitate a coupling of radical threats with 
techno-utopian solutions.12 The National Strategy for instance couples a series of 
securitizations with an exuberant faith in the development of „highly secure, trust-worthy, 
and resilient computer systems. In the future, working with a computer, the Internet, or 
any other cyber system may become as dependable as turning on the lights or the water‟ 
(The National Strategy 2003, 35). Leaving aside that for the majority of the world‟s poor, and 
even for the impoverished American, turning on the light or water may not be entirely 
dependable this echoes a technological utopianism that sidesteps the systemic, inherent 
ontological insecurity that computer scientists consistently emphasize. It also invokes an 
inherent tension between disaster and utopia as the future of cyber security.  
 
The constitution of expert authority in cyber technifications invokes furthermore the 
tenuous relationship between „good‟ knowledge and „bad‟ knowledge, between the 
computer scientist and the hacker. The hacker, argues Nissenbaum (2004), has undergone a 
critical shift in Western policy and media discourse, moving from a previous subject 
position as geeky, apolitical, and driven by the boyish challenge of breaking the codes to 
one of thieves, vandals and even terrorists.13 Although „hackers‟ as well as others speaking 
on behalf of „hacktivista‟ – the use of hacking for dissident, normatively desirable purposes 
– have tried to reclaim the term (Deibert 2003), both official and dissident discourse 
converge in their underscoring of the general securitization of the cyber sector insofar as 
past political hacker naivety is no longer possible. 
 
The privileged role allocated to computer and information scientists within cyber security 
discourse is in part a product of the logic of securitization itself: if cyber security is so 
crucial it should not be left to amateurs. Computer scientists and engineers are however not 
only experts, but technical ones and to constitute cyber security as their domain is to technify 
cyber security. Technifications are, as securitizations, speech acts that „do something‟ rather 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 13 
than merely describe and they construct an issue as reliant upon technical, expert 
knowledge, but they also simultaneously presuppose a politically and normatively neutral 
agenda that technology serves. The mobilization of technification within a logic of 
securitization is thus one that allows for a particular constitution of epistemic authority and 
political legitimacy (Huysmans 2006, 6-9). It constructs the technical as a domain requiring 
an expertise that the public (and most politicians) do not have and this in turn allows 
„experts‟ to become securitizing actors while distinguishing themselves from the 
„politicking‟ of politicians and other „political‟ actors. Cyber security discourse‟s 
simultaneous securitization and technification work to prevent it from being politicized in 
that it is precisely through rational, technical discourse that securitization may „hide‟ its own 
political roots.14 The technical and the securitized should therefore not be seen as opposed 
realms or disjunct discursive modalities, but as deployable in complex, interlocking ways; 
not least by those securitizing actors who seek to depoliticize their discourses‟ threat and 
enemy constructions through linkages to „neutral‟ technologies. A securitization by contrast 
inevitably draws public attention to what is done in the name of security and this provides a 
more direct point of critical engagement for those wishing to challenge these practices than 
if these were constituted as technical. 
  
The Copenhagen School has stated desecuritization, the movement of an issue out of the 
realm of security and into the realm of the politicized as „the optimal long-range option, 
since it means not to have issues phrased as “threats against which we have 
countermeasures” but to move them out of this threat-defense sequence and into the 
ordinary public sphere‟ (Buzan, Wæver and de Wilde 1998, 29). Taking the concept of 
technification to recent debates over whether and when desecuritization is political and 
normatively desirable (Elbe 2006; Huysmans 2006, 124-144; Williams 2003), we can add 
that one should be careful to distinguish a technification that depoliticizes a securitized 
issue, thereby taking it out of the realm of the political, from a „proper‟ desecuritization that 
allows for contestations and hence political debate.  
 
Technifications play a crucial role in legitimating cyber securitizations, on their own as well 
as in supporting hypersecuritizations and in speaking with authority to the public about the 
significance of its everyday practices. Expert knowledge is obviously not exclusive to the 
cyber sector and a significant nodal point in environmental security debates is for instance 
discussions of the scientific reliability of predictions about global warming, resource 
depletion and population growth. Military security discourse is likewise concerned with the 
technicalities of surveillance, SDI and remotely controlled bombings. Yet, if technifications 
are not exclusive to the cyber sector, they have been able to take on a more privileged 
position than in any other security sector. Comparing it to the public debates over 
environmental security, in the case of the latter the audience is expected to know more and 
the repeated contestation of environmental „evidence‟ makes for a public view of (some) 
environmental actors as political ones rather than apolitical, „objective‟ experts. This is not 
to say that computer security is objectively more technical or less political than 
environmental science, but simply that the socially constituted audience-expert subject 
positions differ and that these difference – open to historical change themselves – are 
important for how securitizations are legitimated or challenged. 
 
 Applying the cyber security sector: the case of Estonia 
 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 14 
In April-May 2007, distributed denial of service attacks brought down the websites of the 
Estonian President, Parliament, a series of government agencies, the news media, the two 
largest banks, and website defamations included a fake apology letter posted by the Prime 
Minister (Landler and Markoff 2007) his photo being adorned by a Hitler mustache (Finn 
2007). The New York Times called this „the first real war in cyberspace‟, the Estonian defense 
minister defined it as „a national security situation‟ (Landler and Markoff 2007) and the 
chairman of Estonia‟s cyber-defense coordination committee went as far as describing it as 
„a kind of terrorism‟ (Blomfield 2007). The prelude to this cyber securitization was set off-
line and arose from Estonian authorities‟ decision to remove a memorial commemorating 
the Soviet sacrifices during World War II from a park in the center of Tallinn to a military 
graveyard farther afield. This act was constituted by a significant proportion of the ethnic 
Russian minority as a threat to their cultural and political status: large demonstrations led to 
the arrest of 1300 people, the injury of 100, and the death of one (Traynor 2007). Ethnic 
Estonians on their part constituted the memorial as a residue of Soviet inter-war and Cold 
War occupation, and the removal as significant for the manifestation of cultural identity 
and the demarcation of political sovereignty vis a vis Russia. The memorial incident thus 
crystallized co-constitutive Estonian and Russian-Estonian securitizations of societal as 
well as political referent objects.  
 
As the demonstrations spread from the streets to the Internet, Estonian authorities‟ cyber 
securitization articulated attacks on the network as threats to Estonian political sovereignty 
as well as cultural and national identity. In the words of Linnar Viik, a government IT 
consultant, „This is not some virtual world. This is part of our independence. And these 
attacks were an attempt to take one country back to the cave, back to the Stone Age.‟ (Finn 
2007) Both government and corporate actors have branded „E-stonia‟ as the frontrunner of 
digital modernity and made this a crucial element in the differentiation between Western 
Estonia and the Soviet past – and Russian present - it has fortunately escaped (Michaels 
2007). The significance of national pride also fed into explaining the importance bestowed 
upon the defamation of the Prime Minister‟s websites.15 The gravity of the situation was 
underscored by a further coupling of „network‟ to „state‟ and „society‟. The break-down of 
the network meant that Estonians could not get in touch with public authorities 
(governmental websites were down), conduct crucial private transactions (the two largest 
banks were hit), get information about what was going on (media websites were targeted), 
or trust what was posted by ostensibly trustworthy authorities (defamations of the Prime 
Minister‟s website). By linking to central everyday practices like banking, communicating 
with public authorities and reading on-line news, „individual security‟ was thus constructed 
as directly compromised and the audience outside of Estonia was reminded what cyber war 
could entail for their own digital routines.  
 
The ability of Estonian securitizing actors to have the attacks accepted as „the first war in 
cyberspace‟ and to have them prominently covered by the world press makes for at least a 
partially successful case of cybersecuritization. British and American newspapers ran a large 
number of stories on the issue with editorials in The Washington Times and The New York 
Times defining it as a „very real example of cyberwarfare‟ and the „first real war in 
cyberspace‟ urging NATO to take on a greater role in „collective cyber-security‟ (New York 
Times 2007; Washington Times 2007). The New York Times’  held (2007) that the attacks 
„should put the computer-dependent world on full notice that there can be many offensive 
forms of information warfare and figuring out how to stop it – and ultimately who is 
behind it – is essential to all of our security‟. Yet, in spite of the invocation of „warfare‟, 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 15 
Estonian authorities had difficulties convincing their primary international audience, its 
NATO allies that the attacks constituted an attack on Estonia‟s political sovereignty, and 
hence that NATO‟s Article 5 should be invoked. As Estonia‟s defense minister, Jaak 
Aaviksoo complained, „At present, NATO does not define cyber-attacks as a clear military 
action‟ (Traynor 2007). This did not mean that there was no allied support at all: NATO, 
the EU and Pentagon did dispatch cyber security teams, NATO put information systems 
on its force transformation agenda and over the course of the next year adopted a policy 
on cyber defense, a Cyber Defense Concept, created a Cyber Defense Management 
Authority and supported the creation of a Cooperative Cyber Defense Centre of 
Excellence in Estonia‟s capital Tallinn. These events indicated, in NATO‟s own words, a 
shift in its understandings of what cyber defense entailed from protecting its own 
encrypted structures of communication to protecting the open ones of its member states 
(NATO 2008). 
 
The partial success of the Estonian securitizations illustrates well that the referent object 
constellation of „network‟, „society‟, and „state sovereignty‟ makes the cyber sector a 
particular discursive terrain with challenges as well as opportunities. What worked against a 
fuller acceptance of the Estonian authorities‟ discourse was their inability to trace the origin 
of the attack to an official Russian source. The attacks were conducted through two 
rounds, and in the first round, Estonian officials claimed they had a trace to IP (Internet 
Protocol) addresses in Putin‟s administration. Estonia‟s foreign minister Urman Paet went 
as far as stating that „This is the first time Russia has used these kinds of attacks on another 
country‟ (Anderson et al. 2007). Russian officials denied these allegations pointing to the 
absence of evidence and to the openness of their IP addresses making it quite possible for 
professional hackers to use them to spoil relations between the two countries (Finn 2007). 
The inability to pin down origin and establish culpability increased in the next phase as 
botnets – or zombie computers – were used to launch denial of service attacks. Illustrating 
the significance of technification, the reporting on these attacks is ripe with computer 
expert statements and „facts‟ proving the cascading effects: attacks are said to have come 
from about 50 countries (Michaels 2007) including the United States, China, Vietnam, 
Egypt and Peru (Finn 2007), and to have „infected up to a quarter of the world‟s 
computers‟ (Blomfield 2007). Some claimed that hackers had rented time on large servers 
(Landler and Markoff 2007), further boosting the claim that criminal organizations might 
be involved (Anderson et al. 2007), while others pointed to the events as driven by bottom-
up hacktivist forces who had posted instructions on how to hack on Russian websites and 
chat rooms (The Washington Times 2007). The use of botnets played into the securitization of 
everyday life, as well as into the networked and deterritorialized nature of the attacks, yet, 
ultimately, there was no accepted evidence of a clear digital trace to Russia and NATO and 
the EU were careful to distance themselves from this part of the Estonian discourse.  
 
The second challenge that the Estonian securitizations ran up against was that attackers 
were not able to – or interested in – penetrating critical digital infrastructures that regulate 
electricity, finance, energy, or traffic. Forcing a bank to close down on-line services for an 
hour might be hard to constitute as „war‟ and as the Daily Mail (2007) laconically noted, „to 
be frank, in Estonia no one died‟. In the words of James Andrew Lewis, director of the 
Technology and Public Policy Program at the Center for Strategic and International 
Studies, „The idea that Estonia was brought to its knees – that‟s when we have to stop 
sniffing glue‟ (quoted in Schwartz 2007). In other words, the truly cascading 
hypersecuritization scenario could hardly be sustained, and skeptics may thus hold that the 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 16 
Estonian case is quite likely to fade from memory as did the previous events who earned 
the „first war in cyberspace‟ designation, the war over Kosovo and the Zapatista uprising 
(Denning 2001, 239-40; Gray 1997, 2-6; Ronfeldt et al. 1998).  
 
Yet, skeptics notwithstanding the cyber sector‟s discursive and political specificity also 
accounted for the particular success that Estonian authorities did garnered. First, the 
institutionalized status that hypersecuritizations have achieved over the past fifteen years 
meant that the Estonian attacks, although not being a full-fledged scenario come true, had 
sufficient resonance therewith to draw strength from this institutionalized securitization 
while simultaneously boosting the claim that such devastating scenarios might occur. 
Although unable to territorialize the threat, Estonian allegations that Kremlin 
masterminded the attacks also resonated with long standing American concerns over China 
building up cyber attack capabilities (Schwartz 2007; The Economist 2007b).  
 
Second, although the links between „hackers‟ and Russia proper could not be proven, the 
securitization of hacking was boosted by Estonian officials describing it as „terrorism‟ 
(Blomfield 2007). Constituted within the specter of the on-going War on Terror, the 
Estonian case raised „the possibility of an Al Qaeda-type group replicating it‟ (IISS 2007), 
and showed how the US should secure its networks „against al-Qaeda hackers‟ (Finn 2007). 
„Cyber threats‟ and „terrorism‟ thus entered a process of cross-fertilization where the 
securitization of one term added to the other: „cyber threats‟ supported the claims to the 
dangerous nature of the „terrorists‟, and the „terrorist‟ character of the attacks made them 
more worthy of attention. Crucially, this articulation of terrorist-hacking involved a double 
de-politicization. First, in that the (potential) substantive grievances that Russian-Estonians 
may have had never entered government discourse or international media coverage, 
„hacking‟ in other words is „terrorism‟ with no legitimate political purpose. At the same 
time, all hacking is seen as terrorist-political, rather than, as in the earlier discourses on 
hacking, driven by a juvenile desire to conquer the firewalls. Second, the constitution of the 
attacks as „terrorist-hacking‟ relies upon a simultaneous technification and securitization 
that cuts short political discussion leaving it to computer experts to design the technical 
properties that defend systems and trace the offenders.  
 
 Conclusion 
 
It has been the ambition of this paper to define and theorize the cyber sector of security 
working from a discursive, Copenhagen School-inspired perspective. Our analysis focused 
first on the complexities of the referent object constellations found within this sector and 
we argued with Deibert and Saco for the need for a theoretical framework that allowed for 
the identification of multiple discourses and hence contestations within and across 
geographical and political boundaries. Deibert held that an understanding of multiple 
discourses should be based on distinct referent objects, but we suggested that a 
conceptualization of discourses as constellations of connected referent objects better 
incorporated the political dynamics at the core of security. Central to the cyber security 
sector was particularly the manner in which the referent objects of „the network‟ and „the 
individual‟ were linked to national and regime/state security. We further developed the 
analytical framework by defining three „security grammars‟ distinct to the cyber security 
sector: hypersecuritizations, everyday security practices, and technifications. Our claim is 
not that these particular forms of securitizations cannot be found anywhere else, but that 
they are particularly striking in the cyber sector, and that their interplay gives the sector a 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 17 
distinct character. The applicability of this framework was then illustrated by a case-study 
of the 2007 „cyber war‟ against Estonia. 
 
Let us conclude by reflecting critically on the status of the theoretical framework as well as 
the challenges that may be ahead in further developing the cyber securitization agenda. 
First, while our ambition was to design a theoretical framework that captured multiple 
discourses and contestation, one may argue that the focus on the US as the source of most 
of the empirical material and the choice of the Estonian war as the case-study gives the 
analysis a Western-liberal bias. While we have pointed to ambiguities in the dominant 
discourse as well as to contestations thereof in the US as well as the Estonian case, we have 
not admittedly devoted explicit attention to those cases Deibert defines as „regime security‟, 
that is the crack down on Internet use in countries like China, Belarus, and Burma. Yet, if 
one accepts that it is constellations rather than discrete referent objects that tie cyber 
discourse together, then it follows that the arguments about the constitution of networks 
and individuals will be of significance for discourses that center on regime stability as well. 
These discourses will knit together threats to regimes through network insecurities that to a 
large extent resonate with US discourse, yet couple these to rather different individual, 
privacy, society, and state configurations. Thus while the cyber security sector framework 
has a general applicability, it is quite possible that the different referent object 
configurations that are found in cases of non-democratic regime security have implications 
for the three grammars of the cyber sector. Studies of such cases may discover that not all 
of these three are equally relevant in all settings or – more likely, we assume - that 
catastrophes, everyday experiences, and technifications are significant but that their 
formulation is impacted by the society-citizen-regime-state configuration.  
 
Second, while suggesting our framework may be applicable outside of a Western context 
we also do want to heed the recent anthropological critique that the word „security‟ may 
not be used in specific contexts, that it might be used to signify other discursive modalities, 
and that the very threat-danger-fear-uncertainty discourse that the Copenhagen School 
defines as securitization is not universal, but „contextually and historically linked to shifting 
ontologies of uncertainty‟ (Bubandt 2005, 291; Kent 2006; Wilkinson 2007). Particularly in 
cases of regime insecurity it is furthermore important to recognize the limitations of an 
explicit speech act epistemology that requires that threats are articulated in order to count. 
As Lene Hansen (2000) has argued, this creates a „silent security‟ problem for the 
Copenhagen School in that those repressed are forced to quell their dissent or be further 
threatened by articulating their insecurities. Taking the concepts of cyber security suggested 
here into the context of regime insecurity thus requires an openness to finding other 
modalities through which insecurity is expressed, for instance by reading digital activities as 
text. A further challenge of cases of regime insecurity is that these will to a larger extent 
than the Estonian one - where securitizations were aimed largely at an international 
audience - concern a domestic audience and hence required linguistic skill and intimate 
knowledge of the political and social dynamics in place. 
 
The most significant lesson of bringing the Copenhagen School to cyber security may be to 
foreground the political and normative implications of „speaking security‟. Cyber 
securitizations are particularly powerful precisely because they involve a double move out 
of the political realm: from the politicized to the securitized, and from the political to the 
technified, and it takes an inter-disciplinary effort to asses the implications of the move, 
and possibly to counter it. Thus while this paper has spoken primarily to an IR audience, 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 18 
our wider ambition is to create a space for inter-disciplinary discussions across the fields of 
Computer Science, Political Science, Information Law, Philosophy, Communication, 
Anthropology, Visual Culture and Science Studies. As the analysis has sought to bring out, 
cyber security stands at the intersection of multiple disciplines and it is important that both 
analysis and academic communication is brought to bear upon it. The technical 
underpinnings of cyber security require for instance that IR scholars acquire some 
familiarity with the main technical methods and dilemmas and vice versa that computer 
scientists become more cognizant of the politicized field in which they design and how 
their decisions might impact the (discursively constituted) trade-offs between security, 
access, trust, and privacy.  
 
Notes 
                                                 
1 Authors’ note. An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 49th Annual Convention 
of the International Studies Association, San Francisco, March 26-29, 2008, and to the 
International Relations Research Seminar at the University of Copenhagen, April 23, 2008. 
We thank Barry Buzan, Terrell Carver, Ulrik Pram Gad, Peter Viggo Jakobsen, Morten 
Kelstrup, Alan Klæbel, Mark Lacy, Karen Lund Petersen, Cindy Vestergaard, Ole Wæver, 
Michael C. Williams, Anders Wivel and the three anonymous referees for very constructive 
and incisive comments. Helen Nissenbaum gratefully acknowledges the support of the U.S. 
National Science Foundation, grants ITR-0331542 and CNS 0613893, for work relating to 
this project; Lene Hansen the support of the MODINET (Media and Democracy in the 
Network Society) project and a travel grant from the Department of Political 
Science, University of Copenhagen. 
2 Epistemologically, we take a critical constructivist view of security as „the product of an 
historical, cultural, and deeply political legacy‟ (Williams 2007, 17; Walker 1990), and as a 
discursive and political practice rather than a material condition or a verifiable fact 
(Baldwin 1997, 12). 
3 We use „normative‟ to point to the policies, identities and modes of governance that are 
invoked by securitizations thus continuing discussions laid out in Elbe (2006), Huysmans 
(2006) and Williams (2003). 
4
 Myriam Dunn Cavelty‟s (2008) recent book on cyber security and the Copenhagen School 
adds framing analysis and agenda setting to securitization theory while not discussing the 
concept of sector at greater length.  
5 In this respect, the analytical ambition is parallel to Deudney‟s (1990) work on 
environmental security, Elbe‟s (2006) on the securitization of HIV/AIDS, or Neocleous‟s 
(2006) on social security. 
6 These distinctions have been challenged as in Neocleous‟s (2006, 380-1) argument that 
New Deal policies in the 1930‟s constituted social-economic security with precisely the 
drama and urgency required by the Copenhagen School. 
7 We are less convinced by Deibert‟s claim that the material conditions of the 
communications environment will determine the winning discourse as this constitutes 
material structures as outside and above political decisions and discursive processes. 
8 The use of science fiction within cyber security literature is thus not as far fetched as it 
may sound: the popular coinage of Reagan‟s SDI program as Star Wars exemplified that in 
the face of unknown coordinates, the imaginary would have to do (Edwards 1996, 288). 
9
 The emphasis on catastrophic potentiality of the future resonates with risk theory in the 
tradition of Ulrich Beck, yet since „security‟ rather than „risk‟ is the dominant policy as well 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 19 
 
as academic concept, it is not pursued in further detail in this paper (see Aradau and van 
Munster 2007). 
10
 The securitization of pandemics shares the instantaneity with cyber security, but is – 
except for the most gruesome science fiction scenarios – still more containable to parts of 
the system/globe than cyber security. 
11 Everyday security practices refers to „normal‟ citizens/individuals and thus points to a 
different subject and set of practices than those linked to the „everyday, ordinary practices‟ 
of security professionals identified by Bigo (2002, 73) and Huysmans (2006, 5). We agree 
with Iver B. Neumann (2002, 628) that practices are discursive „both in the sense that some 
practices involve speech acts … and in the sense that practice cannot be thought „outside 
of‟ discourse‟.  
12  The most striking example of this fusion of securitization and techno-utopia is perhaps 
President Reagan‟s SDI program which has been resuscitated by President George W. 
Bush.  
13
 The constitution of expert-hacker subjectivity also throws light upon the gendering of 
cyber discourse. The technical realm invokes on the one hand a hypermasculine discourse, 
yet, the geeky, disembodied subjects that are constituted as its inhabitants works against a 
straight ahead masculine-feminine gendering. Whether male or female, experts or hackers, 
the authoritative subjects of cyberspace are generally cast as lacking in their ability to 
conform to stereotypical notions of gender. Take for instance the constitution of female 
cyber savvy characters in The Net, Rising Sun, Criminal Minds, and Navy CSI as tomboys, 
disabled, overweight, or punks. 
14 There is general agreement in the cyber security literature that digital technologies were 
securitized only after the end of the Cold War. Yet as Paul N. Edwards (1996) aptly 
demonstrates, computer technology and Cold War security discourse were in fact deeply 
intertwined. It is remarkable how these political roots of computer security have been 
subsumed by a technical, depoliticized discourse. 
15 The significance of cyber info-war is further evidenced by US military personnel calling 
for „clandestinely recruiting or hiring prominent bloggers or other persons of prominence 
already within the target nation, group, or community to pass the US message‟ (Kinniburgh 
and Denning 2006, 9) and claims that „Coalition forces are now less concerned with an 
insurgent‟s use of viruses and other malware than with these cyber-related issues of 
mobilization and manipulation‟ (Thomas 2006, 24). 
 
 
References 
 
Anderson, Robert, Daniel Dombey, Stephen Fidler, Isabel Gorst, and Maija Palmer. 2007. 
“US warns cyber-attacks will increase.” Financial Times, May 18. 
 
Anderson, Robert H., and Anthony C. Hearn. 1996. An Exploration of Cyberspace Security 
R&D Investment Strategies for DARPA: “The Day After … in Cyberspace II”. Santa Monica: 
RAND. 
 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 20 
 
Aradau, Claudia, and Rens van Munster. 2007. “Governing Terrorism Through Risk: 
Takng Precautions, (un)Knowing the Future.” European Journal of International Relations 13 
(1): 89-115. 
 
Arquilla, John, and David Ronfeldt. 1993. “Cyberwar is Coming!” Comparative Strategy 12 
(2): 141-65. Reprinted in In Athena’s Camp: Preparing for Conflict in the Information Age, John 
Arquilla and David Ronfeldt, eds., Santa Monica: RAND, 23-60. 
 
Arquilla, John, and David Ronfeldt. 1996. The Advent of Netwar. Santa Monica: RAND. 
 
Arquilla, John, and David Ronfeldt. eds. 2001. Networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, 
Crime, and Militancy. Santa Monica: RAND. 
 
Baldwin, David A. 1997. “The concept of security.” Review of International Studies 23 (1): 5-
26. 
 
Balzacq, Thierry. 2005. “The Three Faces of Securitization: Political Agency, Audience and 
Context.” European Journal of International Relations 11 (2): 171-201. 
 
Bendrath, Ralph. 2003. “The American Cyber-Angst and the Real World – Any Link?” In 
Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging Relationship Between Information Technology and Security, ed. 
Robert Latham. New York: The New Press, 49-73. 
 
Bigo, Didier. 2002 “Security and Immigration: Toward a Critique of the Governmentality 
of Unease.” Alternatives 27 (supplement): 63-92. 
 
Blomfield, Adrian. 2007. “Estonia calls for a NATO strategy on „cyber-terrorists‟ after 
coming under attack.” The Daily Telegraph, May 18. 
 
Bubandt, Niels. 2005. “Vernacular Security.” Security Dialogue 36 (3): 275-96. 
 
Buzan, Barry 2004. The United States and the Great Powers: World Politics in the Twenty-First 
Century. Cambridge: Polity. 
 
Buzan, Barry, Ole Wæver, and Jaap de Wilde. 1998. Security: A New Framework For Analysis. 
Boulder: Lynne Rienner. 
 
Cavelty, Myriam Dunn. 2008. Cyber-Security and Threat Politics: US efforts to secure the information 
age. London: Routledge. 
 
Collins, Alan, ed. 2007. Contemporary Security Studies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board. 1991. Computers at Risk: Safe Computing 
in the Information Age. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
 
Computer Science and Telecommunications Board. 2002. Cybersecurity Today and Tomorrow: 
Pay Now or Pay Later. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 
 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 21 
 
Daily Mail. 2007. “Attack of the Cyber Terrorists.” May 28. 
 
Deibert, Ronald J. 2002. “Circuits of Power: Security in the Internet Environment.” In 
Information Technologies and Global Politics: The Changing Scope of Power and Governance, eds. James 
N. Rosenau and J. P. Singh. Albany: State University of New York, 115-142. 
 
Deibert, Ronald J. 2003. “Black Code: Censorship, Surveillance, and the Militarisation of 
Cyberspace.” Millennium 32 (3): 501-30. 
 
Deibert, Ronald J., and Janice Gross Stein. 2002. “Hacking Networks of Terror.” Dialog-IO 
1 (1): 1-14. 
 
Denning, Dorothy E. 1999. Information Warfare and Security. Reading, Massachusetts: 
Addison-Wesley. 
 
Denning, Dorothy E. 2001. “Activism, Hacktivism, and Cyberterrorism: The Internet as a 
Tool for Influencing Foreign Policy.” In Networks and Netwars: The Future of Terror, Crime, 
and Militancy, eds. John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt. Santa Monica: RAND, 239-288. 
 
Der Derian, James. 1992. Antidiplomacy: Spies, Terror, Speed, and War. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell. 
 
Der Derian, James. 2003. “The Question of Information Technology in International 
Relations.” Millennium 32 (3): 441-56. 
 
Deudney, Daniel. 1990. “The Case Against Linking Environmental Degradation and 
National Security.” Millennium 19 (3): 461-476. 
 
Edwards, Paul N. 1996. The Closed World: Computers and the Politics of Discourse in Cold War 
America. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press. 
 
Elbe, Stefan. 2006. “Should HIV/AIDS Be Securitized? The Ethical Dilemmas of Linking 
HIV/AIDS and Security.” International Studies Quarterly 50 (1): 119-144. 
 
Erikson, Johan. 1999. “Observers or Advocates?: On the Political Role of Security 
Analysts.” Cooperation and Conflict 34 (3): 311-333. 
 
Finn, Peter. 2007. “Cyber Assaults on Estonia Typify a New Battle Tactic.” The Washington 
Post, May 19. 
 
Gray, Chris Hables. 1997. Postmodern War: The New Politics of Conflict. London: Routledge. 
 
Hansen, Lene. 2000. “The Little Mermaid‟s Silent Security Dilemma and the Absence of 
Gender in the Copenhagen School.” Millennium 29 (2): 285-306. 
 
Hansen, Lene. 2008. “Visual Securitization: Taking Discourse Analysis from the Word to 
the Image.” Paper presented at the 49th International Studies Convention, San Francisco, 
March 26-29. 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 22 
 
 
Hundley, Richard O., and Robert H. Anderson. 1995/96. “Emerging Challenge: Security 
and Safety in Cyberspace.” IEEE Technology and Society, 19-28. Reprinted in In Athena’s 
Camp: Preparing for Conflict in the Information Age, eds. John Arquilla and David Ronfeldt. 
Santa Monica: RAND, 231-251. 
 
Huysmans, Jef. 1998. “Revisiting Copenhagen: Or, On the Creative Development of a 
Security Studies Agenda in Europe.” European Journal of International Relations 4 (4): 479-505. 
 
Huysmans, Jef. 2006. The Politics of Insecurity: Fear, migration and asylum in the EU. London: 
Routledge. 
 
IISS. 2007. “NATO – Cyber-Crime and Cyber-Security.” Invitation to panel discussion on 
July 19. 
 
Jackson, Nicole J. 2006. “International Organizations, Security Dichotomies and the 
Trafficking of Persons and Narcotics in Post-Soviet Central Asia: A Critique of the 
Securitization Framework.” Security Dialogue 37 (3): 299-317. 
 
Kent, Alexandra. 2006. “Reconfiguring Security: Buddhism and Moral Legitimacy in 
Cambodia.” Security Dialogue 37 (3): 343-361. 
 
Kinniburgh, James B., and Dorothy E. Denning. 2006. “Blogs and Military Information 
Strategy.” IO Sphere, Summer: 5-13. 
 
Landler, Mark, and John Markoff. 2007. “Data assault hits Estonia were it hurts.” 
International Herald Tribune, May 30. 
 
Latham, Robert. 2003. “Introduction.” In Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging Relationship 
Between Information Technology and Security, ed. Robert Latham. New York: The New Press, 1-
21. 
 
Laustsen, Carsten Bagge and Ole Wæver. 2000. “In Defence of Religion: Sacred Referent 
Objects for Securitization.” Millennium 29 (3): 705-739. 
 
McSweeney, Bill. 1996. “Identity and security: Buzan and the Copenhagen school.” Review 
of International Studies 22 (1): 81-93. 
 
Michaels, Jim. 2007. “NATO to study defense against cyberattacks; Computer assault 
staggered Estonia.” USA Today, June 15. 
 
NATO. 2008. “Defending against cyber attacks.” 
http://www.nato.int/issues/cyber_defence/practice.html. Accessed July 3, 2008. 
 
Neocleous, Mark. 2006. “From Social to National Security.” Security Dialogue 37 (3): 363-
384. 
 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 23 
 
Neumann, Iver B. 2002. “Returning Practice to the Linguistic Turn: The Case of 
Diplomacy.” Millennium 31 (3): 627-651. 
 
Nissenbaum, Helen. 2004. “Hackers and the contested ontology of cyberspace.” New Media 
& Society 6 (2): 195-217. 
 
Nissenbaum, Helen. 2005. “Where computer security meets national security.” Ethics and 
Information Technology 7 (2): 61-73. 
 
North Atlantic Council. 2007. “Final Communique: Meeting of the North Atlantic Council 
in Defence Ministers Session.” Press Release (2007)067, 14 June. 
 
OnGuard. 2008. “P2P Security.” Posted at http://www.onguardonline.gov/topics/p2p-
security.aspx, accessed on October 31, 2008. 
 
Roe, Paul. 2005. Ethnic Violence and the Societal Security Dilemma. London: Routledge. 
 
Ronfeldt, David, John Arquilla, Graham Fuller, and Melissa Fuller. 1998. The Zapatista 
“Social Netwar” in Mexico. Santa Monica: Rand Corporation. 
 
Rothschild, Emma. 1995. “What is Security?” Dædalus 124 (3): 53-98.  
 
Saco, Diana. 1999. “Colonizing Cyberspace: “National Security” and the Internet.” In 
Cultures of Insecurity: States, Communities, and the Production of Danger, eds. Jutta Weldes, Mark 
Laffey, Hugh Gusterson and Raymond Duvall. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 261-291. 
 
Schwartz, John. 2007. “When Computers Attack.” The New York Times, June 24. 
 
Thomas, Timothy L. 2006. “Cyber Mobilization: A Growing Counterinsurgency 
Campaign.” IO Sphere, Summer: 23-28. 
 
The Economist. 2007a. “A good bot roast; Cyber-crime.” June 23. 
 
The Economist. 2007b. “Cybersecurity: Beware of the Trojan panda.” September 8. 
 
The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace. 2003. Washington, D.C.: The White House. 
 
The New York Times. 2007. “A Cyberblockade in Estonia.” June 2. 
 
The Washington Times. 2007. “Cyberwarfare worries.” June 2. 
 
Traynor, Ian. 2007. “Russia accused of unleashing cyberwar to disable Estonia.” The 
Guardian, May 17. 
 
Wæver, Ole. 1995. “Securitization and Desecuritization.” In On Security, ed. Ronnie 
Lipschutz. New York: Columbia University Press, 46-86. 
 
Final draft: Forthcoming in International Studies Quarterly, December 2009 
 
 24 
 
Wæver, Ole, Barry Buzan, Morten Kelstrup, and Pierre Lemaitre. 1993. Identity, Migration 
and the New Security Agenda in Europe. London: Pinter. 
  
Walker, R. B. J. 1990. “Security, Sovereignty, and the Challenge of World Politics.” 
Alternatives 15 (1): 3-27. 
 
Wilkinson, Claire. 2007. “The Copenhagen School on Tour in Kyrgyzstan: Is Securitization 
Theory Useable Outside Europe?” Security Dialogue 38 (1): 5-25. 
 
Williams, Michael C. 1998. “Identity and the Politics of Security.” European Journal of 
International Relations 4 (2): 204-225. 
 
Williams, Michael C. 2003. “Words, Images, Enemies: Securitization and International 
Politics.” International Studies Quarterly 47 (4): 511-529. 
 
Williams, Michael C. 2007. Culture and Security: Symbolic power and the politics of international 
security. London: Routledge. 
 
Yould, Rachel E. 2003. “Beyond the American Fortress: Understanding Homeland Security 
in the Information Age.” In Bombs and Bandwidth: The Emerging Relationship Between Information 
Technology and Security, ed. Robert Latham. New York: The New Press, 74-97. 
 
 

