D. Weerasinghe (Ed.): ISDF 2009, LNICST 41, pp. 76–81, 2009. 
© Institute for Computer Science, Social-Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering 2009 
Ethical Dilemmas in Teaching Computer and Internet 
Security 
Brian Tompsett 
Department of Computer Science, University of Hull 
b.c.tompsett@hull.ac.uk 
Abstract. This paper could be subtitled "Are we teaching the next generation of 
computer criminals and internet terrorists"? This issue was raised by the Secu-
rity Services as part of the collaborative network meeting in the area of IT Fo-
rensics and Data Analysis hosted by City University. These are valid concerns 
about the nature of material taught to computer science students in the area of 
security. 
The questions are also important ethical dilemmas for any professional 
working in the computer and internet security field. These are also applicable 
when discussing such security risks with the media, members of the public and 
even legislators. Information on vulnerabilities has to be presented so that it in-
forms programmers and computer users about the areas of risk, but without 
providing recipes for them to use to conduct criminal activities or mischief 
themselves. 
The paper will look at several case studies from the curriculum at the Uni-
versity of Hull at both undergraduate and postgraduate level. Some specific 
problem areas of email forgery, security of the Windows operating system and 
exploitation of buffer overflows, and deception in online auctions, will be  
explored. 
Keywords: Security, Teaching, Ethics. 
1   Introduction 
Students at Hull perform an assessed practical where they evaluate the security of 
existing laboratory computers, which allows them to put the security theory into a 
practical context. The response of system managers to this exercise is interesting; al-
though they cannot influence the taught component of a course, they express their 
discomfort with the practical aspects. Despite this, the students find the practical as-
pect valuable, and each year a new set of vulnerabilities in our laboratory computers 
in exposed. This enables the configuration of laboratory computers to be improved on 
an ongoing basis. The experience does show that organisations often prefer to believe 
that their computers are secure, and find any information to the contrary painful. Se-
curity by obscurity seems to be the desire of management within organisations, which 
in the security business in known to be no security at all. 
It is an interesting question, “what do computer science students know about com-
puter security and vulnerabilities?” Discussions in the media resulting from recent 
 Ethical Dilemmas in Teaching Computer and Internet Security 77 
computer hacking and attacks [1], [2] have shown that there is a general view that 
those attacking computers have a special form of arcane knowledge which is not 
taught. In fact, this material is taught; since we need to improve the knowledge base 
of all computer graduates to enable them to construct better and more reliable sys-
tems. Such systems are crucial since computer users, on the other hand, are not sup-
plied with knowledge that would enable them to protect themselves from being com-
promised. Furthermore, the knowledge necessary to protect against such attacks on 
existing systems is rarely included in a standard computer curriculum, or anywhere 
else in a standard educational programme. In short, we tend to tell computer science 
students much about building new systems but little about protecting existing ones, 
which we tell computer users virtually nothing about either. 
This paper results from meetings and discussions which were part of the EPSRC 
research network in IT Forensics and Data Analysis hosted by City University in 
London from 2008 to 2009. The research network is composed of academics from 
around the UK research community and also involves the security services. Meetings 
of the research network examined research topics of mutual interest which included 
visual or audio analysis, data mining, forensic analysis, computer and network secu-
rity and so on. Although the group was constituted primarily to facilitate research 
networking, the topic that appeared to be of most concern to the security services was 
not research into new criminal detection techniques, but a concern over the curricu-
lum taught to computer science students. 
The paper does not attempt to thoroughly explore this wide and contentious topic, 
but rather to highlight certain issues by way of a quick tour of the subject and to focus 
on a couple of specific areas by way of example from the topics in programming, e-
business, networking, and security. 
2   The Issues in Computer Teaching 
Software development is a key part of the computer science where the issues of vul-
nerabilities due to software flaws arise. Students need to be aware of these from the 
programming and engineering perspectives in that students need to be taught what are 
common mistakes to make and which ones have been made in the past. The mecha-
nism of the flaws needs to be explained so the students can understand why it is an 
issue, and also how it can be solved. 
In initial teaching of computing and software engineering, the focus is more on the 
correct implementation of a specification, the crafting of data structures, algorithms, 
the design user interfaces and databases. These subjects do not expose many ethical 
dilemmas where students could be taught inappropriate material. 
When teaching internet and distributed computing however, the ethical issues be-
gin to appear. The interconnection of computers with the internet exposes the smallest 
flaws in computer software to a severe test, since each application is itself another 
vulnerable portal to the computer system as whole. Every networked application or 
interactive web page made by a student could potentially compromise a whole com-
puter system. This is much more of a security vulnerability than the problems of soft-
ware development in unconnected systems.  
78 B. Tompsett 
When the topic becomes the operation and implementation of network protocols 
and internet applications the ethical questions become more acute, and it is these top-
ics that the paper will examine by way of some examples from current curricula. 
3   Teaching Network Programming 
The basic tenets of good practice and software engineering are taught to students at 
the beginning of most computer courses in the selected initial teaching language and, 
later, often in their second year, they learn to build applications that use the network, 
by initially programming a simple client and server application. The next stage is to 
develop an understanding of multithreading and concurrency and the associated issues 
of deadlock, as well as connection timeouts, in order to make a robust and functional 
server. They will also learn, as a side effect, about resource starvation and denial of 
service attacks. These become evident when a student is shown how to properly test 
their client and server implementations for multiple connections and responsiveness. 
Along with this they also need to understand the issues regarding interoperability and 
portability of solutions, since a server that only talks to a single client and vice versa 
is not a realistic solution. 
This might seem to be uncontentious in terms of the ethical issues it raises, but can 
lead to knowledge of how to attack systems since knowledge about constructing a 
robust system often leads to an understanding of the vulnerabilities. It is not far from 
the teaching laboratory experience to discover that a denial of service attack or re-
source starvation is not detected or prevented by the computer system or network in-
frastructure and that, further, they can easily either by accident or deliberately attack 
servers run for the class, those operated by other students, those run operationally by 
the university (such as the main web server) and any server of any kind elsewhere on 
the network. We can only explain that it is wrong to do so! 
4   Teaching e-Business 
Many computer science (and business) courses include material on e-Business. In 
teaching the material issues of trust need to be covered, particularly when explaining 
online identities and money transfer systems. The ease with which fraud can be con-
ducted online becomes apparent to the students, and may become a temptation to 
them. Further, when teaching aspects of online marketing, the ability to reach a large 
number of people is also evident, and the students may also see an attraction in unde-
sirable technical-based marketing, such as spam and ad-ware.  
5   Teaching Internet Protocols 
Network protocols are considered in a layered manner using the OSI 7 layer notation. 
In the following subsections a few sample problem areas in the teaching of each layer 
are examined. 
 
 Ethical Dilemmas in Teaching Computer and Internet Security 79 
5.1   Datalink Layer 
The main elements at the datalink layer that students become familiar with in a basic 
computer networking course on internet protocols are the dynamic address assign-
ment protocols such as ARP, RARP, dhcp and perhaps bootp. This does expose the 
students to the notion that they could implement servers to answer these requests or 
monitor this traffic and the information it contains. 
5.2   Network Layer 
The IP layer is fairly straightforward and its teaching does not expose too many  
ethical issues, but to understand the operation of IP the rôle of ICMP needs to be  
explained. The use of the TTL field, the ICMP echo and error responses and their 
application in programs such as Ping and Traceroute are essential for a student to un-
derstand. Understanding of these mechanisms can allow a student to probe network 
topologies or conduct denial of service attacks [3]. The students may also discover 
that most computer systems and network infrastructure will not interfere with these 
activities, however, coverage of these topics is essential to a proper computer net-
working course. When considering IP addressing students may also be exposed to the 
concepts of IP address spoofing, as it becomes clear when the mechanisms of routing 
are covered that the relationship between datalink address and IP address is not fixed. 
5.3   Transport Layer 
TCP contains several features that, when explained, expose security issues with the 
protocol [4]. To understand the operation of the protocol students need to understand 
the acknowledgement system, which includes the numbering of the bytes and the rea-
sons for not starting the numbering at a known point. The connection orientation and 
the open and close protocols also expose mechanisms of resource starvation and de-
nial of service attacks, particularly when combined with an explanation of the state 
diagram of the protocol. The state change mechanism for the protocol is flawed and 
this becomes obvious as that aspect of the protocol is taught. 
5.4   Application Layer 
It is essential in a networking course to explain the operation of basic internet applica-
tion protocols. Those often taught include telnet, ftp, smtp (for email) and http (for the 
web). In explaining the operation of the protocol for technically oriented computing 
students some exploitable flaws in these applications will become self-evident. For 
example, when covering telnet and ftp the unencrypted nature of user names and 
passwords is exposed. The http protocol is fairly straight forward, and its use as the 
backbone of the web means that many potential weak areas have all been closed and 
made unavailable to experimenting students; it therefore does not present so many 
ethical issues in teaching. Smtp, conversely, is full of flaws that stand out and whose 
symptoms are evident to any user of email. When covering the protocol it is necessary 
to explain that the sender and the host details are not authenticated and can be forged, 
and that the entire email headers and body can be user-supplied. Students can then see 
how spam can easily be generated, but by implication they can also see how easy it is 
80 B. Tompsett 
to send. It also is clearly visible to the student how denial of service attacks using 
email (mail bombs) can be generated. 
6   Teaching Trustworthiness and Security 
At higher levels in computer science teaching, usually at the master’s level, students 
need to know how to build systems that are trustworthy and secure. At the under-
graduate level the students will have a full education in software engineering and 
computer networking protocols this is not sufficient for them to understand how to 
engineer fully secure and trustworthy systems. Students need to understand mecha-
nisms of cryptographic security including public key encryption. They then look at 
the use of encryption in networking such as the secure socket layer (SSL) and possi-
ble flaws in key exchange. This exposes students to possible weaknesses in standard 
encryption and key exchange systems in common usage. Similar weaknesses in en-
cryption in wireless protocols make students aware of mechanisms to attack WEP and 
WPA. 
In software trustworthiness students need to be aware of the rôle of buffer overflow 
in system compromise, as well as how attack vectors for buffer overflows are con-
structed and exploited so they can protect against them. Other prominent flaws cov-
ered are ones that can be found commonly in operating systems such as timing race 
conditions, and poor input validation in internet tools. One often overlooked area is 
the mathematics of randomness that affects the security of operations such as online 
gambling. Students also consider fully trustworthy systems mechanisms such as a 
TPM chip [5] which provide onboard encryption and key escrow to authenticate boot-
ing software chains. Knowledge of these areas allows students to have the potential to 
fully exploit all the weaknesses of computer systems, but also allows them to con-
struct systems that are resistant to such vulnerabilities, which is the pedagogic goal of 
the material. 
7   Conclusions 
There has been recent discussion of these matters in the professional press [6], [7] 
which shows that the dilemmas are still omnipresent. When the House of Lords Sci-
ence and Technology Committee considered Personal Internet Security [8], [9] they 
also exposed aspects of the problem. 
The law enforcement and security community seems to be unaware that knowledge 
of computer insecurity is widespread and the frequently used with inappropriately. As 
suggested by the House of Lords, the environment for reporting, detecting and prose-
cuting these offences needs improvement in order to make the chances being caught 
greater. 
It is clear that it is a necessity to retain within our curricula coverage of technical 
flaws within computer systems and to educate future developers on how to avoid 
them. I would go further and say that we should also explain how to protect users and 
developers from flaws in existing systems. Above all, we need to educate students on 
their ethical responsibilities in how they use their knowledge. 
 Ethical Dilemmas in Teaching Computer and Internet Security 81 
References 
1. Boyd, C.: Profile: Gary McKinnon, BBC News Online (30 July 2008),  
  http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4715612.stm 
2. BBC News: Estonia fines man for ‘cyber war’, BBC News Online (25 January 2008),  
  http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/7208511.stm  
3. Gont, F.: Security Assessment of the Internet Protocol, CPNI (July 2008),  
  http://www.cpni.gov.uk/Docs/InternetProtocol.pdf 
4. CPNI: Security Assessment of the Transmission Control Protocol, CPNI Technical Note 
3/2009 (2009),  
  http://www.cpni.gov.uk/Docs/ 
 tn-03-09-security-assessment-TCP.pdf 
5. Trusted Computing Group: Trusted Platform Module (2009),  
 http://www.trustedcomputinggroup.org/developers/ 
 trusted_platform_module 
6. Li, H.K.: Security Ethics, Letter to the Editor, IT Now, British Computer Society, p. 32 
(May 2009) 
7. Wanigaratne, S.: Teaching Security, Letter to the Editor, IT Now, British Computer Society, 
p. 32 (July 2009) 
8. House of Lords Science and Technology Committee: Personal Internet Security, 5th Report 
of Session 2006-07, HL Paper 165, TSO (2007) 
9. House of Lords Science and Technology Committee: Personal Internet Security: Follow-up, 
4th Report of Session 2007-2008, HL Paper 131, TSO (2008) 
 

