Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect
Ad Hoc Networks
journal homepage: www.elsevier .com/locate /adhocSurvey Paper
Internet of things: Vision, applications and research challenges
Daniele Miorandi a,⇑, Sabrina Sicari b, Francesco De Pellegrini a, Imrich Chlamtac a
a CREATE-NET, via Alla Cascata 56/D, IT-38123 Povo, Trento, Italy
b Dipartimento di Informatica e Comunicazione, Università degli Studi dell’ Insubria, via Mazzini, 5, IT-21100 Varese, Italy
a r t i c l e i n f o a b s t r a c tArticle history:
Received 17 February 2012
Accepted 25 February 2012
Available online 21 April 2012
Keywords:
Internet-of-Things
Web
Smart objects
RFID
Sensors
Actuators
Interoperability
Security1570-8705/$ - see front matter  2012 Elsevier B.V
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.adhoc.2012.02.016
⇑ Corresponding author. Tel.: +39 0461 40 84 00; fa
E-mail addresses: daniele.miorandi@create-ne
sabrina.sicari@uninsubria.it (S. Sicari), francesco.dep
org (F. De Pellegrini), imrich.chlamtac@create-net.orThe term ‘‘Internet-of-Things’’ is used as an umbrella keyword for covering various aspects
related to the extension of the Internet and the Web into the physical realm, by means of
the widespread deployment of spatially distributed devices with embedded identification,
sensing and/or actuation capabilities. Internet-of-Things envisions a future in which digital
and physical entities can be linked, by means of appropriate information and communica-
tion technologies, to enable a whole new class of applications and services. In this article,
we present a survey of technologies, applications and research challenges for Internet-
of-Things.
 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.1. Introduction
Nowadays, around two billions people around the
world use the Internet for browsing the Web, sending
and receiving emails, accessing multimedia content and
services, playing games, using social networking applica-
tions and many other tasks. While more and more people
will gain access to such a global information and commu-
nication infrastructure, another big leap forward is coming,
related to the use of the Internet as a global platform for
letting machines and smart objects communicate, dia-
logue, compute and coordinate.
It is predictable that, within the next decade, the Inter-
net will exist as a seamless fabric of classic networks and
networked objects. Content and services will be all around
us, always available, paving the way to new applications,
enabling new ways of working; new ways of interacting;
new ways of entertainment; new ways of living.. All rights reserved.
x: +39 0461 42 11 57.
t.org (D. Miorandi),
ellegrini@create-net.
g (I. Chlamtac).In such a perspective, the conventional concept of the
Internet as an infrastructure network reaching out to
end-users’ terminals will fade, leaving space to a notion
of interconnected ‘‘smart’’ objects forming pervasive com-
puting environments [1]. The Internet infrastructure will
not disappear. On the contrary, it will retain its vital role
as global backbone for worldwide information sharing
and diffusion, interconnecting physical objects with com-
puting/communication capabilities across a wide range of
services and technologies.
This innovation will be enabled by the embedding of
electronics into everyday physical objects, making them
‘‘smart’’ and letting them seamlessly integrate within the
global resulting cyberphysical infrastructure. This will give
rise to new opportunities for the Information and Commu-
nication Technologies (ICT) sector, paving the way to new
services and applications able to leverage the interconnec-
tion of physical and virtual realms.
Within such perspective, the term ‘‘Internet-of-Things’’
(IoT) is broadly used to refer to both: (i) the resulting
global network interconnecting smart objects by means
of extended Internet technologies, (ii) the set of supporting
technologies necessary to realize such a vision (including,
1498 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516e.g., RFIDs, sensor/actuators, machine-to-machine commu-
nication devices, etc.) and (iii) the ensemble of applications
and services leveraging such technologies to open new
business and market opportunities [2,3].
In this survey article, we aim at providing a holistic per-
spective on the Internet-of-Things concept and develop-
ment, including a critical revision of application fields,
enabling technologies and research challenges. As a matter
of fact, the research community active on IoT-related
themes is still highly fragmented, and, to a large extent,
focused around single application domains or single tech-
nologies. Further, the involvement of the networking and
communications scientific communities is still limited, de-
spite the high potential impact of their contributions on
the development of the field [2,4]. We do believe that this
fragmentation is potentially harmful for the development
and successful adoption of IoT technologies. We therefore
hope this survey can help in bridging existing communi-
ties, fostering cross-collaborations and ensuring that
IoT-related challenges are tackled within a system-level
perspective, ensuring that the research activities can then
be turned into successful innovation and industry
exploitation.
The remainder of this article is organized as follows. In
Section 2 we introduce the IoT vision and define the main
related concepts. In Section 3 we analyze the relevant re-
search and technology contexts, including related fields
and their potential contribution towards the realization
of the IoT vision. In Section 4 we present the main research
challenges ahead of us in the IoT landscape. In Section 5 we
discuss the security challenges introduced by IoT technol-
ogies and applications. An analysis of the potential applica-
tion fields and impact areas is reported in Section 6. A
survey of IoT related-on-going initiatives is presented in
Section 7. Section 8 concludes the survey with a number
of remarks on potential approaches to tackle the chal-
lenges identified.1 Their association and relation to the identifier will be discussed further
later on in this article.2. Vision and concept
The Internet-of-Things is emerging as one of the major
trends shaping the development of technologies in the ICT
sector at large [3,5,6,2]. The shift from an Internet used for
interconnecting end-user devices to an Internet used for
interconnecting physical objects that communicate with
each other and/or with humans in order to offer a given
service encompasses the need to rethink anew some of
the conventional approaches customarily used in network-
ing, computing and service provisioning/management.
From a conceptual standpoint, the IoT builds on three
pillars, related to the ability of smart objects to: (i) be iden-
tifiable (anything identifies itself), (ii) to communicate (any-
thing communicates) and (iii) to interact (anything interacts)
– either among themselves, building networks of intercon-
nected objects, or with end-users or other entities in the
network. Developing technologies and solutions for en-
abling such a vision is the main challenge ahead of us.
At the single component level, the IoT will be based on
the notion of ‘‘smart objects’’, or, simply, ‘‘things’’, which
will complement the existing entities in the Internet do-main (hosts, terminals, routers, etc.) [7]. We define smart
objects (or things) as entities that:
 Have a physical embodiment and a set of associated
physical features (e.g., size, shape, etc.).
 Have a minimal set of communication functionalities,
such as the ability to be discovered and to accept
incoming messages and reply to them.
 Possess a unique identifier.
 Are associated to at least one name and one address.
The name is a human-readable description of the object
and can be used for reasoning purposes. The address is a
machine-readable string that can be used to communi-
cate to the object.1
 Possess some basic computing capabilities. This can
range from the ability to match an incoming message
to a given footprint (as in passive RFIDs) to the ability
of performing rather complex computations, including
service discovery and network management tasks.
 May possess means to sense physical phenomena (e.g.,
temperature, light, electromagnetic radiation level) or
to trigger actions having an effect on the physical reality
(actuators).
The last point in the definition above is the key one, and
differentiates smart objects from entities traditionally con-
sidered in networked systems. In particular, the proposed
classification includes devices considered in RFID research
[8] as well as those considered in wireless sensor networks
(WSNs) and sensor/actor networks (SANETs) [9,10].
The inclusion of such entities into a global networked
system questions the architectural and algorithmic princi-
ples at the basis of the design of the Internet as we know it.
In particular, the increased level of heterogeneity, due to
the inclusion of devices with only very basic communica-
tion and computing capabilities, challenges the assump-
tion that any device presents a full protocol stack, as well
as the application of the end-to-end principle in network
operations [11]. From the conceptual standpoint, indeed,
IoT is about entities acting as providers and/or consumers
of data related to the physical world. The focus is on data
and information rather than on point-to-point communi-
cations. This fact could push towards the adoption of re-
cently proposed content-centric network architectures
and principles [12], as will be discussed in the following
sections.
From a system-level perspective, the Internet-of-Things
can be looked at as a highly dynamic and radically distrib-
uted networked system, composed of a very large number
of smart objects producing and consuming information.
The ability to interface with the physical realm is achieved
through the presence of devices able to sense physical phe-
nomena and translate them into a stream of information
data (thereby providing information on the current context
and/or environment), as well as through the presence of
devices able to trigger actions having an impact on the
physical realm (through suitable actuators). As scalability
is expected to become a major issue due to the extremely
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1499large scale of the resulting system, and considering also the
high level of dynamism in the network (as smart objects
can move and create ad hoc connections with nearby ones
following unpredictable patterns), the quest for inclusion
of self-management and autonomic capabilities is ex-
pected to become a major driver in the development of a
set of enabling solutions [13,14].
From a service-level perspective, the main issue relate
to how to integrate (or: compose) the functionalities and/
or resources provided by smart objects (in many cases in
forms of data streams generated) into services [15–17].
This requires the definition of: (i) architectures and meth-
ods for ‘‘virtualizing’’ objects by creating a standardized
representation of smart objects in the digital domain, able
to hinder the heterogeneity of devices/resources and (ii)
methods for seamlessly integrating and composing the re-
sources/services of smart objects into value-added services
for end users.
The Internet-of-Things vision provides a large set of
opportunities to users, manufacturers and companies. In
fact, IoT technologies will find wide applicability in many
productive sectors including, e.g., environmental monitor-
ing, health-care, inventory and product management,
workplace and home support, security and surveillance
(see Section 6 for a more in-depth discussion of relevant
application domains).
From a user point of view, the IoT will enable a large
amount of new always responsive services, which shall an-
swer to users’ needs and support them in everyday activi-
ties. The arising of IoT will provide a shift in service
provisioning, moving from the current vision of always-
on services, typical of the Web era, to always-responsive sit-
uated services, built and composed at run-time to respond
to a specific need and able to account for the user’s context.
When a user has specific needs, she will make a request
and an ad hoc application, automatically composed and
deployed at run-time and tailored to the specific context
the user is in, will satisfy them.
While the IoT vision will require substantial advances in
a number of ICT fields (see Section 4), its realization is
likely going to follow an incremental process, starting from
existing technologies and applications. In particular, IoT
will likely expand starting from identification technologies
such as RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) [8,18], which
are already widely used in a number of applications. At the
same time, in its development path, IoT will likely build on
approaches introduced in a variety of relevant field, such as
wireless sensor networks (as a means to collect contextual
data [9]) and service-oriented architectures (SoA) as the
software architectural approach for expanding Web-based
services through IoT capabilities [19].
Summarizing, we can preliminarily identify the follow-
ing key system-level features that Internet-of-Things
needs to support:
 Devices heterogeneity. IoT will be characterized by a
large heterogeneity in terms of devices taking part in
the system, which are expected to present very differ-
ent capabilities from the computational and communi-
cation standpoints. The management of such a high
level of heterogeneity shall be supported at both archi-tectural and protocol levels. In particular, this may
question the ‘‘thin waist’’ approach at the basis of IP
networking.
 Scalability. As everyday objects get connected to a global
information infrastructure, scalability issues arise at
different levels, including: (i) naming and addressing –
due to the sheer size of the resulting system, (ii) data
communication and networking – due to the high level
of interconnection among a large number of entities,
(iii) information and knowledge management – due to
the possibility of building a digital counterpart to any
entity and/or phenomena in the physical realm and
(iv) service provisioning and management – due to
the massive number of services/service execution
options that could be available and the need to handle
heterogeneous resources.
 Ubiquitous data exchange through proximity wireless
technologies. In IoT, a prominent role will be played by
wireless communications technologies, which will
enable smart objects to become networked. The ubiqui-
tous adoption of the wireless medium for exchanging
data may pose issues in terms of spectrum availability,
pushing towards the adoption of cognitive/dynamic
radio systems [20].
 Energy-optimized solutions. For a variety of IoT entities,
minimizing the energy to be spent for communica-
tion/computing purposes will be a primary constraint.
While techniques related to energy harvesting (by
means, e.g., of piezolectric materials or micro solar pan-
els) will relieve devices from the constraints imposed
by battery operations, energy will always be a scarce
resource to be handled with care. Thereby the need to
devise solutions that tend to optimize energy usage
(even at the expenses of performance) will become
more and more attractive.
 Localization and tracking capabilities. As entities in IoT
can be identified and are provided with short-range
wireless communications capabilities, it becomes possi-
ble to track the location (and the movement) of smart
objects in the physical realm. This is particularly impor-
tant for application in logistics and product life-cycle
management, which are already extensively adopting
RFID technologies.
 Self-organization capabilities. The complexity and
dynamics that many IoT scenarios will likely present
calls for distributing intelligence in the system, making
smart objects (or a subset thereof) able to autono-
mously react to a wide range of different situations, in
order to minimize human intervention. Following users’
requests, nodes in IoT will organize themselves autono-
mously into transient ad hoc networks, providing the
basic means for sharing data and for performing coordi-
nated tasks [21]. This includes ability to perform device
and service discovery without requiring an external
trigger, to build overlays and to adaptively tune proto-
cols’ behavior to adapt to the current context [13].
 Semantic interoperability and data management. IoT will
be much about exchanging and analyzing massive
amounts of data. In order to turn them into useful infor-
mation and to ensure interoperability among different
applications, it is necessary to provide data with
1500 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516adequate and standardized formats, models and seman-
tic description of their content (meta-data), using well-
defined languages and formats. This will enable IoT
applications to support automated reasoning, a key fea-
ture for enabling the successful adoption of such a tech-
nology on a wide scale.
 Embedded security and privacy-preserving mechanisms.
Due to the tight entanglement with the physical realm,
IoT technology should be secure and privacy-preserving
by design. This means that security should be consid-
ered a key system-level property, and be taken into
account in the design of architectures and methods for
IoT solutions. This is expected to represent a key
requirements for ensuring acceptance by users and
the wide adoption of the technology.
3. Research context
As technology progresses, more and more processing
power, storage and battery capacity become available at
relatively low cost and with limited space requirements.
This trend is enabling the development of extremely
small-scale electronic devices with identification/commu-
nication/computing capabilities, which could be embedded
in the environment or in common objects. Such a class of
devices could be used, as described in the previous Section,
to enable a set of novel applications and services, leverag-
ing direct interactions with the physical realm. The devel-
opment of such a new class of services will, in turn, require
the introduction of novel paradigms and solutions for com-
munications, networking, computing and software engi-
neering. The IoT umbrella concept comprises all these
aspects, based on the paradigm of computing and commu-
nications anywhere, anytime and by anything.
In this section, we briefly discuss the relevance and po-
tential impact of existing research areas on the develop-
ment of IoT technologies and applications.
The Internet-of-Things is unlikely to arise as a brand
new class of systems. We envision an incremental develop-
ment path, along which IoT technologies will be progres-
sively employed to extend existing ICT systems/
applications, providing additional functionalities related
to the ability of interacting with the physical realm. In this
sense, we do believe it is worth analyzing which research
fields, among the ones subject of investigation in the last
years, can be more relevant (in terms of techniques/solu-
tions introduced or lessons learned) in the IoT scenario.
In terms of enabling technologies, a key issue for IoT is
the development of appropriate means for identifying
smart objects and enabling interactions with the environ-
ment. In this sense, key building blocks are expected to
be represented by wireless sensor networking technologies
[9] and RFID [8,18,22].
As far as wireless sensor nodes and networks are con-
cerned, the ability of sensing the environment and to
self-organize into ad hoc networks represent important
features from an IoT perspective. At the same time, three
main limiting factors need to be overcome in order to fos-
ter their widespread adoption. The first one relates to the
support of heterogeneous devices. Nodes in a wireless sen-
sor network are customarily expected to possess a set ofcommon characteristics, and to share a number of common
features including a full protocol stack. While advances in
embedded electronics and software are making such a
requirement less and less stringent [23], it still appears
to put unnecessary burden on the devices. Solutions able
to accommodate heterogeneity in terms of supported fea-
tures should be introduced to ease incremental deploy-
ment. The second factor relates to the need of equipping
sensor nodes with a battery. While a number of solutions
for increasing energy efficiency – at various layers of the
OSI model – has been devised, the need to replace batteries
from time to time represents a huge barrier to the wide-
spread development of such technology. A number of
promising research lines, related to energy harvesting
[24] and passive wireless sensor networks [25] are cur-
rently under development. The third issue relates to the
dimension of the electronics needed to be embedded in ob-
jects to make them part of the IoT world. While recent ad-
vances in microelectronics have led to considerable
reduction in size, the current state-of-the-art is unlikely
to be sufficient to enable the realization of the full IoT vi-
sion. In this respect, applications of nanotechnologies,
while still in their infancy [26], may represent a promising
research direction for extending the scope and applicabil-
ity of IoT solutions.
Radio frequency identification devices and solutions
can nowadays be considered a mainstream communica-
tion technology, with a number of massive deployments,
in particular in the goods management and logistics sec-
tors. RFID is expected to play a key role as enabling identi-
fication technology in IoT. At the same time, its integration
with sensing technologies brings alongside a number of
challenges and issues [27,28]. RFID applications have been
so far mainly thought for use within isolated, vertically
integrated, systems, used only for identification and/or
tracking of objects embedded with an RFID tag. Their use
as part of a larger system, where identification of an object
is only a step of the work-flow to be executed to provide a
final service, has not been fully explored yet.
IoT shares a number of characteristics with ambient
intelligence [29]. In Ambient Intelligence (AmI), environ-
ments rich in sensing/computing/actuation capabilities
are designed so to respond in an intelligent way to the
presence of users, thereby supporting them in carrying
out specific tasks. Ambient intelligence builds upon the
ubiquitous computing concept, loosely defined as the
embedding of computational devices into the environ-
ment. Ubiquitous computing provides therefore the dis-
tributed infrastructure necessary to enable the
development of AmI applications.
AmI shares with IoT a number of aspects. This com-
prises the inclusion in the system of sensing/computing
capabilities embedded in the environment. At the same
time, AmI applications have been mainly developed for
‘‘closed’’ environments (e.g., a room, a building), whereby
a number of specific functions (known at design time)
can be accommodated and supported. Accordingly, one of
the main focus of research in AmI has been the develop-
ment of reasoning techniques for inferring activities of
users and devising appropriate response strategies from
the embedded devices. IoT expands the AmI concepts to
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1501integrate ‘‘open’’ scenarios, whereby new functions/capa-
bilities/services need to be accommodated at run-time
without them having been necessarily considered at de-
sign time. This requires IoT solutions to be inherently
autonomic, i.e., presenting the self-configuration and self-
organization, possibly cognitive, capabilities needed to
provide this additional degree of flexibility.
IoT application scenarios require applications to
prove adaptable to highly diverse contexts, with differ-
ent resources available and possibly deployment envi-
ronments changing over time. A number of approaches
have been proposed to overcome devices heterogeneity
in related scenarios. In particular, the use of a standard
virtual platform in all network devices has been pro-
posed [30,31]. While this approach has the potential
to ease the development of software and services for
IoT by providing a standard set of supported primitives,
at the same time it poses some rather stringent require-
ments on the hardware capabilities of the devices them-
selves. Frameworks based on mobile agents have also
been proposed, e.g. [32]. Their applicability to IoT envi-
ronments may however prove difficult due, again, to the
expected high level of heterogeneity in the resources
available on devices.
All the efforts required in terms of development of IoT
architectures, methods for management of resources, dis-
tributed communication and computation, represent the
baseline for the introduction of innovative services that
will improve users’ experience and quality of life. As de-
scribed in the previous section, IoT services will be respon-
sive in nature, being able to anticipate user needs,
according to the situation they are in, by means of dynamic
resource management schemes and on-the-fly composi-
tion of different service components.
This requires applications to be able to understand the
context and situation the user is in. Such a theme has
been addressed within the ambient intelligence, ambient
assisted living and pervasive computing fields, leading
to a number of solutions able to leverage contextual
information coming from a number of sources. In [33] a
contextual information service is introduced, which pro-
vides applications with contextual information via a vir-
tual database in an efficient and scalable way. In this
direction other solutions have been proposed for provid-
ing applications with contextual information in a distrib-
uted setting [34–36]. Schilit’s active map system [34,35]
represents a location-based publish-subscribe system for
contextual information dissemination. In such a system,
location-tagged contextual information is published to
an active map server, which disseminates the information
to subscribed applications. Another approach is Easyliving
[36], which stores contextual information in a single data-
base, allowing applications to query it in order to retrieve
data.
Services in IoT are expected to be able to seamlessly
adapt to different situations and contexts. A number of
research efforts for building self-adaptive situated
services have been undertaken in the last few years
[37–42]. However, we are still far from reaching a global
understanding of how to develop self-adaptive services
presenting the flexibility level required by IoT scenarios.Further, most of the approaches proposed have been con-
ceived to be applied to a single, well-defined specific
application field. What is needed to foster the deployment
of IoT applications is instead a set of design patterns that
can be used to augment end-user applications with self-
adaptive properties. This requires methods for discover-
ing, deploying and composing services at run-time in a
distributed fashion, supporting autonomicity within all
phases of the service life-cycle. While smart objects may
be able to run some limited and lightweight services,
one key aspect of IoT is the integration with the Internet
infrastructure, i.e., the ‘‘cloud’’. This may take the form of
appropriate Web-based services and applications, able to
leverage data and/or atomic services made available by
smart things to provide value-added services to the end
user.
As far as frameworks for developing IoT applications are
concerned, a major role is expected to be played by ap-
proaches based on so-called service-oriented computing
(SOC) [43–45]. SOC envisages a possibly distributed archi-
tecture, whereby entities are treated in a uniform way and
accessed via standard interfaces. A service-oriented archi-
tecture (SOA) is essentially a collection of services, which
communicate with each other via a set of standardized
interaction patterns. The communication can involve
either simple message passing or it could involve two or
more services coordinating some activity via appropriate
protocols. Currently, many SOC deployments make use of
Web-based protocols (e.g., http) for supporting interoper-
ability across administrative domains and enabling tech-
nologies. SOC can be used to manage web services and
make them act like a virtual network, adapting applica-
tions to the specific users needs. Service-oriented architec-
tures support a given level of heterogeneity and flexibility
in the software modules to be deployed and executed
[44,43,46]. SOC/SOA in general and Web services in partic-
ular cannot be straightforwardly applied to the construc-
tion of IoT applications. In particular, such approaches –
at least in their current form – may prove too heavyweight
for being deployed on resources-constrained devices.
Nonetheless, they represent a very powerful approach in
terms of abstracting functionality from the specific soft-
ware implementation as well as for ensuring integration
and compatibility of IoT technologies into the bigger Fu-
ture Internet-Future Web perspective, a key success factor
for enabling the IoT vision. In particular, exploiting the po-
tential of solutions based on Web service technology may
ease the development of a new flexible, dynamic and open
platform of services for Internet-of-Things with a set of
self-methods for the distributed and autonomic manage-
ment and run-time optimization of the platform itself. Key
concept from SOA/SOC, such as late binding and dynamic
service composition/orchestration, are expected to be
inherited in IoT. At the same time, new methods are neces-
sary to adapt them to the IoT peculiarities, including the
definition of specific data models and representation,
architectures and methods for virtualizing smart objects
and their services/resources, together with the develop-
ment of new methods for the dynamic and flexible compo-
sition of smart objects into the Internet of Services
[47,16,17].
1502 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–15164. Research challenges
The key idea behind the Internet-of-Things concept, as
outlined in Section 2, resides in the huge potential of
embedding computing and communication capabilities
into objects of common use. Two additional features
should also be properly accounted for:
 Identification. Each object should be identifiable.
Depending on the specific scenarios, objects may
require to be uniquely identified, or to be identified as
belonging to a given class (e.g., this object is a pen,
regardless of which pen it is). This could be done basi-
cally in two ways. The first one is to physically tag
one object by means of RFIDs, QR code or similar. In
such a way an object can be ‘‘read’’ by means of an
appropriate device, returning an identifier that can be
looked up in a database for retrieving the set of features
(description) associated to it. The second possibility is
to provide one object with its own description: if
equipped with wireless communication means, it could
communicate directly its own identity and relevant fea-
tures. These two approaches are not mutually exclusive,
and can complement each other. RFID-based identifica-
tion is indeed cheaper in terms of requirements on the
electronics to be embedded in objects, but requires the
possibility for the ‘‘reader’’ to access a database where
information about such an object is stored. The self-
description-based approach, on the contrary, relaxes
the requirements to access to a global database, but still
requires to embed more electronics into everyday
objects.
 Sensing/Actuation. Objects can interface with the physi-
cal environment either passively, i.e., performing sens-
ing operations, or actively, i.e., performing actions.
These two dimensions span the two fundamental oper-
ations that represent the interface and the coupling
between the digital and the physical realms. Sensor/
actor networks (SANETs) [10] have represented an
active research field over the last decade. However, they
have been mostly intended as ad hoc systems, with lim-
ited physical extension and designed to carry out typi-
cally a single task. On the other hand, the IoT vision
requires to extend such a perspective considerably
beyond current state-of-art technology. The main dif-
ference is that objects themselves could embed means
for sensing the local environments and acting on it,
without being a priori bound to a single task/
application.
We can briefly resume the three main system-level
characteristics of the Internet-of-Things as follows:
1. Anything communicates: smart things have the ability to
wirelessly communicate among themselves, and form
ad hoc networks of interconnected objects.
2. Anything is identified: smart things are identified with a
digital name: relationships among things can be speci-
fied in the digital domain whenever physical intercon-
nection cannot be established.3. Anything interacts: smart things can interact with the
local environment through sensing and actuation capa-
bilities whenever present.
Based on the aforementioned considerations, in the fol-
lowing we make an attempt to classify the research chal-
lenges that need to be addressed in order to turn the
Internet-of-Things from a concept into a well engineered,
commercially viable technological paradigm.
4.1. Computing, communication and identification
technologies
The scenarios envisioned for IoT require the develop-
ment of advanced techniques able to embed computing,
communication and identification capabilities into every-
day objects. In the last years, several aspects have been
investigated in related fields. The span is wide, ranging
from the research on low-cost low-power consumption
micro/nano-electronics (for both computing as well as
communication purposes), to advancement in near-field
communications (RFID-like) for identification purposes.
Low-power communications is a well-established re-
search field within the sensor networking community, as
proved by the active research performed in the last decade
on power consumption aware medium access protocols
[48–52]. The typical approach pursued in such works re-
lates to the match of the RF front-end activation patterns
(i.e., sleep periods) to the traffic pattern. The use of such
protocols, however, at present does not provide a final an-
swer to the optimization of energy consumption versus
scalability issues. These are of paramount importance for
IoT scenarios, as battery replacement is a costly process
to be avoided as much as possible, especially for large-
scale deployments. Furthermore, the basic idea of such
protocols is to perform active/sleep duty cycles in order
to save the power dispersed in idle listening. The increase
in message latency [48] in turn needs to be traded off in or-
der to balance between network lifetime and communica-
tion performance.
More recently, advances in the field of nano-scale accu-
mulators as well as energy harvesting techniques appear of
prominent interest to limit the need for battery replace-
ments. In particular, it has been showed that it is possible
to integrate several sources of energy harvesting into sen-
sors, including piezoelectric, thermoelectric and radio
waves recharging devices [53]. A comprehensive take at
the technological problem of energy harvesting in real de-
vices is described in [54]. There, techniques for power
management with the adaptation of sensor duty cycles
are proposed.
The effort to reduce the speed of discarding of IoT de-
vices has another dimension of particular relevance, which
relates to the reciprocal interaction between computation
and communication. The notion of distributing computa-
tion in order to reduce the communication overhead,
which is generally termed in-network processing or in-
network computing [55], is typically applied to wireless
sensor networks that perform local measurements, as it
would be the case of field measurements in IoT scenarios.
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1503There, the natural requirement (and also the concern) is to
scale to a large number of sensor nodes. In order to in-
crease scalability, following the seminal work of Gupta
and Kumar on the scaling of capacity in wireless networks
[56], several schemes for distributed estimation based on
local communications have been proposed. For example,
authors of [57] proved that the best linear unbiased esti-
mation of a deterministic parameter can be computed at
every sensor with a distributed algorithm. Similarly, the
scheme from [58] produces an estimate of the average va-
lue of a random field at each sensor. Average field mea-
surement is performed by the distributed self-clocking
scheme described in [59]. Other approaches combine pack-
et forwarding and computation as in [60], which uses a
combination of a binary split-tree algorithm coupled to a
binary hypothesis testing procedure. A joint MAC/PHY de-
sign is proposed in [61], proving an asymptotically optimal
MAC for type-based estimation. In literature, the seminal
paper exploring the issue is the Gallagher’s scheme [62],
where, under the assumption of perfectly scheduled com-
munication, the proposed solution would permit the parity
check on the binary status of a set of nodes with required
communication complexity O(loglogn). The later work in
[63] proved that, in the case of type-threshold functions,
such as AND, OR and MAJORITY, computing requires O(n)
broadcasts. Recently, the problem has been addressed by
the works in [55,64], proving fundamental scaling laws in
the case of co-located and multi-hop packet networks.
The works [55,64] prove that there exist a strong depen-
dence on the scaling law of the number of messages ex-
changed and the computed function.
Clearly, scaling issues arise when the need is either to
cover large areas with a grid of small-size devices for sens-
ing purposes, or to deploy a very dense one for localized
measurements. Both cases apply indeed to IoT scenarios:
how to reconcile scaling laws derived in the context of in-net-
work computing and ad hoc communications with a practi-
cally viable IoT architecture represents a major research
challenge.
At present the issues of density of deployed IoT devices
are probably less critical, though. This relates to miniatur-
ization of sensing and transmitting devices, a celebrated
dimension of the research in sensing technologies which
is not meeting the expectations set. Indeed, current tech-
nologies are far from the level of integration foreseen in
the SmartDust vision [65]. The dimensions of commercial
devices such as WASPMote2 or equivalent ones are typically
of the order of 3–5 cm, dictated by the packaging dimension,
mostly due to the RF interface dimensions and the volume of
batteries. Nevertheless, notable advances have been made
with respect to the variety and the integration of sensing de-
vices that are hosted on modern sensing boards: photocells
for light measurements, thermistores for temperature
probes, microphones, accelerometers and magnetometers
represent standard equipment for modern sensor boards.
Localization systems represent a rather old research
line, dating back to early 90s, see for example Active Badge
of Olivetti Research Ltd. [66] and Georgia Institute of
Technology CyberGuide [67]. Along some twenty years of2 http://www.libelium.com/products/waspmote.activities, research on localization systems has tackled a
number of issues that are certainly relevant in IoT research.
One topic addressed involves the surveillance of moving
objects within a sensorized area [68], or the robustness
of location detection schemes [69] as needed in the
case of emergency networks [70]. Also, the recent advance-
ment of ultra-wideband radio frequency technologies
stimulated research for very fine-grained location estima-
tion and ranging [71].
Identification and proximity detection schemes that
make use of inexpensive RFIDs became recently a promis-
ing choice for commercial deployments in the logistics
field [72]. The most popular type of RFIDs are passive tags,
which do not contain an on-board power source: energy
for operation is supplied by the RFID interrogation signal
itself. Conversely, active tags have an on-board power
source that feeds the on-board receiver and transmitter,
allowing for an increased radio range. Semi-active and
semi-passive RFIDs differ in that the on-board power
source is used to feed the microchip, whereas transmission
is either active (semi-active) or performed using back-scat-
tering (semi-passive). Several vendors propose proprietary
middleware platforms that have been developed with the
aim to support commercial deployments of RFIDs; see for
example the SAP Auto-ID Infrastructure [73]. Other plat-
form include the Siemens RFID Middleware, Sun Java Sys-
tem RFID Software or the IBM WebSphere RFID.
Ultimately, the main challenge from the communica-
tion/computing perspective that hides behind the IoT con-
cept is the need for an architecture supporting low-power,
low-cost and yet fully networked and integrated devices fully
compatible with standard communication technologies.
4.2. Distributed systems technology
This area includes all aspects related to enabling objects
to build a network, creating a distributed platform that en-
able the easy implementation of services on top. This
builds on a traditional research line in computer science
[74,75], where a distributed system is defined as a system
driven by separate components which may be executed
either sequentially or in parallel on different, intercon-
nected, nodes. The design of architectures and protocols
for distributed systems is a key issue for general net-
worked systems and for IoT in particular. In particular, sev-
eral issues, involved in the design of IoT as a distributed
system, can be identified. The analysis and design of IoT
cannot overlook aspects related to networking technolo-
gies such as routing protocols, flow control robustness,
and synchronization. Problems like leader-election, node
counting and averages computation are a core topic in
the distributed systems literature [76–78]. Part of such re-
search lines have been already re-discovered and renewed
in sensor networks literature, as recalled in the previous
section [79,80].
The distributed implementation of routing protocols is
one of the fundamental algorithmic building blocks for
networked systems [81]. However, as seen above, scalabil-
ity issues discourage multi-hop communications for envi-
ronmental data retrieval, i.e., massive and large scale
sensor networks do not appear a viable solution for IoT,
1504 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516at present. Alternative architectures may make use of
proximity communications whenever possible in case of
large deployments; possible implementations are de-
scribed in [82,83].
The massive amount of data streaming from the envi-
ronment to the Internet is a side effect of the IoT type of
scenarios: this means a potentially very large amount of
information injected into the network. The control of infor-
mation injected by ‘‘objects’’ and related data filtering
techniques is a concern for pervasive scenarios [84]. Dis-
tributed flow control, in turn, is a well-studied traditional
topic in networking and controls due to the large amount
of work on TCP [85]. Surprisingly, how to control the huge
amount of data injected into the network from the environ-
ment is a problem so far mostly neglected in the IoT research.
Robustness and fault tolerance will become fundamental
topics in IoT scenarios, involving both the impact of com-
munication links failure, nodes software and hardware fail-
ures, critical data integrity and general safety aspects. For a
general reference on fault tolerance and robustness ap-
proaches please refer to [86]. Issues concerning the impact
of misbehaving nodes [87] represent also a traditional to-
pic that is of interest for large-scale distributed systems
as those foreseen in IoT. For a large-scale IoT deployment,
the presence of myriads of devices in the environment requires
to replace/repair/reprogramm faulty, possibly embedded de-
vices and to design a system natively robust to failures of sin-
gle nodes or groups thereof.
Synchronization of clocks for tasks, which might under-
go failures and restart has also been addressed extensively
in the literature [88]. In the IoT scenario, the foreseen large
scale enriches the challenges for both for data consistency
reasons and protocols functioning purposes.
From the implementation standpoint, a key issue is to
ease the inter-working from an application perspective.
In practice, what is typically provided is a middleware
platform guaranteeing a pre-defined infrastructure for
development and execution of distributed applications.
Middleware design, in particular, has become a popular
research area [89–91]. Middleware communications may
involve synchronous, asynchronous, message or request-
oriented methods. The IoT domain spans any of those mod-
els depending on the specific application targeted.
As mentioned before, a key issue of IoT systems will be
the possibility to address objects using unique IDs. The ini-
tiative for the definition of a global naming system, ONS
[92], is meant to extend the concept of Domain Name Ser-
vice (DNS) to real-world RFID-tagged objects. Indeed, the
ability of distinguishing objects is key in enabling distrib-
uted applications. At present, the possibility to address an ob-
ject and a network node in a seamless fashion is a quite deep
technical issue and requires a global-scale standardization ef-
fort, probably wider than ONS. This issue represents also one
of the key technical barriers to overcome in order to foster
wide adoption of IoT technology.
4.3. Distributed intelligence
Given a system of smart objects that are interconnected
in the digital domain and equipped with suitable interfaces
for programming purposes, applications need to coordi-nate communications and computing in order to leverage
the data coming from several information sources.
IoT scenarios will be typically characterized by huge
amounts of data made available. A challenging task is to
interpret such data and reason about it. This underpins
the need to have an actionable representation of IoT data
and data streams. This represents a key issue in order to
achieve re-usability of components and services, together
with interoperabilty among IoT solutions. Advances in data
mining and knowledge representation/management will
also be required, to satisfactorily address the peculiar fea-
tures of IoT technologies.
A related research field is that of distributed artificial
intelligence, which addresses how autonomous software
entities, usually referred to as ‘agents’, can be made able
to interact with the environment and among themselves
in such a way to effectively pursue a given global goal
[93]. Notice that in this domain a major challenge has to
be faced, compared to the traditional design of a distrib-
uted system. In fact, consider a simple task that involves
the coordination of several autonomous entities: e.g., vot-
ing, auctioning, or cluster formation. The design of such
applications has to account for the fact that part of the
control resides on single agents. Those are the entities that
ultimately interact and may choose different strategies
depending on a certain utility function. Thus, at system
design time, it is possible to leverage the theory of com-
petitive/cooperative games and let agents compete/form
coalitions upon their needs [94]. Theoretical foundations
for these topics are rooted in game theory and social wel-
fare. Applications to networking problems emerged only
recently. A technical description of the issues arising in
that context are beyond the scope of this survey: for a
standard reference see [95]. The access to the IoT devices
is unlikely to be centrally scheduled; conversely, it will be
likely decided based on local interaction of IoT users and de-
vices. This in turn may stimulate a game-theoretical ap-
proach to the resulting problem of resource (object) sharing
in the IoT.
IoT may well inherit concepts and lessons learned in
pervasive computing, ambient intelligence applications
and service-oriented computing [96–99], as detailed in
Section 3. Researchers working in the field of human–com-
puter interfaces and user-centric design methodologies, in
particular, addressed already several issues concerning the
impact of sensorized and pervasive environment on the
user experience [100]. Since IoT will take the reference sce-
narios one step further in terms of scale and offered features,
it will also require the development of suitable, scalable ser-
vice delivery platforms that permit multiple services to coex-
ist. As mentioned already in the previous sections, in
literature there exists indeed a clear gap as concerns reference
architecture models able to support the composition of IoT
based services.
Another key set of research challenges relate to security
issues. Due to their fundamental role as enablers of IoT
applications, they will be separately discussed in the fol-
lowing section.
The taxonomy of the main research areas and related
topics relevant to the Internet-of-Things, as described
above, is graphically depicted in Fig. 1.
Fig. 1. Taxonomy of research areas relevant to Internet-of-Things.
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 15055. Security
Security represents a critical component for enabling
the widespread adoption of IoT technologies and applica-
tions. Without guarantees in terms of system-level confi-
dentiality, authenticity and privacy the relevant
stakeholders are unlikely to adopt IoT solutions on a large
scale. In early-stage IoT deployments (e.g., based on RFIDs
only), security solutions have mostly been devised in an ad
hoc way. This comes from the fact that such deployments
were usually vertically integrated, with all components un-
der the control of a single administrative entity. In the per-
spective of an open IoT eco-system, whereby different
actors may be involved in a given application scenario
(e.g., one stakeholder owing the physical sensors/actua-
tors, one stakeholder handling the data and processing
them, various stakeholders providing different services
based on such data to the end-users, etc.), a number of
security challenges do arise. In this section, we aim at
revising and discussing the major security challenges to
be addressed to turn Internet-of-Things technology into a
mainstream, widely deployed one. In particular, we identi-
fied three key issues requiring innovative approaches: data
confidentiality, privacy and trust. In the following, we ana-
lyze them one by one. It is worth remarking that, as de-
picted in Fig. 1, security considerations are orthogonal to
the other research areas, and span both the communica-
tions/networking, platform/data management and applica-
tion/service levels.3 All techniques are based on a strong trust assumption with respect to
the system platform that handles the access attributes.5.1. Data confidentiality
Data confidentiality represents a fundamental issue in
IoT scenarios, indicating the guarantee that only autho-
rized entities can access and modify data. This is particu-
larly relevant in the business context, whereby data may
represent an asset to be protected to safeguard competi-
tiveness and market values. In the IoT context not only
users, but also authorized objects may access data. This
requires addressing two important aspects: first, thedefinition of an access control mechanism and second,
the definition of an object authentication process (with a
related identity management system).
As data in IoT applications will be related to the physi-
cal realm, ensuring data confidentiality is a primary con-
straint for many use cases (see Section 6 for further
description of potential application scenarios). As a first
example, we may consider data provided by bio-sensors
on bacterial composition of the product used for guaran-
teeing the required quality in the food industry. This data
is clearly confidential because their uncontrolled spreading
could harm company reputation and its competitive
advantage over competing companies. As a second exam-
ple, we may consider an environmental monitoring appli-
cation, whereby data is used to feed an early warning
system against, e.g., the rise of tsunami/earthquakes, etc.
In such a setting, data should be accessible only by the rel-
evant civil protection bodies, which can then put in place
appropriate risks management strategies. The leakage of
such information into the public sphere may give rise to
chaotic and panic situations, putting at risk the safety of
large groups of people.
Customary solutions for ensuring data confidentiality
may not be straightforwardly applied to IoT contexts, due
to two major limiting factors. The first one concerns the
sheer amount of data generated by such systems, and re-
lates hence to scalability issues. The second one relates to
the need of controlling the access to data in an on-line
and flexible way, with access rights changing at run-time
and being applied to dynamic data streams.
Various access control techniques have been proposed
to ensure confidentiality in knowledge management sys-
tems.3 A standard approach, which matches well the fea-
tures of IoT environments, is represented by Role-Based
Access Control (RBAC) [101]. The concept of RBAC has
emerged in the past decade as a widely used and highly suc-
cessful alternative to conventional discretionary and manda-
tory access controls. In RBAC, users and permissions are
1506 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516assigned to roles. Users acquire permissions indirectly via
roles assignment. The main advantage of RBAC, in an IoT
perspective, is the fact that access rights can be modified
dynamically by changing the role assignments. The IoT con-
text requires the introduction of new forms of RBAC-style
solutions, in particular considering that IoT data will likely
represent streams to be accessed in real-time, rather than
constituting static databases. Data Stream management sys-
tems have been increasingly used to support a wide range of
real-time applications (battlefield and network monitoring,
sensor networks and so on), and represents a suitable solu-
tion for the IoT context. In IoT, access control techniques
should be integrated with data streams management sys-
tems. The scientific literature offers few proposals, which
are classified into two main categories: those aiming to en-
sure authenticity, confidentiality and integrity of data
streams during transmission [102,103] and those related to
access control [104,105]. An example of the first category
is presented in [103], which proposes an extension of the
RC4 encryption algorithm to overcome possible decryption
failures due to synchronization problems. The proposed
encryption scheme has been developed in the Nile [106]
stream engine. Another interesting proposal is discussed in
[102], where authors address the authenticity problem of
outsourced data streams. More precisely, [102] considers a
scenario where a data owner constantly outsources its data
streams, complemented with additional authentication
information, to a service provider. As far as data stream ac-
cess control is considered, it is only recently that mecha-
nisms to guard against unauthorized access to streaming
data have been investigated. The work in [104] proposes a
model for extending RBAC to protect data streams from
unauthorized access. The basic idea is to apply a newly de-
signed operator at the stream, resulting from the evaluation
of a query to filter out output tuples that do not satisfy ac-
cess control policies. The main drawback of this approach
is that the proposed framework is not able to handle certain
control policies on views of data from multiple streams, as
occurs in IoT. Another relevant work is presented in [105],
where the authors propose that the data access policies
are defined by the user owning the devices and within the
data stream itself. This makes users able to specify how
the data streams management system has to access her/his
personal data. As such, this solution is more suitable for
addressing privacy issues, rather than general access control
problems. This approach is also dependent on the adopted
stream engine, raising issues in terms of support of hetero-
geneous stream engines. The most general available solu-
tion, to best of our knowledge, is [107], which extends the
work of [108,109] by proposing a general framework to pro-
tect streaming data that is independent form the target en-
gine. The framework is based on an expressive role-based
access control tailored for data streams [108]. It exploits a
query rewriting mechanism, which rewrites user queries in
such a way that they do not return data tuples that should
not be accessed according to the specified access control pol-
icies. Furthermore, the framework includes a deployment
module that translates the rewritten query in such a way
that it can be executed by heterogeneous stream engines,
thus overcoming the lack of a standardized stream engine
solution. This framework should therefore be considered agood starting point for the development of an holistic solu-
tion for IoT scenarios.
In many applications aggregated data obtained from
multiple data sources by applying adequate operators, will
be used. In the literature there are many works that ad-
dress security issues of aggregated data in WSN. These
works have been classified in hop-by-hop encrypted data
aggregation and end-to-end encrypted data aggregation.
In the former the data is encrypted by the sensing nodes
and decrypted by the aggregator nodes. The aggregator
nodes, then, decrypt data coming from the sensing nodes,
aggregate data and encrypt the aggregated data again. At
last, the Sink gets the final encrypted aggregation result
and decrypts it. In the end-to-end encrypted data aggrega-
tion the intermediate aggregator nodes have not the key
and can only do aggregations on the encrypted data.
Different hop-by-hop related works [110–112] assumes
that data security is guaranteed by means of some key dis-
tribution schemes. For example SEDAN [113] proposes a
secure hop-by-hop data aggregation protocol, in which
each node can verify immediately the integrity of its two
hops neighbors’ data and the aggregation of the immediate
neighbors by means a management of new type of key,
called two hops pair-wise key. The performance of SEDAN,
evaluated by means of ad hoc simulation, shows that such
scheme is able to outperform competitive solutions such as
SAWAN [110] in terms of overhead and mean time to
detection. All hop-by-hop proposed solutions are vulnera-
ble because the intermediate aggregator nodes are easy to
tamper and the sensor readings are decrypted on those
aggregators. End-to-end encrypted techniques overcome
this weakness of hop-by-hop techniques. Notice that
end-to-end secure data aggregation techniques also use a
key scheme. Some approaches [114–117] suggest to share
a key among all sensing nodes and the Sink, the aggregator
nodes have not the key because the aggregator nodes han-
dle data without making any encryption/decryption opera-
tion. The limitation of such a solution is that the whole
network is compromised in case the key is compromised
in a sensing nodes.
An alternative approach is represented by the adoption
of public-key encryption [118], but in this case the draw-
back is represented by the related high computational cost.
The aforementioned solutions are all focused on lower
layer security issues, i.e., on the adoption of encryption
techniques and ad hoc key distribution schemes [119–
121]. In the IoT domain, the use of aggregated data requires
to address two other fundamental research challenges. The
first one is related to the access control of aggregated data/
data streams: in case of the aggregation of data with differ-
ent access attributes a solution is needed to establish the
access attributes of the aggregated data. The second, re-
lated, one deals with the introduction of appropriate oper-
ators for ensuring the impossibility of recovering raw data
streams from the aggregated one.
Furthermore, in order to avoid unauthorized access,
especially considering the use of wireless communications
means at the lower layers, the access control mechanisms
should be combined with appropriate data protection
techniques. Typical examples are anonymization tech-
niques based on data suppression or randomization
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1507[122,123], or other data cloaking mechanisms, which per-
turb data following some criteria (e.g., k-anonymity guar-
antees that every record is indistinguishable from at least
k  1 other records [124]). Relevant issues to be addressed
in this context relate to scalability and energy consump-
tions of existing solutions, which may not meet the
requirements typical of IoT deployments.
Another aspect that should be considered when the
problem of confidentiality is faced is that of identity man-
agement. In fact this issue is critical in IoT scenarios where
there is a fusion of digital and physical world. The problem
is to find solutions for handling in secure manner the iden-
tity of objects/things and the related authorization pro-
cesses. Although user’s identity management is a well-
investigated topic in the literature, managing the identity
of smart objects raises a number of novel issues to be dealt
with.
First, it is necessary to reach an agreement on a well-
defined concept of identity, when referred to a smart ob-
ject. A well characterized definition of identity should in-
deed drive the development of an object identity
management system (IdM), specifying the main operations
that the IdM should perform. Looking at the state-of-the-
art, a starting point could be represented by the concept
of federation [125]. A federation is defined as a set of orga-
nizations that establish trust relationships with respect to
the identity information maintained. A federated identity
management system provides a group of organizations
that collaborate with mechanisms for managing and gain-
ing access to identity information of a given entity in the
system and other resources across organizational bound-
aries. Traditionally, identity management systems consider
users as entities whose identity has to be managed; in our
case we are interested in systems whereby the identity
attributes relate to smart objects, and not to users.
IdM systems involve at least two types of actors: iden-
tity providers (IdP) and service providers (SP). An IdP man-
ages authentication of entities4 and of entity-relevant
information. A SP offers services to users that satisfy the pol-
icy requirements associated with the offered services. It fur-
ther specifies and enforces the access control policies for the
resources it offers. An organization in a federation can act as
both an IdP and a SP.
In most IdM systems, IdPs authenticate entities using
single-sign-on (SSO) technology. With SSO, conventionally,
users can log on with the same user name and password
for seamless access to federated services within one or
multiple organizations. Federated identity includes not
only users’ login names, but also user properties, or user
identity attributes (user attributes, for short). Thus, autho-
rizations, specified for a given resource, are no longer ex-
pressed in terms of user login IDs, but in terms of
requirements and conditions against user properties.
In order to apply these concepts to IoT scenarios, we
need to assess their suitability to deal with smart objects
instead of users. Further, we need to properly account for4 Traditional IdM systems handle identities of users. As we are interested
also in handling identities of smart objects, we use the term ‘entity’ in the
remainder to indicate both users and smart objects, depending on the
application context.the distributed nature of IdPs and SPs in IoT applications.
We thus need a secure and privacy-preserving mechanism
for retrieving the entity attributes from different SPs. The
IdM system must provide only the object’s information
that is needed to satisfy the requesting SPs’ access control
policies. In this regard, objects should present different
accessibility (privacy) levels for various types of informa-
tion. For example, depending on the specific application
considered, an object might agree to share a given type
of information, but not all its attributes. Such requirements
call for a flexible and selective approach to sharing entity
attributes in federated systems. A system could achieve
selective release of identity by supporting multiple feder-
ated digital identities. In this direction is the proposal of
[125] that integrates federated IdM with trust-negotiation
techniques. In this way, entities do not have to provide a
given attribute more than once to a given federation.
Although it represents a promising approach, for both its
flexible/distributed nature and its capability to couple
identity management with trust, its application to IoT sce-
narios require proper tailoring and further studies.
Summarizing, the main research challenges for ensur-
ing data confidentiality in an IoT scenario, as reported in
Fig. 2, relate to:
 Definition of suitable mechanisms for controlling access
to data streams generated by IoT devices.
 Definition of an appropriate query language for
enabling applications to retrieve the desired informa-
tion out of a data stream.
 Definition of a suitable smart objects’ identity manage-
ment system.
5.2. Privacy
Privacy defines the rules under which data referring to
individual users may be accessed. The main reasons that
makes privacy a fundamental IoT requirement lies in the
envisioned IoT application domains and in the technolo-
gies used. Health-care applications represent the most out-
standing application field, whereby the lack of appropriate
mechanisms for ensuring privacy of personal and/or sensi-
tive information has harnessed the adoption of IoT tech-
nologies. In addition, in the IoT vision, a prominent role
will be played by wireless communication technologies.
The ubiquitous adoption of the wireless medium for
exchanging data may pose new issue in term of privacy
violation. In fact, wireless channel increases the risk of vio-
lation due to the remote access capabilities, which poten-
tially expose the system to eavesdropping and masking
attacks. Hence privacy represents a real open issue that
may limit the development of the IoT.
A number of frameworks have been proposed for
accounting for privacy issues in the system design phase,
such as Kaos [126], Tropos [127,128], NFR [129,130],
GBRAM [131], PRIS [132,133]. The latter approach may
represent a viable starting point for the definition of appro-
priate privacy-preserving mechanisms for IoT. PRIS [132],
indeed, represents a requirement engineering methodol-
ogy, which incorporates privacy requirements into the sys-
tem design process. PRIS provides a set of concepts to
Data 
 Confidentiality 
Data stream access control, 
Identity management 
system, Confidentiality-
preserving aggregation 
Privacy 
General privacy model for 
IoT, Enforcement 
mechanisms, Role-based 
systems, Data governance, 
Trust 
Trust negotiation  
mechanisms, Negotiation 
language, Object identity 
Fig. 2. Graphical representation of security challenges in Internet-of-Things.
1508 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516model privacy requirements and a set of rules to transform
such requirements into implementation techniques. Differ-
ent is the goal of [133], which defines a general UML con-
ceptual model for representing privacy policies. The model
specifies the needed functional modules of an application
in order to enforce such policies, introducing all the ele-
ments required for the definition of privacy aware systems.
As it operates at a very high level of abstraction, it is suit-
able for application to IoT scenarios, characterized by a
high degree of heterogeneity in terms of privacy
requirements.
At the same time, the development of concrete ap-
proaches for building privacy-preserving mechanisms for
IoT applications still presents a number of challenging as-
pects. The development of concrete implementations
would benefit from the definition of a general model, able
to represent all IoT fundamental entities and their relation-
ships. Moreover the implementations should include
enforcement mechanisms able to cope with the scale and
with the dynamic nature of IoT scenarios. In order to sat-
isfy such requirements, solutions also able to enforce a dy-
namic data stream access control should be provided.
Summarizing, the open research challenges in terms of pri-
vacy-preserving mechanisms for IoT, as reported in Fig. 2,
are given by:
 Definition of a general model for privacy in IoT.
 Development of innovative enforcement techniques,
able to support the scale and heterogeneity characteriz-
ing IoT scenarios.
 Development of solutions that balance the need of ano-
nymity presented by some applications with the locali-
zation and tracking requirements of some other ones.
This entails the definition of privacy policies, that spec-
ify under which conditions it is possible to identify and
localize a smart object. Moreover, it needs to specify
when it is possible to access sensitive data.5.3. Trust
The concept of trust is used in a large number of differ-
ent contexts and with diverse meanings. Trust is a complex
notion about which no consensus exists in the computer
and information science literature, although its importance
has been widely recognized. Different definitions are possi-
ble depending on the adopted perspective. A main problem
with many approaches towards trust definition is that they
do not lend themselves to the establishment of metrics and
evaluation methodologies.
A widely used definition is the one provided by Blaze
and Feigenbaum [134], which refers to security policies
regulating accesses to resources and credentials that are
required to satisfy such policies. Trust negotiation refers
to the process of credential exchanges that allows a party
requiring a service or a resource from another party to pro-
vide the necessary credentials in order to obtain the ser-
vice or the resource. This definition of trust is very
natural for secure knowledge management as systems
may have to exchange credentials before sharing knowl-
edge. For this reason, we base our analysis of trust issues
in IoT upon it. Trust negotiation relies on peer-to-peer
interactions, and consists of the iterative disclosure of dig-
ital credentials, representing statements certified by given
entities, for verifying properties of their holders in order to
establish mutual trust. In such an approach, access re-
sources (data and/or services) is possible only after a suc-
cessful trust negotiation has been completed. A trust
negotiation system typically exploits digital identity infor-
mation for the purpose of providing a fine-grained access
control to protected resources. The ability to meet the trust
requirement is indeed strictly related to the identity man-
agement and access control issues, as discussed above. At
present a limited number of solutions are available
[135,136,46,134]. The most popular approaches include
KeyNote [134] and TrustBuilder [46], which nonetheless
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1509do not lend themselves to a straightforward application to
the IoT domain, due to the high computational require-
ments they impose. Many open issues have to be ad-
dressed in order to develop IoT trust services. First, the
definition of globally accepted certification authorities
should be addressed, together with a number of require-
ments that an IoT-compliant certification authority should
respect. Furthermore, it is necessary to devise an effective
trust negotiation language, able to simplify credential
specifications and to express a wide range of protection
requirements through the definition of flexible disclosure
policies. In addition, the definition of an effective model
of trust should account for both the highly distributed nat-
ure of the IoT as well as for the requirements (in terms of
computational complexity and/or response time) typical
of many IoT applications.
In other words, we need to move away from the classi-
cal centralized and static approaches underpinning the
most widely used trust management solutions, to adopt a
fully distributed and dynamic approach that assumes that
no trust relationship is defined a priori among the entities
in the system. Moreover, a new flexible framework for
trust management should be introduced in order to meet
the scalability requirements that arise at different levels,
including, e.g., naming and addressing information knowl-
edge management and service provisioning.
Anyway, although the complete dynamic and distrib-
uted nature of IoT makes to address trustworthiness extre-
mely challenging, we may well consider IoT as an
extremely interesting application of trust concepts. In fact
in a context in which smart objects themselves take deci-
sions, the first trust relationship has to be established
among humans and the objects surrounding them.
The most relevant research challenges in the definition
of appropriate trust mechanisms for IoT, as reported in
Fig. 2, can be summarized as:
 Introduction of a simple trust negotiation language sup-
porting the semantic interoperability requirements of
IoT.
 Definition of a trust negotiation mechanism based on a
fine-grained access control of data streams.
 Development of an adequate object identity manage-
ment system.
 Design of a general and flexible trust management
framework able to leverage the aforementioned items.
6. Applications and impact areas
The concept of Internet-of-Things, with its vision of
Internet-connected objects of various capabilities and form
factors, could boost the role of ICT as innovation enabler in
a variety of application markets.
One of the technological pillars of the Internet-of-Things,
namely RFID technology, has already been incorporated into
a wide array of products. The number of RFID tags sold in
2011 accounted to 2.88 tags (source: www.idtechex.com),
with an estimated market value of $ 5.84 billions (source:
www.idtechex.com). Adoption of RFID technology in indus-
try slowed down in 2008/2010 as a consequence of the glo-
bal economic downturn, but this decrease got balanced bythe adoption of RFID technology by major governments
(e.g., the issuance of RFID-tag-inlaid Resident ID cards by
the Ministry of Public Security of China).
The increase in the usage of RFID, paving the way to
making Internet-of-Things a reality, is not simply a result
of technological push; it is also driven by the market pull,
since enterprises are increasingly realizing the commercial
benefits of applications that can be realized with Internet-
of-Things technologies. The evolution of Internet-of-Things
may follow the evolution path of mobile phones [137]. At
the end of 2009 there were 5.9 billion mobile phone sub-
scribers (source: ITU), driven by the need to communicate
anywhere and at anytime. Now, imagine this connectivity
being brought to everyday objects: fridges, cars, cups, keys,
etc., as it will be enabled by IoT. A huge market opportunity
exists for Internet-of-Things, related to the possibility of
networking smart things and of providing applications
leveraging said connectivity.
Besides enhancing the competitiveness of various verti-
cal markets, IoT technologies can open up new business
opportunities by: (i) bridging vertical markets, giving rise
to cross-cutting applications and services, based on the
use of a common underlying ICT platform, (ii) enabling
the arising and growth of new market segments and appli-
cations, made possible by the ability, provided by IoT tech-
nologies, to interact with physical objects via digital means
and (iii) optimizing business processes by leveraging on
advanced analytics techniques applied to IoT data streams.
As an example of the latter point, we could consider the
‘‘smart fridge’’ scenario, whereby items stored in a refriger-
ator are identified by means of RFID or equivalent technol-
ogies and the fridge has embedded computing and
networking capability, so that it may understand the quan-
tity and type of items stored and decide whether there is a
need to buy new items, etc. At the moment the electronic
appliances and the large-scale retail trade represent sepa-
rate industrial sectors. Without a set of common technical
standards and interfaces (at both the device and semantic
level) joining the activities of such two sectors, an IoT-en-
abled device like the smart fridge could not take place. Vice
versa, the adoption of IoT technologies can give rise to new
business ecosystems, characterized by new actors and
value chains. An example could be a brokerage service that,
by accounting for what is currently in your fridge, your die-
tary constraints and tastes, your agenda (in terms of din-
ners with friends, etc.) negotiates for you the best food at
the best rate, etc.
In terms of application fields and market sectors where
IoT solutions can provide competitive advantages over cur-
rent solutions, we identified six ones which we do believe
can play a leading role in the adoption of IoT technologies:
environmental monitoring; smart cities; smart business/
inventory and product management; smart homes/smart
building management; health-care and security and sur-
veillance. In the following we briefly discuss the relevance
and potential impact of IoT technologies on the competi-
tiveness of players in such markets.
 Smart Homes/Smart Buildings. Instrumenting buildings
with advanced IoT technologies may help in both
reducing the consumption of resources associated to
1510 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516buildings (electricity, water) as well as in improving the
satisfaction level of humans populating it, be it workers
for office buildings or tenants for private houses. Impact
is both in economic terms (reduced operational expen-
ditures) as well as societal ones (reducing the carbon
footprint associated to buildings, which are a key con-
tributors to the global greenhouse gas emissions). In
this application, a key role is played by sensors, which
are used to both monitor resource consumptions as well
as to proactively detect current users’ needs. Such a sce-
nario integrates a number of different subsystems, and
hence requires a high level of standardisation to ensure
interoperability. Ability to reason in a distributed, coop-
erative way, and to actuate is also necessary in order to
ensure that decisions taken on the resources under con-
trol (e.g., switch on/off lighting, heating, cooling, etc.)
are in line with the users’ needs and expectations,
which in turn are strictly intertwined to the activities
they undertake and/or plan to take.
 Smart Cities. The term ‘Smart Cities’ is used to denote
the cyberphisycal eco-system emerging by deploying
advanced communication infrastructure and novel ser-
vices over city-wide scenarios. By means of advanced
services, it is indeed possible to optimize the usage of
physical city infrastructures (e.g., road networks, power
grid, etc.) and quality of life for its citizens. IoT technol-
ogies can find a number of diverse application in smart
cities scenarios. As a case study, IoT technologies can be
used to provide advanced traffic control systems.
Through IoT it will be possible to monitor car traffic in
big cities or highways and deploy services that offer
traffic routing advice to avoid congestion. In this per-
spective, cars will be understood as representing ‘smart
objects’. In addition, smart parking devices system,
based on RFID and sensor technologies, may allow to
monitor available parking spaces and provide drivers
with automated parking advice, thus improving mobil-
ity in urban area. Moreover, sensors may monitor the
flow of vehicular traffic on highways and retrieve aggre-
gate information such as average speed and numbers of
cars. Sensors could detect the pollution level of air,
retrieving smog information such as the level of carbon
dioxide, PM10, etc., and deliver such information to
health agencies. Furthermore, sensors could be used in
a forensics setting, by detecting violations and by trans-
mitting the relevant data to law enforcement agencies
in order to identify the violator, or to store information
that will be provided in case of accident for subsequent
accident scene analysis.
 Environmental monitoring. IoT technology can be suit-
ably applied to environmental monitoring applications.
In this case a key role is played by the ability of sensing,
in a distributed and self-managing fashion, natural phe-
nomena and processes (e.g., temperature, wind, rainfall,
river height), as well as to seamlessly integrate such
heterogeneous data into global applications. Real-time
information processing, coupled with the ability of a
large number of devices to communicate among them,
provides a solid platform to detect and monitor anoma-
lies that can lead to endangering human and animal life.
The vast deployment of miniaturized devices mayenable access to critical areas, whereby the presence
of human operators might not represent a viable option
(e.g., volcanic areas, oceanic abysses, remote areas),
from where sensed information can be communicated
to a decision point in order to detect anomalous condi-
tions. In this perspective, IoT technologies can enable
the development of a new generation of monitoring
and decision support systems, providing enhanced
granularity and real-time capabilities over current solu-
tions. Another case in which the sensing ability of IoT
devices supports the environmental safety is repre-
sented by fire detection. When a suite of sensors detects
the possible presence of fire (by means, e.g., of temper-
ature sensors), an alarm is sent directly to the fire
department in a short time (exploiting the advanced
communication features of IoT platform), along with
other parameters that are useful in decision making
and support, such as the description of the area subject
to the fire, the possible presence of people, of inflamma-
ble materials, etc. Clearly, rapid response has the conse-
quence of saving human lives, mitigating the damage to
the property or vegetation and in general reducing the
level of disaster. Many other scenarios related to civil
protection can profit from IoT technologies (tunnel area,
earthquake, tsunami, etc.), whereby the ability to access
environmental data in real-time over large-scale areas
enable the uptake of efficient coordination strategies
among rescue teams.
 Health-care. IoT technologies can find a number of appli-
cations in the health-care sector. On the one hand, they
can be used to enhance current assisted living solutions.
Patients will carry medical sensors to monitor parame-
ters such as body temperature, blood pressure, breathing
activity. Other sensors, either wearable (e.g., accelerom-
eters, gyroscopes) or fixed (proximity) will be used to
gather data used to monitor patient activities in their liv-
ing environments. Information will be locally aggregated
and transmitted to remote medical centers, which will be
able to perform advanced remote monitoring and will be
capable of rapid response actions when needed. The
interconnection of such heterogeneous sensors could
provide a comprehensive picture of health parameters,
thereby triggering an intervention by the medical staff
upon detection of conditions that may lead to health
deterioration, thus realizing preventive care.
Another relevant application sector relates to personal-
ized health-care and well-being solutions. The use of
wearable sensors, together with suitable applications
running on personal computing devices enables people
to track their daily activities (steps walked, calories
burned, exercises performed, etc.), providing sugges-
tions for enhancing their lifestyle and prevent the onset
of health problems.
 Smart business/Inventory and product management. RFID
technologies are already used in many sectors for
inventory management, throughout the supply and
delivery chain. This relies on the ability of RFID technol-
ogies to identify and provide support for tracking goods.
At the moment, however, RFID applications are built in
a rather ad hoc fashion, and are only partially integrated
into supply management systems.
5 http://www.nsf.gov/funding/pgm_summ.jsp?pims_id=503286.
6 http://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/microsites/ostp/pcast-
nitrd-report-2010.pdf.
7 http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/programme/challenge1_en.html.
8 http://www.hydramiddleware.eu.
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1511RFID are customarily used to monitor and manage the
movement of products through a supply chain; typi-
cally, RFID tags are directly attached to the items (or
to the containers that carry them), while readers are
placed throughout the facility to be monitored. IoT
technologies can provide enhanced flexibility in terms
of readers positions, while at the same time enabling
seamless interoperability between RFID-based applica-
tions used by different actors dealing with the product
throughout the various phases of its life-cycle.
In retail applications, IoT technologies can be used to
monitor in real-time product availability and maintain
accurate stock inventory. They can also play a role in
after-market support, whereby users can automatically
retrieve all data about the products they bought. Also,
identification technologies can help in limiting thefts
and in fighting counterfeiting by providing products
with a unique identifier including a complete and trust-
worthy description of the good itself.
Furthermore, sensors and specifically bio-sensor tech-
nologies in combination with RFID technology may
allow control production processes, final product qual-
ity and possible shelf life deterioration of the product,
e.g., in the food industry. For example, RFID devices
can be used to identify and track the product, while
the bio-sensors can monitor parameters such as tem-
perature and bacterial composition in order to guaran-
tee required quality of the final product.
 Security and surveillance. Security surveillance has
become a necessity for enterprise buildings, shopping
malls, factory floors, car parks and many other public
places. Homeland security scenarios faces also similar
threats, albeit on a different scale. IoT-enabled technol-
ogies can be used to greatly enhance the performance of
current solutions, providing cheaper and less invasive
alternatives to the widespread deployment of cameras
while at the same time preserving users’ privacy. Ambi-
ent sensors can be used to monitor the presence of dan-
gerous chemicals. Sensors monitoring the behaviour of
people may be used to assess the presence of people
acting in a suspicious way. Efficient early warning sys-
tems can therefore be built. Personal identification by
means of RFID or similar technologies is also an option.
However in many countries user associations are fier-
cely protesting about the privacy infringement that
could result from the widespread adoption of such a
technology. When used in conjunction with role-based
access control systems, IoT technologies can provide
high level of flexibility, being able to cope with access
policies (e.g., to different areas of buildings) which
may change over time due to logistic changes and/or
to changes in role of the user and/or according to con-
textual information (e.g., some areas not accessible on
a given day due to renovation works going on). Also in
this market the advantages are in terms of enhanced
functionality, better user acceptance through reduction
of the use of cameras, reduced operational costs and
increased flexibility in a changing environment.
Clearly, the scope of IoT is extremely wide. However,
applications that are built on top of IoT may consistentlyimprove the competitiveness of the solutions at hand. IoT
adoption is therefore expected to be to strongly driven by
the market needs and by the market dynamics. At the same
time, ICT industries, standardisation bodies and policy-
makers are undertaking a series of initiatives to steer the
IoT development process with the objective of maximizing
its socio-economic value while minimizing the threats re-
lated to privacy and confidentiality of data. In this regard,
the following section reviews a number of IoT initiatives
and also provides a discussion on standardisation
activities.7. Related on-going initiatives
A number of large-scale initiatives on IoT are active in
the US, in Europe, in Japan, China, Korea and other coun-
tries. In the following subsection we will briefly report on
the most relevant ones.
Besides research initiatives, standardization activities
are also of key importance in order to ensure a successful
widespread adoption of IoT technologies and services. In
Section 7.2 we briefly report on the most relevant ones.
7.1. IoT related projects
The growing interest in IoT technologies and applica-
tions is well exemplified by the number of research initia-
tives arising worldwide around such themes. In the US, the
American National Science Foundation (NSF) launched in
2008 a program on Cyber-Physical Systems,5 aimed at
introducing systems able to merge computational and phys-
ical resources. The program is meant to cover a wide array of
application scenarios, ranging from smart electric grid to
smart transportation, from smart medical technologies to
smart manufacturing. The 2010 report of the President’s
Council of Advisors on Science and Technology, ‘‘Designing
a digital future: federally funded research and development
in networking and information technology’’6 encourages fur-
ther investments in Cyber-Physical System, due to their high
potential impact on a number of critical industrial sectors.
The European Commission has been pushing initiatives
related to IoT since 2005 [5], and has recently launched, in
the framework of the 7th Framework Programme, an ini-
tiative on ‘‘Internet-Connected Objects’’. The focus is on
adoption of IoT technologies and services in enterprise
environments, with the aim of increasing the competitive-
ness of European industry through adoption of IoT-enabled
solutions7 http://www.rfid-in-action.eu/cerp. Activities in
such field led to the definition of a strategic research agenda,
including a description of European strategies in this sector
[6].
Within the initiatives which have taken place at the
European level, four large-scale ones are worth mention-
ing. The HYDRA project8 developed a middleware based
on a service-oriented architecture, transparent to the under-
1512 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516lying communication, supporting distributed as well as cen-
tralized architectures, security and trust models. This project
was meant to provide a middleware solution allowing the
developers to incorporate heterogeneous physical devices
into their applications by offering easy to use Web service
interfaces for controlling the physical devices. Support was
provided for a number of underlying communication tech-
nologies, including Bluetooth, RF, ZigBee, RFID, WiFi, etc.
The Hydra middleware included methods for performing
effectively device and service discovery, for supporting
peer-to-peer interaction models and efficient diagnostics
tools. Solutions for distributed security and social trusts
were also devised and prototyped.
The RUNES project9 was meant to create a large-scale,
widely distributed, heterogeneous networked embedded
systems which provide a flexible and adaptable ICT tool to
leverage environmental data. The main target of RUNES is
a fully operational middleware enabling the potential for
the introduction of a new class of networked embedded sys-
tems. In RUNES, one of the target challenges was to achieve
the required level of self-organization to suit a dynamic
environment, while ensuring that proper interfaces were
provided to programmers in order to ease the development
of applications and services. This was meant to allow for a
significant cut in the cost of new application development
and a much faster time to market.
The IoT-A project10 aims at introducing an architectural
reference model for the interoperability of Internet-of-
Things, together with a set of mechanisms for its efficient
integration into the service layer of the Future Internet.
The project is a large-scale one, involving a number of rele-
vant stakeholders and addressing a number of application
domains. Particular attention is paid to resolution schemes,
whereby innovative approaches are proposed to ensure scal-
able look-up and discovery of smart objects and associated
resources.
The iCORE project11 aims at empowering the IoT with
cognitive technologies and is focused around the concept
of virtual objects (VOs), intended as semantically enriched
virtual representation of the capabilities/resources provided
by real-world objects fostering their re-usability and sup-
porting their aggregation into more composite services
(composite virtual objects – CVOs). VOs provide a unified
representation, thereby hiding any underlying technological
heterogeneity and providing a standardized way of access-
ing objects’ capabilities and resources. One key element in
the iCORE project is the use of advanced cognitive tech-
niques for managing and composing VOs to improve IoT
applications and better match user/stakeholder require-
ments. Four use cases are put forward for validation pur-
poses: ambient assisted living, smart office, smart
transportation and supply chain management.
IoT-centric programs are active also in Japan, under the
umbrella of the UNS initiative (Ubiquitous Networked
Society, part of the wider ‘‘e-Japan’’ strategy12), which fo-
cuses on the ubiquitous presence of sensors and RFIDs in or-9 http://www.ist-runes.org/.
10 http://www.iot-a.eu/.
11 http://www.iot-icore.eu/.
12 http://www.kantei.go.jp/foreign/it/network/0122full_e.html.der to enable pervasive services, with target applications
ranging from smart home environments to supply chain
management.
While the widespread diffusion of research initiatives
denotes the vitality of the field and the potential of IoT
applications, it brings alongside a risk of fragmentation
and of lack of adoption of adequate standards. IoT would
require, as the technology gets mature and makes its way
into the real world, a careful standardization process, in or-
der to ensure interoperability among devices and applica-
tions coming from different countries, building the
foundations the real arising of an ‘‘Internet’’ of things.
7.2. Standardization activities
A number of standardization activities with focus on
tag-based technologies has been active in the last years.
These standardization activities are confined mostly within
the sensing/RFID domain. In particular, the RF-layer and
the NFCIP (Near Field Communication Interface and Proto-
col) are already standardized by various bodies (ISO 18092,
21481, 22536 and 23917; ECMA 340, 352, 356 and 365;
ETSI TS 102 190). Also, ECMA 340/352 and ISO 18092/
21481 describe the Near Field Communication Interface
and Protocol (NFCIP-1 and -2). Test methods for interfaces
and protocols are described in ECMA 356/362 and in ISO
22536/23917. In parallel, also the Global System for Mobile
Communications Association (GMSA) established a NFC
working group in 2006 and already derived guidelines for
NFC services to be supported by cellular phones technolo-
gies. The reason for the interest of the GSMA is that cellular
technology is perceived as a potential enabler for the diffu-
sion of a large number of services based on the use of
embedded NFC devices (e.g., micro-payments).
A key issue in IoT relate to the naming systems. As most
IoT applications would require unique identifiers, a global
coordination of the naming scheme to be used is needed.
In the RFID field, the most widely adopted solution is the
Electronic Product Code (EPC). Specification of EPC identi-
fiers constitute an open, freely accessible standard, issued
by EPCglobal Inc., and based upon the work carried out
in the last decade at the MIT Auto-ID Center. Object Nam-
ing Service (ONS) represents a mechanism for discovering
information about a given object starting from its EPC [92].
In terms of communications among smart objects, we
should distinguish between two aspects. At the lower lay-
ers (PHY and MAC), IEEE is running the 802.15 Working
Group on wireless personal area networks. This includes
a number of task groups, which led to the definition of
the 802.15.4 specifications, which are at the basis of the
ZigBee technology. Lately, attention has also been devoted
to optical wireless communications, within the 802.15.7
Task Group. In terms of upper layers, ETSI has launched
in 2008 a technical committee on Machine-to-Machine
(M2M) communications, which is however mostly focused
on the telecommunications perspective.13
It is important to remark that there is a clear lack of
standardization activities related to the data models, ontol-
ogies and data format (s) to be used in IoT applications and13 http://www.etsi.org/Website/Technologies/M2M.aspx.
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1513in terms of service-level interfaces and protocols. Such is-
sues are expected to play a key role for enabling semantic
interoperability and thus the mushrooming of IoT-based
services and applications. A working group on ‘‘Semantic
Sensor Network’’ was active at W3C from 2009 to 2011;
the final report could be found here: http://www.w3.org/
2005/Incubator/ssn/XGR-ssn-20110628/. The lack of a
shared approach towards such issues could represent a
barrier for the development of an open IoT architecture,
thereby harnessing the disruptive innovation potential of
such technology.8. Conclusions
The Internet-of-Things may represent the next big leap
ahead in the ICT sector. The possibility of seamlessly merg-
ing the real and the virtual world, through the massive
deployment of embedded devices, opens up new exciting
directions for both research and business.
In this survey article, we provided an overview of the
key issues related to the development of IoT technologies
and services. A number of research challenges has been
identified, which are expected to become major research
trends in the next years. The most relevant application
fields have been presented, and a number of use cases
identified.
We do hope that this survey will be useful for research-
ers and practitioners in the field, helping them to under-
stand the huge potential of IoT and what are the major
issues to be tackled, devising innovative technical solu-
tions able to turn IoT from a research vision into reality.
Acknowledgments
The work of D. Miorandi and F. De Pellegrini was sup-
ported by the EC within the framework of the BIONETS
Project IST-FET-SAC-FP6-027748, www.bionets.eu. The
authors would like to acknowledge Dr. V. Osmani and Dr.
G. Russello for the comments provided while preparing
this work. The authors also acknowledge the iCore Consor-
tium for the feedback and suggestions provided on an early
version of the article.
References
[1] M. Weiser, The computer for the 21st century, Sci. Am. (1991) 94–
100.
[2] L. Atzori, A. Iera, G. Morabito, The Internet of Things: a survey,
Comput. Netw. 54 (15) (2010) 2787–2805.
[3] The Internet of Things, ITU Internet Reports, 2005. <http://
www.itu.int/internetofthings/>.
[4] M. Zorzi, A. Gluhak, S. Lange, A. Bassi, From today’s INTRAnet of
things to a future INTERnet of things: a wireless- and mobility-
related view, IEEE Wireless Commun. 17 (6) (2010) 44–51 .
[5] J. Buckley, From RFID to the Internet of things: pervasive networked
systems, Final Report on the Conference organised by DG
Information Society and Media, Networks and Communication
Technologies Directorate, March 2006. <ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/
pub/ist/docs/ka4/au_conf670306_buckley_en.pdf>.
[6] Internet of Things: Strategic Research Agenda, September 2009.
<http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/rfid/documents/
in_cerp.pdf>.
[7] G. Kortuem, F. Kawsar, V. Sundramoorthy, D. Fitton, Smart objects
as building blocks for the internet of things, IEEE Internet Comput.
14 (2010) 44–51.[8] G. Roussos, V. Kostakos, RFID in pervasive computing: state-of-the-
art and outlook, Pervasive Mob. Comput. 5 (2009) 110–131. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.pmcj.2008.11.004.
[9] I. Akyilidiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, E. Cayirci, Wireless
sensor network: a survey, Comput. Netw. 38 (4) (2002) 393–422.
[10] I.F. Akyildiz, I.H. Kasimoglu, Wireless sensor and actor networks:
research challenges, Ad Hoc Netw. J. 2 (2004) 351–367.
[11] J. Saltzer, D. Reed, D. Clark, End-to-end arguments in system design,
ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 2 (1984) 277–288.
[12] V. Jacobson, D.K. Smetters, J.D. Thornton, M.F. Plasee, N. Briggs, R.
Braynard, Networking named content, in: Proceedings of ACM
CoNEXT, Rome, Italy, 2009, pp. 1–12.
[13] S. Dobson, S.G. Denazis, A. Fernández, D. Gaı̈ti, E. Gelenbe, F.
Massacci, P. Nixon, F. Saffre, N. Schmidt, F. Zambonelli, A survey of
autonomic communications, TAAS 1 (2) (2006) 223–259. http://
doi.acm.org/10.1145/1186778.1186782.
[14] W. Elmenreich, R. D’Souza, C. Bettstetter, H. de Meer, A survey of
models and design methods for self-organizing networked systems,
in: IWSOS, 2009, pp. 37–49.
[15] D. Guinard, V. Trifa, F. Mattern, E. Wilde, From the Internet of
Things to the Web of Things: Resource Oriented Architecture and
Best Practices, Springer, New York, Dordrecht, Heidelberg, London,
2011 (Chapter 5).
[16] D. Guinard, V. Trifa, S. Karnouskos, P. Spiess, D. Savio, Interacting
with the SOA-based Internet of Things: discovery, query, selection,
and on-demand provisioning of Web services, IEEE Trans. Serv.
Comput. 3 (3) (2010) 223–235.
[17] L. Chen, M. Tseng, X. Lian, Development of foundation models for
Internet of Things, Front. Comput. Sci. China 4 (2010) 376–385.
[18] F. Michahelles, F. Thiesse, A. Schmidt, J.R. Williams, Pervasive RFID
and near field communication technology, IEEE Pervasive Comput.
6 (3) (2007) 94–96.
[19] C. Ghezzi, F. Pacifici, Evolution of software composition
mechanisms: a survey, in: D. Lucia, F. Ferrucci, G. Tortora, M.
Tucci (Eds.), Emerging Methods, Technologies, and Process
Management in Software Engineering, J. Wiley and Sons, New
York, 2008, pp. 3–19.
[20] S. Haykin, Cognitive radio: brain-empowered wireless
communications, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 23 (2005) 201–220.
[21] I. Chlamtac, M. Conti, J.J.-N. Liu, Mobile ad hoc networking:
imperatives and challenges, Ad Hoc Netw. 1 (1) (2003) 13–64.
[22] M. Murphy, J. Butler, Proactive computing: RFID & sensor networks,
Final Report on the Conference organised by DG Information
Society and Media, Networks and Communication Technologies
Directorate, March 2006. <ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/ist/docs/
ka4/au_conf670306_murphy_en.pdf>.
[23] M. Durvy, J. Abeillé, P. Wetterwald, C. O’Flynn, B. Leverett, E.
Gnoske, M. Vidales, G. Mulligan, N. Tsiftes, N. Finne, A. Dunkels,
Making sensor networks ipv6 ready, in: Proceedings of the Sixth
ACM Conference on Networked Embedded Sensor Systems (ACM
SenSys 2008), poster session, Raleigh, North Carolina, USA, 2008,
pp. 421–422.
[24] V. Raghunathan, S. Ganeriwal, M. Srivastava, Emerging techniques
for long lived wireless sensor networks, IEEE Commun. Mag. 44
(2006) 108–114.
[25] O.B. Akan, M.T. Isik, B. Baykal, Wireless passive sensor networks,
IEEE Commun. Mag. 47 (2009) 92–99.
[26] I. Akyilidiz, F. Brunetti, C. Blazquez, Nanonetworking: a new
communication paradigm, Comput. Netw. 52 (12) (2008) 2260–
2279.
[27] H. Liu, M. Bolic, A. Nayak, I. Stojmenovic, Taxonomy and challenges
of the integration of RFID and wireless sensor networks, IEEE Netw.
22 (2008) 26–35.
[28] L. Zhang, Z. Wang, Integration of RFID into wireless sensor
networks: architectures, opportunities and challenging problems,
in: Proceedings of GCCW, 2006, pp. 463–469.
[29] E. Aarts, R. Wichert, Ambient intelligence, in: H.-J. Bullinger (Ed.),
Technology Guide, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 244–
249.
[30] J. Gosling, B. Joy, G. Steele, The Java Language Specification,
Addison-Wesley, 1996.
[31] R. Grimm, T. Anderson, B. Bershad, D. Wetherall, A system
architecture for pervasive computing, in: Proceedings of the 9th
ACM SIGOPS European Workshop, Kolding, Denmark, 2000, pp.
177–182.
[32] J.P. Sousa, D. Garlan, Aura: an architectural framework for user
mobility in ubiquitous computing environments, in: Proceedings of
the 3rd Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Madison, Wisconsin, 2002, pp. 29–43.
1514 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516[33] G. Judd, P. Steenkiste, Providing contextual information to
pervasive computing applications, in: Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Pervasive Computing (PERCOM’03),
Dallas, 2003, pp. 29–43.
[34] B. Schilit, M. Theime, Disseminating active map information to
mobile hosts, IEEE Netw. 8 (1994) 22–32.
[35] B. Schilit, N. Adams, R. Want, Context-aware computing
applications, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Mobile
Computing Systems and Applications, Santa Cruz, CA, 1994, pp. 85–
90.
[36] B. Brumitt, S. Shafer, Topological world modeling using semantic
spaces, in: Proceedings of Workshop on Location Modeling for
Ubiquitous Computing, Atlanta, GA, 2001, pp. 55–62.
[37] M. Baldauf, S. Dustdar, F. Rosenberg, A survey on context-aware
systems, Int. J. Ad Hoc Ubiquitous Comput. 2 (4) (2007) 263–277.
[38] P. Oreizy, M. Gorlick, R. Taylor, D. Heimbigner, G. Johnson, N.
Medvidovic, A. Quilici, D. Rosenblum, A. Wolf, An architecture-
based approach to self-adaptive software, IEEE Intell. Syst. 14
(1999) 54–62.
[39] J. Coutaz, C. J, S. Dobson, D. Garlan, Context is key, Commun. ACM
48 (2005) 49–53.
[40] A. Krause, A. Smailagic, D.P. Siewiorek, Context-aware mobile
computing: learning context dependent personal preferences
from wearable sensor array, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 5 (2006)
113–127.
[41] A.K. Clear, R. Shannon, T. Holland, A. Quigley, S. Dobson, P.Nixon,
SITUVIS: a visual tool for modelling a users behavior patterns in a
pervasive environment, in: Proceedings of the Seventh
International Conference on Pervasive Computing, Nara, Japan,
2009, pp. 327–341.
[42] S. Loke, Representing and reasoning with situations for context-
aware pervasive computing:a logic programming perspective, The
Knowl. Eng. Rev. 19 (2004) 213–233.
[43] V. Andrikopoulos, S. Benbernou, M.P. Papazoglou, Managing the
evolution of service specifications, in: Proceedings of 20th
International Conference on the Advanced Information Systems
Engineering, CAiSE 2008, Montpellier, France, 2008, pp. 359–374.
[44] M.P. Papazoglou, W. van den Heuvel, Service oriented
architectures: approaches, technologies and research issues, VLDB
J. 16 (2007) 389–415.
[45] M. Papazoglou, Foresight & research priorities for service oriented
computing, in: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Enterprise Information Systems, Milan, Italy, 2009, pp. 5–6.
[46] T. Yu, M. Winslett, A unified scheme for resource protection in
automated trust negotiation, in: Proceedings of IEEE International
Symposium Security and Privacy, Colorado Springs, 2003, pp. 110–
122.
[47] Perci (pervasive service interaction). <http://www.hcilab.org/
projects/perci/index.html>.
[48] W. Ye, J. Heidemann, D. Estrin, An energy-efficient MAC protocol for
wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, vol. 3,
2002, pp. 1567–1576.
[49] J. Polastre, J. Hill, D. Culler, Versatile low power media access for
wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings of ACM SenSys,
Baltimore, MD, USA, 2004, pp. 95–107.
[50] G. Lu, B. Krishnamachari, C. Raghavendra, An adaptive energy-
efficient and low-latency MAC for data gathering in sensor
networks, in: Proceedings of International Workshop on
Algorithms for Wireless, Mobile, Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks
(WMAN), Santa Fe, NM, 2004, p. 224.
[51] C. Enz, A. El-Hoiydi, J.-D. Decotignie, V. Peiris, WiseNET: an
ultralow-power wireless sensor network solution, IEEE Comput.
37 (8) (2004) 62–70.
[52] C. Schurgers, V. Tsiatsis, S. Ganeriwal, M. Srivastava, Optimizing
sensor networks in the energy-latency-density design space, IEEE
Trans. Mob. Comput. 1 (1) (2002) 70–80.
[53] G. Merrett, N. White, N. Harris, B. Al-Hashimi, Energy-aware
simulation for wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings of IEEE
SECON, Rome, Italy, 2009, pp. 64–71.
[54] A. Kansal, J. Hsu, S. Zahedi, M.B. Srivastava, Power management in
energy harvesting sensor networks, ACM Trans. Embed. Comput.
Syst. 6 (4) (2007) 32.
[55] A. Giridhar, P.R. Kumar, Computing and communicating functions
over sensor networks, IEEE JSAC 23 (4) (2005) 755–764.
[56] P. Gupta, P.R. Kumar, The capacity of wireless networks, IEEE Trans.
Inform. Theory 46 (2) (2000) 388–404.
[57] A.R.I. Schizas, G.B. Giannakis, Distributed estimation with ad hoc
wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings of EURASIP EUSIPCO,
Florence, 2006.[58] D.S. Scherber, H. Papadopoulos, Distributed computing of averages
over ad-hoc networks, IEEE JSAC 23 (4) (2005) 755–764.
[59] S. Barbarossa, G. Scutari, A. Swami, Distributed detection and
estimation in decentralized sensor networks: and overview, in:
Proceedings of EURASIP EUSIPCO, Florence, 2006.
[60] M.Z.H.Y.E. Bottega, P. Popowsky, R. Prasad, Hypothesis testing over
a random access channel in wireless sensor networks, in:
Proceedings of EURASIP EUSIPCO, Florence, Italy, 2006.
[61] G. Mergen, L. Tong, Type based estimation over multiaccess
channels, IEEE Trans. Signal Process. 54 (2) (2006) 613–626.
[62] R. Gallagher, Finding parity in a simple broadcast network, IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory 34 (2) (1988) 176–179.
[63] E. Kushilevitz, Y. Mansour, Computation in noisy radio networks,
in: Proceedings of ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms,
San Francisco, USA, 1998, pp. 236–243.
[64] A. Giridhar, P.R. Kumar, Towards a theory of in-network
computation in wireless sensor networks, IEEE Commun. Mag. 44
(4) (2006) 98–107.
[65] B. Warneke, M. Last, B. Liebowitz, K.S.J. Pister, Smart dust:
communicating with a cubic-millimeter computer, Computer 34
(1) (2001) 44–51.
[66] A. Harter, A. Hopper, A distributed location system for the active
office, IEEE Netw. 8 (1) (1994) 62–70.
[67] G.D. Abowd, C.G. Atkeson, J. Hong, S. Long, R. Kooper, M. Pinkerton,
Cyberguide: a mobile context-aware tour guide, Wireless Netw. 3
(1997) 421–433.
[68] P. Vicaire, T. He, T. Yan, Q. Cao, G. Zhou, L. Gu, L. Luo, R. Stoleru, J.A.
Stankovic, T. Abdelzaher, Achieving long-term surveillance in
vigilne, ACM Trans. Sens. Netw. 5 (2009) 1–39.
[69] D. Moore, J. Leonard, D. Rus, S. Teller, Robust distributed network
localization with noisy range measurements, in: Proceedings of
SenSys ’04, Baltimore, USA, 2004, pp. 50–61.
[70] S. Ray, R. Ungrangsi, F.D. Pellegrini, A. Trachtenberg, D.
Starobinski, Robust location detection in emergency sensor
networks, in: Proceedings of INFOCOM, S. Francisco, CA, 2003,
pp. 1044–1053.
[71] S. Gezici, Z. Tian, G.B. Giannakis, H. Kobayashi, A.F. Molisch, H.V.
Poor, Z. Sahinoglu, Localization via ultra-wideband radios, IEEE
Signal Process. Mag. 22 (2005) 70–84.
[72] C. Decker et al., Cost–benefit model for smart items in the supply
chain, in: Proceedings of IOT Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, 2008,
pp. 155–172.
[73] C. Bornhövd, T. Lin, S. Haller, J. Schaper, Integrating automatic data
acquisition with business processes experiences with sap’s auto-id
infrastructure, in: VLDB ’04: Proceedings of the Thirtieth
International Conference on Very Large Data Bases, VLDB
Endowment, 2004, pp. 1182–1188.
[74] A.S. Tanenbaum, M.V. Steen, Distributed Systems: Principles and
Paradigms, Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA, 2001.
[75] J.N. Tsitsiklis, Problems in decentralized decision making and
computation, Ph.D. thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
1984.
[76] M. Jelasity, A. Montresor, O. Babaoglu, Gossip-based aggregation in
large dynamic networks, ACM Trans. Comput. Syst. 23 (1) (2005)
219–252.
[77] D. Kempe, A. Dobra, J. Gehrke, Gossip-based computation of
aggregate information, in: Proceedings of FOCS, IEEE, Cambridge,
MA, USA, 2003, pp. 482–491.
[78] J. Garay, Y. Moses, Fully polynomial byzantine agreement for n > 3t
processors in t + 1 rounds, SIAM J. Comput. 27 (1) (1998) 247–
290.
[79] D. Spanos, R. Olfati-Saber, R.M. Murray, Distributed sensor fusion
using dynamic consensus, in: Proceedings of IFAC’05, Prague, 2005,
p. 99.
[80] L. Xiao, S. Boyd, S. Lall, A scheme for asynchronous distributed
sensor fusion based on average consensus, in: Proceedings of
IPSN’05, Los Angeles, USA, 2005, p. 99.
[81] T.H. Cormen, C.E. Leiserson, R.L. Rivest, C. Stein, Introduction to
Algorithms, MIT Press, 2001.
[82] R.C. Shah, S. Roy, S. Jain, W. Brunette, Data mules: modeling a three-
tier architecture for sparse sensor networks, in: Proceedings of IEEE
International Workshop on Sensor Networks Protocols and
Applications, 2003, pp. 30–41.
[83] F. De Pellegrini, C. Moiso, D. Miorandi, I. Chlamtac, R-P2P: a data
centric dtn middleware with interconnected throwboxes, in:
Proceedings of Autonomics, Turin, Italy, 2008, pp. 11–20.
[84] I. Carreras, I. Chlamtac, F. De Pellegrini, D. Miorandi, BIONETS: bio-
inspired networking for pervasive communication environments,
IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 56 (1) (2007) 218–229.
D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516 1515[85] J. Padhye, V. Firoiu, D. Towsley, J. Kurose, Modeling TCP throughput:
a simple model and its empirical validation, in: Proceedings of ACM
SIGCOMM, Vancouver, CA, 1998, pp. 303–314.
[86] I. Koren, C.M. Krishna, Fault Tolerant Systems, Morgan Kaufman
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2007.
[87] R.S. Leslie Lamport, M. Pease, The byzantine generals problem, ACM
Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 4 (3) (1982) 382–401.
[88] S. Dolev, Self-stabilization, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2000.
[89] W. Masri, Z. Mammeri, Middleware for wireless sensor networks: a
comparative analysis, in: Proceedings of IFIP International Network
and Parallel Computing Workshops (NPC), China, 2007, pp. 349–356.
[90] J. Charles, Middleware moves to the forefront, Computer 32 (5)
(1999) 17–19.
[91] N. Ibrahim, Orthogonal classification of middleware technologies,
in: Proceedings of UBICOMM ’09, Sliema, Malta, 2009, pp. 46–51.
[92] Object Naming Service (ONS) Standard. <http://
www.epcglobalinc.org/standards/ons/ons101-standard-
20080529.pdf>.
[93] G. Weiss, Multiagent Systems. A Modern Approach to Distributed
Modern Approach to Artificial Intelligence, MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA, USA, 1999.
[94] T.W. Sandholm, V.R. Lesser, Coalitions among computationally
bounded agents, Artif. Intell. 1 (94) (1997) 99–137.
[95] D. Fudenberg, J. Tirole, Game Theory, MIT Press, 1991.
[96] D. Estrin, D. Culler, K. Pister, G. Sukhatme, Connecting the physical
world with pervasive networks, IEEE Pervasive Comput. 1 (1)
(2002) 59–69.
[97] W. Weber, J. Rabaaey, E. Aarts (Eds.), Ambient Intelligence,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2005.
[98] E. Zelkha, B. Epstein, From devices to ambient intelligence, in:
Digital Living Room Conference, Laguna Niguel, California, 1998.
[99] M. Berger, F. Fuchs, M. Pirker, Ambient intelligence – from personal
assistance to intelligent megacities, in: Proceedings of Conference
on Advances in Ambient Intelligence, 2007, pp. 21–35.
[100] M. Kranz, P. Holleis, A. Schmidt, Embedded interaction: interacting
with the internet of things, IEEE Internet Comput. 14 (2010) 46–53.
[101] R. Sandhu, E. Coyne, H. Feinstein, C. Youman, Role-based access
control models, IEEE Comput. 29 (2) (1996) 38–47.
[102] S. Papadopoulos, Y. Yang, D. Papadias, CADS: continuous
authentication on data streams, in: Proceedings of the 33rd
International Conference on Very Large Data Base (VLDB’07),
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., Vienna, Austria, 2007, pp.
135–146.
[103] M. Ali, M. ElTabakh, C. Nita-Rotaru, Ft-Rc4: A Robust Security
Mechanism for Data Stream Systems, Purdue University, Technical
Report, TR-05-024.
[104] W. Lindner, J. Meier, Securing the borealis data stream engine, in:
Proceedings of the International Database Engineering and
Application Symposium (IDEAS’06), Delhi, India, 2006, pp. 137–
147.
[105] R. Nehme, E. Rundesteiner, E. Bertino, A security punctuation
framework for enforcing access control on streaming data, in:
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE’08), Cancun, Mexico, 2008, pp. 406–415.
[106] M. Hammad, M. Franklin, W. Aref, A. Elmagarmid, Scheduling the
shared window joins over data streams, in: Proceedings of the 29th
International Conference on Very Large Data Base (VLDB’03),
Morgan Kaufman Publishers Inc., Berlin, Germany, 2003, pp. 297–
308.
[107] B. Carminati, E. Ferrari, K. Tan, J. Cao, A framework to enforce access
control over data streams, ACM Trans. Inform. Syst. Sec. (TISSEC) 13
(3) (2008) 1–31.
[108] B. Carminati, E. Ferrari, K. Tan, Enforcing access control policies on
data streams, in: Proceedings of the 12th ACM Symposium on
Access Control Models and Technologies (SACMAT’07), Sophia
Antipolis, France, 2007, pp. 21–30.
[109] B. Carminati, E. Ferrari, K. Tan, Specifying access control policies on
data streams, in: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference
on Database System for Advanced Applications, Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, Springer, Bangkok, Thailand, 2007, pp. 410–421.
[110] L. Hu, D. Evans, Secure data aggregation in wireless sensor
networks, in: Proceedings of IEEE WSAAN, Orlando, Florida, USA,
2003, pp. 93–105.
[111] A. Mahimkar, T. Rappaport, SECUREDAV: a secure data aggregation
and verification protocol for sensor networks, in: Proceedings of
IEEE Globecom, Dallas, Texas, USA, 2004, pp. 2175–2179.
[112] B. Przydatek, D. Song, A. Perrig, SIA: secure information aggregation
in sensor networks, in: Proceedings of ACM SenSys, Los Angeles,
California, USA, 2003, pp. 255–265.[113] M. Bagaa, N. Lasla, A. Ouadjaout, Y. Challal, SEDAN: secure and
efficient protocol for data aggregation in wireless sensor networks,
in: Proceedings of IEEE LCN, Dublin, Ireland, 2007, pp. 1053–1060.
[114] C. Castelluccia, E. Mykletun, G. Tsudik, Efficient aggregation of
encrypted data in wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings of
MobiQuitous, San Diego, CA, USA, 2005, pp. 109–117.
[115] J. Girao, D. Westhoff, M. Schneider, CDA: concealed data
aggregation for reverse multicast traffic in wireless sensor
networks, in: Proceedings of IEEE ICC, Seoul, Korea, 2005, pp.
3044–3049.
[116] R. Riggio, S. Sicari, Secure aggregation in hybrid mesh/sensor
networks, in: Proceedings of SASN, Saint Petersburg, Russia, 2009,
pp. 1–6.
[117] A. Coen-Porisini, S. Sicari, SeDAP: Secure data aggregation protocol
in privacy aware wireless sensor networks, in: Springer
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Sensor
Systems and Software, Miami, Florida, USA, 2010.
[118] E. Mykletun, J. Girao, D. Westhoff, Public key based cryptoschemes
for data concealment in wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings
of IEEE ICC, Istanbul, Turkey, 2006, pp. 2288–2295.
[119] L. Eschenauer, V.D. Gligor, A key-management scheme for
distributed sensor networks, in: Proceedings of ACM CCS,
Washington, DC, USA, 2002, pp. 41–47.
[120] R.D. Pietro, A. Mei, L.V. Mancini, Random key assignment for secure
wireless sensor networks, in: Proceedings of ACM SASN, Fairfax,
VA, USA, 2003, pp. 62–71.
[121] R.D. Pietro, C. Soriente, A. Spognardi, G. Tsudik, Collaborative
authentication in unattended WSNs, in: Proceedings of ACN WiSec,
Zurich, Switzerland, 2009, pp. 237–244.
[122] T. Mielikinen, Privacy problems with anonymized transaction
databases, in: Proceedings of international Conference on
Discovery Science (DS 2004), Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
vol. 3245, Springer, 2004.
[123] A. Narayanan, V. Shmatikov, Obfuscated databases and group
privacy, in: Proceedings of ACM International Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (CCS), ACM Press, New
York, USA, 2005, pp. 102–111.
[124] P. Samarati, L. Sweeney, Protecting privacy when disclosing
information: k-anonymity and its enforcement through
generalization and suppression, Technical Report SRI-CSL-98-04,
Computer Science Laboratory, SRI International.
[125] A. Bhargavspantzel, A. Squicciarini, E. Bertino, Trust negotiation in
identity management, IEEE Secur. Priv. (2007) 55–63.
[126] A.V. Lamsweerde, E. Handling, Obstacles in goal-oriented
requirement engineering, IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 26 (2000) 978–
1005.
[127] L. Liu, E. Yu, J. Mylopoulos, Analyzing security requirements as
relationships among strategic actors, in: Proceedings of
International Symposium on Requirements Engineering for
Information Security (SREIS), Raleigh, North Carolina, USA, 2002.
[128] H. Mouratidis, P. Giorgini, G.A. Mason, Integrating security and
systems engineering: towards the modelling of secure information
system, in: Proceedings of International Conference on Advanced
Information System Engineering (CAiSE), Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 2681, Springer, 2003, pp. 63–78.
[129] L. Chung, Dealing with security requirements during the
development of information system, in: Proceedings of
International Conference on Advanced Information System
Engineering (CAiSE), vol. Klagenfurt/Velden, Austria, Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, Springer, Paris, France, 1993, pp.
234–251.
[130] J. Mylopolulos, L. Chung, B. Nixon, Representing and using non
functional requirements: a process oriented approach, IEEE Trans.
Softw. Eng. 18 (1998) 483–497.
[131] A. Anton, Goal-based requirements analysis, in: Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Requirements Engineering (ICRE 96),
Colorado Springs, 1996, pp. 136–144.
[132] E. Kavakli, C. Kalloniatis, P. Loucopoulos, S. Gritzalis, Addressing
privacy requirements in system design: the pris method, J.
Requirements Eng. 13 (3) (2008) 241–255.
[133] A. Coen-Porisini, P. Colombo, S. Sicari, Privacy aware systems: from
models to patterns, in: Software Engineering for Secure Systems:
Industrial and Research Perspectives, IGI Global, 2010.
[134] M. Blaze, J. Feigenbaum, J. Lacy, Decentralized trust management,
in: Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium Security and
Privacy, Colorado Springs, 1996, pp. 164–173.
[135] K. Ren, T. Li, Z. Wan, F. Bao, R. Deng, K. Kim, Highly realible trust
establishment scheme in ad hoc networks, Comput. Netw. 45 (6)
(2004) 687–699.
1516 D. Miorandi et al. / Ad Hoc Networks 10 (2012) 1497–1516[136] Z. Liang, W. Shi, Enforcing cooperative resource sharing in
untrusted peer to peer environment, ACM J. Mobile Netw. Appl.
10 (6) (2005) 771–783.
[137] Y.-B. Lin, I. Chlamtac, Wireless and Mobile Network Architectures,
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA, 2000.
Daniele Miorandi is the head of the iNSPIRE
Area at CREATE-NET, Italy. He received a PhD
in Communications Engineering from Univ. of
Padova, Italy, in 2005, and a Laurea degree
(summa cum lauda) in Communications
Engineering from Univ. of Padova, Italy, in
2001. He joined CREATE-NET in Jan. 2005,
where he is leading the iNSPIRE (Networking
and Security Solutions for Pervasive Comput-
ing Systems: Research & Experimentation).
His research interests include bio-inspired
approaches to networking and service provi-
sioning in large-scale computing systems, modeling and performance
evaluation of wireless networks, prototyping of wireless mesh solutions.
Dr. Miorandi has co-authored more than 100 papers in internationally
refereed journals and conferences. He serves on the Steering Committee
of various international events (WiOpt, Autonomics, ValueTools), for
some of which he was a co-founder (Autonomics and ValueTools). He also
serves on the TPC of leading conferences in the networking field,
including, e.g., IEEE INFOCOM, IEEE ICC, IEEE Globecom. He is a member of
IEEE, ACM and ICST.
Sabrina Sicari was born on September 18,
1977 in Catania, Sicily, Italy. She received her
laurea degree in Electronical Engineering,110/
110 cum laude, from University of Catania,
Catania, Italy, in 2002. In March 2006 she got
her Ph.D. in Computer and Telecommunica-
tions Engineering at the same university.
From September 2004 to March 2006 she has
been a Visiting Scholar at Dipartimento di
Elettronica e Informatica, Politecnico di
Milano, Italy. Since May 2006 she works at
Dipartimento di Informatica e Comunicazi-
one, Universit degli Studi dell’Insubria in software engineering group
(head Prof. Alberto Coen-Porisini). Dr. Sicari is an IEEE member. She is
reviewer of Pervasive and Mobile Computing (Elsevier), IEEE Transactions
on Vehicular Technology, ACM-Monet, International Journal of Computer
Applications in Technology (IJCAT), IEEE ICC’09, IEEE ICC’10, IEEE ISIE’10,
S-Cube’09, WiOpt’09, Mobility’11, ICDT 2012,and TPC member of
Q2SWinet 2011, Q2SWinet 2010, Q2SWinet 2009, IEEE Globecom’11, IEEE
Globecom’10, IEEE ICC’11, GIIS’11, IWCMC ’11, the international work-
shop SESENA 2010 (co-located with ICSE’10), S-cube’10. Dr. Sicari has
been the general co-chair of S-Cube 2009. She has been a Steering Com-
mittee member of S-Cube 2010 and guest editor for the ACM Monet
Special Issue, named ‘‘Sensor, system and Software’’. Dr. Sicari is an Editor
for Computer Networks (Elsevier) journal since 2008. She is a SteeringCommitee member of S-Cube 2012. She is a TPC member of the inter-
national conference IWCMC 2012, SENSORNETS 2012, S-Cube 2012, ICDT
2012, Mobility 2012, SNDS 2012, Q2SWinet 2012
Francesco De Pellegrini received the Laurea
degree in 2000 and the Ph.D. degree in 2004,
both in Telecommunication Engineering, from
the University of Padova. During year 2001/
2002 he spent one year at Boston University
as a visiting scholar. He is currently a senior
researcher and Deputy Area Head of the
iNspire group at CREATE-NET. His research
interests are location detection, multirate
systems, routing, wireless mesh networks,
VoIP, Ad Hoc and Delay Tolerant Networks. F.
De Pellegrini has been a TPC member of IEEE
Infocom and a reviewer for several international networking conferences
and journals. Francesco serves in the Steering Programm Commitee of
Mobiquitous and Complex Conferences. Francesco was the Vice-chair for
the first edition of Robocomm.
Imrich Chlamtac is the President of CREATE-
NET and the Bruno Kessler Professor at the
University of Trento, Italy and has held vari-
ous honorary and chaired professorships in
USA and Europe including the Distinguished
Chair in Telecommunications Professorship at
the University of Texas at Dallas, Sackler
Professorship at Tel Aviv University and Uni-
versity Professorship at the Tech- nical Uni-
versity of Budapest. In the past he was with
Technion and UMass, Amherst, DEC Research.
Dr. Imrich Chlamtac has made significant
contribution to various networking technologies as scientist, educator
and entrepreneur. Dr. Chlamtac is the recipient of multiple awards and
recognitions including Fellow of the IEEE, Fellow of the ACM, Fulbright
Scholar, the ACM Award for Outstanding Contributions to Research on
Mobility and the IEEE Award for Outstanding Technical Contributions to
Wireless Personal Communications. Dr. Chlamtac published close to four
hundred refereed journal, book, and conference articles and is listed
among ISIs Highly Cited Researchers in Computer Science. Dr. Chlamtac is
the co-author of four books, including the first book on Local Area Net-
works (1980) and the Amazon.com best seller and IEEE Editor’s Choice
Wireless and Mobile Network Architectures, published by John Wiley and
Sons (2000). Dr. Chlamtac has widely contributed to the scientific com-
munity as founder and Chair of ACM Sigmobile, founder and steering
committee chair of some of the lead conferences in net-working,
including ACM Mobicom, IEEE/SPIE/ACM OptiComm, CreateNet Mobiq-
uitous, CreateNet WiOpt, IEEE/CreateNet Broadnet, IEEE/CreateNet Tri-
dentcom and IEEE/CreateNet Securecomm conferences. Dr. Chlamtac also
serves as the founding Editor in Chief of the ACM/URSI/Springer Wireless
Networks (WINET), the ACM/Springer Journal on Special Topics in Mobile
Networks and Applications (MONET).

