
Introduction  ................................................................................................... 01
Overview ........................................................................................................ 02
Security Threats  ............................................................................................ 03
	 	 Internet	Security	Threats	Impacting	Enterprise	Systems		..........................	03
	 	 The	Threat	Food	Chain		............................................................................	03
	 	 Increasing	Complexity	of	Threats		............................................................	04
Cost Implications  ........................................................................................... 06
	 	 Repairs	and	Support		...............................................................................	07
	 	 Information	Security	Breaches		................................................................	07
	 	 Legal	and	Regulatory	Compliance		...........................................................	08
Protecting the Enterprise  ............................................................................... 10
	 	 Policy	and	Process	Best	Practices	for	Securing	Enterprise	Information	....	10
	 	 Technology	Best	Practices	to	Secure	Enterprise	Information		...................	11
Conclusion  ..................................................................................................... 13
	 	 What	the	Future	Holds		.............................................................................	13
	 	 About	Webroot	Software		.........................................................................	14
	 	 Sources		..................................................................................................	15
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1
The State of  Internet Security report provides an in-depth review and analysis of  the most pressing computer and data security 
related concerns. Based on research conducted by Webroot Software, Inc., each quarterly report will focus on a specific aspect of  
Internet security. 
The focus for the first quarter of  2007 is Protecting Enterprise Systems. This report provides industry data, trends, best practices  
and an evaluation of  the threat landscape. 
Future reports will concentrate on the Internet security topics of  the day that impact Webroot’s consumer and business  
customers around the globe.
I N T R O D U C T I O N
2
Since the very beginning of  commerce, businesses large and small have needed to secure and protect their assets. For many 
years, a safe inside strong walls with a locked door, or perhaps a fence and a vicious dog, were all perfectly adequate solutions.  
Of course, with the advent of  computer technology the world has changed significantly in recent decades. 
Today, the vast majority of  intellectual property, customer information and trade secrets are created and stored in the form of 1s 
and 0s – making data security a top priority for every company. Loss of  physical assets such as laptops and storage media that 
can contain highly sensitive and valuable data, as well as intentional criminal or malicious activities from within the organization 
caused by a disgruntled employee, remain significant risks to data security that need to be addressed in a company’s approach to 
protecting information assets.
Additionally, with the arrival of  the Internet the number of  external people who can potentially make their way “inside the 
company’s walls” has multiplied exponentially. Online perpetrators are well-paid to extract information such as social security 
numbers, credit card numbers, bank account numbers, user names and passwords from company files. Internet security deals 
specifically with risks that arise from network connectivity to the world, including spyware, viruses, Trojan horses, system 
monitors, rootkits, keyloggers, phishing, pharming, adware and spam.
These economically motivated efforts to infiltrate a company’s network present significant costs and liabilities. In addition to 
the risk of  direct losses, there are also significant impacts to staff  productivity. Furthermore, companies are increasingly held 
accountable by government agencies and shareholders for properly securing the consumer data they retain. Failure to do so  
can result in legal charges, fines and a damaged reputation.
This report explores the most prevalent Internet security threats, their impacts, and what companies need to do to protect  
their most valuable business assets.
O V E R V I E W
3
Internet Security Threats Impacting Enterprise Systems
Companies hold valuable information in the form of customer data, proprietary information and trade secrets in their 
computers, networks, servers and storage devices. As a consequence, company IT systems are under constant attack driven  
by the potential for monetary gains. Greed breeds creativity in the methods used to steal enterprise data. This is evidenced by  
the “wolf  in sheep’s clothing” approach that ties lower risk threats to critical risk threats, as well as the increasing complexity  
of  the threats invading IT systems.
 
The Threat Food Chain
Industry analyst firm IDC’s Enterprise Security Survey for 2006 identifies the top five threats  
to enterprise security as: 
 • Trojans, viruses, worms, and other malicious code
 • Spyware
 • Spam
 • Employees
 • Application vulnerabilities 
These categories are closely intertwined. Spam can be the delivery mechanism for spyware, 
and spyware’s primary payload is often a Trojan horse, which disguises the real or secondary 
payload. A Trojan can download multiple pieces of  spyware, or contain spyware bots (web 
robots that run automated tasks) used for spam, backdoors, or keyloggers to record  
user keystrokes. 
Too often adware and spam have been categorized as mere nuisances and not considered truly damaging. That trend is clearly 
changing. Recently, the New York State Attorney General reached a settlement with three well-known online advertisers, 
Travelocity, Priceline and Cingular Wireless, for promoting products and services on the Internet through deceptively installed 
adware programs. This is just one example of  government action based on the view that adware can cause material harm. 
Beyond the incessant inflow of spam and adware, spyware writers will be relentless in their efforts to penetrate the enterprise 
because it is their business. They are parasites in the corporate IT environment that survive at the expense of  the systems they 
infiltrate. Successful spyware writers reap significant financial rewards, usually in the form of bank passwords and personal 
information, such as social security numbers, credit card information, as well as Web site and e-mail usernames and passwords. 
Spam	can	be	
the	delivery	
mechanism	for	
spyware,	and	
spyware’s	
primary	payload	
is	often	a	Trojan	
horse,	which	
disguises	the	real	
or	secondary	
payload.
S E C U R I T Y  T H R E A T S

Beyond individuals chasing these financial gains, there has also been greater involvement from organized crime groups in recent 
years. While at a cybercrime conference in London, Christopher Painter, deputy chief  of  the computer crimes and intellectual 
property section of  the U.S. Department of  Justice, told reporters, “There are still instances of  ‘lone-gunman’ hackers but more 
and more we are seeing organized criminal groups.” In an interview with ComputerWorld magazine, Andrew Arena, special 
agent in charge of  the U.S. Federal Bureau of  Investigation’s criminal division in New York, stated that cybercrime is the number 
three overall priority at the FBI (only behind counter-terrorism and counter-intelligence) as it overlaps organized crime, as well  
as state-sponsored and terrorist organizations. 
 
Increasing Complexity of Threats
The United Kingdom’s Department of  Trade and Industry (DTI) commissioned 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP to conduct an Information Security Breaches survey in  
2006 that found 99 percent of  companies are connected to the Internet, and over 80 percent  
of  the large companies surveyed suffered a security incident within the preceding year. Web 
sites continue to be a leading source for malware infections. The Threat Research Team at 
Webroot Software identified exploits on over 3 million web sites in 2006. An exploit takes 
advantage of  malicious code present on a Web site to force a Web browser to install spyware  
or other malware on a user’s machine without his or her knowledge or consent.
For years now, spyware and other unwanted programs have often been able to bypass 
traditional security defenses like firewalls and other perimeter solutions because the malicious 
programs are disguised as legitimate traffic entering through well-established ports left open on firewalls. Once installed on a 
system, many spyware applications disguise themselves as trusted programs, allowing them to communicate freely with the 
Internet over TCP ports that are commonly left unprotected. 
According to a market research study conducted by Webroot Software in January of  2007, over one-third of  enterprises surveyed 
dealt with Trojan horse attacks (39 percent) and almost one-fourth dealt with system monitor attacks (24 percent).
State of Internet Security: Security Threats
Cyber-crime	is	
the	number	three	
overall	priority	
at	the	FBI,	
only	behind	
counter-terrorism	
and	counter-
intelligence.	

Significantly compounding the challenges posed by these programs is how they are programmed to evade detection. Today’s 
spies are more complex and dangerous, infecting machines with more registry entries and files to make removal more difficult. 
Further complicating removal efforts, many pieces of  spyware use watcher processes, which monitor each other so that when 
removal is attempted the malicious code will be repopulated or new components will be downloaded from the Internet. 
Most alarming is the continuous trend towards more advanced techniques. Just a couple years ago, rootkits, Trojans, and 
polymorphic code (capable of  mutating while keeping the original functionality intact) were the most advanced methods being 
used; these are now becoming common ways to evade detection. Today’s spyware programs create permissions to gain network 
access, alter security settings and modify system properties and preferences. 
In 2006, there were increasing incidents of  even more sinister ways to infiltrate and capture PC data, including what has become 
referred to as ransomware. In these cases, once installed on the computer, the code encrypts data holding it hostage. Then a 
ransom to be paid via an online payment service is requested to recover the files. Businesses are often the targets of  these types  
of  attacks. The requested amount is generally low enough that many simply pay “the ransom” and do not report the crime to 
law enforcement so that access to the information can be recovered as quickly as possible.
The chart below summarizes how the distribution and infection methods, as well as the removal techniques required, have  
evolved since 2004.
State of Internet Security: Security Threats
The Evolution of Threat Complexity
200 200 2006
Type •	Benign	Adware	
•	Randomized	Hijacks	
•	Malicious	Adware
•	Trojans
•	Targeted/Custom	Trojans
•	Phishing	Trojans
Distribution •	Web	sites
•	BitTorrent
•	Peer-to-Peer	(P2P)
•	Bundles
•	Piggybacking
•	Email
•	 Internal	Hacking
Infection •	File	Placement	 	
	 and	Naming
•	DLL	Injection
•	Browser	Helper	 	
	 Object	(BHO)
•	Modifying	Executables
Removal •	Deleting	on	Disk
•	Deleting	Registry	Keys
•	File	Neutering
•	Correlation	Removal
•	Driver-based	Removal
•	Dynamic	Conditional	 	
	 Removal
Source: Webroot Software Threat Research Department
6
Cost Implications for the Enterprise
These unrelenting attacks on enterprise networks have significant cost implications. Based 
on an industry survey conducted by Webroot in January 2007, almost half  of  the companies 
had incurred the costs of  increased help desk time to repair spyware damage, disrupted 
business activities and reduced employee productivity. In addition, more than a quarter of   
the companies stated that confidential information had been compromised as a result of  
spyware. Beyond the direct costs and impacts to employee productivity, failure to  
adequately protect enterprise IT systems from Internet security threats can also  
expose the company to legal liabilities.  
 
Almost	half	
the	companies	
surveyed	had	
incurred	the	
costs	of		
increased	help	
desk	time	to	
repair	spyware	
damage.
C O S T  I M P L I C A T I O N S

Repairs and Support
Based on Webroot’s experience with thousands of  enterprise customers, a profile of  an “average” company’s experience with 
malware issues is described in the table below. Webroot prepared this case study analysis of  the repair, support and productivity 
costs for a company with 14,000 workstations.   
While these costs will vary from company to company, the multiplying effect of  the sheer volume of  incidents that enterprise IT 
departments must remedy remains the same. These direct support and productivity costs are themselves significant, yet they are 
only a part of  the impact felt by enterprises infected with spyware and other Internet threats.  
 
Information Security Breaches 
The 2006 Information Security Breaches survey issued by the United Kingdom’s Department 
of  Trade and Industry (DTI) found that the average cost of  a UK company’s worst data 
security incident of  the year was roughly $23,000. The breaches in large businesses were  
seven times more expensive, with the average cost of  the worst incident reaching $175,000. 
Based on the survey, DTI has said that the overall cost of  data security breaches incurred  
by UK companies is in excess of  $19.5 billion per annum.
In the U.S., the Small Business Technology Institute conducted a study called Small Business 
Information Security Readiness covering the same time period that reported more than half  of  
all small businesses experienced a security breach. In spite of  these incidents, nearly one-fifth 
of  the companies were not using virus-scanning software for e-mail, over 60 percent did not 
protect their wireless networks with encryption, and two-thirds did not have an information 
security plan. The costs of  a serious incident could have an even more significant impact on 
a smaller company, yet many small businesses make reactive purchase decisions only after  
suffering an information security incident. 
State of Internet Security: Cost Implications
The	overall	
cost	of	data	
security	breaches	
incurred	by	UK	
companies	is		
in	excess	of		
$19.5	billion		
per	annum.
Malware Cost Analysis: Company X with 14,000 Workstations
Help Desk Costs
Average	percent	
of	users	with	a	
malware-related	
call	each	month
Average	number	of	
malware-related	
calls	per	month	
Average	cost	
per	call
Monthly	
Cost
Annual	
Cost
7.5% 1,050 $20 $21,000 $252,000
IT Support Costs for Machine Re-Imaging
Average	number	of	
machines	re-imaged	
per	day
Average	hours	
needed	for	
each	re-image
Average	
hourly	rate	for	
employee	time
Monthly	
Cost
Annual	
Cost
3 3 $50 $9,000 $108,000
Lost Productivity of Employee (user) with Affected Machine
Average	number	
of	employees	with	
affected	machines	
per	day
Average	hours	of	
lost	productivity	
while	machine	is	
being	re-imaged
Average	
hourly	rate	for	
employee	time
Monthly	
Cost
Annual	
Cost
3 3 $50 $9,000 $108,000
Total Costs:
Per Month Per Year
$39,000 $68,000
Source: Webroot Software Threat Research Department
8
Beyond the direct costs associated with resolving incidents, there are significant intangible costs associated with brand and 
reputation damage when government action is taken following a data breach. In the United States, government offices 
responsible for protecting consumer interests, such as the U.S. Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and several state Attorneys 
General have become increasingly proactive in filing complaints against companies for lax computer security measures.  
For example, in 2006, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) approved a final consent order with DSW, Inc. (FTC File No. 052-
3096). The complaint filed by the FTC stated that DSW, Inc. had created unnecessary risks to the personal information collected 
about consumers in its stores by failing to use readily available security measures to protect its computer networks, nor employing 
sufficient measures to detect unauthorized access. As result of  the consent decree, DSW was required to establish and implement 
“a comprehensive information security program that is reasonably designed to protect the security, confidentiality and integrity 
of  personal information collected from or about consumers.” Similar findings and requirements have been included in other 
FTC consent decrees, such as in the BJ Wholesale case in 2005 (FTC File No. 042-3160). 
In spite of  these and other highly visible cases in the past couple years, significant data breach stories continue to surface. In 
January 2007, reports emerged that hackers used a Trojan to access customer information from TJX Companies, possibly for as 
long as three years. Stolen was credit card, debit card, check and merchandise return transaction information for customers of  
T.J. Maxx, Marshalls, Homegoods and A.J. Wright stores in the United States and Puerto Rico; Winners and HomeSense stores 
in Canada; and possibly T.K. Maxx stores in the United Kingdom and Ireland. The breach has already generated consumer 
lawsuits against TJX, the first of  which was filed in U.S. federal court in Boston. The case, which may become a class action 
suit on behalf  of  anyone who had their personal information stolen, claims that TJX failed to have adequate security in place to 
safeguard customers’ data, and failed to notify customers of  the breach as soon as it was discovered, constituting negligence.
 
Legal and Regulatory Compliance 
Over the past decade, in an effort to protect citizens’ data from misappropriation and fraud, governments in many parts of  the 
world have instituted additional data protection measures. While legal and regulatory compliance can often be expensive, it is a 
cost of  doing business in that given jurisdiction. Even more costly is the potential liability for a company that fails to comply with 
the appropriate legal requirements to safeguard sensitive information.
One of  the most well known laws in this regard is the European Union’s Data Protection Directive. This Directive sets out the 
guidelines on which European countries have crafted their laws. Article 17 of  the Directive requires: 
 Member States shall provide that the (data) controller must implement appropriate technical and organizational  
 measures to protect personal data against accidental or unlawful destruction, alteration, unauthorized disclosure  
 or access, in particular where processing involves the transmission of  data over a network.
Most European countries have now implemented this Directive in country-specific laws very similar to the language used in 
Section 31 of  the Italian Personal Data Protection Code to address security requirements. It states:
 Personal data undergoing processing shall be kept and controlled, also in consideration of  technological innovations,  
 of  their nature and the specific features of  the processing, in such a way as to minimize, by means of  suitable  
 preventative security measures, the risk of  their destruction or loss, whether by accident or not, of  unauthorized  
 access to the data … 
State of Internet Security: Cost Implications
9
The United States also has several laws that set out data protection requirements. For example, the U.S. Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) requires that the privacy of  medical records be adequately protected against 
unauthorized access and misuse. In the financial sector, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act requires that organizations which 
maintain credit information for customers be held accountable if  that data is accessed or compromised by an unauthorized third 
party. All public companies must comply with Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) which includes attesting to the risk assessment and audit 
controls required by the Act. Incidents of  unauthorized network access, system monitors and Trojans can bring the authenticity 
of  reporting into question, and will raise concerns of  SOX non-compliance. 
Beyond country laws, there are international governing bodies and industry organizations 
that have set certain relevant requirements. For example, the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision provides a forum for regular cooperation on banking supervisory matters, and  
over recent years, it has developed increasingly into a standard-setting body. The Committee, 
whose members come from Belgium, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, 
the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States, 
is best known for its international standards on capital adequacy. Risk management is a 
significant factor in determining a bank’s required capital reserves. In turn, this becomes a 
factor in a bank’s review of  business loan applications. Planned for implementation by this 
year, the Basel Committee issued a revised Framework referred to as Basel II to “promote 
the adoption of  stronger risk management practices by the banking industry.” Basel II defines 
operational risk as “the risk of  loss resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes, 
people or systems, or from external events.” 
 
Many U.S. companies that do business in Europe have struggled to comply with European 
directives since they can be a significantly higher standard than in the U.S. Rules and 
regulations in different countries can overlap or conflict, creating a complex challenge for 
security executives responsible for aligning security strategy across the globe. In the face of  
these diverse laws, rules and regulations, some organizations find themselves overwhelmed  
and unsure about how to achieve compliance. To complicate matters further, the often-
ambiguous language of  the laws causes some businesses to suffer from ‘analysis paralysis’  
and ultimately – they end up doing nothing at all.
State of Internet Security: Cost Implications
Rules	and	
regulations	
in	different	
countries	can	
overlap	or	
conflict,	creating	
a	complex	
challenge	for	
security	
executives	
responsible	for	
aligning	security	
strategy	across	
the	globe.
10
Protecting the Enterprise
One of  the biggest challenges enterprises face in dealing with Internet security is the apparent pot of  gold available to the 
perpetrators. Malware writers can be paid large sums for each Trojan planted on a computer. This creates some very strong 
incentives that undermine a company’s ability to protect enterprise IT systems. 
Another development complicating the job of  corporate IT departments is the ever-growing number of  network access points 
and wireless network support. As employees are increasingly mobile, relying on laptops and remote access to connect to the 
corporate network, the ability to ensure those machines are malware free is critical. Network-level controls are insufficient. Every 
machine needs to be secure as well.
In order to effectively protect the enterprise against Internet security threats, companies require a multifaceted approach. 
Fortunately, there has been a great deal of  attention paid to these concerns in recent years, and 
there are both guidelines and technologies that companies can implement to help assure the 
security of  their information. 
  
Policy and Process Best Practices for Securing Enterprise Information
Company efforts to secure enterprise information must include appropriate corporate policies 
for information handling that are strongly enforced, along with significant employee education. 
Based on the widely accepted British Standard BS 7799 for information security management, 
the International Standards Organization issued ISO/IEC 27001 that specifies the 
requirements for establishing, implementing, operating, monitoring, reviewing, maintaining 
and improving a documented Information Security Management System. It specifies 
requirements for the implementation of  security controls customized to the needs of  individual 
organizations. This along with other guidelines and standards provide tools for companies to 
assess and implement appropriate information security programs.
Another reliable directive is the globally recognized Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard, which was created  
as guidance for all companies that process any credit card information whether from consumer or businesses customers.  
It states that companies should: 
 • Build and Maintain a Secure Network 
 • Protect Cardholder Data
 • Maintain a Vulnerability Management Program
 • Implement Strong Access Control Measures
 • Regularly Monitor and Test Networks
 • Maintain an Information Security Policy
PROTECTING THE ENTERPRISE
Failure	to		
protect	enterprise	
IT	systems	from	
Internet	security	
threats	can	
expose	a	
company	to	
legal	liabilitites.
11
The PCI standard provides details about how to best fulfill each of  these objectives. Specific elements of  the standard, such as 
ensuring that anti-virus programs can protect against other forms of  malicious code such as spyware and adware, are important 
guidance for all companies, even those that do not accept credit cards as a form of payment.
Along these same lines, some government regulatory bodies have issued advisories to the entities which they oversee in an 
attempt to avoid preventable security breaches. For example, the U.S. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)  
issued an official letter of  guidance to financial institutions that recommends:
 • Restricting users from downloading software not previously approved by the bank. 
 • Expanding the risk-assessment process to consider threats from spyware. 
 • Expanding security and Internet use policies to include risks associated with spyware  
  and acceptable user behavior. 
 • Taking steps to enforce these policies and reprimand staff  who fail to comply.
 • Installing and configuring firewalls to monitor both inbound and outbound traffic.  
  If  possible, block outbound ports that are not necessary for business functions. 
 • Implementing tools to scan e-mail for spam and either block the e-mail or designate  
  it as spam. 
 • Implementing tools to restrict or prevent pop-up windows. 
While aimed specifically at U.S. banks, there are policies and processes that all enterprises will benefit from following.
Implementing strong Internet security policies and processes is critical to ensure that the technological tools utilized  
are fully effective.
  
Technology Best Practices to Secure Enterprise Information
The U.S. Government Accountability Office provided government departments with these criteria for the consideration, selection 
and implementation of  cybersecurity technologies that are equally applicable to private enterprises:
 • Implement technologies through a layered, defense-in-depth strategy.
 • Consider the (organization’s) unique information technology infrastructure. 
 • Utilize results of  independent testing when assessing the technologies’ capabilities.
 • Train staff  on the secure implementation and utilization of  the technologies.
 • Ensure that technologies are securely configured.
Most important for the enterprise Internet security infrastructure are solutions that provide accurate threat detection that mini-
mize false positives and provide comprehensive removal in real-time. Enterprises require seamless, scalable deployments that 
provide centralized, customizable user management, including coverage for laptops and remote employees. Most importantly, 
advances in technology need to provide proactive defenses. 
State of Internet Security: Protecting the Enterprise
12
One such proactive system is Phileas™, a ground-breaking online research system developed by Webroot Software that uses 
patent-pending technology to scour the entire Web discovering spyware on the Internet faster and more efficiently than any other 
research method. Developed to automate the search and discovery of  new threats, Phileas consists of  servers that control “bots” 
to detect web pages with characteristics of  exploits, suspicious application code or suspected new spyware threats. One Phileas 
bot is able to scan 10 URLs per second, completing in one hour the equivalent of  80 hours of  manual research. The bot 
architecture used by Phileas is also highly scalable to keep pace with the growing volume of  Internet threats. 
Its innovative, pattern-matching technology allows Phileas to identify known and unknown exploits, plus any changes to existing 
spyware variants. New URL targets identified by Phileas are sent to Webroot’s threat research team, who use proprietary 
algorithms to evaluate the URLs and create definitions for each new signature or variant. Since its inception in October 2004, 
Phileas has found over 8 billion URLs, scanned 250 million URLs, and identified 4.2 million malicious URLs. 
 
This proactive approach to seeking, finding and disabling malicious malware is a revolutionary advancement that takes the 
burden off  the user or IT director and places it confidently on the shoulders of  the technology itself. Webroot was the first 
security company to develop and use this proactive technology in the fight against spyware.
State of Internet Security: Protecting the Enterprise
Phileas	scours	
the	entire	Web	
discovering	
malware	faster	
and	more		
efficiently		
than	any	other		
research	method.
13
What the Future Holds
If  there is a silver lining in the dark cloud that looms over Internet security, it is that awareness about the problem has greatly 
increased over the past couple of  years. Spyware, system monitors and Trojans have become a part of  the lexicon within 
enterprise IT departments. One of  the biggest risks going forward is that this increased familiarity with the problem could  
breed complacency. We cannot mistake attentiveness for vigilance. 
The assault on the enterprise will continue. According to eWEEK magazine, hackers are now 
being paid up to $50,000 to find vulnerabilities in Microsoft’s new Vista operating system. 
IDC’s “Key Forecast Assumptions for the Worldwide Software Market, 2006-2010”  
found that:
 Software is becoming much more dangerous… The ability to bury malware within  
 other software will become a dangerous trend that will lead to improved spyware  
 software, and increase the need for software and application security tools…
As would be expected, companies will continue to make Internet security one of  their highest 
priorities. In her December 2006 paper “State of  Security in SMBs and Enterprises,” Forrester 
analyst Natalie Lambert found that “66 percent of  enterprises will increase spending on 
security equipment and services this year.” 
Certainly it bodes well that enterprise IT departments will continue to invest in procuring security tools to protect valuable 
company and customer data. At the same time, growing network security budgets will also attract newcomers into the security 
market that lack the experience and expertise held by the companies who have been on the front lines for years. Effectively 
protecting enterprise systems will require more than simply increasing spending.   
Parsing the multitude of  devices, software and service options will no doubt present challenges for enterprise IT managers. Most 
effective will be those companies that remain focused on their priorities, and select industry-leading solutions to address  
these needs:
	
 • Prevent the installation of  unauthorized software.
 • Monitor network use and abuse.
 • Block inappropriate content on the Web.
 • Remove useless files to free up disk space (temp files, memory dumps).
 • Set custom policies to manage employee Internet, network, and application use.
While the marauders will continue their attacks, the enterprise can be protected by continuing to widen the moat, raising the 
walls and placing the best trained sentries at the posts.
C O N C L U S I O N
66	percent	of	
enterprises	
will	increase	
spending	on	
security	
equipment	and	
services	
this	year.
1
Additional Information
Webroot is one of  the founding members of  the Anti-Spyware Coalition (ASC) based in Washington, D.C., which is another 
source of  educational resources, including: 
 ASC Definitions (June 2006) 
   http://www.antispywarecoalition.org/documents/DefinitionsJune292006.htm
 ASC Glossary (June 2006) 
   http://www.antispywarecoalition.org/documents/GlossaryJune292006.htm
 Protecting Your Network: Mitigating Spyware in Organizations (April 2006) 
   http://www.antispywarecoalition.org/documents/documents/ProtectingYourNetworkflyerA4.pdf
  
About Webroot Software
Webroot Software, Inc. provides industry leading security software for consumers, enterprises and small and medium-sized 
businesses worldwide. Globally recognized for its award-winning Spy Sweeper® line of  anti-spyware products, Webroot 
recently incorporated anti-virus protection into two new products for consumers and SMBs, respectively: Spy Sweeper® with 
AntiVirus and Webroot® SME Security. The company also recently expanded into the parental controls software market with 
the introduction of  Webroot® Child Safe®. The Boulder, Colorado based company is privately held and backed by some of  the 
industry’s leading venture capital firms, including Technology Crossover Ventures, Accel Partners and Mayfield. 
Webroot’s software consistently receives top review ratings by respected third-party media and has been adopted by millions 
globally. Available as either branded solutions or on an OEM basis, Webroot products can be found at www.webroot.com and 
on the shelves of  leading retailers worldwide. 
To find out more about Webroot, visit www.webroot.com or call 1-800-772-9383.
© 2007 All rights reserved. Webroot Software, Inc. Webroot, the Webroot icon, Spy Sweeper, Child Safe and Phileas are 
trademarks or registered trademarks of  Webroot Software, Inc. in the United States and other countries. All other  
trademarks are properties of  their respective owners. 
NO WARRANTY. Analysis based on research provided by Webroot Software, Inc. The technical information is being delivered 
to you AS-IS and Webroot makes no warranty as to its accuracy or use. Any use of  the technical documentation or the infor-
mation contained herein is at the risk of  the user. Documentation may include technical or other inaccuracies or  
typographical errors. Webroot reserves the right to make changes without prior notice. 
Certain data is available upon request.
State of Internet Security: Conclusion
1
Sources
Government-Issued Documents:
Directive 95/46/EC of  the European Parliament  
and of  the Council (The ‘Data Protection Directive’)
Official Journal of  the European Communities
Brussels, Belgium – October 1995
http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/fsj/privacy/
law/index_en.htm
Decision and Order in the Matter of  BJ’s  
Wholesale Club, Inc.
File Number 042-3160
Federal Trade Commission
Washington, D.C. USA – September 2005
http://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/0423160/
092305do0423160.pdf
Decision and Order in the Matter of  DSW, Inc.
File Number 052-3096
Federal Trade Commission
Washington, D.C. USA – March 2006 
http://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/0523096/
0523096c4157DSWDecisionandOrder.pdf
German Federal Data Protection Act (English translation)
The Federal Ministry of  the Interior
Berlin, Germany – February 2002
http://www.iuscomp.org/gla/statutes/BDSG.htm
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of  1999
Public Law 106-102
U.S. Congress
Washington, D.C. USA – November 1999 
http://banking.senate.gov/conf/confrpt.htm
Guide for Assessing the Security Controls in  
Federal Information Systems
Ron Ross, Arnold Johnson, Stu Katzke,  
Patricia Toth, George Rogers
National Institute of  Standards and Technology
U.S. Department of  Commerce 
Washington, D.C. USA – April 2006
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/drafts/ 
SP800-53A-spd.pdf
Health Care Insurance Portability and  
Accountability Act of  1996 (HIPAA) 
Public Law 104-191
U.S. Congress
Washington, D.C. USA – August 1996
http://aspe.hhs.gov/admnsimp/pl104191.htm
Information Security Breaches Survey 2006
Prepared by PriceWaterhouseCoopers LLP
UK Department of  Trade and Industry (DTI)
London, United Kingdom – April 2006
http://www.pwc.com/uk/eng/ins-sol/publ/ 
pwc_dti-fullsurveyresults06.pdf
Medical Privacy – National Standards to Protect the  
Privacy of  Personal Health Information
Office for Civil Rights
U.S. Department of  Health and Human Services
Washington, D.C. USA
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/hipaa/
Press Release: Groundbreaking Settlements Hold Online 
Advertisers Responsible For Displaying Ads Through  
Deceptively Installed “Adware” Programs 
Office of  the New York State Attorney General
Albany, New York USA – January 2007
http://www.oag.state.ny.us/press/2007/jan/ 
jan29b_07.html
 
Press Release: Massachusetts Attorney General  
Martha Coakley Leads Multi-State Investigation  
Into TJX Security Practices
Office of  the Massachusetts State Attorney General
Boston, Massachusetts USA – February 2007
http://www.ago.state.ma.us/
sp.cfm?pageid=986&id=1812
Personal Data Protection Code (English Translation)
Legislative Decree no. 196
Italian Parliament
Rome, Italy –June 2003
http://www.garanteprivacy.it/garante/
doc.jsp?ID=311113
Recommended Security Controls for Federal  
Information Systems
Ron Ross, Stu Katzke, Arnold Johnson, 
Marianne Swanson, Gary Stoneburner,  
George Rogers, Annabelle Lee
National Institute of  Standards and Technology
U.S. Department of  Commerce
Washington, D.C. USA – February 2005
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-53/
SP800-53.pdf
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of  2002 
Public Law 107-204
U.S. Congress
Washington, D.C. USA – July 2002
http://corporate.findlaw.com/industry/corporate/
docs/publ107.204.pdf
Security Controls for Information Systems
Shirley Radack, Editor
NIST Information Technology Laboratory Bulletin 
U.S. Department of  Commerce 
Washington, D.C. USA – January 2007
http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistbul/
b-01-07.pdf
The 60 Minute Network Security Guide (First Steps 
Towards a Secure Network Environment)
Systems and Network Attack Center
U.S. National Security Agency
Fort Meade, Maryland USA –May 2006
http://www.nsa.gov/snac/support/ 
I33-011R-2006.pdf
Industry Analyst White Papers:
2007 Enterprise IT Budget Outlook: North America
G. Oliver Young, Forrester Research, Inc. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts USA – February, 2007
http://www.forrester.com/Research/Document/
Excerpt/0,7211,41034,00.html
Corporate Anti-Spyware Market: 2006-2010
Matt Anderson and Sara Radicati
The Radicati Group, Inc.
Palo Alto, California USA –March 2006
http://www.radicati.com/reports/single.asp
Enterprise Security Survey 2006: The Rise  
of  the Insider Threat
Brian Burke, Rose Ryan, Sally Hudson,  
Charles Kolodgy, Allan Carey
IDC
Framingham, Massachusetts USA – December 2006
http://www.idc.com/getdoc.jsp?containerId=
204807
 
Worldwide Anti-Spyware 2006-2010 Forecast  
and Analysis: Boom or Bust?
Brian Burke
IDC
Framingham, Massachusetts USA – June 2006
http://www.idc.com/getdoc.
jsp?containerId=202020
Industry Organization Studies:
Small Business Information Security Readiness
Andrea Peiro, Patrick Cook, Hassan Beydoun
Small Business Technology Institute
Santa Jose, California USA – July 2005
http://www.sbtechnologyinstitute.org/mi/research/
readReport.php?codeId=1172605709&
targetFile=security.pdf
Standards Related Documents:
BS 7799-3:2006 Information Security  
Management Systems
British Standards Institute
London, United Kingdom – March 2006
http://www.bsi-global.com/en/Shop/
Publication-Detail/?pid=000000000030125022&
recid=2568
International Conversion of  Capital Measurement 
and Capital Standards
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
Basel, Switzerland  –June 2004 
(for implementation by 2007)
http://www.federalreserve.gov/BoardDocs/press/
bcreg/2004/20040626/attachment.pdf
ISO/IEC 27001 Information Security 
Management Systems
International Standards Organization
Geneva, Switzerland –October 2005
http://www.iso.org/iso/en/CatalogueDetailPage.
CatalogueDetail?CSNUMBER=42103
Payment Card Industry (PCI) Data Security Standard
PCI Security Standards Council, LLC
Wakefield, Massachusetts USA – September 2006
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/tech/
News Articles:
“DOJ Prosecutor: Criminals Teaming Up With hackers”
By Jeremy Kirk
InfoWorld – September 14, 2006
http://www.infoworld.com/article/06/09/14/
HNdojhackers_1.html?VIRUSES%20AND 
%20WORMS
“Q&A: Making a Federal Case – How the FBI 
Collars Cyber Criminals… and What Companies  
Can do to Avoid Being Victims”
By Robert Mitchell
ComputerWorld – July 28, 2006
http://www.computerworld.com/action/article.do?
command=viewArticleBasic&articleId=9002069& 
intsrc=article_more_bot
“TJX Faces Class Action Lawsuit in Data Breach”
By Jenn Abelson
Boston Globe  –January 30, 2007 
http://www.boston.com/business/globe/articles/
2007/01/30/tjx_faces_class_action_lawsuit_in_
data_breach/
State of Internet Security: Sources


