ARTICLE IN PRESSComputer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
www.elsevier.com/locate/comnetWireless mesh networks: a survey
Ian F. Akyildiz a, Xudong Wang b,*, Weilin Wang b
a Broadband and Wireless Networking (BWN) Lab, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
b Kiyon, Inc., 4225 Executive Square, Suite 290, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA
Received 1 June 2004; received in revised form 1 November 2004; accepted 20 December 2004Abstract
Wireless mesh networks (WMNs) consist of mesh routers and mesh clients, where mesh routers have minimal mobil-
ity and form the backbone of WMNs. They provide network access for both mesh and conventional clients. The inte-
gration of WMNs with other networks such as the Internet, cellular, IEEE 802.11, IEEE 802.15, IEEE 802.16, sensor
networks, etc., can be accomplished through the gateway and bridging functions in the mesh routers. Mesh clients can
be either stationary or mobile, and can form a client mesh network among themselves and with mesh routers. WMNs
are anticipated to resolve the limitations and to significantly improve the performance of ad hoc networks, wireless local
area networks (WLANs), wireless personal area networks (WPANs), and wireless metropolitan area networks
(WMANs). They are undergoing rapid progress and inspiring numerous deployments. WMNs will deliver wireless ser-
vices for a large variety of applications in personal, local, campus, and metropolitan areas. Despite recent advances in
wireless mesh networking, many research challenges remain in all protocol layers. This paper presents a detailed study
on recent advances and open research issues in WMNs. System architectures and applications of WMNs are described,
followed by discussing the critical factors influencing protocol design. Theoretical network capacity and the state-of-
the-art protocols for WMNs are explored with an objective to point out a number of open research issues. Finally, test-
beds, industrial practice, and current standard activities related to WMNs are highlighted.
 2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Wireless mesh networks; Ad hoc networks; Wireless sensor networks; Medium access control; Routing protocol; Transport
protocol; Scalability; Security; Power management and control; Timing synchronization1389-1286/$ - see front matter  2004 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2004.12.001
*
Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 425 442 5039.
E-mail addresses: ian@ece.gatech.edu (I.F. Akyildiz), wxudong@ieee.org (X. Wang).
2 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS1. Introduction
As various wireless networks evolve into the
next generation to provide better services, a key
technology, wireless mesh networks (WMNs),
has emerged recently. In WMNs, nodes are com-
prised of mesh routers and mesh clients. Each
node operates not only as a host but also as a rou-
ter, forwarding packets on behalf of other nodes
that may not be within direct wireless transmission
range of their destinations. A WMN is dynami-
cally self-organized and self-configured, with the
nodes in the network automatically establishing
and maintaining mesh connectivity among them-
selves (creating, in effect, an ad hoc network). This
feature brings many advantages to WMNs such as
low up-front cost, easy network maintenance,
robustness, and reliable service coverage.
Conventional nodes (e.g., desktops, laptops,
PDAs, PocketPCs, phones, etc.) equipped with
wireless network interface cards (NICs) can con-
nect directly to wireless mesh routers. Customers
without wireless NICs can access WMNs by con-
necting to wireless mesh routers through, for
example, Ethernet. Thus, WMNs will greatly help
the users to be always-on-line anywhere anytime.
Moreover, the gateway/bridge functionalities in
mesh routers enable the integration of WMNs
with various existing wireless networks such as cel-
lular, wireless sensor, wireless-fidelity (Wi-Fi)
[136], worldwide inter-operability for microwave
access (WiMAX) [137], WiMedia [138] networks.
Consequently, through an integrated WMN, the
users of existing network can be provided with
otherwise impossible services of these networks.
WMN is a promising wireless technology for
numerous applications [98], e.g., broadband home
networking, community and neighborhood net-
works, enterprise networking, building automa-
tion, etc. It is gaining significant attention as a
possible way for cash strapped Internet service
providers (ISPs), carriers, and others to roll out ro-
bust and reliable wireless broadband service access
in a way that needs minimal up-front investments.
With the capability of self-organization and self-
configuration, WMNs can be deployed incremen-
tally, one node at a time, as needed. As more nodesare installed, the reliability and connectivity for the
users increase accordingly.
Deploying a WMN is not too difficult, because
all the required components are already available
in the form of ad hoc network routing protocols,
IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol, wired equivalent pri-
vacy (WEP) security, etc. Several companies have
already realized the potential of this technology
and offer wireless mesh networking products. A
few testbeds have been established in university re-
search labs. However, to make a WMN be all it
can be, considerable research efforts are still
needed. For example, the available MAC and
routing protocols applied to WMNs do not have
enough scalability; the throughput drops signifi-
cantly as the number of nodes or hops in a
WMN increases. Similar problems exist in other
networking protocols. Consequently, all existing
protocols from the application layer to transport,
network MAC, and physical layers need to be en-
hanced or re-invented.
Researchers have started to revisit the protocol
design of existing wireless networks, especially of
IEEE 802.11 networks, ad hoc networks, and wire-
less sensor networks, from the perspective of
WMNs. Industrial standards groups are also ac-
tively working on new specifications for mesh net-
working. For example, IEEE 802.11 [64,74], IEEE
802.15 [65,79], and IEEE 802.16 [66,111,135] all
have established sub-working groups to focus on
new standards for WMNs.
The remainder of the paper is organized as fol-
lows. In Section 2, we present possible system
architectures of WMNs. The characteristics of
WMNs are summarized in Section 3, where a com-
parison between WMNs and ad hoc networks is
also conducted. In Section 4, different application
scenarios of WMNs are addressed. Critical factors
influencing protocol design are emphasized in Sec-
tion 5. We discuss fundamental issues such as net-
work capacity and optimal node density of WMNs
in Section 6. Recent advances in protocol design
for WMNs are investigated in Sections 7–15,
where protocols on both data and management
planes are covered and challenging research issues
in all these aspects are discussed. Several testbeds
and implementation practice of WMNs are pre-
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 3
ARTICLE IN PRESSsented in Section 16. Current status of standard
activities in WMNs is highlighted in Section 17.
The paper is concluded in Section 18.2. Network architecture
WMNs consist of two types of nodes: mesh rou-
ters and mesh clients. Other than the routing capa-
bility for gateway/repeater functions as in a
conventional wireless router, a wireless mesh rou-
ter contains additional routing functions to sup-
port mesh networking. To further improve the
flexibility of mesh networking, a mesh router is
usually equipped with multiple wireless interfaces
built on either the same or different wireless access
technologies. Compared with a conventional wire-
less router, a wireless mesh router can achieve the
same coverage with much lower transmission
power through multi-hop communications.
Optionally, the medium access control (MAC)
protocol in a mesh router is enhanced with better
scalability in a multi-hop mesh environment.
In spite of all these differences, mesh and con-
ventional wireless routers are usually built based
on a similar hardware platform. Mesh routers
can be built based on dedicated computer systems
(e.g., embedded systems) and look compact, as
shown in Fig. 1. They can also be built based on
general-purpose computer systems (e.g., laptop/
desktop PC).
Mesh clients also have necessary functions for
mesh networking, and thus, can also work as a
router. However, gateway or bridge functions doFig. 1. Examples of mesh routers based on different embedded
systems: (a) PowerPC and (b) Advanced Risc Machines
(ARM).not exist in these nodes. In addition, mesh clients
usually have only one wireless interface. As a con-
sequence, the hardware platform and the software
for mesh clients can be much simpler than those
for mesh routers. Mesh clients have a higher vari-
ety of devices compared to mesh routers. They can
be a laptop/desktop PC, pocket PC, PDA, IP
phone, RFID reader, BACnet (building automa-
tion and control networks) controller, and many
other devices, as shown in Fig. 2.
The architecture of WMNs can be classified
into three main groups based on the functionality
of the nodes:
• Infrastructure/Backbone WMNs. The architec-
ture is shown in Fig. 3, where dash and solid
lines indicate wireless and wired links, respec-
tively. This type of WMNs includes mesh rou-
ters forming an infrastructure for clients that
connect to them. The WMN infrastructure/
backbone can be built using various types of
radio technologies, in addition to the mostly
used IEEE 802.11 technologies. The mesh rou-
ters form a mesh of self-configuring, self-healing
links among themselves. With gateway func-
tionality, mesh routers can be connected to
the Internet. This approach, also referred to asFig. 2. Examples of mesh clients: (a) Laptop, (b) PDA, (c) Wi-
Fi IP Phone and (d) Wi-Fi RFID Reader.
Fig. 3. Infrastructure/backbone WMNs.
Fig. 4. Client WMNs.
4 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSinfrastructure meshing, provides backbone for
conventional clients and enables integration of
WMNs with existing wireless networks, through
gateway/bridge functionalities in mesh routers.
Conventional clients with Ethernet interface
can be connected to mesh routers via Ethernet
links. For conventional clients with the same
radio technologies as mesh routers, they can
directly communicate with mesh routers. If dif-
ferent radio technologies are used, clients must
communicate with the base stations that have
Ethernet connections to mesh routers.
Infrastructure/Backbone WMNs are the most
commonly used type. For example, community
and neighborhood networks can be built using
infrastructure meshing. The mesh routers are
placed on the roof of houses in a neighborhood,
which serve as access points for users inside the
homes and along the roads. Typically, two
types of radios are used in the routers, i.e., for
backbone communication and for user commu-
nication, respectively. The mesh backbone com-
munication can be established using long-range
communication techniques including direc-
tional antennas.• Client WMNs. Client meshing provides peer-to-
peer networks among client devices. In this type
of architecture, client nodes constitute the
actual network to perform routing and configu-
ration functionalities as well as providing end-
user applications to customers. Hence, a mesh
router is not required for these types of net-
works. The basic architecture is shown in Fig.
4. In Client WMNs, a packet destined to a node
in the network hops through multiple nodes to
reach the destination. Client WMNs are usually
formed using one type of radios on devices.
Moreover, the requirements on end-user devices
is increased when compared to infrastructure
meshing, since, in Client WMNs, the end-users
Fig. 5. Hybrid WMNs.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 5
ARTICLE IN PRESSmust perform additional functions such as rout-
ing and self-configuration.
• Hybrid WMNs. This architecture is the combi-
nation of infrastructure and client meshing as
shown in Fig. 5. Mesh clients can access the net-
work through mesh routers as well as directly
meshing with other mesh clients. While the
infrastructure provides connectivity to other
networks such as the Internet, Wi-Fi, WiMAX,
cellular, and sensor networks; the routing capa-
bilities of clients provide improved connectivity
and coverage inside the WMN. The hybrid
architecture will be the most applicable case in
our opinion.3. Characteristics
The characteristics of WMNs are explained as
follows:
• Multi-hop wireless network. An objective to
develop WMNs is to extend the coverage range
of current wireless networks without sacrificing
the channel capacity. Another objective is to
provide non-line-of-sight (NLOS) connectivity
among the users without direct line-of-sight(LOS) links. To meet these requirements, the
mesh-style multi-hopping is indispensable [85],
which achieves higher throughput without sac-
rificing effective radio range via shorter link dis-
tances, less interference between the nodes, and
more efficient frequency re-use.
• Support for ad hoc networking, and capability of
self-forming, self-healing, and self-organization.
WMNs enhance network performance, because
of flexible network architecture, easy deploy-
ment and configuration, fault tolerance, and
mesh connectivity, i.e., multipoint-to-multi-
point communications [128]. Due to these fea-
tures, WMNs have low upfront investment
requirement, and the network can grow gradu-
ally as needed.
• Mobility dependence on the type of mesh nodes.
Mesh routers usually have minimal mobility,
while mesh clients can be stationary or mobile
nodes.
• Multiple types of network access. In WMNs,
both backhaul access to the Internet and peer-
to-peer (P2P) communications are supported
[75]. In addition, the integration of WMNs with
other wireless networks and providing services
to end-users of these networks can be accom-
plished through WMNs.
6 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS• Dependence of power-consumption constraints on
the type of mesh nodes. Mesh routers usually
do not have strict constraints on power con-
sumption. However, mesh clients may require
power efficient protocols. As an example, a
mesh-capable sensor [113,114] requires its com-
munication protocols to be power efficient.
Thus, the MAC or routing protocols optimized
for mesh routers may not be appropriate for
mesh clients, such as sensors, because power
efficiency is the primary concern for wireless
sensor networks [8,9].
• Compatibility and interoperability with existing
wireless networks. For example, WMNs built
based on IEEE 802.11 technologies [133,69]
must be compatible with IEEE 802.11 stan-
dards in the sense of supporting both mesh-
capable and conventional Wi-Fi clients. Such
WMNs also need to be inter-operable with
other wireless networks such as WiMAX, Zig-
Bee [148], and cellular networks.
Based on their characteristics, WMNs are gen-
erally considered as a type of ad-hoc networks
due to the lack of wired infrastructure that exists
in cellular or Wi-Fi networks through deployment
of base stations or access points. While ad hoc net-
working techniques are required by WMNs, the
additional capabilities necessitate more sophisti-
cated algorithms and design principles for the real-
ization of WMNs. More specifically, instead of
being a type of ad-hoc networking, WMNs aim
to diversify the capabilities of ad hoc networks.
Consequently, ad hoc networks can actually be
considered as a subset of WMNs. To illustrate this
point, the differences between WMNs and ad hoc
networks are outlined below. In this comparison,
the hybrid architecture is considered, since it com-
prises all the advantages of WMNs.
• Wireless infrastructure/backbone. As discussed
before, WMNs consist of a wireless backbone
with mesh routers. The wireless backbone pro-
vides large coverage, connectivity, and robust-
ness in the wireless domain. However, the
connectivity in ad hoc networks depends on
the individual contributions of end-users which
may not be reliable.• Integration. WMNs support conventional cli-
ents that use the same radio technologies as a
mesh router. This is accomplished through a
host-routing function available in mesh rou-
ters. WMNs also enable integration of various
existing networks such as Wi-Fi, the Inter-
net, cellular and sensor networks through gate-
way/bridge functionalities in the mesh routers.
Consequently, users in one network are pro-
vided with services in other networks, through
the use of the wireless infrastructure. The inte-
grated wireless networks through WMNs
resembles the Internet backbone, since the
physical location of network nodes becomes less
important than the capacity and network
topology.
• Dedicated routing and configuration. In ad hoc
networks, end-user devices also perform routing
and configuration functionalities for all other
nodes. However, WMNs contain mesh routers
for these functionalities. Hence, the load on
end-user devices is significantly decreased,
which provides lower energy consumption and
high-end application capabilities to possibly
mobile and energy constrained end-users.
Moreover, the end-user requirements are lim-
ited which decreases the cost of devices that
can be used in WMNs.
• Multiple radios. As discussed before, mesh rou-
ters can be equipped with multiple radios to
perform routing and access functionalities. This
enables separation of two main types of traffic
in the wireless domain. While routing and
configuration are performed between mesh rou-
ters, the access to the network by end users
can be carried out on a different radio. This sig-
nificantly improves the capacity of the net-
work. On the other hand, in ad hoc networks,
these functionalities are performed in the same
channel, and as a result, the performance
decreases.
• Mobility. Since ad hoc networks provide
routing using the end-user devices, the net-
work topology and connectivity depend on
the movement of users. This imposes addi-
tional challenges on routing protocols as
well as on network configuration and de-
ployment.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 7
ARTICLE IN PRESS4. Application scenarios
Research and development of WMNs is moti-
vated by several applications which clearly demon-
strate the promising market while at the same time
these applications cannot be supported directly by
other wireless networks such as cellular networks,
ad hoc networks, wireless sensor networks, stan-
dard IEEE 802.11, etc. In this section, we discuss
these applications.
• Broadband home networking. Currently broad-
band home networking is realized through
IEEE 802.11 WLANs. An obvious problem is
the location of the access points. Without a site
survey, a home (even a small one) usually has
many dead zones without service coverage.
Solutions based on site survey are expensive
and not practical for home networking, while
installation of multiple access points is also
expensive and not convenient because of Ether-
net wiring from access points to backhaul net-
work access modem or hub. Moreover,
communications between end nodes under two
different access points have to go all the way
back to the access hub. This is obviously not
an efficient solution, especially for broadband
networking. Mesh networking, as shown in
Fig. 6, can resolve all these issues in home
networking.
The access points must be replaced by wireless
mesh routers with mesh connectivity establishedFig. 6. WMNs for broadband home networking.among them. Therefore, the communication be-
tween these nodes becomes much more flexible
and more robust to network faults and link fail-
ures. Dead zones can be eliminated by adding
mesh routers, changing locations of mesh rou-
ters, or automatically adjusting power levels of
mesh routers. Communication within home net-
works can be realized through mesh networking
without going back to the access hub all the
time. Thus, network congestion due to back-
haul access can be avoided. In this application,
wireless mesh routers have no constraints on
power consumptions and mobility. Thus, proto-
cols proposed for mobile ad hoc networks [34]
and wireless sensor networks [8,9] are too cum-
bersome to achieve satisfactory performance in
this application. On the other hand, Wi-Fis are
not capable of supporting ad hoc multi-hop net-
working. As a consequence, WMNs are well-
suited for broadband home networking.
• Community and neighborhood networking. In a
community, the common architecture for net-
work access is based on cable or DSL connected
to the Internet, and the last-hop is wireless by
connecting a wireless router to a cable or DSL
modem. This type of network access has several
drawbacks:
– Even if the information must be shared
within a community or neighborhood, all
traffic must flow through Internet. This sig-
nificantly reduces network resource
utilization.
– Large percentage of areas in between houses
is not covered by wireless services.
– An expensive but high bandwidth gateway
between multiple homes or neighborhoods
may not be shared and wireless services must
be set up individually. As a result, network
service costs may increase.
– Only a single path may be available for one
home to access the Internet or communicate
with neighbors.
WMNs mitigate the above disadvantages
through flexible mesh connectivities between
homes, as shown in Fig. 7. WMNs can also
enable many applications such as distributed
file storage, distributed file access, and video
streaming.
Fig. 7. WMNs for community networking.
8 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS• Enterprise networking. This can be a small net-
work within an office or a medium-size network
for all offices in an entire building, or a large
scale network among offices in multiple build-
ings. Currently, standard IEEE 802.11 wireless
networks are widely used in various offices.
However, these wireless networks are still iso-
lated islands. Connections among them have
to be achieved through wired Ethernet connec-
tions, which is the key reason for the high cost
of enterprise networks. In addition, adding
more backhaul access modems only increases
capacity locally, but does not improve robust-
ness to link failures, network congestion and
other problems of the entire enterprise network.
If the access points are replaced by mesh rou-
ters, as shown in Fig. 8, Ethernet wires can be
eliminated. Multiple backhaul access modems
can be shared by all nodes in the entire network,
and thus, improve the robustness and resourceutilization of enterprise networks. WMNs can
grow easily as the size of enterprise expands.
WMNs for enterprise networking are much
more complicated than at home because more
nodes and more complicated network topolo-
gies are involved. The service model of enter-
prise networking can be applied to many other
public and commercial service networking sce-
narios such as airports, hotels, shopping malls,
convention centers, sport centers, etc.
• Metropolitan area networks. WMNs in metro-
politan area have several advantages. The phys-
ical-layer transmission rate of a node in WMNs
is much higher than that in any cellular net-
works. For example, an IEEE 802.11g node
can transmit at a rate of 54% Mbps. Moreover,
the communication between nodes in WMNs
does not rely on a wired backbone. Compared
to wired networks, e.g., cable or optical net-
works, wireless mesh MAN is an economic
Fig. 8. WMNs for enterprise networking.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 9
ARTICLE IN PRESSalternative to broadband networking, especially
in underdeveloped regions. Wireless mesh
MAN covers a potentially much larger area
than home, enterprise, building, or community
networks, as shown Fig. 9. Thus, the require-
ment on the network scalability by wireless
mesh MAN is much higher than that by other
applications.
• Transportation systems. Instead of limiting
IEEE 802.11 or 802.16 access to stations and
stops, mesh networking technology can extend
access into buses, ferries, and trains. Thus, con-
venient passenger information services, remote
monitoring of in-vehicle security video, and dri-
ver communications can be supported. To
enable such mesh networking for a transporta-
tion system, two key techniques are needed:
the high-speed mobile backhaul from a vehicle
(car, bus, or train) to the Internet and mobile
mesh networks within the vehicle, as shown in
Fig. 10.• Building automation. In a building, various elec-
trical devices including power, light, elevator,
air conditioner, etc., need to be controlled and
monitored. Currently this task is accomplished
through standard wired networks, which is very
expensive due to the complexity in deployment
and maintenance of a wired network. Recently
Wi-Fi based networks have been adopted to
reduce the cost of such networks. However, this
effort has not achieved satisfactory performance
yet, because deployment of Wi-Fis for this
application is still rather expensive due to wir-
ing of Ethernet. If BACnet (building automa-
tion and control networks) access points are
replaced by mesh routers, as shown in Fig. 11,
the deployment cost will be significantly
reduced. The deployment process is also much
simpler due to the mesh connectivity among
wireless routers.
• Health and medical systems. In a hospital or
medical center, monitoring and diagnosis data
Fig. 10. WMNs for transportation systems.
Fig. 9. WMNs for metropolitan area networks.
10 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSneed to be processed and transmitted from
one room to another for various purposes.
Data transmission is usually broadband, since
high resolution medical images and various
periodical monitoring information can easily
produce a constant and large volume of data.
Traditional wired networks can only provide
limited network access to certain fixed medical
devices. Wi-Fi based networks must rely on
the existence of Ethernet connections, which
may cause high system cost and complexity
but without the abilities to eliminate dead
spots. However, these issues do not exist in
WMNs.• Security surveillance systems. As security is
turning out to be a very high concern, security
surveillance systems become a necessity for
enterprise buildings, shopping malls, grocery
stores, etc. In order to deploy such systems at
locations as needed, WMNs are a much more
viable solution than wired networks to connect
all devices. Since still images and videos are the
major traffic flowing in the network, this appli-
cation demands much higher network capacity
than other applications.
In addition to the above applications, WMNs
can also be applied to Spontaneous (Emergency/
Fig. 11. WMNs for building automation.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 11
ARTICLE IN PRESSDisaster) Networking and P2P Communications.
For example, wireless networks for an emergency
response team and firefighters do not have in-ad-
vance knowledge of where the network should be
deployed. By simply placing wireless mesh routers
in desired locations, a WMN can be quickly estab-
lished. For a group of people holding devices with
wireless networking capability, e.g., laptops and
PDAs, P2P communication anytime anywhere is
an efficient solution for information sharing.
WMNs are able to meet this demand. These Appli-
cations illustrate that WMNs are a superset of ad
hoc networks, and thus can accomplish all func-
tions provided by ad hoc networking.5. Critical factors influencing network performance
Before a network is designed, deployed, and
operated, factors that critically influence its perfor-
mance need to be considered. For WMNs, the crit-
ical factors are summarized as follows:
• Radio techniques. Driven by the rapid progress
of semiconductor, RF technologies, and com-
munication theory, wireless radios have under-
gone a significant revolution. Currently many
approaches have been proposed to increasecapacity and flexibility of wireless systems. Typ-
ical examples include directional and smart
antennas [117,124], MIMO systems [139,126],
and multi-radio/multi-channel systems [122,3].
To date, MIMO has become one of the key
technologies for IEEE 802.11n [64], the high
speed extension of Wi-Fi. Multi-radio chipsets
and their development platforms are available
on the market [44].
To further improve the performance of a wire-
less radio and control by higher layer protocols,
more advanced radio technologies such as
reconfigurable radios, frequency agile/cognitive
radios [97,89], and even software radios [102]
have been used in wireless communication.
Although these radio technologies are still in
their infancy, they are expected to be the future
platform for wireless networks due to their
capability of dynamically controlling the radios.
These advanced wireless radio technologies all
require a revolutionary design in higher layer
protocols, especially MAC and routing proto-
cols. For example, when directional antennas
are applied to IEEE 802.11 networks, a routing
protocol needs to take into account the selec-
tion of directional antenna sectors. Directional
antennas can reduce exposed nodes, but they
also generate more hidden nodes. Thus, MAC
protocols need to be re-designed to resolve this
issue. As for MIMO systems, new MAC proto-
cols are also necessary [126]. When software
radios are considered, much more powerful
MAC protocols, such as programmable MAC,
need to be developed.
• Scalability. Multi-hop communication is com-
mon in WMNs. For multi-hop networking, it
is well known that communication protocols
suffer from scalability issues [62,72], i.e., when
the size of network increases, the network per-
formance degrades significantly. Routing proto-
cols may not be able to find a reliable routing
path, transport protocols may loose connec-
tions, and MAC protocols may experience sig-
nificant throughput reduction. As a typical
example, current IEEE 802.11 MAC protocol
and its derivatives cannot achieve a reasonable
throughput as the number of hops increases to
4 or higher (for 802.11b, the TCP throughput
12 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSis lower than 1.0 Mbps). The reason for low sca-
lability is that the end-to-end reliability sharply
drops as the scale of the network increases. In
WMNs, due to its ad hoc architecture, the cen-
tralized multiple access schemes such as TDMA
and CDMA are difficult to implement due to
their complexities and a general requirement
on timing synchronization for TDMA (and
code management for CDMA). When a distrib-
uted multi-hop network is considered, accurate
timing synchronization within the global net-
work is difficult to achieve [62]. Thus, distrib-
uted multiple access schemes such as CSMA/
CA are more favorable. However, CSMA/CA
has very low frequency spatial-reuse efficiency
[2], which significantly limits the scalability of
CSMA/CA-based multi-hop networks. To
improve the scalability of WMNs, designing a
hybrid multiple access scheme with CSMA/CA
and TDMA or CDMA is an interesting and
challenging research issue.
• Mesh connectivity. Many advantages of WMNs
originate from mesh connectivity which is a crit-
ical requirement on protocol design, especially
for MAC and routing protocols. Network self-
organization and topology control algorithms
are generally needed. Topology-aware MAC
and routing protocols can significantly improve
the performance of WMNs.
• Broadband and QoS. Different from other ad hoc
networks, most applications of WMNs are
broadband services with various QoS require-
ments. Thus, in addition to end-to-end transmis-
sion delay and fairness, more performance
metrics such as delay jitter, aggregate and per-
node throughput, and packet loss ratios, must
be considered by communication protocols.
• Compatibility and inter-operability. It is a
desired feature for WMNs to support network
access for both conventional and mesh clients.
Thus, WMNs need to be backward compatible
with conventional client nodes; otherwise, the
motivation of deploying WMNs will be signifi-
cantly compromised. Integration of WMNs
with other wireless networks requires certain
mesh routers to have the capability of inter-
operation among heterogeneous wireless
networks.• Security. Without a convincing security solu-
tion, WMNs will not be able to succeed due
to lack of incentives by customers to subscribe
to reliable services. Although many security
schemes have been proposed for wireless LANs,
they are still not ready for WMNs. For
instance, there is no centralized trusted author-
ity to distribute a public key in a WMN due to
the distributed system architecture. The existing
security schemes proposed for ad hoc networks
can be adopted for WMNs, but several issues
exist:
– Most security solutions for ad hoc networks
are still not mature enough to be practically
implemented.
– The network architecture of WMNs is differ-
ent from a conventional ad hoc network,
which causes differences in security mecha-
nisms.
As a consequence, new security schemes ranging
from encryption algorithms to security key distri-
bution, secure MAC and routing protocols, intru-
sion detection, and security monitoring need to be
developed.
• Ease of use. Protocols must be designed to
enable the network to be as autonomous as pos-
sible, in the sense of power management, self-
organization, dynamic topology control, robust
to temporary link failure, and fast network-sub-
scription/user-authentication procedure. In
addition, network management tools need to
be developed to efficiently maintain the opera-
tion, monitor the performance, and configure
the parameters of WMNs. These tools together
with the autonomous mechanisms in protocols
will enable rapid deployment of WMNs.6. Capacity of WMNs
The capacity of WMNs is affected by many
factors such as network architecture, network
topology, traffic pattern, network node density,
number of channels used for each node, trans-
mission power level, and node mobility. A clear
understanding of the relationship between net-
work capacity and the above factors provides
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 13
ARTICLE IN PRESSa guideline for protocol development, architec-
ture design, deployment and operation of the
network.
6.1. Capacity analysis
In the last decade, much research has been car-
ried out to study the capacity of ad hoc networks
which can be adopted to investigate the capacity
of WMNs.
For a stationary multi-hop network, it has been
shown that the optimum transmission power level
of a node is reached when the node has six neigh-
boring nodes [81]. With this value, an optimum
tradeoff is achieved between the number of hops
from source to destination and the channel spa-
tial-reuse efficiency. This result is useful for infra-
structure WMNs with minimal mobility. When
the mobility is a concern as in hybrid WMNs, no
theoretical results are reported so far. Some exper-
imental studies have been performed in [16], where
the simulation results of a stationary network val-
idate the theoretical results of [81].
Analytical lower and upper bounds of network
capacity are given in [54]. From the analytical re-
sults, it follows that the throughput capacity per
node reduces significantly when the node density
increases. An important implication is derived in
[54] as a guideline to improve the capacity of ad
hoc networks: A node should only communicate
with nearby nodes. To implement this idea, two
major schemes are suggested in [54]:
• Throughput capacity can be increased by
deploying relaying nodes.
• Nodes need to be grouped into clusters.
Thus, communications of a node with another
node that is not nearby must be conducted
through relaying nodes or clusters. However, these
schemes have limitations. In the first scheme, a
very large number of relaying nodes are needed
in order to increase the throughput by a significant
percent. This will definitely increase the overall
cost of a network. In the second scheme, clustering
nodes in ad hoc networks or WMNs is not a pre-
ferred approach, because it is difficult to manage
clusters in a distributed system.Nevertheless, this implication has motivated
other research work such as [83,93], where a hy-
brid network architecture is considered to improve
the capacity of ad hoc networks. In the hybrid
architecture, nodes only communicate with nearby
nodes. If they need to communicate with nodes
with many hops away, base stations or access
points are used to relay packets via wired net-
works. The hybrid architecture can improve
capacity of ad hoc networks, however, it may still
not be favored by many applications because
wired connections between base stations do not ex-
ist in many ad hoc networks.
The implication given in [54] can also be re-
flected in [130]. The scheme proposed in [130] in-
creases the network capacity of ad hoc networks
by utilizing the node mobility. When a node needs
to send packets to another node, it will not send
until the destination node is close to the source
node. Thus, via the node mobility, a node only
communicates with its nearby nodes. This scheme
has a limitation: The transmission delay may be-
come large and the required buffer for a node
may be infinite.
The analytical approach in [54] has significantly
driven the progress in capacity research of ad hoc
networks. However, it contains limitations. The
networking protocols have not been fully captured
by the analysis. For example, power control mech-
anisms, commonly used to improve the network
capacity, is not considered in the analysis. As an-
other example, the characteristics of ad hoc rout-
ing protocols have not been totally captured in
the analysis. In any routing protocol, the route
for packets does not necessary follow the path
along the straight-line segment between the source
and destination as given in the analysis, because
the routing protocol determines a path according
to certain metrics such as the number of hop
counts, link quality, etc. [41].
As a result, the applicability of the theoretical
results on practical network architectures still re-
mains unclear. A close match between the theoret-
ical results in [54] and IEEE 802.11 based ad hoc
networks is reported in [90]. However, this study
relies on the assumption that the traffic pattern
in a large ad hoc network tends to be local and
thus, nodes usually communicate with nearby
14 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSnodes. This assumption is not always valid in a
network unless it is intentionally designed so.
Most of the existing analytical approaches are
based on asymptotic analysis [54]. The upper or
lower capacity bounds derived from these ap-
proaches do not reveal the exact capacity of an
ad hoc network with a given number of nodes, in
particular when the number is small. Recently,
an analytical approach is proposed in [75] to study
the exact capacity of WMNs. The analysis is sim-
plified by taking advantage of the low mobility
feature of WMNs. However, the analytical model
in [75] contains three assumptions that are not nec-
essarily valid.
• The traffic in all nodes is sent to a single gate-
way which is not the case in WMNs.
• Each node receives an equal share of the band-
width to achieve fairness. However, this
assumption is not valid if the network nodes
have different distances between them.
• The unidirectional traffic case is mentioned to
be easily extendable to the bidirectional traffic
case. However, the network capacity becomes
totally different if bidirectional traffic is
considered.
• The network architecture considered is actually
still an ad hoc network. Furthermore, only a
specific MAC protocol very similar to CSMA/
CA with RTS/CTS is considered. However,
CSMA/CA is not the only MAC solution for
mesh networks. For example, the IEEE
802.11e or a TDMA MAC can achieve higher
throughput than CSMA/CA, because of the
existence of contention free periods (CFP).6.2. Open research issues
Many research issues still exist in the capacity
analysis of WMNs for several reasons:
1. The theoretical results on the capacity of either
ad hoc networks or WMNs are still based on
some simplified assumptions, as explained
before. The derivation of new results by consid-
ering critical factors such as transmission power
levels, traffic patterns, optimal routing path,
etc., is still a challenging research topic.2. Despite much research progress has been made
in network capacity analysis of ad hoc net-
works, WMNs have not been fully explored
due to the differences between WMNs and ad
hoc networks. The research results about net-
work capacity and optimum node density of
ad hoc networks may not directly be applicable
to WMNs. For example, in [54], the network
architecture in the analysis does not match that
of WMNs, because both stationary and mobile
ad hoc nodes exist in WMNs.
3. Important techniques of increasing capacity of
WMNs have not been considered in the analyt-
ical models for ad hoc networks. For example,
multi-channels per radio or multi-radios per
node will be applied in WMNs. Then, a critical
question that arises is: what is the optimum
number of channels or radios for each network
node. Although the analytical model in [54]
allows multi-channels in a node, it does not con-
tain a scheme to find the optimum number of
channels. When other advanced techniques such
as directional antennas, multi-input multi-out-
put (MIMO) systems, are considered, new ana-
lytical models are required.7. Physical layer
7.1. Advanced physical layer techniques
Physical layer techniques advance fast as RF
and circuit design for wireless communications
evolve. Most of existing wireless radios are able
to support multiple transmission rates by a combi-
nation of different modulation and coding rates
[67,68]. With such modes, adaptive error resilience
can be provided through link adaptation
[115,31,52]. It should be noted that under a fre-
quency selective fading environment, a link adap-
tation algorithm cannot take signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) or carrier-to-interference ratio (CIR) as a
single input from the physical layer, because
SNR or CIR alone does not adequately describe
the channel quality [88].
In order to increase the capacity of wireless net-
works, various high-speed physical techniques
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 15
ARTICLE IN PRESShave been invented. For example, orthogonal fre-
quency multiple access (OFDM) has significantly
increased the speed of IEEE 802.11 from 11 Mbps
to 54 Mbps. A much higher transmission rate can
be achieved through ultra-wide band (UWB) tech-
niques. However, UWB is only applicable to short-
distance applications such as wireless personal
area networks (WPANs). If a transmission speed
as high as that of UWB is desired in a wider area
network such as WLANs or WMANs, new physi-
cal layer techniques are needed.
In order to further increase capacity and miti-
gate the impairment by fading, delay-spread, and
co-channel interference, multiple-antenna systems
have been used for wireless communication
[104,21]. Considering communications between
nodes A and B in Fig. 12, node A is assumed to
have M antennas for transmission and N antennas
for reception, while in node B there are K antennas
for transmission and L antennas for reception.
Different values of M, N, K, L result in various
multiple-antenna systems. If multiple antennas
are in the receiver but single channel in the trans-
mitter (i.e., K = 1, M = 1 and either L > 1 or
N > 1), techniques such as antenna diversity and
adaptive/smart antennas can be used for a multi-
antenna system. They have been proposed for
point-to-multipoint one-hop cellular networks.
Antenna diversity is based on the fact that signals
received from uncorrelated antennas have inde-
pendent fading. Thus, it has high probability that
at least one good signal can be received at the re-
ceiver. Antenna uncorrelation is usually achieved
through space, polarization, or pattern diversity,
and the processing technologies for diversity in-
clude switch diversity, equal gain, and maximum...
...
...
...
...
...
Node
A
M
N
L
K
Node
B
Fig. 12. Multiple-antenna systems.ratio combining [104]. When strong interference
is present, diversity processing alone is insufficient
to receive signals with high quality. To resolve this
issue, adaptive antenna array processing is used to
shape the antenna beamform so as to enhance the
desired signals while to nullify the interfering sig-
nals. The technique for adaptive antenna process-
ing is called optimum combining. It assumes that
part information of the desired signal can be ac-
quired through a training sequence.
Antenna diversity and smart antenna tech-
niques are also applicable to WMNs and other
ad hoc networks. However, their performance in
WMNs or any other ad hoc networks needs more
evaluation. Examples of analyzing smart antenna
systems for MANETs are reported in [18,117].
Due to complexity and cost, a fully adaptive smart
antenna system is only used in base stations of cel-
lular networks. On-going research and develop-
ment efforts are still needed to implement fully
adaptive smart antenna system in a mobile termi-
nal. For WMNs, low-cost is a challenging issue.
As a consequence, directional antennas have been
actively researched in the area of ad hoc networks.
A mechanically or electronically steerable or
switched directional antenna system can be tuned
to a certain direction. By using directional trans-
mission, interference between network nodes can
be mitigated and thus, network capacity can be im-
proved [124,118]. Directional antenna can also im-
prove energy efficiency [123]. However, directional
antennas bring challenges to the MAC protocol
design [144,105,82,36].
If multiple antennas are in the transmitter and
single antenna in the receiver, i.e., N = 1, L = 1
and either K > 1 or M > 1, antenna diversity or
smart antenna cannot be applied unless the chan-
nel state information (CSI) is available. However,
usually partial information of channel state is
available at the transmitter. To achieve diversity
under this situation, a commonly used technique
is space–time coding (STC) [12], where signals
transmitted at different antennas in different sym-
bol periods are processed with a certain coding
technique. The received signals are then combined
at the receiver through an appropriate algorithm
such as maximum likelihood detection (MLD).
STC is a promising technique that achieves second
16 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSorder diversity without bandwidth expansion
[104]. To date, if CSI is not available, no solution
has been developed yet for smart antennas at a
transmitter. Schemes such as [35] still assume that
CSI is perfectly known.
If multiple antennas are in both the transmitter
and the receiver, i.e., M > 1, L > 1 or K > 1, N > 1,
the multiple-antenna system is an MIMO system,
where both diversity and simultaneous transmis-
sions exist. Thus, MIMO can potentially increase
the system capacity by three times or even more
[94]. Currently MIMO is being adopted into IEEE
802.11n [64]. Depending on where the MIMO pro-
cessing is placed, MIMO systems can be catego-
rized into three types: receiver processing only,
transmitter processing only, and both transmitter
and receiver processing MIMO systems. The pro-
cessing techniques can be based on maximum like-
lihood detection (MLD), vertical Bell Lab Layered
Space–Time (V-BLAST) [51], singular value
decomposition (SVD) [13], and space–time coding.
So far only few results have been reported on the
research of applying STC and MIMO to WMNs
as well as other ad hoc networks.
Since multiple channels are usually available in
the frequency band of a wireless radio, they can be
used to increase the capacity. A single-transceiver
radio can use different channels by channel switch-
ing on the time axis according to the needs of high-
er layer protocols. For a multi-transceiver radio,
simultaneous transmissions in different channels
can be supported. Multiple transceivers can be eas-
ily implemented in a base station of cellular net-
works. However, with the concern of cost and
system complexity, a wireless radio with multiple
transceivers has not become a mature technique
yet, although IEEE 802.11 chipsets with multiple
transceivers are already available [44]. In some sit-
uations, the system capacity of a network node can
be improved by using multiple radios each with
single or multiple channels. Since each radio con-
tains both MAC and physical layers, in order to
make a multi-radio network work as a single node,
a virtual MAC protocol is usually required to
coordinate the communication in all radios [3].
For a wireless network, the frequency band is a
very precious resource. However, many of existing
allocated frequency bands (both licensed and unli-censed) have not been utilized efficiently. Measure-
ments by the FCC show that around 70% of
allocated spectrum is not utilized [45,89]. In addi-
tion, the time scale of spectrum occupancy can
vary from milliseconds to hours [45]. Therefore,
abundant spectrum is still available for wireless
communication. Furthermore, in a large scale ad
hoc network, the complexity is beyond human
planning, and thus, conventional static frequency
planning becomes impossible [96]. To achieve
much better spectrum utilization and viable fre-
quency planning, frequency agile [97] or cognitive
radios [89] are being developed to dynamically
capture this unoccupied spectrum. The FCC has
recognized the promising future of this technique
and pushes to enable it to a full realization. In or-
der to implement cognitive radios, software de-
fined radio (SDR) is one of the most convenient
platforms [46] because programmability exists in
all components of a radio such as programmable
RF bands, channel access modes, and channel
modulations [102]. SDR is not a mature technique
yet, although testbeds are available now [139].
However, for the long term, SDR will be a key
technique for wireless communications. It cannot
only realize the cognitive radios, but can also eas-
ily implement all other advanced physical tech-
niques such as adaptive modulation and coding,
MIMO system [139], controller for smart and
directional antennas, multi-channel radio, and
multi-radio systems.
7.2. Open research issues
Open issues in the physical layer are twofold.
First, it is necessary to further improve the trans-
mission rate and the performance of physical layer
techniques. New wideband transmission schemes
other than OFDM or UWB are needed in order
to achieve higher transmission rate in a larger area
network. Multiple-antenna systems have been re-
searched for years. However, their complexity
and cost are still too high to be widely accepted
for WMNs. An example of low-cost directional
antenna implementation is reported in [76]. Fre-
quency agile techniques are still in the early phase.
Many challenging issues need to be resolved before
they can be accepted for commercial use [89].
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 17
ARTICLE IN PRESSSecond, to best utilize the advanced features
provided by physical layer, higher layer protocols,
especially MAC protocols, need to be carefully de-
signed. Otherwise, the advantages brought by such
physical layer techniques will be significantly com-
promised. For directional and smart antennas,
many MAC protocols have been proposed for ad
hoc networks [144,105,82,36]. A MAC protocol
for MIMO systems is studied in [126]. However,
for multi-antenna systems, an efficient MAC pro-
tocol to achieve significant throughput improve-
ment is still needed, as will be discussed in
Section 8. Communication protocols for cognitive
radios remain an open issue. Significant research
efforts are needed to make cognitive-radio based
WMNs become practical.8. MAC layer
MAC protocols for WMNs have the following
differences compared to classical counterparts for
wireless networks:
• MAC for WMNs is concerned with more than
one hop communication. Classical MAC proto-
cols are limited to one-hop communication
while the routing protocol takes care of multi-
hop communication. This assumption makes
protocol design easier, since MAC and routing
are transparent to each other. However, this
method does not work well in WMNs, because
data transmission and reception at a node is not
only affected by nodes within one hop but
within two or more hops away. The hidden-
node issue in a multi-hop wireless LAN is such
an example.
• MAC is distributed and cooperative and works
for multipoint-to-multipoint communication. In
WMNs, no centralized controller is available.
The MAC function is accomplished in a distrib-
uted way, i.e., the MAC protocol must ensure
all nodes to cooperate in transmission. In addi-
tion, any network node with mesh networking
capability is able to communicate all its neigh-
boring mesh nodes. Thus, multipoint-to-multi-
point communications can be established
among these nodes.• Network self-organization is needed for the
MAC. MAC protocol should have the knowl-
edge about network topology which can help
better cooperation between neighboring nodes
and nodes in multi-hop distances. This can
significantly improve the MAC performance in
a multi-hop environment. In some circum-
stances, network self-organization based on
power control can optimize network topology
[91], minimize the interference between neigh-
boring nodes, and thus, improve the network
capacity.
• Mobility affects the performance of MAC.
Mobility dynamically changes network con-
figuration, and thus, may significantly impact
the performance of the MAC protocol. In
order to be adaptive to mobility or even to
utilize the mobility [130], the network nodes
need to exchange network topology infor-
mation.
These differences must be considered in order to
design a scalable MAC for WMNs.
The scalability of WMNs can be addressed by
the MAC layer in two ways. The first way is to en-
hance existing MAC protocols or propose new
MAC protocols to increase end-to-end throughput
when only single channel is available in a network
node. The second way is to allow transmission on
multiple channels in each network node. In the fol-
lowing, existing single-channel and multi-channel
MAC protocols are studied separately. Since IEEE
802.11 is a widely accepted radio technique for
WMNs, most of the following discussions are fo-
cused on the IEEE 802.11 MAC, i.e., CSMA/CA
with RTS/CTS.
8.1. Single-channel MAC
There are three approaches in this case:
• Improving existing MAC protocols. Currently
several MAC protocols have been proposed
for multi-hop ad hoc networks by enhancing
the CSMA/CA protocol [27,116]. These schemes
usually adjust parameters of CSMA/CA such as
contention window size and modify backoff
procedures. They may improve throughput for
18 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSone-hop communications. However, for multi-
hop cases such as in WMNs, these solutions
still reach a low end-to-end throughput, because
they cannot significantly reduce the probabil-
ity of contentions among neighboring nodes.
As long as contention occurs frequently,
whichever method is taken to modify backoff
and contention resolution procedures, the end-
to-end throughput will be significantly reduced
due to the accumulating effect on the multi-
hop path.
• Cross-layer design with advanced physical layer
techniques. Two major schemes exist in this cat-
egory: MAC based on directional antenna
[82,36] and MAC with power control [112].
The first set of schemes eliminates exposed
nodes if antenna beam is assumed to be perfect.
However, due to the directional transmission,
more hidden nodes are produced in this case.
Thus, new solutions must be developed to
reduce the number of hidden nodes. Moreover,
MAC protocols based on directional antennas
also face other difficulties such as cost, system
complexity, and practicality of fast steerable
directional antennas. The second set of schemes
is developed for the purpose of reducing power
consumptions [33,147,131]. These schemes
reduce exposed nodes problem, especially in a
dense network, and thus, improve the spectrum
spatial-reuse factor in WMNs [2]. However,
hidden nodes still exist and may become worse
because lower transmission power level reduces
the possibility of detecting a potential interfer-
ing node [72].
• Proposing innovative MAC protocols. In order
to fundamentally resolve the issue of low end-
to-end throughput in a multi-hop ad hoc envi-
ronment such as WMNs, innovative solutions
are necessary. Determined by their poor scala-
bility in an ad hoc multi-hop network, random
access protocols such as CSMA/CA are not an
efficient solution. Thus, revisiting the design of
MAC protocols based on TDMA or CDMA
is an important research topic [78,134]. To date,
few TDMA or CDMA MAC protocols have
been proposed for WMNs. This is probably
because of two factors. One is the complexity
and cost of developing a distributed and coop-erative MAC with TDMA or CDMA. The
other is the compatibility of TDMA (or
CDMA) MAC with existing MAC protocols.
For example, in IEEE 802.16, the original
MAC protocol is a centralized TDMA scheme.
A distributed TDMA MAC for IEEE 802.16
mesh is still being researched. In WMNs based
on IEEE 802.11, how to design a distributed
TDMA MAC protocol overlaying CSMA/CA
is an interesting but challenging problem [134].
For distributed TDMA or CDMAMAC proto-
cols, network self-organization based on topol-
ogy control and/or power control must also be
considered.8.2. Multi-channel MAC
A multi-channel MAC can be implemented on
several different hardware platforms, which also
impacts the design of the MAC. A multi-channel
MAC may belong to one of the following
categories:
• Multi-channel single-transceiver MAC. If the
cost and compatibility are the concern, one
transceiver on a radio is a preferred hardware
platform. Since only one transceiver is avail-
able, only one channel is active at a time in each
network node. However, different nodes may
operate on different channels simultaneously in
order to improve system capacity. To coordi-
nate transmissions between network nodes
under this situation, protocols such as the
multi-channel MAC in [122] and the seed-slot-
ted channel hopping (SSCH) scheme [14] are
needed. SSCH is actually a virtual MAC proto-
col, since it works on top of IEEE 802.11 MAC
and does not need changes in the IEEE 802.11
MAC.
• Multi-channel multi-transceiver MAC. In this
scenario, a radio includes multiple parallel RF
front-end chips and baseband processing mod-
ules to support several simultaneous channels.
On top of the physical layer, there is only one
MAC layer to coordinate the functions of mul-
tiple channels. Engim multi-channel wireless
LAN switching engine [44] belongs to this cate-
gory. However, how to design an efficient MAC
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 19
ARTICLE IN PRESSprotocol for this type of physical layer platform
is still an open research topic.
• Multi-radio MAC. In this scenario, a network
node has multiple radios each with its own
MAC and physical layers. Communications in
these radios are totally independent. Thus, a vir-
tual MAC protocol such as the multi-radio unifi-
cation protocol (MUP) [3] is required on top of
MAC to coordinate communications in all chan-
nels. In fact one radio can have multiple chan-
nels. However, for simplicity of design and
application, a single channel is used in each radio.
To illustrate typical issues existing in multi-
channel MAC protocols, here we explain two pro-
tocols in detail: multi-channel MAC (MMAC)
[122] and multi-radio unification protocol (MUP)
[3].
As far as MMAC is concerned, there are three
main functions:
• Maintaining data structure of all channels in each
node. Channels of a node are classified into
three types depending on its status of allocation.
• Negotiating channels during ad hoc traffic indica-
tion message (ATIM) window. Negotiations are
done through a pre-defined channel known to
all nodes.
• Selecting a channel. The criterion is to use a
channel with the lowest count of source–desti-
nation pairs that have selected the channel.
Several problems have not been solved in the
MMAC [122].
• It is assumed that RTS/CTS always work in
IEEE 802.11 DCF. In reality, RTS/CTS is an
optional function of DCF, and it may cause a
high standard.
• Global synchronization in the network is diffi-
cult to achieve in an ad hoc network with a
large number of hops and nodes.
• The channel switching time may be much larger
than 224 ls [122]. A larger channel switching
time will significantly degrade the performance
of a multi-channel MAC protocol [3].
• Channel selection criterion based on the lowest
number of source–destination pairs for eachchannel is not always appropriate. Using pend-
ing packets as a metric to select a channel
achieve better performance [122].
• The MMAC eliminates multi-channel hidden
nodes, but it also generates many exposed nodes
because of using RTS/CTS and ATIM/ATIM-
ACK (for default channel) procedures.
In MUP, there are multiple wireless network
interface cards (NICs) on each node. Channels
on all NICs are orthogonal and fixed. The major
functions of MUP [3] include:
• Discovering neighbors. After the discovering
procedures, neighbors are classified into MUP-
enabled and legacy nodes.
• Selecting a NIC based on one-hop round trip time
(RTT) measurements. MUP selects the NIC
with the shortest RTT between a node and its
neighbors.
• Utilizing the selected NIC for a long period. This
period is determined by a random process and
in the order of 10–20 s.
• Switching channels. After the random time
period, all NICs are measured again through
one-hop probe messages. If an NIC has a cer-
tain amount of quality improvement than the
existing NIC, then it is selected for sending
packets.
Several issues still need to be investigated
further:
• Hidden node issue is not effectively solved. The
channel quality measurement is based on one-
hop RTT. However, measurements based on
shortest RTT do not guarantee that there exists
no hidden nodes. For example, suppose nodes
A and C are hidden from each other and node
B is a neighbor of both A and C. Then the same
channel can be selected by nodes A and C. The
RTS/CTS mechanism can be applied to reduce
the collision probability in this situation, but it
causes very high overhead.
• NIC switching mechanism is not justified. MUP
allocates a random time period for each selected
NIC. Performance of this scheme cannot be
guaranteed, because the time of having the best
20 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSquality in a NIC is not randomized but related
to the wireless channel characteristics and inter-
ference from nodes using the same channel.
• Packet re-ordering is needed after NIC switch-
ing. MUP relies on TCP to handle this issue.
However, this will cause low end-to-end
throughput in a multi-hop network like WMNs.
In addition, fixed channel assignment on each
NIC also limits the flexibility of MUP.
8.3. Open research issues
To the best of our knowledge, the scalability is-
sue in multi-hop ad hoc networks has not been
fully solved yet. Most of existing MAC protocols
based on CSMA/CA solve partial problems of
the overall issue, but raise other problems. Thus,
how to fundamentally improve the scalability of
CSMA/CA is a challenging problem. A distributed
TDMA MAC overlaying CSMA/CA [134] ad-
dressed one possible solution to this problem.
For networks based on techniques other than
CSMA/CA, both TDMA and CDMA can be ap-
plied to WMNs, if a distributed scheme can be
developed to locally eliminate the difficulties of
implementing TDMA or CDMA in an ad hoc net-
work. Many other interesting research problems
related to the scalability issue of ad hoc networks
still remain to be solved. When advanced tech-
niques such as MIMO and cognitive radios are
used in the physical layer, novel MAC protocols
need to be proposed to utilize the agility provided
by the physical layer.
Due to the differences between WMNs and ad
hoc networks, a scalable MAC protocol for ad
hoc networks may not be effective to WMNs. In
WMNs, mesh routers and mesh clients hold signif-
icantly different characteristics such as mobility,
power constraints, etc. Same distributed solution
may not work for both mesh routers and clients.
Thus, a MAC protocol for WMNs must consider
both scalability and heterogeneity between differ-
ent network nodes.
Some mesh routers in WMNs are responsible
for integration of various wireless technologies.
Thus, advanced bridging functions must be devel-
oped in the MAC layer so that different wirelessradios such as IEEE 802.11, 802.16, 802.15, etc.,
can seamlessly work together. Reconfigurable/soft-
ware radios and the related radio resource man-
agement schemes may be the ultimate solution to
these bridging functions.
Multi-channel MAC protocols for radios with
multiple transceivers have not been thoroughly ex-
plored, possibly due to the relatively high cost of
such radios. However, as the cost goes down, a
multi-channel multi-transceiver MAC will be a
rather promising solution for WMNs. To really
achieve spectrum efficiency, a multi-channel
MAC protocol must include the single-channel
solution that can fundamentally resolve the scala-
bility issue of WMNs. Otherwise, the throughput
per node per channel will still be very low. How
to apply the innovative single-channel solution to
a multi-radio or multi-channel system is another
research problem.
Most of the existing research efforts in MAC
are focused on capacity, throughput, and fairness.
However, many applications need to support
broadband multimedia communication in WMNs.
Thus, the development of MAC protocols with
multiple QoS metrics such as delay, packet loss ra-
tios, and delay jitter is an important topic for
WMNs.
Another challenge related to MAC is the imple-
mentation, because both software and firmware
may be involved when a MAC protocol is to be
modified. As an example in IEEE 802.11 MAC,
although chipset manufacturers have put efforts
to pull up more functions in the firmware into
the driver level as software, many timing critical
functions remain in the firmware. Such a ‘‘thin’’
MAC solution provides little flexibility in modify-
ing MAC protocols. To avoid modifying firmware,
one approach is to design a MAC without cou-
pling with firmware. For example, the virtual
MAC protocols do not require any modification
in firmware or hardware. However, in some cir-
cumstances key functions in the firmware need to
be modified in order to significantly improve the
performance of the MAC protocol. Changing the
firmware is a doable but not a viable solution
due to its cost and complexity. A solution to this
problem is to choose a more flexible MAC proto-
col architecture. To our knowledge, there are sev-
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 21
ARTICLE IN PRESSeral IEEE 802.11 chipset manufacturers that have
eliminated firmware in their MAC implementation
architecture. With such an architecture, a true soft
MAC [134] or even a programmable MAC can be
implemented. When software radios become ma-
ture enough for commercial use, more flexible
and powerful MAC protocols can be easily
developed.9. Network layer
WMNs will be tightly integrated with the Inter-
net, and IP has been accepted as a network layer
protocol for many wireless networks including
WMNs. However, routing protocols for WMNs
are different from those in wired networks and cel-
lular networks. Therefore, we focus our study on
routing protocols in this section.
Since WMNs share common features with ad
hoc networks, the routing protocols developed
for ad hoc networks can be applied to WMNs.
For example, mesh routers of Firetide Networks
[47] are based on topology broadcast based on re-
verse-path forwarding (TBRPF) protocol [108],
Microsoft mesh networks [101] are built based on
dynamic source routing (DSR) [73], and many
other companies [80] are using ad hoc on-demand
distance vector (AODV) routing [109].
Despite the availability of several routing proto-
cols for ad hoc networks, the design of routing
protocols for WMNs is still an active research area
for several reasons. First of all, new performance
metrics need to be discovered and utilized to im-
prove the performance of routing protocols. In
addition, existing routing protocols still have lim-
ited scalability. Moreover, the existing routing
protocols treat the underlying MAC protocol as
a transparent layer. However, the cross-layer inter-
action must be considered to improve the perfor-
mance of the routing protocols in WMNs. More
importantly, the requirements on power efficiency
and mobility are much different between WMNs
and ad hoc networks. In a WMN, nodes (mesh
routers) in the backbone have minimal mobility
and no constraint on power consumption, while
mesh client nodes usually desire the support of
mobility and a power efficient routing protocol.Such differences imply that the routing protocols
designed for ad hoc networks may not be appro-
priate for WMNs.
Based on the performance of the existing rout-
ing protocols for ad hoc networks and the specific
requirements of WMNs, we believe that an opti-
mal routing protocol for WMNs must capture
the following features:
• Performance metrics. Many existing routing
protocols use minimum hop-count as a perfor-
mance metric to select the routing path. This
has been demonstrated not to be valid in many
situations. Suppose a link on the minimum hop-
count path between two nodes has bad quality.
If the minimum hop count is used as the perfor-
mance metric, then the throughput between
these two nodes will be very low. To solve this
problem, performance metrics related to link
quality are needed. If congestion occurs, then
the minimum-hop count will not be an accurate
performance metric either. Usually Round trip
time (RTT) is used as an additional perfor-
mance metric. The bottomline is that a routing
path must be selected by considering multiple
performance metrics.
• Fault tolerance with link failures. One of the
objectives to deploy WMNs is to ensure robust-
ness in link failures. If a link breaks, the routing
protocol should be able to quickly select
another path to avoid service disruption.
• Load balancing. One of the objectives of WMNs
is to share the network resources among many
users. When a part of a WMN experiences con-
gestion, new traffic flows should not be routed
through that part. Performance metrics such
as RTT help to achieve load balancing, but
are not always effective, because RTT may be
impacted by link quality.
• Scalability. Setting up a routing path in a very
large wireless network may take a long time,
and the end-to-end delay can become large.
Furthermore, even when the path is established,
the node states on the path may change. Thus,
the scalability of a routing protocol is critical
in WMNs.
• Adaptive Support of Both Mesh Routers and Cli-
ents. Considering the minimal mobility and no
22 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSconstraint of power consumption in mesh rou-
ters, a much simpler routing protocol can be
developed for mesh routers than existing ad
hoc routing protocols. However, for mesh cli-
ents, the routing protocol must have the full
functions of ad hoc routing protocols. Conse-
quently, it is necessary to design an efficient
routing protocol for WMNs that can adaptively
support both mesh routers and mesh clients.
In the rest of this section, we discuss various
routing protocols applicable to WMNs and
emphasize the open research issues.
9.1. Routing protocols with various performance
metrics
The impact of performance metrics on a routing
protocol is studied in [41], where the link quality
source routing (LQSR) is proposed on the
basis of DSR. LQSR aims to select a routing
path according to link quality metrics. Three
performance metrics, i.e., the expected transmis-
sion count (ETX) [39], per-hop RTT, and per-
hop packet pair are implemented separately in
LQSR.
The performance of the routing protocol with
these three performance metrics is also compared
with the method using the minimum hop-count.
For stationary nodes in WMNs, ETX achieves
the best performance, while the minimum hop-
count method outperforms the three link quality
metrics when nodes are mobile. The reason is that,
as the sender moves, the ETX metric cannot
quickly track the change in the link quality. This
result illustrates that the link quality metrics used
in [41] are still not enough for WMNs when mobil-
ity is concerned. Better performance metrics need
to be developed, and routing protocols integrating
multiple performance metrics are necessary for
WMNs.
9.2. Multi-radio routing
In WMNs, multi-radio per node may be a pre-
ferred architecture, because the capacity can be in-
creased without modifying the MAC protocol. A
routing protocol is proposed in [42] for multi-radioWMNs. A new performance metric, called the
weighted cumulative expected transmission time
(WCETT) is proposed for the routing protocol.
WCETT takes into account both link quality met-
ric and the minimum hop-count. It can achieve
good tradeoff between delay and throughput be-
cause it considers channels with good quality and
channel diversity in the same routing protocol.
In WMNs, multi-channel per radio is another
alternative to improve the capacity. For this type
of networks, the scheme proposed in [42] is not
applicable because significant differences exist be-
tween a multi-channel node and a multi-radio
node as explained in Section 8.
9.3. Multi-path routing for load balancing and fault
tolerance
The main objective of using multi-path routing
is to perform better load balancing and to provide
high fault tolerance [103]. Multiple paths are se-
lected between source and destination. Packets
flow in one of these selected paths. When link is
broken on a path due to a bad channel quality
or mobility, another path in the set of existing
paths can be chosen. Thus, without waiting for set-
ting up a new routing path, the end-to-end delay,
throughput, and fault tolerance can be improved.
However, the improvement depends on the avail-
ability of node-disjoint routes between source
and destination.
A drawback of multi-path routing is its com-
plexity. Whether or not the multi-path routing
can be used for WMNs needs to be investigated
depending on applications. Another problem is
that multi-path routing is infeasible if the shortest
path is taken as the routing performance metric.
Unless a large number of shortest paths are se-
lected, load distribution is almost the same as sin-
gle shortest path routing [50]. Thus, how to design
an effective multi-path routing protocol with
appropriate performance metrics is an interesting
research topic.
9.4. Hierarchical routing
Numerous hierarchical routing protocols [17,
120,140] have been proposed in recent years. In-
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 23
ARTICLE IN PRESSstead of addressing each of them, we describe the
common principle of these routing protocols.
In hierarchical routing, a certain self-organiza-
tion scheme is employed to group network nodes
into clusters. Each cluster has one or more cluster
heads. Nodes in a cluster can be one or more hops
away from the cluster head. Since connectivity be-
tween clusters are needed, some nodes can commu-
nicate with more than one cluster and work as a
gateway. Routing within a cluster and routing be-
tween clusters may use different mechanisms. For
example, inter-cluster routing can be a proactive
protocol, while intra-cluster routing can be on de-
mand [120].
When the node density is high, hierarchical
routing protocols tend to achieve much better per-
formance because of less overhead, shorter aver-
age routing path, and quicker set-up procedure
of routing path. However, the complexity of main-
taining the hierarchy may compromise the perfor-
mance of the routing protocol. In WMNs,
hierarchical routing actually may face the imple-
mentation difficulty, because a node selected as a
cluster head may not necessarily have higher pro-
cessing capability and channel capacity than the
other nodes. Unless being intentionally designed
so, the cluster head may become a bottleneck.
Hierarchical routing provides a possible approach
for scalability. However, whether or not these hier-
archical schemes can really solve the scalability
problem still remains a question.
9.5. Geographic routing
Compared to topology-based routing schemes,
geographic routing schemes forward packets by
only using the position information of nodes in
the vicinity and the destination node [48]. Thus,
topology change has less impact on the geographic
routing than other routing protocols.
Early geographic routing algorithms are actu-
ally a type of single-path greedy routing schemes
in which packet forwarding decision is made based
on the location information of current forwarding
node, its neighbors, and the destination node. Var-
ious greedy routing algorithms differ in the optimi-
zation criterion applied in the forwarding decision.
To improve power efficiency, a greedy algorithm isproposed in [58], which reduces signaling overhead
by eliminating the periodic hello messages in other
greedy routing algorithms. However, all greedy
routing algorithms have a common problem:
Delivery is not guaranteed even if a path exists be-
tween source and destination. Partial flooding and
keeping the past routing information can help to
guarantee delivery. However, these approaches in-
crease communication overhead and lose the state-
less property of single-path greedy routing [48].
In order to keep the stateless property and guar-
antee delivery, planar-graph based geographic
routing algorithms are proposed recently [23,38].
However, open issues still remain in these algo-
rithms. For example, in the face routing algorithm
[23], the communication overhead is much higher
than in the single-path greedy routing algorithm
[48]. Thus, the face routing algorithm is mainly
used a recovery scheme when the greedy routing
algorithm fails.
9.6. Open research issues
Scalability is the most critical question in
WMNs. Hierarchical routing protocols can only
partially solve this problem due to their complexity
and difficulty of management. Geographic routing
relies on the existence of GPS or similar position-
ing technologies, which increases cost and com-
plexity of WMNs. Moreover, the inquiry of
destination position produces additional traffic
load. Thus, new scalable routing protocols need
to be developed. Existing performance metrics
incorporated into routing protocols need to be ex-
panded. Moreover, how to integrate multiple per-
formance metrics into a routing protocol so that
the optimal overall performance is achieved is a
challenging issue.
Routing for multicast applications is another
important research topic. Many applications of
WMNs need multicasting capability. For example,
in a community or a city-wide network, video dis-
tribution is a common application.
Cross-layer design between routing and MAC
protocols is another interesting research topic. Pre-
viously, routing protocol research was focused on
layer-3 functionality only. However, it has been
shown that the performance of a routing protocol
24 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSmay not be satisfactory in this case. Adopting mul-
tiple performance metrics from layer-2 into rout-
ing protocols is an example. However,
interaction between MAC and routing is so close
that merely exchanging parameters between proto-
col layers is not adequate. Merging certain func-
tions of MAC and routing is a promising
approach.
When multi-radio or multi-channel wireless
mesh nodes are considered, new routing protocols
are needed for two reasons. First, the routing pro-
tocol not only needs to select a path in-between
different nodes, it also needs to select the most
appropriate channel or radio on the path. Second,
cross-layer design becomes a necessity because
change of a routing path involves the channel or
radio switching in a mesh node. Without consider-
ing cross-layer design, the switching process may
be too slow to degrade the performance of WMNs.
The existing routing protocols treat all network
nodes in the same way. However, such solutions
may not be efficient for WMNs, because the mesh
routers in WMNs backbone and mesh clients have
significant differences in power constraint and
mobility. More efficient routing protocols that
take into account these differences are desired for
WMNs.10. Transport layer
To the best of our knowledge, no transport pro-
tocol has been introduced specifically for WMNs
to date, although several transport protocols have
been developed for both wired and wireless net-
works in the last decade. In this section, we explain
existing transport protocols with a focus on ad hoc
networks, since WMNs share common features
with ad hoc networks in spite of their differences.
Then, we also discuss the research challenges.
10.1. Protocols for reliable data transport
To date, a large number of reliable transport
protocols have been proposed for ad hoc net-
works. They can be classified into two types:
TCP variants and entirely new transport proto-
cols. TCP variants [15,29,59,92] include transportprotocols that are an enhanced version of the clas-
sical TCP for wired networks. In an entirely new
transport protocol [127], the reliable transport
mechanism is designed from a fresh start, with
an objective to avoid fundamental problems in
TCP.
10.1.1. TCP variants
The performance of classical TCPs degrades
significantly in ad hoc networks. In this section,
we discuss various enhanced TCP protocols by
addressing the fundamental problems in TCP
and the corresponding solutions.
One of the well-known reasons for TCP perfor-
mance degradation is that the classical TCPs do
not differentiate congestion and non-congestion
losses [142]. As a result, when non-congestion
losses occur, the network throughput quickly
drops. Moreover, once wireless channels are back
to the normal operation, the classical TCP cannot
be recovered quickly. The protocol in [29] en-
hances TCP through a feedback mechanism to dif-
ferentiate between losses caused by congestion or
wireless channels. This concept can be adopted
to WMNs. However, how to design a loss differen-
tiation approach and accordingly modify the TCP
for WMNs accordingly is subject to future study.
Link failure also degrades the TCP perfor-
mance. Link failure may occur frequently in mo-
bile ad hoc networks since all nodes are mobile.
As far as WMNs are concerned, link failure is
not as critical as in mobile ad hoc networks, be-
cause the WMN infrastructure avoids the issue
of single-point-of-failure. However, due to wireless
channels and mobility in mesh clients, link failure
may still happen. To enhance TCP performance,
congestion losses and link failure also need to be
differentiated. Schemes similar to explicit link fail-
ure notification (ELFN) scheme [59] can perform
such differentiations.
TCP is critically dependent on ACK, so its per-
formance can be severely impacted by network
asymmetry which is defined as the situation where
the forward direction of a network is significantly
different from the reverse direction in terms of
bandwidth, loss rate, and latency [15]. In WMNs,
TCP data and TCP ACK packets may take differ-
ent paths, and thus experience different packet loss
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 25
ARTICLE IN PRESSrate, latency, or bandwidth. Even if the same path
is taken by TCP data and ACK packets, they still
face network asymmetry problem, because the
channel condition and bandwidth on the path var-
ies from time to time. Consequently, TCP has poor
performance for wireless multihop ad hoc net-
works [110,141]. To solve the network asymmetry
problem, schemes such as ACK filtering, ACK
congestion control, etc., [15] have been proposed.
However, a different network architecture is stud-
ied in [15], i.e., the effectiveness of these schemes
in WMNs needs investigation.
In WMNs, mesh routers and mesh clients are
connected as an ad hoc network, so dynamic
change of routing path is common. Considering
mobility, variable link quality, traffic load, and
other factors, the change may be frequent and
may cause large variations in RTT. This will de-
grade the TCP performance, because the normal
operation of TCP relies on a smooth measurement
of RTT [1]. How to enhance a TCP so that it is ro-
bust to large RTT variations has not been thor-
oughly studied for both mobile ad hoc networks
and WMNs.
10.1.2. Entirely new transport protocols
As discussed before, many fundamental prob-
lems exist in TCP. Therefore, some researchers
have started to develop entirely new transport pro-
tocols for ad hoc networks.
In [127], the ad hoc transport protocol (ATP) is
proposed for ad hoc networks. Transmissions in
ATP are rate-based, and quick start is used for ini-
tial rate estimation. The congestion detection is a
delay-based approach, and thus ambiguity be-
tween congestion losses and non-congestion losses
is avoided. Moreover, in ATP, there is no retrans-
mission timeout, and congestion control and reli-
ability are decoupled. By using an entirely new
set of mechanisms for reliable data transport,
ATP achieves much better performance (e.g., de-
lay, throughput, and fairness) than the TCP
variants.
Despite its advantages, an entirely new trans-
port protocol is not favored by WMNs due to
the compatibility issue. ATP [127] assumes that
the wireless network can be stand-alone. While this
may be true for mobile ad hoc networks, it is inva-lid for WMNs, since WMNs will be integrated
with the Internet and many other wireless net-
works. Transport protocols for WMNs must be
compatible with TCPs in other networks.
10.2. Protocols for real-time delivery
To support end-to-end delivery of real-time
traffic, UDP instead of TCP is usually applied as
a transport protocol. However, the simple mecha-
nism of UDP cannot guarantee real-time delivery
and may starve TCP connections in the same net-
work. Thus, additional protocols such as real-time
protocol (RTP) and real-time transport protocol
(RTCP) are needed to work over UDP. On top
of RTP/RTCP, rate control protocol (RCP) is also
needed for congestion control.
To date, many RCP protocols have been pro-
posed for wired networks. They can be classified
into two types: additive-increase multiplicative-de-
crease (AIMD)-based or equation-based. How-
ever, these protocols are not applicable to
wireless networks due to existence of packet errors
and link failures. Thus, differentiation between
losses caused by congestion or wireless channels
need to be taken into account with RCP. Various
loss differentiation algorithms (LDAs) with con-
gestion control are studied in [28], where only
one wireless link is considered on the path between
sender and receiver. It is shown in [28] that the hy-
brid LDA is the most effective. However, this re-
sult may not be applicable to WMNs, since
multiple wireless links are on the path between re-
ceiver and sender.
An analytical rate control scheme is proposed in
[6] for end-to-end transmission of real-time traffic
over both wired and wireless links. However, the
scheme has not considered factors such as the ad
hoc architecture and mobility as in WMNs. There-
fore, whether this scheme is applicable to WMNs
needs to be researched further.
To date, few rate control schemes are available
for mobile ad hoc networks. Recently, an adaptive
detection rate control (ADTFRC) scheme has
been proposed for mobile ad hoc networks in
[49], where an end-to-end multi-metric joint detec-
tion approach is developed for TCP-friendly rate
control schemes. However, to really support real-
26 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESStime delivery for multimedia traffic, the accuracy
of the detection approach is still insufficient. In
addition, all non-congestion packet losses due to
different problems are processed in the same way
[49]. This may degrade the performance of the rate
control scheme.
To date, no RCP has been proposed for WMNs.
In addition, no effective RCPs for ad hoc networks
can be adopted and tailored for WMNs. Thus,
RCP for WMNs is a new research area.
10.3. Open research issues
In addition to the above mentioned open re-
search issues, there exist several other problems
which need investigation.
In order to reduce the impact of network asym-
metry on TCP performance, cross-layer optimiza-
tion is a challenging but effective solution, since
all problems of TCP performance degradation
are actually related to protocols in the lower lay-
ers. For example, it is the routing protocol that
determines the path for both TCP data and
ACK packets. To avoid asymmetry between data
and ACK packets, it is desired for a routing proto-
col to select an optimal path for both data and
ACK packets but without increasing overhead.
We also know that the link layer performance di-
rectly impacts packet loss ratio and network asym-
metry. Thus, in order to reduce the possibility of
network asymmetry, the MAC layer may need to
treat TCP data and ACK packets differently. In
addition, error control schemes may need to be en-
hanced in the MAC layer.
It is also important that the enhanced TCP has
minimal impact on existing TCP. For WMNs, it is
common that a network node will communicate
with other network nodes outside of mesh net-
works such as the Internet. Thus, from an end
node to another end node, both wireless and wired
links may exist, which requires the enhanced TCP
in WMNs and can work together with classical
TCPs for wired networks. For example, the inter-
mediate-layer concept of ATCP [92] can be
adopted for WMNs.
Besides the Internet, WMNs will also be inte-
grated with various wireless networks such as
IEEE 802.11, 802.16, 802.15, etc. The characteris-tics of these networks may be significantly hetero-
geneous due to different network capacity and
behaviors of error control, MAC, and routing pro-
tocols. Such heterogeneity renders the same TCP
ineffective for all networks. Applying different
TCPs in these networks will make the integration
be complicated and costly. As a consequence, pro-
posing an adaptive TCP is the most promising
solution for WMNs. An adaptive transport proto-
col is proposed in [7] for an integrated network of
wireless LANs, cellular networks, Internet back-
bone, and satellite networks. However, due to
the hybrid ad hoc and infrastructure architecture,
an integrated WMN is much different from the
integrated network in [7]. Consequently, new
adaptive transport protocols need to be proposed
for an integrated WMN.
For real-time delivery, no existing solution from
ad hoc networks can be adopted and tailored for
the use of WMNs. Thus, brand-new RCPs need
to be developed considering the features of
WMNs. In addition, new loss differentiation
schemes must be developed to work together with
RCPs. Since WMNs will be integrated with vari-
ous wireless networks and the Internet, adaptive
rate control protocols are also needed for WMNs.11. Application layer
Applications determine the necessity to deploy
WMNs. Thus, it is always a key step to find out
what existing applications can be supported by
WMNs and what new applications need to be
developed.
11.1. Applications supported by WMNs
Since numerous applications can be supported
by WMNs, it is infeasible to have a complete list
of them. Here, depending on the functions for
WMNs, we categorize applications of WMNs into
several classes:
• Internet access. Various Internet applications
provide important timely information to peo-
ple, make life more convenient, and increase
work efficiency and productivity. For example,
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 27
ARTICLE IN PRESSemail, search engine like Google, on-line actions
like eBay, on-line purchase, chatting, video
streaming, etc., have become an indispensable
part of life. Thus, people are interested to sub-
scribe the Internet. In a home or small/medium
business environment, the most popular net-
work access solution is still DSL or cable
modem along with IEEE 802.11 access points.
However, comparing with this approach,
WMNs have many potential advantages: lost
cost, higher speed, and easy installation. There-
fore, Internet access will greatly motivate the
development of WMNs.
• Distributed information storage and sharing
within WMNs. For this type of applications,
backhaul access to the Internet is not necessary.
Users of these applications communicate within
WMNs. A user may want to store high-volume
data in disks owned by other users, download
files from other users disks based on peer-to-
peer networking mechanism, and query/retrieve
information located in distributed database
servers. Users within WMNs may also want to
chat, talk on the video phones, and play games
with each other. To have these applications
work at the end-users, certain protocols must
exist in the application layer.
• Information exchange across multiple wireless
networks. Again, this type of applications does
not need backhaul access to the Internet. For
example, when a cellular phone talks to a Wi-
Fi phone throughWMNs, no Internet is needed.
Similarly, a user on a Wi-Fi network may expect
to monitor the status in various sensors in a
wireless sensor network. All these applications
must be supported by new algorithms or soft-
ware in the application layer of the end-users.
11.2. Open research issues
There are mainly three main research directions
in the application layer:
1. To make existing Internet applications work
under the architecture of WMNs. Due to ad
hoc and multi-hop wireless network architec-
ture of WMNs, there is no way for protocolsin the lower layers to provide perfect support
for the application layer. For example, as per-
ceived by the application layer, packet loss
may not always be zero, packet delay may be
variable with a large jitter, etc. Such problems
may fail certain applications working smoothly
in a wired network, especially those with time-
critical constraints. Therefore, algorithms in
the application layer must be developed to
improve the performance of real-time Internet
applications over WMNs.
2. To study application protocols for distributed
information sharing in WMNs. For example,
for wired networks, application protocols are
available for peer-to-peer information sharing,
on-line gaming, etc. However, WMNs have
much different characteristics than wired net-
works. Whether these protocols achieve a satis-
factory performance in WMNs need to be
investigated. In case the answer is negative,
new application protocols need to be developed.
3. To discover unique applications that utilize the
advantages of WMNs. Such applications must
bring tremendous benefits to customers. More-
over, their functions cannot be accomplished
by other existing networks. In such a way,
WMNs will be enabled to be a unique network-
ing solution instead of just another option of
wireless networking. For example, if wireless
sensor networks are integrated with WMNs,
software tools can actually be developed for
users in a home networking environment to
remotely monitor, configure, and control all
electronic devices, which makes home automa-
tion become a reality.12. Protocols for network management
Many management functions are needed to
maintain the appropriate operation of WMNs.
12.1. Mobility management
Mobility management consists of two impor-
tant tasks: location and handoff management
[10]. Location management handles location regis-
tration and call delivery, while handoff manage-
28 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSment is responsible for handoff initiation, new con-
nection generation, and data flow control for call
handoff. The mobility management schemes devel-
oped for cellular [10] or mobile IP networks [11]
could be useful for WMNs. However, the central-
ized scheme is generally not applicable on WMNs
which are based on distributed and ad hoc archi-
tecture. Thus, distributed mobility management
is a preferred solution for WMNs. Mobility man-
agement schemes of ad hoc networks are mainly
comprised of two types: distributed [56] and hier-
archical mobility management [125,30]. These
schemes may not perform well for WMNs due to
the specific features of WMNs. More specifically,
the backbone of WMNs does not have high mobil-
ity as mobile nodes in ad hoc networks, but con-
nections between all mesh routers are wireless.
Mesh clients may constantly roam across different
mesh routers. These features also render the mobil-
ity management schemes for cellular networks
ineffective for WMNs. As a result, new mobility
management schemes need to be developed for
WMNs.
Location service is a desired feature in WMNs.
Location information can enhance the perfor-
mance of MAC and routing protocols. It can help
to develop promising location-related applica-
tions. Proposing efficient algorithms for location
service is still an open research topic.
Mobility management is closely related to mul-
tiple layers of network protocols. The development
of multi-layer mobility management schemes as in
[43] is an interesting topic.
12.2. Power management
The goal of power management for WMNs var-
ies. Usually, mesh routers do not have a constraint
on power consumption; power management aims
to control connectivity, interference [86], spectrum
spatial-reuse, and topology [91]. If a single channel
is used in each network node, the interference
among the nodes directly impacts the spectrum
spatial-reuse factor. Reducing transmission power
level decreases the interference and increases the
spectrum spatial-reuse efficiency [86]. However,
more hidden nodes may cause performance degra-
dation in MAC protocols. Thus, power manage-ment schemes are closely coupled with MAC
protocols. Moreover, since connectivity affects
performance of a routing protocol, power manage-
ment is also crucial for the network layer.
In contrast to mesh routers, mesh clients may
expect protocols to be power efficient. For exam-
ple, some mesh clients are IP phones or even sen-
sors; power efficiency is the major concern for
them. Thus, it is quite possible that some applica-
tions of WMNs require power management to
optimize both power efficiency and connectivity,
which results in a complicated problem.
12.3. Network monitoring
Many functions are performed in a network
management protocol. The statistics in the MIB
(management information base) of mesh nodes,
especially mesh routers, need to be reported to
one or several servers in order to continuously
monitor the network performance. Data process-
ing algorithms in the performance monitoring
software on the server analyze these statistical data
and determine potential abnormality. In case any
abnormal symptom is detected, the server reacts
to take responses, e.g., triggering an alarm. Based
on the statistical information collected from MIB,
data processing algorithms can also accomplish
many other functions such as network topology
monitoring. The network topology of WMNs is
not always fixed due to mobility in mesh clients
or possible failures in some mesh routers. Thus,
monitoring the network topology is a desired fea-
ture for WMNs.
A few network management protocols [121]
have been proposed for ad hoc networks. How-
ever, the efficiency of these schemes needs to be im-
proved for a large scale mesh network. In addition,
in order to accurately detect abnormal operation
of WMNs, effective data processing algorithms
are needed. Also, how to quickly determine net-
work topology is still an open question.13. Security
Security is always a critical step to deploy
and manage WMNs. Virtual private networking
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 29
ARTICLE IN PRESS(VPN) is possible over wireless LANs. It is usually
implemented with standard key encryption algo-
rithms for tunneling such as IPSec to provide se-
cure virtual paths along the shared networks.
Security in terms of authentication and authori-
zation is not a big issue for wireless LANs; some
wireless LAN commercial system implementations
provide authentication, authorization, and
accounting (AAA) services directly over the wire-
less LAN access point or via gateways to take care
of this issue. AAA is usually performed through a
centralized server such as RADIUS (remote
authentication dial-in user service). However, the
centralized scheme is not scalable in WMNs. Sim-
ilar to mobile ad hoc networks, WMNs still lack
efficient and scalable security solutions because
their security is easier to be compromised due to
[143,25]: vulnerability of channels and nodes in
the shared wireless medium, absence of infrastruc-
ture, and dynamic change of network topology.
The attacks may advertise routing updates in [60]
and [145] for DSR and AODV, respectively. An-
other type of attacks is packet forwarding, i.e.,
the attacker may not change routing tables, but
the packets on the routing path may be lead to a
different destination that is not consistent with
the routing protocol. Moreover, the attacker
may sneak into the network, and impersonate a
legitimate node and does not follow the re-
quired specifications of a routing protocol [37].
Some malicious nodes may create wormhole and
shortcut the normal flows among legitimate nodes
[61].
Same types of attacks as in routing protocols
may also occur in MAC protocols. For example,
the backoff procedures and NAV for virtual car-
rier sense of IEEE 802.11 MAC may be misused
by some attacking nodes, which cause the network
to be always congested by these malicious nodes
[55].
Attackers may sneak into the network by mis-
using the cryptographic primitives [22]. In a cryp-
tographic protocol, the exchange of information
among users occurs frequently. The users employ
a fair exchange protocol which depends on a
trusted third party. However, this trusted party is
not available in WMNs due to lack of infrastruc-
ture. Thus, another exchange scheme, called ra-tional exchange, must be used. Rational exchange
ensures that a misbehaving party cannot gain any-
thing from misbehavior, and thus, will not have
any incentives to misbehave [26].
The key management is one of the most impor-
tant tasks for network security. However, the key
management for WMNs becomes much more dif-
ficult, because there is no central authority, trusted
third party or server to manage security keys. Key
management in WMNs need to be performed in a
distributed way. A self-organization scheme was
proposed in [63] to distribute and manage the secu-
rity keys. In this self-organizing key management
system, certificates are stored and distributed by
users themselves. When the public keys of two
users need to be verified, they first merge the local
certificate repositories and then find the appropri-
ate certificate chains within the merged reposito-
ries that can pass this verification.
To enhance security of WMNs, two strategies
need to be adopted. Either to embed security
mechanism into network protocols such as secure
routing and MAC protocols or to develop security
monitoring and response systems to detect attacks,
monitor service disruption, and respond quickly to
attacks. To date, many secure protocols have been
proposed [60,145]. However, their role of defend-
ing attacks is very limited, because schemes located
in a single protocol layer cannot solve problems in
other layers. However, security attacks in a net-
work may come simultaneously from different pro-
tocol layers. Thus, a multi-protocol layer security
scheme is desired for network protocols.
For a security monitoring system, a cross-layer
framework also needs to be developed. A frame-
work of intrusion detection in ad hoc networks is
proposed in [146]. However, how to design and
implement a practical security monitoring system,
including cross-layer secure network protocols and
various intrusion detection algorithms, is a chal-
lenging research topic.14. Timing synchronization
Timing synchronization is critical for the per-
formance of network protocols, e.g., power man-
agement schemes and MAC protocols.
30 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSA power management scheme usually depends
on the synchronized time to determine when a net-
work node needs to be turned on/off or to enter
sleep mode according to certain performance crite-
ria. For WMNs, TDMA MAC protocols are usu-
ally difficult to implement because network nodes
are not accurately synchronized. Without enough
accuracy in timing synchronization, a large per-
centage of bandwidth must be used as guard time
in TDMA MAC.
Synchronization among nodes has been speci-
fied as timing synchronization function (TSF) in
IEEE 802.11 for both infrastructure and ad hoc
modes. To improve performance of the standard
synchronization scheme, especially the scalability,
some solutions have been proposed in [62,87].
However, the TSF in IEEE 802.11 standard and
in [62,87] cannot be directly applied to large
WMNs, because the synchronization information
may take a long time.
To date, timing synchronization for WMNs
lacks an effective approach to achieve satisfactory
accuracy. Thus, it is necessary to develop better
power management schemes or MAC protocols
that do not demand high accuracy of timing
synchronization.15. Cross-layer design
Traditionally, different protocol layers are re-
quired to be transparent from each other. This
makes the protocol development and implementa-
tion be a simple and scalable process. However,
the methodology of layered protocol design does
not necessarily lead to an optimum solution for
wireless networks. For example, the physical chan-
nel in a wireless environment is variable in terms of
capacity, bit error rate, etc. Although different
coding, modulation, and error control schemes
can be used to improve the performance of the
physical channel, there is no way to guarantee
fixed capacity, zero packet loss rate, or reliable
connectivity as expected by higher layers. There-
fore, higher layer protocols will be inevitably af-
fected by the unreliable physical channel. To
further improve the performance of a wireless net-
work, MAC, routing, and transport protocolshave to work together with the physical layer. In
addition, MAC, routing, and transport protocols
also need to work collaboratively among them-
selves. Such interactions demand a cross-layer de-
sign among different protocols.
In WMNs, because of the ad hoc feature, net-
work topology constantly changes due to mobility
and link failures. Such dynamic network topology
impacts multiple protocol layers. Thus, in order to
improve protocol efficiency, cross-layer design be-
comes indispensable. For instance, a MAC proto-
col for WMNs may include a mechanism for
network topology control and self-organization.
Such information can be directly shared by a rout-
ing protocol. To avoid broadcast storming in a
routing protocol, the underlying MAC protocol
can optimize the procedure of transmitting signal-
ing messages initiated by routing protocols.
Cross-layer design can be performed in two
ways. The first way is to improve the performance
of a protocol layer by considering parameters in
other protocol layers. Typically, parameters in
the lower protocol layers are reported to higher
layers. For example, the packet loss rate in the
MAC layer can be reported to the transport layer
so that a TCP protocol is able to differentiate con-
gestion from packet loss. As another example, the
physical layer can report the link quality to a rout-
ing protocol as an additional performance metric
for the routing algorithms. The second way of
cross-layer design is to merge several protocols
into one component. For example, in ad hoc net-
works, MAC and routing protocols can be com-
bined into one protocol in order to closely
consider their interactions. The advantage of the
first way is that it does not totally abandon the
transparency between protocol layers, while the
second way will totally lose this advantage. How-
ever, the second way can achieve much better per-
formance by considering an optimized interaction
between protocol layers.
Cross-layer design can significantly improve
network performance [20,84,32]. However, certain
issues must be considered when carrying out cross-
layer protocol design [77]: cross-layer design have
risks due to loss of protocol layer abstraction,
incompatibility with existing protocols, unforeseen
impact on the future design of the network, and
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 31
ARTICLE IN PRESSdifficulty in maintenance and management. Thus,
certain guidelines need to be followed [77].16. Testbeds and implementations
Numerous testbeds have established to carry
out research and development for WMNs.
16.1. Academic research testbeds
One of the earliest mesh network testbeds is
Carnegie-Mellon Universitys mobile ad hoc net-
work testbed [95]. It consists of seven nodes: two
stationary nodes, five car mounted nodes that
drive around the testbed site, and 1 car mounted
roving node that enters and leaves the site. Packets
are routed between the nodes using the DSR pro-
tocol [73] which also integrates the ad hoc network
into the Internet via a gateway. They experimented
with the network behavior under different levels of
traffic load, including audio and video streams,
and designing protocol enhancements to provide
these streams with QoS promises. Interesting re-
sults were observed in the experiments:
• Local (i.e., link layer) retransmission algorithms
is a critical part of any multihop ad hoc net-
work. If the retransmission algorithms imple-
mented above the link layer, it must be
adaptive in order to accommodate network
congestion and periods of high contention in
the wireless channel.
• Delivering routing protocol control packets as
rapidly as possible is important for high end-
to-end performance, and this implies that pack-
ets with routing implications should be sched-
uled for transmission ahead of users data
packets.
MITs Roofnet is an experimental multi-hop
802.11b mesh network [4,5]. It consists of about
50 wireless nodes to interconnect the Ethernet net-
works (with Internet gateways) in apartments in
Cambridge, MA. A primary feature of Roofnet
is that it requires no configuration or planning.
One consequence of an unplanned network is that
each node can route packets through any of a largenumber of neighbors, but the radio link to each
neighbor is often of marginal quality; finding the
best multi-hop routes through a rich mesh of mar-
ginal links turns out to be a challenge. The average
TCP throughput and latency of all Roofnet nodes
to their nearest gateway were measured in April
2004. When 1 hop is considered for 18 nodes, the
average throughput and latency are 357.2 kbytes/
s and 9.7 ms. However, when 4 hops are consid-
ered for 7 nodes, the average throughput is only
47.3 kbytes/s and the average latency is 43.0 ms.
The low multihop throughput reflects the problem
typical in all 802.11 MAC based multihop
networks.
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign has
reported a 4-node multi-channel 802.11b testbed
[119]. Each node is equipped with 2 cards whose
channels were determined based on the load-aware
channel assignment algorithm. The multi-channel
network achieves 2.63 times the throughput as
compared to the single channel network. The num-
ber of non-overlapping channels in 802.11b stan-
dard, i.e., 3, is the limiting factor for this
performance. The performance, however, does
not reach 3 times of the single-channel network
performance because of the inter-channel interfer-
ence that cannot be completely eliminated. Sub-
stantial interference was observed between two
802.11b cards placed on the same machine despite
operating on non-overlapping channels. In addi-
tion, the degradation due to inter-channel interfer-
ence was found independent of the guard band.
One way to reduce the interference is to use USB
cards instead of PCI/PCMCIA cards and place
them side-by-side in similar configuration as in
Orinoco AP-1000 access points. Another possibil-
ity is to equip cards with external antennas and
place the external antennas slightly away from
each other. Yet another option is to use the
upcoming Engim chipsets which solve the interfer-
ence problem at RF-level [44].
California Institute for Telecommunications
and Information Technology (Cal-(IT)2) has
established a basic Wi-Fi MAC development plat-
form called CalRADIO-I [132]. This is a Wi-Fi re-
search and development device that consists of a
TI 5410 DSP, a 16-bit stereo CODEC, external
Flash and SRAM memories, and support of a
32 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSRF LAN module. It provides a convenient plat-
form for development of RF radios from the phys-
ical layer up to the application layer. The key
benefit of the board is that all aspects of the
MAC are coded in C language and, therefore,
are altered easily for research in queueing, security,
power management, MIMO, cognitive radio, and
so forth. It also utilizes basic Symbol Technolo-
gies Wi-Fi test board as the base for modifying
board and re-spinning to incorporate new features.
CalRADIO-I is evolving into a CalRADIO-II de-
velop platform with basic DSP board and multiple
RF front-end modules such as 802.11x, 802.16, cell
and general RF. This will eventually allow the
capability of publishing standards in software/
firmware and hardware.Fig. 13. BWN-Mesh testbThe Broadband and Wireless Network (BWN)
Lab at Georgia Institute of Technology has re-
cently built a testbed of WMNs, as shown in Fig.
13. The WMN, called BWN-Mesh, consists of 15
IEEE 802.11b/g based mesh routers, among which
several of them are connected to the next genera-
tion Internet testbed (also available in the BWN
Lab) as backhaul access to the Internet. The test-
bed consists of laptops and desktops equipped
with IEEE 802.11b and IEEE 802.11g cards lo-
cated in various rooms on the floor where the
BWN Lab resides. By changing the topology of
the network, experiments investigating the effects
of inter-router distance, backhaul placement and
clustering are performed along with mobility
experiments using the laptops in the testbed.ed at Georgia Tech.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 33
ARTICLE IN PRESSMoreover, experiments with existing protocols
(i.e., TCP, AODV, and IEEE 802.11g as transport,
routing, and MAC protocols) for BWN-Mesh test-
bed have demonstrated that these protocols do not
perform well in terms of end-to-end delay and
throughput in WMNs. Currently, the research is
focused on adaptive protocols for transport layer,
routing and MAC layers and their cross-layer de-
sign [24]. These protocols are developed and eval-
uated on the BWN-Mesh testbed. The approaches
being explored in the BWN lab are not merely lim-
ited to Wi-Fi mesh networks but also applicable
for wireless sensor networks (WSNs) and wireless
sensor and actor networks (WSANs). Thus, the
BWN-Mesh testbed is integrated with the already
existing BWN Sensor Network Testbed, which
consists of MICA motes, with TinyOS distributed
software operating system, and light, temperature,
acoustic actuator, magnometer, and accelerometer
sensors. In align with this effort, BWN Lab is also
trying to integrate the current Wi-Fi mesh net-
works with other wireless networks such as Wi-
MAX. Consequently, this integrated testbed will
enable the design and evaluation of protocols
applicable to heterogeneous wireless networks
including WMNs, next generation Internet,
WSNs, WSANs, and WiMAX.
16.2. Industrial practice
Microsoft Research Lab (MSR) implements ad
hoc routing and link quality measurement in a soft-
ware module called the mesh connectivity layer
(MCL) [101]. Architecturally, MCL is a loadable
Windows driver. It implements a virtual network
adapter, so that the ad hoc network appears as
an additional (virtual) network link to the rest of
the system. MCL routes by using a modified ver-
sion of DSR called LQSR. MCL is a routing pro-
tocol well-suited for low mobility, unconstraint
power consumption and small diameter networks.
The MCL driver implements an interposition layer
between the link layer and the network layer. To
higher layer software, MCL appears to be just an-
other Ethernet link, albeit a virtual link. To lower
layer software, MCL appears to be just another
protocol running over the physical link. This design
has several significant advantages. First, higherlayer software runs unmodified over the ad hoc net-
work. In Microsofts testbeds, both IPv4 and IPv6
can run over the ad hoc network. No modification
to either network stack is required. Network layer
functionality (for example ARP, DHCP, and
Neighbor Discovery) works fine. Second, the ad
hoc routing runs over heterogeneous link layers.
Microsofts implementation supports Ethernet-like
physical link layers (e.g., IEEE 802.11 and 802.3)
but the architecture accommodates link layers with
arbitrary addressing and framing conventions. The
virtual MCL network adapter can multiplex sev-
eral physical network adapters, so that the ad hoc
network can extend across heterogeneous physical
links. Third, the design can support other ad hoc
routing protocols as well.
A variety of research and development at Intel
are geared toward understanding and addressing
the technical challenges of multi-hop mesh net-
works. Early work at the Intel Research-Berkeley
Lab, affiliated with the University of California,
Berkeley, has resulted in small sensor motes [70]
which form self-configuring, low-cost adaptive
networks. Additional work within Intels Network
Architecture Lab is aimed at overcoming many of
the challenges faced by mesh networks. Low-cost
and low-power access point prototypes, or nodes,
have been developed to enable further research
on security, traffic characterization, dynamic rout-
ing and configuration, and QoS problems. A dem-
onstration was discussed in various occasions [71],
consisting of a collection of Centrino laptop com-
puters and IXP425 network processor based rou-
ters running AODV and 802.11b MAC
protocols. The testbed results confirm that 802.11
MAC limits full exploitation of multihop through-
put. As a means to enhance multihop throughput,
it advocates spatial-reuse through carrier sensing
threshold tuning [53]. Another potential solution
experimented was the concept of heterogeneous
networks: an 802.11 mesh network comprised of
four high-end nodes, such as Intel XScale based
nodes, is overlaid on a 50-sensor node (motes) net-
work scattered throughout a large conference
room. Sensor data can enter and exit the 802.11
backbone at multiple interchanges (the XScale
nodes) in order to bypass the intermediate sensors.
This should enable faster trips across the network
34 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSand result in improved performance since the num-
ber of nodes that the data has to pass through is
much lower, leading to improved reliability and
lower energy consumption [70]. This experiment
has shown that, without the top level mesh net-
work (XScale nodes), the average data age dou-
bled, from approximately 10 s to 20–25 s, and the
network lifetime increased by 20%.
Nortels commercial roll out of the WMN prod-
ucts [106] includes wireless access point (WAP)
which is a dual radio system supporting a
2.4 GHz access link and a 5 GHz transit link,
equipped with smart antennas. Along with Nor-
tels wireless gateway routers and a network man-
agement system, WAPs can be used to wirelessly
backhaul data traffic to the wired network or serv-
ers for an enterprise or carrier network. The WAP
transit link employs an 802.11a standard physical
layer, and an inter-AP meshing protocol above
the MAC layer for transit link discovery, establish-
ment, monitoring, maintenance, and re-establish-
ment. It also performs automatic assignment of
channels according to local conditions and access
point neighborhood. The transit link uses an ele-
vated dual-polar antenna with multiple degrees
of freedom: beam, frequency, polarization, and
burst time. Having multiple beams alleviates
deployment difficulties. The WAP access link uses
an 802.11g standard physical layer with an ele-
vated, dual-polar, diversity switched antennas. Ac-
cess Link coverage is typically less than the reach
of a transit link. The user devices use standard
802.11b/g NIC and software to access the network.
The Nortel mesh network is a sophisticated, car-
rier class quality but expensive system. Multiple
field trials have been reported since late 2003.
MeshNetworks initial attempt to commercializ-
ing mesh technology was its quadrature division
multiple access (QDMA) radio platform. [99].
The QDMA radio is designed for mobile ad hoc
broadband networking. It uses multi-channel
MAC and PHY to overcome the effects of Doppler
shifting, rapid Raleigh fading and multipath
encountered in a mobile system. The MeshNet-
works scalable routing protocol [100] is imple-
mented above QDMA radios. The scalable
routing technology utilizes a hybrid ad hoc routing
algorithm that combines both proactive and reac-tive routing techniques. To adapt the routing pro-
tocol to a given radio platform, adaptive
transmission protocol (ATP) is implemented to
tightly bind the scalable routing protocol to the
underlying radio platform. MeshNetworks pro-
vides a software-only overlay solution that lets na-
tive 802.11b clients in existing networks work in
mesh-mode. While it will not add any mobile
broadband capabilities beyond what 802.11b can
already support, it will extend the range and link
robustness of existing Wi-Fi networks by allowing
mesh-style multi-hopping. Security features in
MeshNetworks QDMA-based systems include a
hardware firewall on a chip that makes it impossi-
ble for a client to access somebody elses packets.
This feature will not be available in retrofitted
802.11 networks using the software overlay tech-
nology. However, other approaches such as route
diversity will help resolve security issues.
Tropos Networks employs a cellular Wi-Fi net-
work architecture to support ‘‘infrastructure
mesh’’ networking [129], using its a layer-3 net-
work operating system (NOS) called Tropos
Sphere, that runs on standard 802.11 hardware
and software. Tropos Sphere operates on every
(small sized) Tropos Wi-Fi cell and contains the
key communications, path selection, and security
functions that allow the Wi-Fi cells to inter-oper-
ate and form a completely wireless network like
a wireless routed LAN. Tropos uses a lightweight
control protocol for supporting a large number
of Wi-Fi cells. It uses a proprietary predictive path
optimization protocol to improve end-user
throughput and continuously optimize perfor-
mance to compensate for the changing RF envi-
ronment. This protocol is called predictive
wireless routing protocol (PWRP), which is analo-
gous to traditional wired routing protocols such as
open shortest path first (OSPF). However, PWRP
does not use routing tables or rely on hop-count
only to select transmission paths. Rather, it com-
pares packet error rates and other network condi-
tions to determine the best path at a given
moment. Since the system is largely a layer-3 solu-
tion that relies on the standard 802.11 MAC pro-
tocol for a large mesh network, many of the
throughput performance impairments remain
unresolved.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 35
ARTICLE IN PRESSPacketHops core technology was developed in
the SRI International lab [107]. It consists of a net-
work controller, performing gateway, QoS, secu-
rity, and roaming functions, a network
management system, and the Windows software
for ad hoc mesh routing. This is largely a layer-3
solution that runs on 802.11 andmulti-mode broad-
band radios. PacketHop is in collaboration with
Nortel to complement Nortels ‘‘infrastructure
mesh’’ solution with its ad hoc meshing capability.
Kiyon is in conduction field trials with building
automation and ‘‘small office home office’’
(SOHO) customers of its broadband wireless mesh
routers [80]. Its technology is a layer-2/3 solution
that implements a hybrid CSMA/CA and distrib-
uted TDMA MAC protocol atop an 802.11g/a
physical layer. This is tightly coupled with a mul-
ti-metric ‘‘Attribute Routing’’ protocol, aiming at
high and steady multihop throughput in a mesh
network. As the new generation 802.11 radios
adopt the soft MAC approach, e.g., Atheros,
Broadcom and more recently Intel, Kiyons en-
hanced MAC/routing protocols can be imple-
mented in host software and downloaded into
these standard 802.11 chipsets at runtime. Kiyon
supports both infrastructure and client mesh, sta-
tionary or mobile wireless networks.
In a Kiyon mesh network, a number of routers
form a broadband backbone of the network. Each
of the routers is equipped with Kiyons routing
and MAC protocol software plus a standard IEEE
802.11g/a radio. For client access to the broad-
band backbone, several options can be adopted.
The first option is called the ‘‘wired host route’’,
in which a client can connect to the backbone via
an Ethernet connection. Any IP capable devices
(e.g., a RFID reader, BACnet controller or data-
base server) can be connected to the wireless net-
work this way. No software modification on the
client is required. The second option is called the
‘‘wireless host route’’, in which a client device con-
nects to the wireless network via a wireless LAN
interface such as an 802.11 b/g/a NIC. In this
arrangement, the client is ‘‘homed’’ on one of the
routers in the network that satisfies the defined
routing metric, such as signal strength. The client
has the option to run Kiyons software or not.
With Kiyons software, a client becomes a fullfunction router. Without Kiyons software, a client
device running standard 802.11 station software
can originate and terminate traffic. Mobility of cli-
ent devices is supported in both cases. The third
option is a form of hierarchical network, in which
a number of standard 802.11 access points serve as
the access layer for client devices. Each of these ac-
cess points is attached to one of the backbone rou-
ters via an Ethernet connection.17. Standard activities
17.1. IEEE 802.11 mesh networks
Currently, IEEE 802.11 wireless networks can
achieve a peak rate of 11 Mbps (802.11b) and
54 Mbps (802.11a/g). Also under development is
a high-bandwidth extension to the current Wi-Fi
standard. Researchers expect 802.11n to increase
the speed of Wi-Fi connections by 10–20 times.
Although many home users will not benefit from
the additional speed right away, because of limita-
tions on their cable or DSL connections, enter-
prises are hoping the technology will allow them
to reduce the burden of laying and maintaining
Ethernet cabling throughout the building.
There are many academic testbeds and commer-
cial deployment of mesh networks using IEEE
802.11 wireless LAN technology. However, mesh
networking is at the same stage as wireless LANs
were in the early 1990s; they are expensive and
proprietary. To become commoditized, the eco-
nomic pressures are driving the standard pro-
cesses. Furthermore, protocols for 802.11 ad hoc
mode are insufficient for multi-hop and mesh net-
working, because of lack of scalability in the MAC
protocol, resulting in poor network performance.
A working group within IEEE 802.11, called
802.11s, has been formed recently to standardize
the extended service set (ESS) [57]. 802.11s aims
to define MAC and PHY layers for mesh networks
that extended coverage with no single point of fail-
ure. In such networks, 802.11 cellular wireless
LAN access points relay information from one to
another in a router-like hop-by-hop fashion.
As users and access points are added, the capac-
ity increases, as in the Internet, giving rise to a
36 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSscalable and redundant architecture. Early discus-
sions in this working group include definition of
WMNs, usage cases, QoS, architecture specifica-
tions, security, routing protocols, and develop-
ment of new MAC protocols. Several task
groups have been formed to tackle these issues.
Wi-Fi mesh networking can be implemented in
two basic modes: infrastructure and client mesh-
ing. The former is an infrastructure ESS mesh, in
which access points are interconnected through
wireless links that enable automatic topology
learning and dynamic path configuration. Clients
are associated with access points and need not be
aware of the mesh. Infrastructure meshing creates
wireless backhaul mesh among access points or
wireless routers. This reduces system backhaul
costs while increasing network coverage and reli-
ability. To provide an IEEE 802.11 ESS Mesh,
802.11s will define an architecture and protocol
based on the IEEE 802.11 MAC to create an IEEE
802.11 wireless distribution system (WDS) that
supports both broadcast/multicast and unicast
delivery at the MAC layer using radio-aware met-
rics over self-configuring multi-hop topologies.
From the view of access points, the infrastructure
meshing also forms an ad hoc network among ac-
cess points. The other mode of meshing, i.e., client
meshing, is a layer-3 ad hoc IBSS (independent ba-
sic service set), in which all devices operate in ad
hoc mode in a flat network, using IP routing.
There is no distinction between access points and
client. Client meshing enables wireless peer-to-peer
networks to form between and among client de-
vices and does not require any network infrastruc-
ture to be present. In this case, clients can hop
through each other to reach other clients in the
network. To maximize the benefit that meshing
can offer, both modes should be supported simul-
taneously and seamlessly in a single network.
17.2. IEEE 802.15 mesh networks
IEEE 802.15.3a standard [65] is based on Mul-
tiBand OFDM Alliance (MBOA)s physical layer
that uses ultra wide band (UWB) to reach up to
480 Mbps. A competing proposal of a Direct Se-
quence-UWB (DS-UWB) claims support for up
to 1.3 Gbps. It is intended for high throughputpersonal area networking (PAN) that has commu-
nication distances of around 10 m (or less), with
applications in home networking space, with
imminent wireless extensions to USB, IEEE
1394, and with the capability to address the con-
vergence of PC, consumer electronics and IP mo-
bile phones. Vendors planning to produce
802.15.3a products have formed the WiMedia Alli-
ance [138], a branding and testing organization
that will certify standards compliance.
UWB networks hold many advantages over
other wireless networks, such as covert communi-
cations, low power and cost requirement, accurate
location information, and extra high bandwidth.
However, the communication range is rather
short. Mesh networks have been predicted to be
the killer application for UWB radio systems. A
new MAC proposed by MBOA, which deviates
substantially from the original IEEE 802.13a
MAC proposal, has added strong support for
mesh networking and mobility, paving the way
for UWB to enter the enterprise network. The
MBOA MAC uses piconet structure, combined
with a decentralized resource-handling ability to
allow for the reservation of timeslots for
802.15.3-like TDMA for high priority connections
requiring determinism while assigning contention-
based, best-effort access periods.
IEEE 802.15.4 is intended for telemetry with low
data rate, long battery life and low device cost
requirements. The ZigBee Alliance [148] is develop-
ing higher-level protocols that will run over
802.15.4 MAC and PHY layers that operate in
unlicensed bands worldwide. Raw data rates of
250 Kbps can be achieved at 2.4 GHz (16 chan-
nels), 40 Kbps at 915 MHz (10 channels), and
20 Kbps at 868 MHz (1 channel). The transmission
distance is expected to range from 10 to 75 m,
depending on power output and environmental
characteristics. The ZigBee network layer supports
multiple network topologies including star, cluster
tree, and mesh. In a mesh topology, a special node
called coordinator is responsible for starting the
network and for choosing key network parameters.
The routing algorithm uses a request–response pro-
tocol to eliminate sub-optimal routing.
Recently a new working group, i.e., IEEE
802.15.5, is established to determine the necessary
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 37
ARTICLE IN PRESSmechanisms in the physical and MAC layers to en-
able mesh networking [65] in wireless PANs.
17.3. IEEE 802.16 mesh networks
While IEEE 802.11 networks fulfill the need for
data services in a local area (i.e. last several hun-
dreds of feet), IEEE 802.16 aims at serving the
broadband wireless access in metropolitan area
networks [66] (i.e., last mile), supporting point-
to-multipoint connection oriented QoS communi-
cations to extend fiber optic backbones. The origi-
nal 802.16 standard operates in the 10–66 GHz
frequency band and requires line-of-sight towers.
The 802.16a extension, ratified in January 2003,
uses a lower frequency of 2–11 GHz, enabling non-
line-of-sight connections. With 802.16a, carriers
will be able to connect more customers to a single
tower and substantially reduce service costs. To al-
low consumers to connect to the Internet while
moving at vehicular speeds, researchers are devel-
oping an extension to IEEE 802.16 standard called
802.16e.
WiMAX is the commercialization of the matur-
ing IEEE 802.16 standard. WiMAX antennas will
be able to beam high-speed Internet connections to
homes and businesses miles away, eliminating the
need for every building to be wired to the Internet.
WiMAX is ideal for many neighborhoods that are
too remote to receive Internet access via cable or
DSL, and for anyplace where the cost of laying
or upgrading landlines to broadband capacity is
prohibitively expensive. In areas with cable or
DSL access, WiMAX will provide consumers with
an additional, and possibly cheaper, alternative.
Along with the IEEE 802.16 standard, WiMAX
is envisioned to provide long distance both line
of sight and non-line of sight (NLOS) broadband
wireless access (BWA).
The 802.16 mesh in the current standard draft
has several limitations:
• The 802.16 mesh has limited scalability. The
mesh can only support around 100 subscribers
due to centralized scheduling message structures.
• The 802.16 mesh is based on a connectionless
MAC, so QoS of real-time services is difficult
to guarantee [40].• It is assumed no interference between nodes
that are two hops away. Thus, the 802.16 mesh
suffers from the hidden terminal problem.
To enhance the 802.16 mesh, several proposals
have been submitted to the standard committee
[19]. A group within 802.16, the Mesh Ad Hoc
committee, is investigating ways to improve the
performance of mesh networking. It is understood
that only a small amount of meshing is required to
see a large improvement in the coverage of a single
base station. More importantly, the following is-
sues are considered in specifying the 802.16 mesh
MAC protocol:
• Avoiding hidden terminal collisions,
• Selection of links,
• Synchronization,
• Power versus data rate tradeoffs, and
• Greater routing-MAC interdependence.18. Conclusion
The capability of self-organization in WMNs
reduces the complexity of network deployment
and maintenance, and thus, requires minimal up-
front investment. The backbone of WMNs pro-
vides a viable solution for users to access the
Internet anywhere anytime. It can also enhance
the reliability of the mobile ad hoc network of
mesh clients. WMNs enable the integration of
multiple wireless networks.
WMNs can be built up based on existing tech-
nologies. Some companies already have products
for sale, while other companies have started to de-
ploy WMNs in various application scenarios.
However, field trials and experiments with existing
WMNs prove that the performance of WMNs is
still far below what they are expected to be. As ex-
plained throughout this paper, many open re-
search issues need to be resolved:
• Scalability. Based on existing MAC, routing,
and transport protocols, the network perfor-
mance, indexed by throughput, end-to-end
delay, and fairness, is not scalable with either
the number of nodes or the number of hops in
38 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESSthe network. This problem can be alleviated by
increasing the capacity of network nodes. Typ-
ical approaches include applying multiple chan-
nels/radios per node or developing wireless
radios with higher transmission speed. How-
ever, these approaches do not truly enhance
the scalability of WMNs, because the relative
performance over the increased network capac-
ity is not actually improved. Therefore, in order
to achieve scalability, it is essential to develop
new MAC, routing, and transport protocols
for WMNs.
• Self-organization and self-configuration. Self-
organization and self-configuration require all
protocols in WMNs to be distributive and col-
laborative. Otherwise, WMNs will lose the
autonomic feature. However, current WMNs
can only partially realize this objective.
• Security. Due to wireless ad hoc architecture,
WMNs are vulnerable to security attacks in var-
ious protocol layers. However, current security
approaches may be effective to a particular
attack in a specific protocol layer, but lack a
comprehensive mechanism to prevent or coun-
ter attacks in different protocol layers.
• Network integration. Current WMNs have very
limited capabilities of integrating heterogeneous
wireless networks. Integrating multiple hetero-
geneous wireless networks is still an on-going
task for WMNs, due to the difficulty in building
multiple wireless interfaces and the correspond-
ing gateway/bridge functions in the same mesh
router. Software radios may be the ultimate
solution to this problem.
Protocol improvement relying on single layer
cannot entirely solve all the existing problems.
All protocols ranging from physical to application
layers need to be improved or re-invented, and the
cross-layer design among these protocols is needed
in order to reach the optimal performance.
WMNs are a promising technology for next
generation wireless networking. Many application
scenarios are stimulating its rapid development.
However, to strengthen the market penetration
and secure the success of WMNs, more research
is needed.Acknowledgments
The authors would like to thank Michael Nova
with Kiyon, Inc., Ozgur B. Akan with Middle East
Technical University, Turkey, and Vehbi C. Gun-
gor, Ismail H. Kasimoglu, Tommaso Melodia,
Dario Pompili, Mehmet C. Vuran, all with Broad-
band and Wireless Networking Lab at Georgia
Institute of Technology, for their constructive
comments.References
[1] A.A. Abouzeid, S. Roy, Stochastic modeling of TCP in
networks with abrupt delay variations, ACM/Kluwer
Wireless Networks 9 (2003) 509–524.
[2] A. Acharya, A. Misra, S. Bansal, High-performance
architectures for IP-based multihop 802.11 networks,
IEEE Wireless Communications 10 (5) (2003) 22–28.
[3] A. Adya, P. Bahl, J. Padhye, A. Wolman, L. Zhou, A
multi-radio unification protocol for IEEE 802.11 wireless
networks, in: International Conferences on Broadband
Networks (BroadNets), 2004.
[4] D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, S. Biswas, G. Judd, R. Morris,
Link-level measurements from an 802.11b mesh network,
in: ACM Annual Conference of the Special Interest
Group on Data Communication (SIGCOMM), August
2004, pp. 121–131.
[5] D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, S. Biswas, D.S.J. De Couto, R.
Morris, MIT Roofnet Implementation. Available from:
<http://pdos.lcs.mit.edu/roofnet/design/>.
[6] O.B. Akan, I.F. Akyildiz, ARC for real-time traffic:
ARC: the analytical rate control scheme for real-time
traffic in wireless networks, IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking 12 (4) (2004) 634–644.
[7] O.B. Akan, I.F. Akyildiz, ATL: an adaptive transport
layer suite for next-generation wireless internet, IEEE
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 22 (5)
(2004) 802–817.
[8] I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, E. Cay-
irci, Wireless sensor networks: a survey, Computer
Networks 38 (4) (2002) 393–422.
[9] I.F. Akyildiz, I.H. Kasimoglu, Wireless sensor and actor
networks: research challenges, Ad Hoc Networks 2 (2004)
351–367.
[10] I.F. Akyildiz, J. McNair, J.S.M. Ho, H. Uzunalioglu, W.
Wang, Mobility management in next generation wire-
less systems, IEEE Proceedings 87 (8) (1999) 1347–
1385.
[11] I.F. Akyildiz, J. Xie, S. Mohanty, A survey of mobility
management in next-generation all-IP-based wireless
systems, IEEE Wireless Communications 11 (4) (2004)
16–28.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 39
ARTICLE IN PRESS[12] S.M. Alamouti, A simple transmit diversity technique for
wireless communications, IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications 16 (8) (1998) 1451–1458.
[13] J.B. Andersen, Array gain and capacity for known
random channels with multiple element arrays at both
ends, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communica-
tions 18 (11) (2000) 2172–2178.
[14] P. Bahl, R. Chandra, J. Dunagan, SSCH: slotted seeded
channel hopping for capacity improvement in IEEE
802.11 ad hoc wireless networks, in: ACM Annual
International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking (MOBICOM), 2004, pp. 216–230.
[15] H. Balakrishnan, V.N. Padmanabhan, R.H. Katz, Net-
work asymmetry: the effects of asymmetry on TCP
performance, Mobile Networks and Applications 4
(1999) 219–241.
[16] E.M. Belding-Royer, P.M. Melliar-Smith, L.E. Moser,
An analysis of the optimum node density for ad hoc
mobile networks, in: IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), vol. 3, June 2001, pp. 857–861.
[17] E.M. Belding-Royer, Multi-level hierarchies for scalable
ad hoc routing, ACM/Kluwer Wireless Networks 9 (5)
(2003) 461–478.
[18] S. Bellofiore, J. Foutz, R. Govindaradjula, I. Bahceci,
C.A. Balanis, A.S. Spanias, J.M. Capone, T.M. Duman,
Smart antenna system analysis, integration and perfor-
mance for mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs), IEEE
Transactions on Antennas and Propagation 50 (5) (2002)
571–581.
[19] D. Beyer, N.V. Waes, K. Eklund, Tutorial: 802.16 MAC-
Layer Mesh Extensions, IEEE 802.16 Standard Group
Discussions, February 2002.
[20] R. Bhatia, M. Kodialam, On power efficient communica-
tion over multi-hop wireless networks: joint routing,
scheduling, and power control, in: IEEE Annual Confer-
ence on Computer Communications (INFOCOM), 2004,
pp. 1457–1466.
[21] S.D. Blostein, H. Leib, Multiple antenna systems: their
role and impact in future wireless access, IEEE Commu-
nications Magazine (2003) 94–101.
[22] N. Borisov, I. Goldberg, D. Wagner, Intercepting mobile
communications: the insecurity of 802.11, in: ACM
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing
and Networking (MOBICOM), September 2002, pp. 180–
188.
[23] P. Bose et al., Routing with guaranteed delivery in ad hoc
wireless networks, in: 3rd ACM International Workshop
on Discrete Algorithms and Methods for Mobile Com-
puting and Communications, August 1999, pp. 48–55.
[24] BWN lab wireless mesh networks research project.
Available from: <http://www.ece.gatech.edu/research/
labs/bwn/mesh/>.
[25] L. Buttyan, J.-P. Hubaux, Report on a working session
on security in wireless ad hoc networks, ACM Mobile
Computing and Communications Review 7 (1) (2002) 74–
94.[26] L. Buttyan, J.-P. Hubaux, Rational exchange—a formal
model based on game theory, in: 2nd International
Workshop on Electronic Commerce, November 2001.
[27] F. Cali, M. Conti, E. Gregori, Dynamic tuning of the
IEEE 802.11 protocol to achieve a theoretical throughput
limit, IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 8 (6)
(2000) 785–799.
[28] S. Cen, P.C. Cosman, G.M. Voelker, End-to-end differ-
entiation of congestion and wireless losses, IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Networking 11 (5) (2003) 703–717.
[29] K. Chandran, S. Raghunathan, S.R. Prakash, A feed-
back-based scheme for improving TCP performance in ad
hoc wireless networks, IEEE Personal Communications 8
(1) (2001) 34–39.
[30] W.-T. Chen, P.-Y. Chen, Group mobility management in
wireless ad hoc networks, in: IEEE Vehicular Technology
Conference, Fall 2003, pp. 2202–2206.
[31] P. Chevillat, J. Jelitto, A.N. Barreto, H.L. Truong, A
dynamic link adaptation algorithm for IEEE 802.11a
wireless LANs, in: IEEE International Conference on
Communications (ICC), 2003, pp. 1141–1145.
[32] M. Chiang, To layer or not to layer: balancing transport
and physical layers in wireless multihop networks, in:
IEEE Annual Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM), 2004, pp. 2525–2536.
[33] C.F. Chiasserini, R.R. Rao, A distributed power man-
agement policy for wireless ad hoc networks, in: IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), 2000, pp. 1209–1213.
[34] I. Chlamtac, M. Conti, J. Liu, Mobile ad hoc networking:
imperatives and challenges, Ad Hoc Networks 1 (1) (2003)
13–64.
[35] L.-U. Choi, K.B. Letaief, R.D. Murch, MISO CDMA
transmission with simplified receiver for wireless commu-
nication handsets, IEEE Transactions on Communica-
tions 49 (2001) 888–898.
[36] R.R. Choudhury, X. Yang, R. Ramanathan, N.H.
Vaidya, Using directional antennas for medium access
control in ad hoc networks, in: ACM Annual Interna-
tional Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking
(MOBICOM), 2002, pp. 59–70.
[37] K. Sanzgiri, B. Dahill, B.N. Levine, C. Shields, E.M.
Belding-Royer, A secure protocol for ad hoc networks, in:
IEEE International Conference on Network Protocols
(ICNP), 2002, pp. 78–87.
[38] S. Datta, I. Stojmenovic, J. Wu, Internal node and
shortcut based routing with guaranteed delivery in
wireless networks, in: Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Distributed Computing and Sys-
tems; Wireless Networks and Mobile Computing
Workshop, Phoenix, AZ, April 2001, p. 46166.
[39] D.S.J. De Couto, D. Aguayo, J. Bicket, R. Morris, A
high-throughput path metric for multi-hop wireless rout-
ing, in: ACM Annual International Conference on
Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM),
2003, pp. 134–146.
40 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS[40] J. Dickman, K. Rath, L. Kotecha, Proposal for 802.16
Connection Oriented Mesh, IEEE 802.16 Standard Pro-
posal, March 2003.
[41] R. Draves, J. Padhye, B. Zill, Comparisons of routing
metrics for static multi-hop wireless networks, in: ACM
Annual Conference of the Special Interest Group on Data
Communication (SIGCOMM), August 2004, pp. 133–
144.
[42] R. Draves, J. Padhye, B. Zill, Routing in multi-radio,
multi-hop wireless mesh networks, in: ACM Annual
International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking (MOBICOM), 2004, pp. 114–128.
[43] A. Dutta, K.D. Wong, J. Burns, R. Jain, A. McAuley, K.
Young, H. Schulzrinne, Realization of integrated mobility
management protocol for ad hoc networks, in: IEEE
Military Communication Conference (MILCOM), 2002,
pp. 448–454.
[44] Engim Inc., Multiple Channel 802.11 Chipset. Available
from: <http://www.engim.com/products_en3000.html>.
[45] FCC Cognitive Radios. Available from: <http://
www.fcc.gov/oet/cognitiveradio>.
[46] B. Fette, SDR Technology Implementation for the
Cognitive Radio, FCC Workshop on Cognitive Radios,
May 2003.
[47] Firetide Networks. Available from: <www.firetide.com>.
[48] H. Frey, Scalable geographic routing algorithms for
wireless ad hoc networks, IEEE Network Magazine 1
(2004) 18–22.
[49] Z. Fu, X. Meng, S. Lu, A transport protocol for
supporting multimedia streaming in mobile ad hoc
networks, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communi-
cations 21 (10) (2003) 1615–1626.
[50] Y. Ganjali, A. Keshavarzian, Load balancing in ad hoc
networks: single-path routing vs. multi-path routing, in:
IEEE Annual Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM), March 2004, pp. 1120–1125.
[51] G.D. Golden, et al., Detection algorithm and initial
laboratory results using V-BLAST space–time communi-
cation architecture, IEE Electronics Letters 35 (1) (1999)
14–16.
[52] A. Grilo, M. Nunes, Link adaptation and transmit power
control for unitcast and multicast in IEEE 802.11a/h/e
WLANs, in: IEEE International Conferences on Local
Computer Networks, 2003, pp. 334–345.
[53] X. Guo, S. Roy, W.S. Conner, Spatial reuse in wireless ad
hoc networks, in: IEEE Vehicular Technology Confer-
ence, October 2003, pp. 1437–1442.
[54] P. Gupta, P.R. Kumar, The capacity of wireless networks,
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 46 (2) (2000)
388–404.
[55] V. Gupta, S. Krishnamurthy, M. Faloutsos, Denial of
service attacks at the MAC layer in wireless ad hoc
networks, in: IEEE Military Communication Conference
(MILCOM), 2002, pp. 1118–1123.
[56] Z.J. Haas, B. Liang, Ad Hoc mobility management with
uniform quorum systems, IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking 7 (2) (1999) 228–240.[57] J. Hauser, Draft PAR for IEEE 802.11 ESS Mesh, IEEE
Document Number: IEEE 802.11-03/759r2.
[58] M. Heissenbuttel, T. Braun, BLR: beacon-less routing
algorithm for mobile ad hoc networks, Computer Com-
munications 27 (11) (2004) 1076–1086.
[59] G. Holland, N. Vaidya, Link failure and congestion:
analysis of TCP performance over mobile ad hoc
networks, in: ACM Annual International Conference on
Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM), 1999,
pp. 219–230.
[60] Y. Hu, A. Perrig, D. Johnson, Ariadne: a secure on-
demand routing protocol for ad hoc networks, in: ACM
Annual International Conference on Mobile Computing
and Networking (MOBICOM), September 2002, pp. 12–
23.
[61] Y. Hu, A. Perrig, D. Johnson, Packet leashes: a defense
against wormhole attacks in wireless networks, in: IEEE
Annual Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM), 2003, pp. 1976–1986.
[62] L. Huang, T. Lai, On the scalability of IEEE 802.11 ad
hoc networks, in: ACM International Symposium on
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MOBI-
HOC), 2002, pp. 173–182.
[63] J.-P. Hubaux, L. Butttan, S. Capkun, The quest for
security in mobile ad hoc networks, in: ACM Interna-
tional Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and
Computing (MOBIHOC), 2001, pp. 146–155.
[64] IEEE 802.11 Standard Group Web Site. Available from:
<http://www.ieee802.org/11/>.
[65] IEEE 802.15 Standard Group Web Site. Available from:
<http://www.ieee802.org/15/>.
[66] IEEE 802.16 Standard Group Web Site. Available from:
<http://www.ieee802.org/16/>.
[67] IEEE 802 Standard Working Group, Wireless LAN
medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY)
specifications: high-speed physical layer in the 5 GHz
Band, IEEE 802.11a Standard, 1999.
[68] IEEE 802 Standard Working Group, Wireless LAN
medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY)
specifications: further higher data rate extension in
2.4 GHZ Band, IEEE 802.11g Standard, 2003.
[69] Intel Inc., Multi-HopMesh Networks—a new kind of Wi-
Fi network.
[70] Intel Exploratory Research, Heterogeneous sensor net-
works. Available from: <http://www.intel.com/research/
exploratory/heterogeneous.htm>.
[71] Intel Mesh Networks Demonstrations. Available from:
<http://www.intel.com/idf/us/fall2003/presentations/
F03USWNTS116_OS.pdf>.
[72] K. Jain, J. Padhye, V. Padmanabhan, L. Qiu, Impact of
interference on multi-hop wireless network performance,
in: ACM Annual International Conference on Mobile
Computing and Networking (MOBICOM), September
2003, pp. 66–80.
[73] D.B. Johnson, D.A. Maltz, Y.-C. Hu, The dynamic
source routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks
(DSR), IETF Internet-Draft: work in progress, July 2004.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 41
ARTICLE IN PRESS[74] T.-S. Jou, D.E. Eastlake, ESS MESH Network Study
Group Meeting Minutes, May 2004.
[75] J. Jun, M.L. Sichitiu, The nominal capacity of wireless
mesh networks, IEEE Wireless Communications 10 (5)
(2003) 8–14.
[76] J. Kajiya, Commodity software steerable antennas for
mesh networks, Microsoft Mesh Networking Summit,
June 2004.
[77] V. Kawadia, P.R. Kumar, A cautionary perspective on
cross layer design, IEEE Wireless Communications,
submitted for publication.
[78] J.-W. Kim, N. Bambos, Power efficient MAC scheme
using channel probing in multirate wireless ad hoc
networks, in: IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference,
Fall 2002, pp. 2380–2384.
[79] P. Kinney, IEEE 802.15 General Interest in Mesh
Networking, IEEE 802.15 Request for Information of a
Mesh Network Study Group, presentation slides, Novem-
ber 2003.
[80] Kiyon Autonomous Networks. Available from: <http://
www.kiyon.com>.
[81] L. Kleinrock, J. Silvester, Optimum transmission radii for
packet radio networks or why six is a magic number, in:
Proceedings of the IEEE National Telecommunications
Conference, Birmingham, Alabama, December 1978, pp.
4.3.1–4.3.5.
[82] Y.B. Ko, V. Shankarkumar, N.H. Vaidya, Medium access
control protocols using directional antennas in ad hoc
networks, in: IEEE Annual Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), 2000, pp. 13–21.
[83] U.C. Kozat, L. Tassiulas, Throughput capacity of
random ad hoc networks with infrastructure support, in:
ACM Annual International Conference on Mobile Com-
puting and Networking (MOBICOM), San Diego, CA,
2003, pp. 55–65.
[84] U.C. Kozat, I. Koutsopoulos, L. Tassiulas, A framework
for cross-layer design of energy-efficient communication
with QoS provisioning in multi-hop wireless networks, in:
IEEE Annual Conference on Computer Communications
(INFOCOM), 2004, pp. 1446–1456.
[85] L. Krishnamurthy, S. Conner, M. Yarvis, J. Chhabra, C.
Ellison, C. Brabenac, E. Tsui, Meeting the demands of
the digital home with high-speed multi-hop wireless
networks, Intel Technology Journal 6 (4) (2002) 57–68.
[86] L. Krishnamurthy, Making radios more like human ears:
alternative MAC techniques and innovative platforms to
enable large-scale meshes, Microsoft Mesh Networking
Summit, June 2004.
[87] T. Lai, D. Zhou, Efficient and scalable IEEE 802.11 ad
hoc mode timing synchronization function, in: 17th IEEE
International Conferences on Advanced Information
Networking and Applications, 2003.
[88] M. Lampe, N. Rohling, W. Zirwas, Misunderstandings
about link adaptation for frequency selective fading
channels, in: IEEE International Symposium on Personal,
Indoor, and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC),
2002, pp. 710–714.[89] B. Lane, Cognitive radio technologies in the commercial
arena, in: FCC Workshop on Cognitive Radios, May
2003.
[90] J. Li, C. Blake, D.S.J. De Couto, H.I. Lee, R. Morris,
Capacity of ad hoc wireless networks, in: ACM Annual
International Conference on Mobile Computing and
Networking (MOBICOM), 2001, pp. 61–69.
[91] L. Li, J.Y. Halpern, P. Bahl, Y-M. Wang, R. Wattenho-
fer, A cone-based distributed topology-control algorithm
for wireless multi-hop networks, IEEE/ACM Transac-
tions on Networking, in press.
[92] J. Liu, S. Singh, ATCP: TCP for mobile ad hoc networks,
IEEE Journals on Selected Areas in Communications 19
(7) (2001) 1300–1315.
[93] B. Liu, Z. Liu, D. Towsley, On the capacity of hybrid
wireless networks, in: IEEE Annual Conference on
Computer Communications (INFOCOM), San Fran-
cisco, CA, 2003, pp. 1543–1552.
[94] A. Lozano, F.R. Farrokhi, R.A. Valenzuela, Lifting the
limits on high-speed wireless data access using antenna
arrays, IEEE Communications Magazines 39 (2001) 156–
162.
[95] D.A. Maltz, J. Broch, D.B. Johnson, Lessons from a full-
scale multihop wireless ad hoc network testbed, IEEE
Personal Communications 8 (2001) 8–15.
[96] P. Marshall, Beyond the outer limits: next generation
communications, FCC Workshop on Cognitive Radios,
May 2003.
[97] M. McHenry, Frequency Agile Spectrum Access Tech-
nologies, FCC Workshop on Cognitive Radios, May
2003.
[98] Mesh Networking Forum, Building the business case
for implementation of wireless mesh networks, Mesh
Networking Forum 2004, San Francisco, CA, October
2004.
[99] MeshNetworks Inc. QDMA technology. Available
from: <http://www.meshnetworks.com/pages/technology/
qdma_overview.htm>.
[100] MeshNetworks Inc. Scalable routing technology. Avai-
lablef from: <http://www.meshnetworks.com/pages/tech-
nology/msr_atp_overview.htm>.
[101] Microsoft Mesh Networks. Availablef from: <http://
research.microsoft.com/mesh/>.
[102] J. Mitola III, Software Radio Architecture: Object-
Oriented Approaches to Wireless System Engineering,
Wiley Inter-Science, New York, 2000.
[103] S. Mueller, D. Ghosal, Multipath routing in mobile ad
hoc networks: issues and challenges, in: M.C.i Calzarossa,
E. Gelenbe (Eds.), Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
2004.
[104] R.D. Murch, K. Ben Letaief, Antenna systems for
broadband wireless access, IEEE Communications Mag-
azine 40 (4) (2002) 76–83.
[105] A. Nasipuri, S. Ye, R.E. Hiromoto, A MAC protocol for
mobile ad hoc networks using directional antennas, in:
IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Con-
ference (WCNC), 2000, pp. 1214–1219.
42 I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx
ARTICLE IN PRESS[106] Nortel Mesh Networks. Available from: <http://
www.nortelnetworks.com/solutions/wrlsmesh/index.
html>.
[107] PacketHop Networks. Available from: <http://www.
packethop.com>.
[108] R. Ogier, F. Templin, M. Lewis, Topology dissemination
based on reverse-path forwarding (TBRPF), IETF RFC
3684, February 2004.
[109] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, S. Das, Ad hoc on-demand
distance vector (AODV) routing, IETF RFC 3561, July
2003.
[110] M. Petrovic, M. Aboelaze, Performance of TCP/UDP
over ad hoc IEEE 802.11, in: International Conference on
Telecommunications, 2003, pp. 700–708.
[111] P. Piggin, B. Lewis, P. Whitehead mesh networks in fixed
broadband wireless access: multipoint enhancements for
the 802.16 standard, IEEE 802.16 presentation slides, July
2003.
[112] N. Poojary, S.V. Krishnamurthy, S. Dao, Medium access
control in a network of ad hoc mobile nodes with
heterogeneous power capabilities, in: IEEE International
Conference on Communications (ICC), 2001, pp. 872–877.
[113] R. Poor, Wireless mesh networks, Sensors, February
2003.
[114] R. Poor, Wireless mesh links everyday devices, Electronic
Engineering Times, 5 July 2004.
[115] D. Qiao, S. Choi, K.G. Shin, Goodput analysis and link
adaptation for IEEE802.11a wireless LANs, IEEE Trans-
actions on Mobile Computing 1 (4) (2002) 278–292.
[116] D. Qiao, K. Shin, UMAV: a simple enhancement to IEEE
802.11 DCF, in: Hawaii International Conference on
System Science, 2002.
[117] R. Ramanathan, On the performance of ad hoc networks
with beamforming antennas, in: ACM International
Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Com-
puting (MOBIHOC), October 2001, pp. 95–105.
[118] R. Ramanathan, J. Redi, C. Santivanez, D. Wiggins, S.
Polit, Ad hoc networking with directional antennas: a
complete system solution, in: IEEE Wireless Communi-
cations and Networking Conference (WCNC), 2004, pp.
375–380.
[119] A. Raniwala, K. Gopalan, T. Chiueh, Centralized channel
assignment and routing algorithms for multi-channel
wireless mesh networks, ACM Mobile Computing and
Communications Review 8 (2) (2003).
[120] A.K. Saha, D.B. Johnson, Self-organizing hierarchical
routing for scalable ad hoc networking, Technical Report,
TR04-433, Department of Computer Science, Rice
University.
[121] C.-C. Shen, C. Srisathapornphat, C. Jaikaeo, An adaptive
management architecture for ad hoc networks, IEEE
Communications Magazine 41 (2) (2003) 108–115.
[122] J. So, N. Vaidya, Multi-channel MAC for ad hoc
networks: handling multi-channel hidden terminals using
a single transceiver, in: ACM International Symposium
on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MOBI-
HOC), May 2004, pp. 222–233.[123] A. Spyropoulos, C.S. Raghavendra, Energy efficient
communications in ad hoc networks using directional
antenna, in: IEEE Annual Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), 2002, pp. 220–228.
[124] A. Spyropoulos, C.S. Raghavendra, Asymptotic capacity
bounds for ad hoc networks revisited: the directional
and smart antenna cases, in: IEEE Global Telecommu-
nications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2003, pp. 1216–
1220.
[125] J. Sucec, I. Marsic, Location management for hierarchi-
cally organized mobile ad hoc networks, in: IEEE
Wireless Communications and Networking Conference
(WCNC), 2002, pp. 603–607.
[126] K. Sundaresan, R. Sivakumar, M.A. Ingram, T.-Y.
Chang, A fair medium access control protocol for ad
hoc networks with MIMO links, in: IEEE Annual
Conference on Computer Communications (INFOCOM),
2004, pp. 2559–2570.
[127] K. Sundaresan, V. Anantharaman, H.-Y. Hsieh, R.
Sivakumar, ATP: a reliable transport protocol for ad-
hoc networks, in: ACM International Symposium on
Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing (MOBI-
HOC), 2003, pp. 64–75.
[128] S. Tierney, Mesh Networks, whitepaper of community-
networking.org.
[129] Tropos Networks. Available from: <http://www.tropos.
com/technology/whitepaper.shtml>.
[130] D.N.C. Tse, M. Grossglauser, Mobility increases the
capacity of ad hoc wireless networks, IEEE/ACM Trans-
actions on Networking 10 (4) (2002) 477–486.
[131] Y.-C. Tseng, C.-S. Hsu, T.-Y. Hsieh, Power-saving
protocols for IEEE 802.11 based multi-hop ad hoc
networks, in: IEEE Annual Conference on Computer
Communications (INFOCOM), 2002, pp. 200–209.
[132] UCSD mesh networks testbed. Available from: <http://
www.calit2.net/>.
[133] J. Walker, Wi-Fi mesh networks, the path to mobile ad
hoc. Available from: <http://www.wi-fitechnology.com/
Wi-Fi_Reports_and_Papers/
Mesh_Networks_References.html>.
[134] X. Wang, W. Wang, M. Nova, A high performance
single-channel IEEE 802.11 MAC with distributed
TDMA, Technical Report of Kiyon, Inc. (submitted for
patent application), October 2004.
[135] P. Whitehead, P. Piggin, B. Lewis, S. Lynch Mesh
extensions to IEEE 802.16 and 16a, IEEE 802.16
proposal, May 2003.
[136] The Wi-Fi Alliance. Available from: <http://www.wi-fi.
org/>.
[137] The WiMAX Forum. Available from: <http://www.wim-
axforum.org/home>.
[138] The WiMedia Alliance. Available from: <http://www.
wimedia.org/>.
[139] W. Xiang, T. Pratt, X. Wang, A software radio testbed
for two-transmitter two-receiver space time coding wire-
less LAN, IEEE Communications Magazine 42 (6) (2004)
S20–S28.
I.F. Akyildiz et al. / Computer Networks xxx (2005) xxx–xxx 43
ARTICLE IN PRESS[140] K. Xu, X. Hong, M. Gerla, Landmark routing in ad hoc
networks with mobile backbones, Journal of Parallel and
Distributed Computing, Special Issue on Ad Hoc Net-
works 63 (2) (2002) 110–122.
[141] S. Xu, T. Saadawi, Does the IEEE 802.11 MAC proto-
col work well in multihop wireless ad hoc networks,
IEEE Communications Magazine 39 (6) (2001) 130–
137.
[142] G. Xylomenos, G.C. Polyzos, P. Mahonen, M. Saaranen,
TCP performance issues over wireless links, IEEE Com-
munications Magazine 39 (4) (2001) 52–58.
[143] H. Yang, H. Luo, F. Ye, S. Lu, L. Zhang, Security in
mobile ad hoc networks: challenges and solutions, IEEE
Wireless Communications 11 (1) (2004) 38–47.
[144] T.-S. Yum, K.-W. Hung, Design algorithms for multihop
packet radio networks with multiple directional antennas
stations, IEEE Transactions on Communications 41 (11)
(1992) 1716–1724.
[145] M. Zapata, N. Asokan, Securing ad hoc routing proto-
cols, ACM Workshop on Wireless Secuirty (WiSe),
September 2002, pp. 1–10.
[146] Y. Zhang, W. Lee, Intrusion detection in wireless ad hoc
networks, in: ACM Annual International Conference on
Mobile Computing and Networking (MOBICOM), 2000,
pp. 275–283.
[147] R. Zhong, R. Kravets, On demand power management
for ad hoc networks, in: IEEE Annual Conference on
Computer Communications (INFOCOM), 2003, pp. 481–
491.
[148] The ZigBee Alliance. Available from: <http://www.zig-
bee.org/>.
Ian F. Akyildiz received his BS, MS,
and PhD degrees in Computer Engi-
neering from the University of Erlan-
gen-Nuernberg, Germany, in 1978,
1981 and 1984, respectively.
Currently, he is the Ken Byers Distin-
guished Chair Professor with the
School of Electrical and Computer
Engineering, Georgia Institute of
Technology and Director of Broad-
band and Wireless Networking Labo-
ratory.
He is the Editor-in-Chief of Computer Networks (Elsevier)
Journal and of Ad Hoc Networks (Elsevier) Journal.
He is an IEEE FELLOW (1995), an ACM FELLOW (1996).
He served as a National Lecturer for ACM from 1989 until
1998 and received the ACM Outstanding Distinguished Lec-
turer Award for 1994.
He received the 1997 IEEE Leonard G. Abraham Prize award
(IEEE Communications Society) for his paper entitled ‘‘Mul-
timedia Group Synchronization Protocols for Integrated Ser-
vices Architectures’’ published in the IEEE Journal of Selected
Areas in Communications (JSAC) in January 1996.He received the 2002 IEEE Harry M. Goode Memorial award
(IEEE Computer Society) with the citation ‘‘for significant and
pioneering contributions to advanced architectures and proto-
cols for wireless and satellite networking’’.
He received the 2003 IEEE Best Tutorial Award (IEEE Com-
munication Society) for his paper entitled ‘‘A Survey on Sensor
Networks’’, published in IEEE Communication Magazine, in
August 2002.
He received the 2003 ACM SIGMOBILE award for his signifi-
cant contributions to mobile computing and wireless networking.
His current research interests are in wireless mesh networks,
sensor networks, InterPlaNetary Internet, wireless networks and
satellite networks.
Xudong Wang received his B.E. and
Ph.D. degrees from Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai, China, in
1992 and 1997, respectively. From
1998 to 2003, he was with the Broad-
band and Wireless Networking (BWN)
Lab at Georgia Institute of Technol-
ogy. He also received the Ph.D. degree
from Georgia Institute of Technology
in 2003. Currently, he is a senior
research engineer with Kiyon, Inc.,
where he conducts research and
development of MAC, routing, and
transport protocols for wireless mesh networks. His research
interests also include software radios, cross-layer design, and
communication protocols for cellular, mobile ad hoc, sensor,
and ultra-wideband networks.
He is a technical committee member of IEEE/ACM Broad-
WISE 2004, SANPA 2004, IEEE ITRE 2005, EWSN 2005, and
ConWiN 2005. He has been a technical reviewer for numerous
international journals and conferences. He has two patents
pending in wireless mesh networks. He is a member of IEEE,
ACM, and ACM SIGMOBILE.
Weilin Wang received his BS degree in
radio-electronics from Zhongshan
University, MS in computer science
from New York University, and Ph.D.
in electrical engineering from City
College of New York. He is the head
of Kiyons autonomic networks R&D
group. His research interests are in the
areas of broadband wireless mesh
network architecture and protocols.
Prior to Kiyon, he was with Gravitons
wireless technology division, co-devel-
oped a multichannel MAC and multi-
hop routing wireless sensor networking system for homeland
security applications. He was previously chief network architect
at OMM, working on high speed switching subsystems for
wavelength switching, routing, and mesh restoration. Earlier he
was a senior advisor and architect at Nortel Networks
advanced technology lab and broadband networks division,
and contributed to Nortels intellectual property portfolio
development, OPS terabit router QoS and MPLS capabilities,
and the success of Nortels dynamic routing controller product
line. He has a number of issued patents and several pending in
the areas of wireless mesh networks.

