Appendix A
COMPUTER HARDWARE AND
SOFTWARE
In this appendix we discuss some of the issues in choosing hardware and software for image
analysis. The purpose is to draw attention to the issues involved rather than to discuss the
merits of particular manufacturers’ products. This latter information would date very rapidly.
The reader should consult recent computer journals and magazines, particularly those devoted
to graphics. Even the issues involved may change with time.
Changing computer technology also affects the amount of time required by image analysis
algorithms. The computing power available for a given amount of money appears to be in-
creasing exponentially, and has been estimated as doubling every two years. The complexity
of commercially available software has been growing at a similar rate.
In the two following sections we separately consider hardware and software requirements. Some-
times, they will be offered for sale as a package.
A.1 Hardware
Hardware consists of the physical components of an image analysis system. The main compo-
nents are illustrated in Fig A.1.
It will be essential to have
• A Central Processing Unit (CPU). This resides on a chip, and does the computing.
It will have some memory to store the information it is currently using. There may be a
memory specifically for storing digital images, usually called a framestore. This is often
an added component in a computer system.
• A display monitor to look at digital images.
1
2 APPENDIX A. COMPUTER HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
• Some image storage device to store digital images.
• An image capture device to create digital images from whatever is being studied.
It can also be useful to have
• Some peripheral storage media. These are ways of storing many images at low cost,
although access will be slower. They also provide backup security should images on the
main storage device become lost.
• A printer or other device to produce permanent copies of images.
There is an increasing trend for computing equipment to be joined to a network, and this
applies to most of the equipment mentioned above. It has the advantage of allowing equipment
and data to be easily shared among several users.
Since it will be necessary to acquire several items of equipment, an important issue will be
compatibility — the extent to which different pieces of equipment can work properly together.
It is the authors’ experience that this can be a substantial problem. Two ways to overcome this
are to buy all equipment from one manufacturer, or to buy a packaged system. These options
may cost more than a separately bought configuration, and can be less flexible.
Disk
storage
processing
unit (the chip)
Central CPU
memory
Peripheral storage device
Printer
Display
monitor
device
Image
capture
Framestore
Object/scene of study
Figure A.1: Basic hardware components of an image analysis computer system.
A.1. HARDWARE 3
Figure A.2: Storing information in bytes
We next consider the issues involved in choosing each of the items of equipment mentioned
above.
A.1.1 The central processing unit
The central processing unit (or chip) is the ‘brain’ of the computer. Although different man-
ufacturers may produce computers with the same chip, the differences between them will be
much less than those between computers with different chips. The chip is the main factor in
determining the speed with which a system works. Naturally, faster chips tend to cost more.
It can be difficult to judge before a system is in routine use how long it will take to complete
particular tasks. If possible, advice should be sought from others working on similar tasks.
Associated with a CPU chip there will be a certain amount of CPU memory, which stores the
information currently required where it can be accessed very quickly. All other information
storage is much slower. The basic unit of computer memory is the byte (see Fig A.2), and
CPU memory is usually measured in megabytes (Mb) or millions of bytes (actually 220 bytes).
CPU memory is relatively inexpensive, and it is usually worth spending money to have a good
amount of it. The link between the CPU memory and the CPU (the bus) affects memory
access, and therefore processing, times. There are also aspects to how the CPU memory is
managed which will affect performance. For example, a cache memory on the CPU allows
blocks of data to be processed and transferred quickly.
Most computers have only one CPU. Computers with more than one are also built, and designed
so that computing tasks can be shared out and performed on different CPUs. This is parallel
computing. Many image analysis tasks involve repeating the same operation many times and
are well suited to parallel implementation.
4 APPENDIX A. COMPUTER HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
A.1.2 The image capture device
The image capture device is the equipment which provides the link between the real world and
the digital image in a computer. It can be any machine which records a signal from the object
under study and converts it to a set of pixel values. They may be roughly divided into three
types: electronic cameras, scanners and other imaging devices.
Electronic cameras are like the familiar video camera, which produces, as an electronic signal,
images of the scene it is pointed at. Usually this is an analogue signal, but an analogue-to-
digital converter will turn it into a digital signal, which may be arranged to form an image.
This conversion is often done in the computer by an image framestore or framegrabber. A
still video camera operates very like a photographic camera, but stores images in digital form,
which can later be transferred to a computer.
Scanners work like photocopiers. They are widely available for use in desktop publishing
(DTP). Scanners intended for scientific use are also produced. They are designed to produce
more precise and repeatable results, and are more expensive. For most purposes, DTP scanners
should be adequate. Although the principles they use are similar to cameras, they differ in that
• They can only scan flat objects placed in them, such as photographs. As a result they are
not suitable for freezing an image at a chosen moment while observing a changing scene.
• An ordinary photograph must be produced as an intermediate stage between the scene
and the scanner, except in rare cases where objects (such as electrophoresis gels) may be
placed directly on the scanner.
• They can often produce higher spatial resolution and more pixels than cameras.
• Hand-held scanners, which are a cheaper option, produce poorer quality images.
Many other types of imaging equipment, particularly medical imaging equipment such as mag-
netic resonance imagers, ultrasound scanners and positron emission tomographs produce their
images in digital form. From here, they can be transferred to a computer. Sometimes, sub-
stantial differences in hardware and software compatibility have to be overcome to do this.
The two critical aspects of any image capture equipment are its spatial and radiometric resolu-
tions. The spatial resolution is basically the number of pixels per unit area the device produces.
It determines how much detail is recorded in the object being studied. The radiometric reso-
lution is the number of grey levels recorded. This must be at least two (for a binary image).
It is sometimes 16 (half a byte), which is the minimum that can be considered useful in most
applications, and is often 256 (a full byte). More than 256 is of little value in many applications.
Another aspect of image capture devices is whether they record colour. As described in chapter
2, this is done by recording more than one value at each pixel. Colour is a useful facility to
have in some applications. The question to ask is: Can one see in a colour image features of
interest which cannot be seen as clearly in a monochrome image? If so, then colour may help
in the image analysis task planned. If not, it may simply add expense and extra processing
effort without any benefits.
A.1. HARDWARE 5
A.1.3 The framestore
Image analysis software will sometimes store the images it is working with in the CPU memory
of the computer. In other cases, it will require a separate memory device in the computer,
usually termed an image framestore or graphics device. There are many of these available.
Usually they are more than simply storage devices, and can do some elementary processing of
the image (such as zooming, arithmetic operations etc.) much more quickly than can be done
by the CPU. They may also be the means whereby an image in some analogue form (e.g. a
video camera signal) is converted into a digital image.
The size of the framestore will determine how much image data it can hold. The maximum
image size will be determined by the number of rows and columns of pixels available in the
framestore. The number of grey levels that can be handled is usually expressed in terms of
the number of bits (see Fig A.2). Eight bits can accommodate 28 = 256 grey levels. To store
three such images simultaneously, usually in order to handle red, green and blue components,
requires 24 bits. Some framestores will have extra bits to enable features to be drawn on an
image without changing pixel values. Naturally, bigger framestores cost more.
A.1.4 Image storage
For many applications, it will be necessary to store digital images somewhere, so that they
can be accessed on the computer in the future without the need to capture the image again.
Computers usually store information on a disk, locally, or perhaps centrally if the computer is
part of a network. Images stored here can be accessed quickly. Images for which rapid access is
not needed can be stored on some other peripheral device. These include diskettes, cassettes,
tapes of various sorts and various optical storage media. With the exception of diskettes, these
are cheaper per amount of information stored than computer disks. They are all considered
to be more secure than computer disks. Diskettes can store only a little information each, but
are easy to use, convenient for transferring information between computers and can allow an
individual more control, since they are not a shared facility. Compact Disc Read-Only Memory
(CD-ROM) devices are an inexpensive way of storing a large amount of data or images, although
they can only be written to once.
In deciding what storage is to be used, the amount of storage needed should be considered.
Digital images occupy a lot of space. If the images are to be n × n pixels in size, with b bytes
per pixel, then each image will occupy at least bn2 bytes. For example, a 512× 512 pixel image
of 1-byte pixels will occupy 1
4
Mb.
If lots of images are to be stored, consideration should be given to image compression
techniques. These are ways of storing images in smaller amounts of storage space. They
make use of the property that adjacent pixels tend to be similar, or identical, in value and
so image detail can be stored without the need to record each individual pixel. Compression
has the disadvantage that images take longer to access. Some image analysis programs will
6 APPENDIX A. COMPUTER HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
offer compression as an option. Alternatively, stand-alone programs can be used to compress
image (and possibly other) files stored on the computer. They can then be uncompressed
(re-expanded) before use.
Many compression algorithms for binary images are very straightforward. For example, we can
record for each row of the image what the starting value (0 or 1) is, and at which pixel positions
along the row the value changes. This information is sufficient to reconstruct the image, and a
considerable reduction in storage space can be achieved. With the turbinate image, the storage
required using this algorithm is only 7% of the original uncompressed image. Images with less
fine detail would be compressed even more.
Image compression can be with or without loss of information, sometimes termed lossy or
lossless. If information is not lost, then the uncompressed image should be identical to what it
was before compression. In some situations, some degradation of fine detail can be accepted in
the compression process, in order to achieve higher compression ratios (the ratio of the size of
the uncompressed to compressed images). Careful comparison of before and after compression
images should be made before such algorithms are used.
Compression algorithms, whether with or without loss of information, differ in their speed of
processing and the compression ratios they achieve. For a detailed discussion, see Jain (1989,
Ch.11). At the time of writing, a very popular and widely available algorithm for lossless
compression is the Lempel-Ziv algorithm (Lempel and Ziv, 1986). Similarly, for compression
with loss, the JPEG standard (Wallace, 1991) is widely used. For descriptions of some other
recent algorithms, see Devore, Jawerth and Lucier (1992), Nasiopoulos, Ward, and Morse (1991)
and Martinelli, Ricotti and Marcone (1993).
A.1.5 Display
It is essential to be able to display the digital image on a monitor of some sort. Many of the
issues in image display were discussed in chapter 2. Display monitors will differ in the number
of pixels and the number of colours or levels of grey that can be displayed. Be aware that some
systems may not allow all colours to be displayed at the same time, although this may not be
as serious a drawback as it might seem — see §2.3.3.
Some framestores will be configured to use a dedicated monitor for image display, separate from
the standard monitor on the computer.
A monitor with an adequate number of pixels and number of colours should be chosen. Nat-
urally, colour monitors are more expensive than monochrome, and cost increases for monitors
with greater numbers of display pixels. Monitors may have bigger screens without necessarily
having more pixels. However, this may make the screen easier to look at.
A.2. SOFTWARE 7
A.1.6 Printing
It may be useful to produce printed copies of images. Most printers can produce some form
of image printout, but the quality of the result can be very variable. Printers designed mainly
for printing text will tend to produce very poor reproductions of images, only suitable for very
limited purposes. Printers designed for desktop publishing, such as laser printers, will produce
much better results. However, they usually print by using a very fine matrix of black dots.
An image printed in this way will usually look inferior to a computer monitor display, and
is unlikely to be acceptable for publication unless the image has little fine detail. Printers
which can truly handle grey levels are, at the time of writing, rare and expensive, but this may
change in the future. Also, colour printers are several times more expensive to buy and run
than monochrome printers. The remarks made above about the number of colours that can be
displayed on a monitor also apply to printers.
A variety of other devices that can produce permanent copies of images are also available.
Slidewriters, for example, print copies of images onto standard 35mm transparencies. Finally,
a crude but quite effective way of getting permanent copies of digital images is to photograph
the monitor.
A.2 Software
A large amount of image analysis software, with a wide range of abilities, costs and computer
customisation is now available. Any attempt to review it would rapidly become out of date.
We can only give some general pointers in this section to the issues to be considered.
A.2.1 Choosing software
The first thing to realise is that all computers will be running basic computer management soft-
ware called the operating system. Most are computer-specific, but some operating systems
(e.g. Unix, DOS) are available on different computers, and some computers have a choice of
operating systems. In some cases extra management tools (sometimes called user interfaces)
will be provided as well. Window systems are an example. Many software packages will work
with only one operating system, and will sometimes require a particular user interface to be
available.
Some image analysis programs will require particular hardware, usually framestores, to be
present. They may or may not offer a choice of framestores with which they will work.
The most important things to examine in any image analysis software are the facilities it
provides. These should be considered in relation to the image analysis tasks to be performed.
If possible, the package should be tested using images of the type to be studied. A list of the
facilities that may be found in many packages is given in Table A.1.
8 APPENDIX A. COMPUTER HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
Image input facilities — how an image can be read into the package.
Image spatial resolution. Is the number of pixels fixed or variable?
Handling of greyscale images.
Handling of multiple/colour images.
Bus and processing speeds — how will these affect efficiency of use?
Image storage — formats available.
Image printing.
Zooming and scrolling — looking at the image in detail.
Contrast stretching/enhancement.
Image registration.
Filters (smoothing, edge-enhancing etc.)
Binary morphological operations.
Greyscale morphological operations.
Segmentation algorithms.
Image feature measurement.
Image editing — manually editing image features or the results of analysis algorithms.
Algorithm building — ability to store a sequence of operations for single step execution.
Ability to incorporate user-written algorithms in high level languages.
Table A.1: Facilities in image analysis packages. These facilities should not be considered to
be requirements, unless they are needed for the tasks the package is to perform.
Flexibility is an important feature, and one which can be hard to judge before a program has
been used extensively. The program may perform its tasks in a very restricted way, or it may
allow the user to modify how it does things. One point to remember is that flexibility is often
sacrificed to greater ease of use. In the long term, the gains in ease of use may not justify the
loss of flexibility. A well-written package should have both ease of use and flexibility, in such
a way that the user can do straightforward operations very readily, and progress to the more
advanced features which provide the flexibility required when experience and confidence have
been gained.
Many packages provide their image manipulations in the form of building blocks which can be
put together by the user to construct whole tasks. This is a form of programming, and can
provide great flexibility. It is useful if the program also provides some standard combinations
of operations through an easy-to-use interface. It is also sometimes possible to write image
analysis software from scratch using standard programming languages such as C or Fortran.
This gives the ultimate in flexibility, but requires a lot of time and effort and should only be
attempted by those with experience of these languages. Libraries of image analysis routines in
these languages can be bought, and incorporated into one’s own programs.
Finally, it is worth noting that in the authors’ experience there is much less correlation between
cost and such qualities as usefulness, power, flexibility and reliability in software than there is
in hardware. We have found that even software which is free of charge and available in the
public domain can be powerful and flexible. With more expensive packages, one will usually
get more support from the software’s producers.
A.2. SOFTWARE 9
A.2.2 Software compatibility and image formats
Sometimes a user may wish to handle images in more than one program. For example, an
image analysis program can produce scientific results, and a DTP program can be used to
incorporate images into documents. Also, one may wish to use more than one image analysis
package, perhaps on different computers. This gives rise to the question of compatibility. It
arises because digital images may be stored in computer files in several different formats. These
differ in how the pixel values are arranged, what extra information is included in the file etc.
At the time of writing there is a plethora of different formats in use (TIFF, GIF, RLE, PPM,
BMP, Sunraster, PCX and many, many more). Most packages will read and write a subset
of these, and compatibility will be a problem if these subsets do not overlap. Standardisation
may come in the future, but until then the user will need to be aware in what format their
images are being stored, and what other possibilities are available in the programs being used.
If necessary, programs (many of which are in the public domain) that convert between different
formats may be used.

