1
INTRODUCTION TO 
COMPUTERS 
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   2 9/30/11   8:07 AM
C
H
A
P
T
E
R
 C
O
N
T
E
N
T
S
L
E
A
R
N
IN
G
 O
B
J
E
C
T
IV
E
S
1.1 Defi ne computer, and distinguish between analog and 
digital computer designs, p. 4
1.2 Identify the main types of single user and multi-user 
computers, p. 5
1.3 Discuss how computers have shaped our current 
world, p. 10
1.4 List the parts of a complete computer system and 
discuss the phases of the information processing 
cycle, p. 20
1.5 Identify four basic categories of computer hardware, 
p. 22
1.6 Discuss the role of software as a part of the computer, 
p. 27
1.7 Explain the crucial link between data, users and 
technology, p. 28
Chapter Overview
Th is chapter introduces you to the computer, inside and out. 
You’ll learn about the types of computers that are in use today, 
and you’ll get an overview of diff erent ways that computers 
are used in our society. You will take a look inside a computer 
and see some of the parts used to construct it, and you’ll learn 
how the machine, the soft ware programs, and users all work 
together to transform a computer from a calculating engine 
to a data-processing marvel. Where have you already used a 
computer? How would you like to use computers in the future? 
LESSON 1A: Computers and Their Uses
• LO1.1 What is a Computer?, p. 4
• LO1.2 Types of Digital Computers, p. 5
• LO1.3 Computers in Society, p. 10
LESSON 1B: Looking Inside the Computer
• LO1.4 The Parts of a Computer System, p. 20
• LO1.5 Essential Computer Hardware, p. 22
• LO1.6 Software Brings the Machine to Life, p. 27
• LO1.7 Data and Users, p. 28
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   3 9/30/11   8:07 AM
4 • COMPUTING NOW
accepts input from a person via the keyboard, runs 
 programs like word  processors or games, and displays 
the results on the screen. A  diagnostic computer in 
a car accepts input from engine parts, sorts the data, 
and stores performance information for a mechanic 
to retrieve when a  problem occurs.
Computer design is separated into two categories: 
analog and digital. You don’t hear much about ana-
log computers anymore, and that’s because they’ve 
been largely replaced by digital computers.
Analog computers, which have been around in 
one form or another since ancient times, are usu-
ally mechanical. For input, they rely on some kind 
of fi xed starting point, like fl uids at certain levels or 
wires connecting electrical components together. 
As they operate, their physical state changes—fl uid 
 levels rise and fall, for example—to  indicate solu-
tions or new input. Analog  computers can be very 
complex and may employ thousands of parts to 
construct, but in spite of all that complexity, each 
analog computer will solve only one specifi c kind 
of  problem. An  analog computer designed to calcu-
late a  diff erential equation cannot also be used to 
calculate where a bomb will land when dropped 
from an airplane.
Th e computers discussed in this book and 
found throughout the world are known as 
digital computers, because they work by 
 processing sequences of  numbers. Digital 
computers convert their input and 
operating instructions into numeric 
codes and perform calculations with 
those codes. Th e calculations are per-
formed in strict, single steps;  however, 
because they use numbers, digital 
 computers can execute their instruc-
tions extremely fast. Unlike their ana-
log counterparts, digital computers rely 
on  electrical components rather than 
heavy gears. Digital computers are 
also fl exible. Th e same digital com-
puter can run programs to calculate 
 diff erential equations, determine where 
a dropped bomb will fall, store recipes for 
tonight’s dinner, and show you a map with 
the best route to the airport.
LESSON 1A: 
Computers and 
Their Uses
Computers are everywhere!
From offi  ce desks to kitchen tables, from library 
tables to people’s laps in coff ee shops, the screen and 
keyboard combination is a familiar sight. But if you 
look more carefully, you’ll discover that computers 
exist in even more places than you fi rst realize. Cash 
registers in stores have computers inside that calculate 
prices and help manage inventory. Most cars produced 
today have diagnostic computers to help fi nd prob-
lems and improve performance. Cell phones  contain 
computers, and wristwatches oft en rely on simple 
computers for stopwatch and calendar functions.
Since the 1970s, computers have rapidly reshaped 
personal and business life as we know it. Factories 
and  industrial companies oft en use computer- 
controlled machinery. Professional occupa-
tions such as law, engineering, medicine, 
and fi nance use  computers almost univer-
sally. Many workers who once had  little use 
for technology now interact with computers 
almost every minute of the workday.
At home, people use computers to read 
the news, play games, and keep in touch 
with family and friends. News from 
around the world is instantly available. 
More and more people have interna-
tional friends and colleagues, and they 
can use computers to communicate.
1.1 What Is a 
Computer?
In the simplest terms, a computer is 
a machine that accepts some kind of input, 
performs actions and calculations according 
to a set of instructions, and returns the result 
of its calculations. All computers, regard-
less of their size, purpose, or type, follow this 
defi nition.
Th e computer in a stopwatch, for example, 
accepts a command to start (a person  pressing 
the button), counts the passing of time, and 
shows the time on a screen to the  person 
holding the stopwatch. A personal computer 
Figure 1.1 Computers have 
become so commonplace that 
sometimes we hardly notice 
people carrying them.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   4 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 5
Fact Check
1. The two basic types of computer design are
a. PC and Mac
b. analog and digital
c. wired and wireless
2. Digital computers are so named because
a. they are made by a company called Digital 
Manufacturing
b. they process all their data and instructions 
as numbers
c. they don’t require levers or hydraulics
1.2 Types of Digital 
Computers
While some computers are designed to work with 
many people at the same time, most computers are 
meant to be used by only one person at a time. Th ose 
computers are known as personal computers (PCs). 
It’s common for personal computers to have separate 
work spaces and storage for several diff erent users 
(those in a computer lab are probably set up that way), 
but only one user can work with the machine at a time. 
Personal computers are also called  microcomputers 
because they are among the smallest computers cre-
ated for people to use. Although personal comput-
ers are used by individuals, they can be connected 
together to create networks, allowing users to share 
information from computer to computer. In fact, 
 networking—the process of connecting to and shar-
ing data between devices and locations—has become 
one of the most important jobs of personal comput-
ers, and even tiny handheld computers can now be 
connected to networks. You will learn about com-
puter networks in Chapter 2.
Some computers, while still following the same 
fundamental design of all digital computers, are spe-
cially created to handle the needs of many users at the 
same time. Th ese powerful systems are most oft en 
used by businesses or schools, and are commonly 
found at the heart of an organization’s network. Each 
user interacts with the computer through his or her 
own input and output hardware, freeing people from 
having to wait their turn at a single keyboard and 
monitor. Th e largest organizational computers sup-
port thousands of individual users at the same time, 
from thousands of miles away. While some of these 
large-scale systems are devoted to a special purpose, 
enabling users to perform only a few specifi c tasks, 
Figure 1.2 The same technology that 
helps us build bridges and airplanes is 
also a great fi t for family game night.
many organizational computers are g eneral-purpose 
systems that support a wide variety of tasks.
Six primary types of computers are designed to be 
used by one person at a time:
• Desktop computers
• Workstations
• Notebook (or laptop) computers
• Tablet computers
• Handheld computers
• Smart phones
Th ere are four main types of multi-user computers:
• Network servers
• Mainframe computers
• Minicomputers
• Supercomputers
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   5 9/30/11   8:08 AM
6 • COMPUTING NOW
DESKTOP 
COMPUTERS
Th e most common type of 
personal computer is the 
 desktop computer—a PC 
that is designed to sit on 
(or more  typically under) a 
desk or table.
Today’s desktop com-
puters are powerful and versatile, 
and they are used for an amazing 
array of tasks. Not only do these machines enable 
people to do their jobs with greater ease and effi  -
ciency, but they can be used to communicate, produce 
music, edit photographs and videos, play sophisti-
cated games, and much more. Used by everyone from 
preschoolers to nuclear physicists, desktop computers 
are indispensable for learning, work, and play.
As its name implies, a desktop computer is a full-size 
computer that is too big to be easily carried around. 
Th e main component of a desktop PC is the system 
unit, which is the case that houses the computer’s criti-
cal parts, such as its processing and storage devices. 
WORKSTATIONS
A workstation is a specialized, single-user computer 
that typically has more power and features than a 
 standard desktop PC. Th ese machines are popular 
among scientists, engineers, and animators who need 
a system with greater-than-average speed and the 
power to perform sophisticated tasks. Workstations 
oft en have large, high-resolution monitors and 
 accelerated graphics-handling capabilities, making 
them suitable for advanced  architectural or engineer-
ing design, modeling, animation, and video editing.
NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS
Notebook computers, as their name implies, approx-
imate the shape of a writing notebook and easily fi t 
inside a briefcase. Because people frequently set these 
devices on their lap, they are also called laptops. 
Notebooks have a “clam-shell” design; during use, the 
notebook’s lid is raised to reveal a thin monitor and 
a keyboard. When not in use, the device folds up for 
easy storage. 
Notebooks are fully functional microcomput-
ers; the people who use them need the power of a 
Figure 1.4 Notebook computers help 
people get their work done no matter 
where they are.
Figure 1.3 The screen, 
keyboard, and system unit of a 
desktop computer is a familiar 
sight practically everywhere.
 full-size desktop computer wherever 
they go. Along with the monitor and 
keyboard, notebooks also 
typically  contain a mouse, 
DVD player, and wireless 
networking capability.
Notebook computers come in a variety of sizes, 
with diff erent sets of features and hardware to accom-
modate a wide range of user preferences. Notebook 
computers can operate on either an AC adapter or 
special batteries. Th ey generally weigh less than 
eight pounds, and some even weigh less than three 
pounds.
Some notebook systems are designed to be plugged 
into a docking station, which allows the notebook to 
hook up to devices and services like full-sized key-
boards, large monitors, and local networks.
Recent arrivals to the notebook scene are small 
and inexpensive computers referred to as  netbooks. 
Netbooks are small, compact  computers with reduced 
processing power and oft en  without extra devices such 
as DVD drives. Th ey are designed both for  notebook 
shoppers with a very low budget and for users who 
only need a computer for casual use.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   6 9/30/11   8:08 AM
Because of their portability, notebook PCs fall into 
a category of devices called mobile computers— 
systems small enough to be carried by their user.
TABLET PCS
Th e tablet PC is the newest development in portable, 
full-featured  computers. Tablet PCs off er all the func-
tionality of a notebook PC, but they are lighter and 
can accept input directly from a special pen—called 
a  stylus or a  digital pen—or even the user’s  fi ngers. 
Some of the newer  models can display an image of a 
keyboard on the screen and allow the user to type.
Many tablet PCs also have a built-in microphone 
and special soft ware that accepts input from the user’s 
voice. A few models even have a fold-out keyboard, so 
they can be transformed into a standard notebook PC. 
Tablet PCs run specialized versions of standard pro-
grams and can be connected to a network.
Th e popularity of tablet PCs has exploded in 
recent years both for business and personal use. Th e 
combination of portable size and friendly interface 
makes them ideal in a wide range of circumstances 
for note-taking, document sharing, and online 
communication.
HANDHELD PCS
Handheld personal computers (or 
just handheld PCs) are computing 
devices small enough to fi t in your 
hand. Th ough they can be indis-
pensable tools for many types of 
Figure 1.5 A tablet PC.
users, their small size and limited 
processing power puts them in a 
diff erent category from notebook 
and tablet computers. Handheld 
PCs are typically used for appli-
cations that help  connect mobile 
users to online resources; provide 
portable entertainment in the 
form of games, music and video; 
and assist with mobile comput-
ing tasks such as taking notes and 
managing address books or task 
lists. Many users rely heavily on 
their handheld PC to stay current 
all day long with the latest news 
from the world and their friends.
As handheld PCs became widely 
popular in the 1990s and early 
2000s, they were commonly known 
as personal digital assistants 
(PDAs). Early PDAs had a limited set of soft ware pro-
grams that they could run, many of which were targeted 
toward note-taking, small spreadsheets, and appoint-
ment management. Input to the PDA was commonly 
accomplished via tapping and drawing on a touch-
sensitive screen with a stylus. Now, handheld PCs oft en 
have intuitive and shortcut-rich user interfaces with 
colorful displays, and touch screens that can accept var-
ious kinds of fi ngertip taps and swipes for input.
Th e term smart phone was coined as manu-
facturers of cellular telephones began including 
PDA features and programs in their telephones. 
Th e combination of PDA and cell phone produced 
a convenient multi-function device that proved 
Figure 1.6 Smart 
phones provide 
communication, 
computing power, 
and more.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   7 9/30/11   8:08 AM
8 • COMPUTING NOW
A network server is a powerful personal computer 
with special soft ware and equipment that enable it to 
function as the primary computer in the network. 
Th ough their exact functions are diff erent from 
organization to organization, network servers all 
have the basic task of making  documents,  programs, 
and in some cases other computer hardware avail-
able to others.
For example, a network server might run the e-mail 
services for a company. Rather than having each 
employee run his or her own mail program, employ-
ees simply access the central e-mail program running 
on the server to retrieve their messages. 
Network servers are also responsible for sending 
Web pages to users who are browsing the Internet; a 
single server can send its Web pages to thousands of 
people visiting the site that it hosts. 
Oft en, the requests from the network grow so large 
and complex that a single PC cannot handle the job 
by itself. In such cases, network server computers 
are linked together to share the load. In some cases, 
dozens or even hundreds of individual servers work 
together to manage data processing requests. When 
set up in such groups—sometimes called  clusters or 
server farms—network servers may not even resem-
ble standard PCs. Th e big case that holds the typi-
cal PC system unit is reduced to a thin unit called 
a “blade,” which can slide in and out of a rack that 
holds many of its companion servers. In these large 
networks, PC groups 
are oft en serving dif-
ferent purposes, such 
as supporting a certain 
set of users, handling 
printing tasks, enabling 
Internet communica-
tions, and so on.
Depending on how 
the network is set up, 
users may be able to 
access the server in 
multiple ways. In an 
office, users might have 
a standard desktop 
PC on their desk that 
is permanently con-
nected to the network. 
Mobile users may be 
able to connect a note-
book PC or a handheld 
device to the network 
wirelessly. 
highly popular not only with business and technical 
PDA users, but also with cell phone  consumers. Not 
every handheld PC user  prefers to combine their 
phone and handheld computer together, so sales of 
devices both with and without phones are increas-
ing. Th e concept of the PDA is alive and well, even 
though the “PDA” term itself is rapidly becoming a 
thing of the past.
Manufacturers of handheld PCs have made 
rapid advances in their products as a result of this 
 widespread acceptance and demand for mobile com-
puting devices. While the PDA of the past provided 
a limited set of business-oriented soft ware programs 
for their users, vast libraries of programs are now 
available for download that support business and 
entertainment interests alike.
NETWORK SERVERS
Today, most organizations’ networks are based on 
personal computers. Individual users have their 
own desktop computers, and those computers are 
linked together in a network to allow convenient 
fi le and information sharing between users. In cases 
where all the people use their computers for a com-
mon purpose (for example, running e-mail pro-
grams or working on documents), a special, central 
computer called a  network server is added to the 
network.
Figure 1.7 Blades are full PCs in a narrow box suitable 
for side-by-side installation.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   8 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 9
MAINFRAME 
COMPUTERS
Mainframe  computers are large, 
powerful  systems used in organi-
zations such as insurance com-
panies and banks, where many 
people frequently need to use the 
same data. 
In a traditional  mainframe 
environment, each user accesses 
the mainframe’s resources 
through a device called a termi-
nal. Th ere are two kinds of termi-
nals. A dumb terminal does not 
process or store data; it is simply 
an input/output (I/O) device 
that functions as a window into 
a computer located somewhere 
else. An intelligent terminal can 
perform some processing opera-
tions, but it usually does not have 
any storage. In some mainframe 
environments, however, workers 
can use a standard personal com-
puter to access the mainframe.
Th e largest mainframes 
can handle the processing 
needs of thousands of users at 
any given moment. But  what 
these systems off er in power, 
they lack in fl exibility. Most mainframe systems 
are designed to handle only a specifi c set of tasks. 
In your state’s Department of Motor Vehicles, for 
example, a mainframe system is probably devoted 
to storing information about drivers, vehicles, and 
driver’s licenses, but little or nothing else. By limit-
ing the number of tasks the system must perform, 
administrators preserve as much power as possible 
for required operations. 
MINICOMPUTERS
First released in the 1960s, minicomputers got their 
name because of their small size relative to other 
 computers of the day. Th e capabilities of a minicom-
puter are somewhere between those of mainframes 
and personal computers. For this reason, minicomput-
ers are oft en called midrange computers. Like main-
frames, minicomputers can handle much more input 
and output than personal computers. Although some 
“minis” are designed for a single user, the most power-
ful minicomputers can serve the input and output needs 
of hundreds of users at a time. Users can access a central 
minicomputer through a terminal or a standard PC.
SUPERCOMPUTERS
Supercomputers are the most powerful com-
puters and phys ically they are some of the larg-
est. Th ese systems can process huge amounts of 
data, and the fastest supercomputers can perform 
nearly two  quadrillion calculations per second. 
Fact Check
1. What is the most common type of single-user 
computer?
a. Desktop computer
b. Minicomputer
c. Analog computer
2. List the four types of multi-user computers.
Figure 1.8 Mainframe computers are often housed alone 
in special rooms, away from their users.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   9 9/30/11   8:08 AM
10 • COMPUTING NOW
Figure 1.9 Supercomputers like Cray’s XT5 Jaguar are massive machines, 
integrating hundreds of thousands of smaller processors together.
Some   supercomputers link together hundreds of 
thousands of  processors. Supercomputers are ideal 
for handling large and highly complex problems that 
require extreme calculating power. For example, 
 supercomputers are actively used in the mapping of 
the human genome, forecasting weather, and mod-
eling complex processes like nuclear fi ssion.
1.3 Computers in Society
How important are computers to our society? People 
oft en talk in sweeping terms about computers and 
their impact on our lives, with expressions like 
“computers have changed our world” or “computers 
have changed the way we do everything.” Such state-
ments may strike you at fi rst as exaggerations, but if 
you stop and really think about the eff ect computers 
have had on our daily lives, they may not be so far 
off  the mark.
To better gauge the impact of computers, think 
of the impact of other inventions. Can you imagine, 
for instance, the many ways in which American life 
changed aft er the introduction of the automobile? 
Consider a few examples:
•  Because of the car, people were able to travel 
farther than ever before, and this created huge 
opportunities for businesses to meet the needs 
of the traveling public.
•  Because vehicles could be mass-produced, the 
nature of manufacturing and industry changed, 
and throngs of people began working on assem-
bly lines.
• Because of road development, suburbs became 
a feasible way for people to live close to a city 
without actually living in one.
• Because of car travel, motels, restaurants, and 
shopping centers sprang up in places where 
there had previously been nothing.
Th ink of other great inventions and discoveries, 
such as electricity, the telephone, or the airplane. 
Each, in its own way, brought signifi cant changes to 
the world and to the ways people lived and spent 
their time. Today, still relatively soon aft er its cre-
ation, the digital computer is beginning to make its 
mark on society.
WHY ARE COMPUTERS SO IMPORTANT?
People can list countless reasons for the impor-
tance of computers. For someone with a disability, 
for example, a computer may off er freedom to com-
municate, learn, or work without leaving home. For 
a sales professional, a PC may mean the ability to 
 communicate whenever necessary, track leads, and to 
manage an ever-changing schedule. For a researcher, 
a computer may be the workhorse that does painstak-
ing and time-consuming calculations.
But if you took all the benefi ts that people derive 
from computers, mixed them together, and distilled 
them down into a single element, what would you 
have? Th e answer is simple: information.
Computers are important because information is so 
essential to our lives, and information is much more 
than the stuff  you see and hear on television. Facts in a 
textbook or an encyclopedia are information, but only 
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   10 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 11
that ready access to information has created  some 
ethical gray areas along with  learning opportunities. 
For an example of one such gray area, see the “Ethical 
Dilemma” feature.
When you consider the importance of computers 
in our society, think about the importance of infor-
mation. As tools for working with information, and 
for creating new information, computers may be one 
of humanity’s most important creations.
Let’s take a look at where computers are found in 
our society and what they do there.
Home In many American homes, the family 
computer is nearly as important as the refrigerator 
or the washing machine. In fact, a growing num-
ber of families have multiple PCs in their homes; in 
most cases, at least one of those computers has an 
Internet  connection. Why do home users need their 
computers?
• Communication. Electronic mail (e-mail) 
allows family members to communicate with 
one another and to stay in contact with friends 
and coworkers. Social networking programs 
such as Facebook help extended families and 
groups of friends stay in touch and share their 
lives. Services like Twitter take the “keep in 
touch” idea even further, allowing people to 
broadcast quick updates, thoughts, and items of 
interest throughout the day. It’s more common 
than ever for computer users to meet and make 
friends with people all over the world, no matter 
where they live.
•  Business work done at home. Th anks to com-
puters and Internet connections, more people 
are working from home than ever before. It 
is possible for many users to  connect to their 
employer’s network from home.  Computers 
also are  making it easier for people to start 
their own home-based businesses.
•  Schoolwork. Today’s students are  increasingly 
reliant on computers, and not just as a 
 replacement for typewriters. Th e Internet is 
replacing printed books as a reference tool, and 
 easy-to-use soft ware makes it possible for even 
young users to create polished documents.
• Entertainment. Computers and video game con-
soles are intensely popular, with an endless variety 
of games from solitaire to simulating your own 
living room rock band. People can play games 
alone, with a family member, or go online to play 
with tens of thousands of others in a single, mas-
sive fantasy or sci-fi  world. PCs can also serve as 
one kind. Mathematical formulas and their results 
are information, too, as are the plans for a building, 
or the recipe for a cake. Pictures, songs, addresses, 
games, poems, menus, shopping lists,  résumés—the 
list goes on and on. All these things and many others 
can be thought of as information, and they can all be 
stored and processed digitally by  computers. In fact, 
Is it okay to 
download and use 
software without 
paying for it?
Yesterday, you and your friend Tracy were looking 
at family photos on her computer. Tracy showed 
you a hilarious picture of her little nephew that had 
been altered to make it look like he was dancing 
with penguins. You asked her where she’d found 
the thousand dollars to buy fancy photo-editing 
software.
“I found this great site on the Web where you can 
download old versions of software for free,” she 
 replied. “The photo software company doesn’t sup-
port this version anymore, but it works  perfectly.”
Looking through the site Tracy mentioned, you see 
that you could easily get the photo software and 
lots of other programs. The download site is safe, 
virus-free, doesn’t track who accesses the site or 
downloads programs, and contains only software 
versions that are out of date and no longer sup-
ported.
QUESTIONS
1. Would it be ethical to download and use the 
program even though you’re not paying for it?
2. Is this situation different from fi nding a copy of 
this same software at a garage sale and  paying 
the person in the driveway a few dollars to 
take it home? If so, how?
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   11 9/30/11   8:08 AM
12 • COMPUTING NOW
Computer technology has also brought more 
opportunities for  education to a large population. 
With Internet access available in small towns and 
remote areas, students can join online classes taught 
at universities around the world, learning new sub-
jects and completing classes without having to leave 
their hometowns.
Small Business Many of today’s successful small 
companies simply could not exist without computer 
technology. Each year,  hundreds of thousands of 
 individuals launch businesses based from their homes 
or in small-offi  ce locations. Th ey rely on inexpensive 
computers and soft ware not only to perform basic work 
functions but also to manage and grow their companies.
Th ese tools enable business owners to handle 
tasks—such as daily accounting chores, inventory 
management, marketing, payroll, and many others—
that once required the hiring of outside specialists. As 
a result, small businesses become more self-suffi  cient 
and reduce their operating expenses.
Businesses both small and large can also benefi t 
from using computers and networks to allow their 
employees to work from home, or to support satellite 
offi  ces away from the main corporate site. Workers 
who would face a prohibitive commute or who want 
to live in a remote location can still be productive, 
connected employees via their computers.
Industry Today, enterprises use diff erent kinds of 
computers in many combinations. A corporate head-
quarters may have a  standard PC-based  network, for 
media centers, storing music, videos, and mov-
ies for on-demand playback on other computers, 
consoles, and televisions throughout the home.
• Creativity. Poetry, music, painting, essays on 
the state of the world, funny stories—these once 
required publishers and marketing eff orts to 
produce. Now, with blogs, personal Web pages, 
and Web sites for sharing pictures and video 
clips, people can create anything to their hearts’ 
content and share it with an audience.
• Finances and Shopping. Computers and per-
sonal fi nance soft ware can make balancing 
your checkbook an enjoyable experience. Well, 
almost. At any  rate, they certainly make it eas-
ier. Home users rely on their PCs for bill pay-
ing, investing, and other fi nancial chores. Th ey 
also use computers to spend what they earn, 
shopping online for everything from cars to 
collectibles.
Education More and more schools are adding 
computer technology to their curricula, not only 
teaching pure computer skills, but also incorporat-
ing those skills into other classes. Students may be 
required to use a drawing  program, for example, to 
draw a plan of the Alamo for a history class, or use 
spreadsheet soft ware to analyze voter turnouts during 
the last  century’s presidential elections. Educators see 
computer technology as an essential learning require-
ment for all students, starting as early as preschool. 
Even now, basic computing skills such as keyboard-
ing are being taught in elementary 
schools, and kids are taught how 
to search online for informa-
tion at an early age. 
Many of today’s successful small companies simply 
could not exist without computer technology. 
Figure 1.10 Users of all ages at home can use computers for work, creative 
expression and play.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   12 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 13
 example, but its production facilities 
may use  computer-controlled robot-
ics to manufacture  products. Here 
are just a few ways computers are 
applied to industry:
•  Design. Nearly any company that 
designs and makes products can use 
a computer-aided design or com-
puter-aided manufacturing system 
in their creation.
•  Shipping. Freight companies need 
computers to manage the thou-
sands of ships, planes, trains, and 
trucks that are moving goods at 
any given moment. In addition 
to tracking vehicle locations and 
contents, computers can manage 
maintenance, driver schedules, 
invoices and billing, and many 
other activities.
• Process control. Modern assem-
bly lines can be massive, complex 
systems, and a breakdown at one point can cause 
chaos throughout a company. Sophisticated pro-
cess-control systems can oversee output, check 
the speed at which a machine runs, manage con-
veyance systems, and look at parts inventories, 
with very little human interaction.
Government Not only are governments big 
consumers of technology, but they help to develop 
it as well. As you will learn in Chapter 4, the U.S. 
 government played a key role in developing the 
Internet. Today, computers play a crucial part in 
nearly every  government agency:
• Population. Th e U.S. Census Bureau was one 
of the fi rst organizations to use computer 
technology, recruiting mechanical computers 
known as “diff erence engines” to assist in tally-
ing the American population in the early 20th 
century.
• Taxes. Can you imagine trying to calculate 
Americans’ tax bills without the help of comput-
ers? Neither could the Internal Revenue Service. 
In fact, the IRS now encourages taxpayers to fi le 
their tax returns online via the Internet.
• Military. Some of the world’s most sophisti-
cated computer technology has been devel-
oped primarily for use by the military. In fact, 
some of the earliest digital computers were cre-
ated for such purposes as calculating the tra-
jectory of missiles. Today, for tasks  including 
everything from payroll management and 
weapons control to games and simulations that 
teach combat skills, the armed forces use the 
 widest array of computer hardware and soft -
ware imaginable.
• Police. When it comes to stocking their crime-
fi ghting arsenals, many police forces consider 
computers to be just as important as guns 
and ammunition. Today’s police cruisers are 
equipped with laptop computers and wire-
less Internet connections that enable offi  cers 
to search for information on criminals, crime 
scenes, and procedures.
Figure 1.11 Police offi cers use computers to 
quickly access vital information on the job.
Fact Check
1. The common element that makes computers 
so important throughout society is
a. the central processing unit
b. information
c. fl exibility
2. List four things a home computer might be 
commonly used to accomplish.
3. List three types of government agencies that 
use computers.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   13 9/30/11   8:08 AM
14 • COMPUTING NOW
Health Care Pay a visit to your family doctor or 
the local hospital, and you’ll fi nd yourself surrounded 
by computerized equipment. Computers, in fact, are 
making health care more effi  cient and accurate while 
helping providers bring down costs. 
Many diff erent health care procedures now involve 
computers, from ultrasound and magnetic  resonance 
imaging to laser eye surgery and fetal monitor-
ing. Surgeons now can use robotic surgical devices 
to perform delicate operations and even to conduct 
 surgeries remotely. New virtual-reality technologies 
are being used to train new surgeons in cutting-edge 
techniques, without cutting an actual patient.
Controlling Computers with the Mind
The idea that humans could control computers with little more than their thoughts is the stuff of science 
fi ction. Or is it?
A team of doctors, scientists, and programmers has developed a device that does exactly that. For the 
fi rst time, a severely paralyzed—or  “locked-in”—patient has the ability to control a computer directly with 
his or her thoughts.
The device, called the Brain Communicator, was created by Neural Signals, Inc., and allows a locked-in user 
(who is alert and intelligent but unable to move or speak due to stroke, disease, or injury) to control his or 
her personal computer without the need for a manual keyboard, voice recognition system, or other standard 
means of control. No voluntary movement is necessary.
Neural interface devices (NIDs) such as the Brain Communicator allow users to take advantage of 
small electrical signals generated spontaneously in the body. These signals can be obtained either 
directly or indirectly. Direct methods of collecting the signals involve surgical implantation in the 
user’s body; indirect methods can  utilize the user’s muscle movements, eye movements, or EEG 
brain waves.
With NIDs, simply by imagining movement, locked-in patients can use a word processor or speech 
synthesizer, surf the Internet, or access environmental controls such as lights, music, and TV. Medicine and 
computer technology combine to open the horizons of their locked-in world.
Even as the future looks bright, the fi eld of neural interfacing technology is still in its infancy, and 
the practical applications of the technology have yet to be realized. Perhaps, someday soon, personal 
computers will come bundled with biological  signal sensors and  thought-recognition software just as 
commonly as the word processing and educational programs of today.
Focus on the Issues
But not all medical computers are so high-tech. 
Clinics and hospitals use standard computers to  manage 
schedules, maintain patient records, and  perform bill-
ings. Many transactions between physicians, insu rance 
companies, and pharmacies are  conducted by comput-
ers,  saving health care workers time.
Green Computing Environmental impact  is 
a familiar topic in business and personal life. 
Companies, governments and individuals around the 
world are considering the infl uence that their choices 
and actions have on the health and well-being of our 
planet. Green computing refers to the eff orts made 
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   14 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 15
programs to run more effi  ciently, to encourag-
ing businesses to let some of their employees 
work from home, leave the car in the driveway, 
save gas and reduce pollution. With computers 
in such heavy use all around the world, even 
small improvements in computer effi  ciency can 
make a big diff erence to the pressure we place 
on the environment.
Social Communication As you’ve seen in 
this lesson, computers have become familiar 
tools in many diff erent parts of our society. But 
computer technology is also having a profound 
eff ect on society itself by changing the ways we 
communicate. Th e way we interact with oth-
ers, the people to whom we’re connected, the 
frequency of communication, and the methods 
we now use are all  startlingly diff erent than they 
were twenty, ten, or in some cases just one or 
two years ago.
Once, if we wanted to contact a friend or  colleague, 
we called their telephone number. If they weren’t 
home or at their desk, we’d just have to call them back 
later and in the  meantime, chances were good that we 
didn’t know for sure where they were.
Now, mobile computers and smart phones provide 
instant access to people. Send a text message and it 
instantly requests attention from the receiver. Call 
someone’s cell phone, and you rarely get silence in 
return.
Services have also sprung up that encourage people 
to constantly share their whereabouts and thoughts. 
Foursquare is a social soft ware program that allows 
you to alert the world that you just walked into Jim’s 
Fabulous Bakery. Twitter will help you tell your 
friends and followers that the place is packed, and 
you’re going to be in line forever. Facebook lets your 
friends know that chocolate croissants are simply the 
best thing in your life right now.
In the past, you might tell a small handful of peo-
ple about your divine croissant, but on Facebook and 
Twitter you might have dozens, hundreds, or even 
thousands of connections, and every one of them gets 
your news. On the receiving end, you get a steady 
stream of similar updates from everyone with which 
you have a connection.
Computers allow us to create and maintain inti-
mate social connections with far more people than 
had ever before been possible, no matter where in the 
world they live. Whatever changes this may bring to 
our local and global cultures, computers will cer-
tainly continue to play a major role in our rapid evo-
lution of communication.
toward reducing the environmental impact in the 
manufacture, use, and disposal of computers.
Like many products, the manufacture of comput-
ers of any size can use or produce hazardous mate-
rials. But properly handling and reducing the use 
of those materials is just the beginning for green 
computing.
Th e “green” philosophy includes looking at 
ways to reduce waste when replacing comput-
ers. Underperforming computers could be simply 
replaced, of course, but then the old computers are 
completely discarded. Instead, upgrading  components 
as needed (for example, increasing the amount of 
memory or data storage capacity) may allow a com-
puter to keep up with demand, reducing the amount 
that is thrown away in the process.
Computers can generate a great deal of heat, and a 
lot of power is used to keep them cool; fans in the case 
and attached to individual parts use a lot of energy, and 
in large computer installations air conditioning plants 
may be required to keep room temperature low. Green 
computing solutions can combine more power-effi  cient 
computer hardware with improved cooling techniques 
such as liquid-cooled components and improved air 
fl ow to signifi cantly reduce power use. Even home 
users can reduce power usage by keeping the fans and 
airways of their home computers free of dust.
Th ere are many other ways that green comput-
ing advocates work to fi nd ways to improve the 
condition of our planet, from designing soft ware 
Figure 1.12 Computers help in nearly 
all aspects of health care, from billing to 
controlling machines for surgeons.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   15 9/30/11   8:08 AM
16 • COMPUTING NOW
computer, 4 
desktop computer, 6 
digital pen, 7 
docking station, 6 
handheld personal 
computer, 7 
input/output (I/O) device, 9 
laptop computer, 6 
mainframe, 9 
microcomputer, 5 
midrange computer, 9 
minicomputer, 9 
mobile computer, 7 
netbooks, 6
network server, 8 
networking, 5
notebook computer, 6 
personal computer (PC), 5 
personal digital assistant 
(PDA), 7
smart phone, 7 
stylus, 7 
supercomputer, 9 
system unit, 6
tablet PC, 7 
terminal, 9 
workstation, 6 
Key Terms
• A computer is an electronic device that processes 
data, converting it into information that is useful 
to people. Th e two basic types of computers are 
analog and digital. Th e computers commonly 
used today are all digital computers.
• Computers designed for use by a single person 
include desktop computers, workstations, note-
book (or laptop) computers, tablet computers, 
handheld computers, and smart phones. Other 
types of computers—such as network servers, 
mainframes, minicomputers, and  supercomputers—are commonly used by organizations 
and support the computing needs of many users at once.
• Computers have changed the way we work, communicate, create, and play. Computers are 
important because information is so essential to our lives, whether that information takes 
the form of a news report, song, X-ray, mathematical formula, or recipe. All these kinds of 
information can be stored and processed by computers. As tools for working with informa-
tion, and for creating new information, computers may be one of humanity’s most important 
creations.
SummaryIN
Complete each statement by writing one of the terms listed 
under “Key Terms” in each blank.
1. Th e general name for a single-user computer is a(n) .
2.  A computer designed to handle the needs and requests of 
thousands of users at a time is known as a(n) .
3.  When not in use, a(n)  computer folds up for easy 
storage.
Key Terms
QUIZ
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   16 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 17
4.   PCs are fl at computers that have a touch-sensitive screen that can accept input from a 
special pen or fi nger.
5. Th ough it may look like a desktop computer, a(n)  is a device that provides access to a 
mainframe computer.
6. A(n)  combines a cellular phone with computer programs in a single device.
7. A(n)  is similar in function and appearance to a smart phone, but lacks the telephone 
capability.
8. Th e special pen used with touch-sensitive computer screens is known as a(n) .
9. Computers can be connected together with wires or wireless technology to create a(n) .
10.  are the most powerful computers ever created, linking hundreds of thousands of 
smaller computer processors together.
Review
QUESTIONS
In your own words, briefl y answer the following ques-
tions or respond to the statements.
1. What is a computer?
2.  List six types of computers designed to be used by 
one person at a time.
3. List four types of computers that are designed to sup-
port many users and can be accessed by multiple people at the same time.
4. What are four ways that computers can be used in a typical home?
5. How can computers improve education for people who live in remote areas where local col-
leges and schools are not available?
6. Describe two ways that computers can help people running small businesses.
 7. In addition to helping doctors perform surgery, what are two functions in the health care 
industry that are aided by computers?
8. Explain what the term “green computing” means.
9. List three ways that computer technology or users can reduce the harm done to the Earth’s 
environment.
10. Describe three ways that computers have aff ected the way we communicate with each other.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   17 9/30/11   8:08 AM
18 • COMPUTING NOW
Complete the following exercises as directed by your instructor.
1. During the course of a normal day, keep a list of your encoun-
ters with computers of various kinds. Your list should show 
the place and time of the encounter, the type of interaction you 
had with the technology, and the results of that interaction. 
(Remember, computers can take many sizes and forms, so be 
alert to more than just PCs.) Share your list with the class.
2. Learn more about green computing. Start your computer’s 
browser and go to Google at http://www.google.com/. Search 
on the term “green computing” and follow search result links to at least two of the related sites. 
Th en, take a look at Google’s own statistics for their data center effi  ciency at http://www.google.com/
corporate/datacenter/effi  cient-computing/index.html and see how they compare the energy they use for 
searches to other common activities.
LESSON
LAB
Th is lesson identifi ed many diff erent types of computers that 
are used in the world today, from handheld PCs to giant, 
room-sized supercomputers. In this exercise, you’ll revisit 
that topic by applying an important workplace ability:  critical 
thinking, which brings together skills such as observation, 
interpretation, and evaluation to understand and apply infor-
mation. In this case, you’ll be paying closer attention to the 
part that computers play in the world around you and your 
classmates.
Before your next class session, note three diff erent types 
of computers (for example, handheld, tablet, or desktop PCs) that you see being used, either by your-
self or by people around you. For each type of computer, identify and record the basic tasks that are being 
performed.
Back in class, divide into groups of three or four. First, compare notes on commonality. Were there some 
types of computers that all of you found in use? Was there a kind of computer that only one person identi-
fi ed? If everybody found at least one type in common, was the same type of activity being performed?
Th en, have each person choose one computer task that they noted and discuss whether the computer 
itself is a requirement to perform that task. Could the task still be accomplished without a computer, or is 
this a type of activity that simply did not exist before digital computers were made readily available? Create 
a list of these tasks and fi ndings to share with other groups when the exercise is complete.
Team 
EXERCISE
 Critical Thinking
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   18 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 19
Ca
re
er
B
U
Z
Z Ask Andy Yother what the best part of his job is, and his answer comes quickly: “I get to play with million-dollar toys,” says this lead hardware and support engineer at Norcross, Georgia-based Canvas Systems, a reseller of 
certifi ed, pre-owned IT equipment. Those toys span a wide range of technology systems and manufacturers, 
making Yother’s job both challenging and fulfi lling at the same time.
“I handle any piece of equipment that a manufacturer like Sun Microsystems or IBM would make,” says 
Yother. “It’s neat to know that during any given week I’m going to build, confi gure, test, and prepare for sale a 
wider variety of equipment than most folks will see in their entire careers.”
Yother, who is currently completing his bachelor’s degree in business administration at Shorter College, has 
racked up career experience working for PC makers and circuit board manufacturers. He started in an entry-level 
position at Canvas Systems, handling low-level testing and identifi cation of systems. Today he oversees a team of 
six auditors and fi ve engineers who build bare-metal assembly orders to customer specifi cations.
“Our customers contact us, tell us what they need, and we start with the bare bones and work up from 
there,” says Yother, whose typical workday starts at 8 a.m. and ends at 7 p.m. or later, depending on 
the  time of year and level of demand. “We configure the machines, test them, and prepare them for 
customer use.”
Keeping up with changing technology 
is no easy task for Yother, who must know 
how to break down and rebuild both older 
systems and the newest, state-of-the-art 
systems available on the market. To keep 
up, he reads trade and technology 
magazines, visits manufacturers’ Web 
sites, and subscribes to online mailing 
lists. “It’s about trying to fi nd the best 
sources of accurate information and 
digesting it all,” says Yother. “Some days, 
my brain just aches from information 
overload.”
Yother sees hardware technicians’ roles 
increasing in the future. “We wouldn’t have 
an IT fi eld without the circuits, memory, and 
processors to back it up,” says Yother, who 
advises all aspiring technicians to learn the 
computer inside and out, and to truly understand 
how it processes information and accom-
plishes tasks. Whether they’re working for a company like Canvas Systems or within a fi rm’s IT department, hardware 
maintenance technicians are responsible for the following kinds of tasks:
 • Installing and confi guring new computer hardware. Installing peripherals.
 • Upgrading computers (installing updated cards, memory, drives, etc.). 
 •  Dealing with network-related hardware issues (installing network interface cards, working with cabling, 
installing hubs or routers, etc.).
 • Troubleshooting and repairing hardware of all types.
Many companies rely on their hardware maintenance technicians for input when planning for new system 
development, expansion, or acquisitions. Their input is important because technicians are in daily contact with 
end users and develop a good understanding of their needs. A signifi cant advantage of the hardware 
technician’s job is that it is a great springboard to other, more advanced careers in technology. Entry-level 
technicians typically earn $30,000 to $35,000, with pay scales increasing with experience to levels of $50,000 
a year or more.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   19 9/30/11   8:08 AM
20 • COMPUTING NOW
 nothing. Finally, you will see that the user is (in most 
cases, at least) an essential part of a complete com-
puter system.
1.4 The Parts of a 
Computer System
As you saw in Lesson 1A, computers come in many 
varieties, from the tiny computers built into house-
hold appliances to the astounding supercomputers 
that have helped scientists map the human genome. 
But no matter how big it is or how it is used, every 
computer is part of a system. A complete computer 
system is much more than just the box on the fl oor 
at your feet and the monitor on your desk. Th e term 
encompasses the four broad categories that make the 
machine fully useful: hardware, soft ware, data, and 
the user (see Figure 1.13).
HARDWARE
Th e physical devices—both electronic and 
 mechanical—that make up the computer are called 
hardware. Hardware is any part of the computer you 
can touch. Input and output devices, the system case, 
cables, and networking devices are all examples of 
hardware.
SOFTWARE
Soft ware is a set of instructions that makes the computer 
perform tasks. In other words, soft ware tells the com-
puter what to do. Th e term program refers to any piece 
of soft ware. Some programs exist primarily to help 
the computer and its subsystems perform tasks 
and manage their own resources. Other types of 
programs exist for the user, enabling him or her 
to perform tasks such as creating documents, 
playing games, using the Internet, or even writ-
ing other programs. Th ousands of diff erent pro-
grams are available for use on  personal computers.
LESSON 1B: 
Looking Inside the 
Computer
Most people believe computers must be extremely 
complicated devices because they perform such 
amazing tasks. To an extent, this is true. Th e complex-
ity of a central processor’s circuitry, layering millions 
of connections together in a space the size of your fi n-
gernail, is one of humankind’s greatest technological 
triumphs. No less of a feat is the lightning-fast coordi-
nation of all the diff erent subsystems in a computer to 
produce a fl exible, reliable machine that its user barely 
notices as he or she performs tasks with it.
Yet like any machine, a computer is still a collec-
tion of parts, which are grouped according to the 
kinds of work they do. Although there are many, 
many variations on the parts themselves, there 
are only a few major categories. If you learn about 
those families of computer components and their 
basic functions, you will have mastered some of 
the most important concepts in computing. As you 
will see, the concepts are by and large simple and 
straightforward.
Th is lesson gives you a glimpse inside a standard 
desktop computer and introduces you to its most 
important parts. You will learn how these compo-
nents work together and allow you to interact with 
the system. You also will discover the importance 
of soft ware, without which a computer could do 
SOFTWARE
(programs)
Software installed
on the computer
Memo
HARDWARE
(the computer)
USER
(people)
DATA
(information)
Figure 1.13 A complete computer system.
DATA
Data consist of individual facts or pieces of informa-
tion. Data are specifi c to the task at hand and oft en 
make sense only in their intended context. For exam-
ple, if you were writing a  proposal to lower the speed 
limit on a  neighborhood street, you might include 
facts about the  average speed of cars on that road 
and statistics about auto speed and serious injuries. 
Th ose facts are data, and while they are relevant for 
your  proposal, they might not be useful data when 
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   20 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 21
A computer can still have users without a 
person sitting in front of it at every moment. 
A car’s diagnostic computer normally doesn’t 
have an attentive user, but the information it 
saves and provides is certainly put to use at 
the repair shop. Th e repair technician is that 
computer’s user, even though he or she is rarely 
present. 
A direct user can also be other computers or 
computer components acting on behalf of peo-
ple. For example, a network server (whose sole 
job is to route network traffi  c from one PC to 
another) communicates with client computers 
instead of directly with people. Even so, those 
client   computers are ultimately there at the request 
or intention of people, so no useful computer is com-
pletely isolated from human contact.
THE INFORMATION PROCESSING CYCLE
Using all its parts together, a computer converts data 
into information by performing various actions on the 
data. For example, a computer might perform a math-
ematical operation on two numbers and then display 
the result. Or the computer might perform a logical 
operation, such as comparing two numbers, and dis-
play that result. Th ese operations are part of a process 
called the information processing cycle, which is a 
series of steps the computer follows to receive data, 
process the data according to instructions from a pro-
gram, display the resulting information to the user, 
and store results (see Figure 1.15).
Each step in the information processing cycle 
involves one or more specifi c components of the 
computer:
1. Input. Th e computer accepts data from some 
source, such as the user, a program, or some 
sort of hardware, for processing.
2. Processing. Th e computer’s processing compo-
nents perform actions on or with the data, based 
on instructions from the user or a program.
3. Output. Th e computer provides the results of 
its processing. Typically, the results appear as 
text, numbers, or a graphic on the computer’s 
screen or as sounds from its speaker. Th e com-
puter also can send output to a printer or trans-
fer the output to another computer through a 
network. During the information processing 
 planning recipes for this weekend’s dinner party. 
Choosing the right data to examine and process is a 
big part of making the computer an eff ective tool.
Th ere is a diff erence between information and data. 
Information describes concepts, facts, and ideas that 
people fi nd useful. Data are raw materials that we use 
in the creation of information. For example, you could 
think of the letters of the alphabet as data. By them-
selves, the letters mean little; they are merely symbols. 
But when we put them together to form words and sen-
tences, we produce information. Others can read the 
words and gain understanding of concepts and ideas.
Information can also be used as data, as you can see 
in the example above about auto speed and injuries. 
Data about speeds can produce statistical informa-
tion, and that information could itself be used as data 
when creating presentation pictures for the proposal.
Computers require data in order for their pro-
grams, their processing tasks, to take on meaning. A 
program that simply adds numbers together for no 
purpose isn’t very useful. A program that adds a list of 
auto speeds together in order to calculate an average is 
producing value for the user by helping the user create 
a proposal.
USERS
People are the computer operators, also known as 
users. One might argue that some computer systems 
are complete without a person’s involvement; how-
ever, no computer is totally autonomous. Without 
a user, a  computer would have no data to use in its 
 calculations, and its results would be of no value 
because no person would put those results to use.
Figure 1.14 Software turns a 
generic computer into just the right 
tool for each user.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   21 9/30/11   8:08 AM
22 • COMPUTING NOW
information permanently, the computer will 
save its  output to a hard drive or some other 
kind of storage medium. Storage is optional and 
may not always be required by the user or pro-
gram. (Th e next  section  discusses  memory and 
storage devices.)
1.5 Essential 
Computer 
Hardware
Electronic parts and subsystems in a 
computer are generally installed on a 
 circuit board, which is commonly a thin, 
rigid piece of plastic or other material that 
provides a convenient way to mount, 
organize, and connect parts together. 
Circuit boards are usually rectangu-
lar, come in a wide variety of sizes, 
and have at least one kind 
of connector so they can 
be conveniently linked 
to other parts of 
the computer. 
cycle, the computer will always produce some 
form of output, but that output will not neces-
sarily be noticeable for its user. Output may be 
stored, held for later, or used as input for new 
tasks without the user being aware of it.
4. Storage. Th e computer stores the results of its 
 processing. If the computer stores output in 
its memory, it is usually considered temporary 
storage because information in memory can be 
lost when the computer shuts down. To store 
Fact Check
1. A complete computer system includes
a. hardware, software, data, and users
b. CPU, hard drive, keyboard, and mouse
c. windows, Web windows, Web browser, 
e-mail, and word processor
2. Computer hardware
a. is only contained within the system unit
b. must never be plugged in when the 
computer is turned on
c. is any part of the computer you can touch
3. The specifi c components involved in each 
step of the information processing cycle are
a. hardware, software, data, and users
b. input, processing, output, and storage
c. hard drive, optical disk, and tape
2. Processing
4. Storage
3. Output
1. Input
Figure 1.15 The information processing cycle.
Figure 1.16 
A circuit 
board with 
sets of chips 
installed.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   22 9/30/11   8:08 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 23
soft ware. In a personal computer, the CPU consists 
of a  specialized chip, called a microprocessor, which 
integrates several diff erent processing functions into 
a single chip.
Th e CPU is plugged into a special socket on the 
computer’s motherboard. CPUs come in a wide vari-
ety of designs and processing power. By designing the 
CPU as an installable unit, manufacturers allow users 
more fl exibility; computer makers can select diff er-
ent combinations of motherboards and CPUs, which 
would not be possible if CPUs were preinstalled on 
each motherboard.
Modern CPUs generate a great deal of heat when 
they operate. Without cooling, the heat would 
quickly damage a CPU and cause it to stop function-
ing. CPUs are therefore installed with cooling units 
that consist of large blocks of heat-conducting metal 
pressed tightly against the CPU and cooling fans to 
whisk the heat from the metal. Between the cooling 
unit and the mounting circuit board with dozens of 
tiny copper pins, the CPU looks like a very 
large unit, yet the chip itself is 
just a thin wafer a fraction 
of an inch across.
Memory In a computer, memory is one or more 
sets of chips that store data and/or program instruc-
tions, either temporarily or permanently. Memory 
is a critical processing component in any computer. 
Personal computers use several diff erent types of 
memory, but the two most important are called ran-
dom access memory (RAM) and read-only memory 
(ROM). Th ese two types of memory work in very dif-
ferent ways and perform distinct functions.
Th e most noticeable type of memory for a PC user 
is called random access memory (RAM). As a result, 
the term memory is typically used to mean RAM. Like 
many computer components, RAM consists of a set of 
chips mounted on a small circuit board. Th ose circuit 
boards are plugged into sockets on the motherboard 
so that various subsystems can access the memory.
RAM is like an electronic scratch pad inside the 
computer, allowing the computer to store and retrieve 
Circuit boards that are used to provide a specifi c abil-
ity (like sound or video capability) in the computer 
are also commonly called cards.
MOTHERBOARD
A computer has several hardware subsystems that 
perform its required tasks. While it’s common to refer 
to the CPU as the central part of a computer  system, 
there is a  less-mentioned hardware component that 
truly serves to connect everything else together: 
the motherboard. Sometimes called a mainboard, 
a motherboard is the largest circuit board in a per-
sonal computer. It contains  connectors and ports for 
hooking up all the other parts of a computer, from 
the CPU to the webcam on top of the monitor. It 
also  contains its own set of electronic components 
to help regulate power to diff erent subsystems and 
manage the fl ow of data from one hardware sub-
system to another. In some cases, the motherboard 
contains its own electronic subsystems that years 
ago were only stored on separate cir-
cuit boards, handling tasks such 
as video and sound output and 
network communication.
To be fully func-
tional, a computer 
requires a set of 
hardware compo-
nents that are con-
nected to the motherboard. 
Th ese hardware devices fall into 
one of four basic categories:
• Processors
• Memory
• Input and output
• Storage
While any type of computer contains these four types 
of hardware, this book focuses on them as they relate 
to the PC.
PROCESSORS
Th e procedure that transforms raw data into useful 
information is called processing. Logically, the com-
puter components responsible for this procedure are 
called processors. Processors are complex  electronic 
 circuits etched into slivers of silicon.
Th e main processor for the computer is known as 
the central processing unit (CPU). Th e CPU is like 
the brain of the  computer; it organizes and carries 
out instructions that come from either the user or the 
Figure 1.17 The 
motherboard 
provides connections 
for many different 
devices and 
subsystems.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   23 9/30/11   8:08 AM
24 • COMPUTING NOW
of memory it takes to store a single character, 
such as a letter of the alphabet or a numeral. 
When referring to a computer’s memory, the 
numbers are oft en so large that it is helpful 
to use terms such as kilobyte  (KB), 
megabyte (MB), gigabyte (GB), and 
terabyte (TB) to describe the values; these terms 
are defi ned in Table 2.1. Today’s personal computers 
commonly require at least one gigabyte of memory 
to comfortably function for light-duty use. Many 
users choose to add more (four to eight gigabytes) 
for better performance.
RAM cards are not all created equal. Diff erent 
models of RAM may have diff erent speeds at which 
they store and retrieve data, diff erent methods for 
data storage and retrieval, and even diff erent physical 
layouts.
Each PC motherboard requires a specifi c type 
and speed range of RAM. Many older styles of 
RAM cannot even be physically installed on newer 
motherboards because their connectors are a 
diff erent size and shape. But even if a RAM card can 
be plugged in, an incompatible data transfer speed 
or method can result in terrible performance or—
more likely—a completely nonfunctional computer. 
Whether building a computer from scratch or 
upgrading an existing system’s RAM, it is critically 
important to match the RAM card’s specifi cations 
to the requirements provided by the motherboard 
manufacturer. When adding extra RAM to a system, 
it’s also important to make sure the existing and new 
RAM modules match in speed in order to avoid poor 
performance (or no performance at all).
Read-only memory (ROM) permanently stores its 
data, even when the computer is shut off . It is used not 
for programs and user data but, rather, to store com-
puter instructions and hardware information that rarely 
changes. Th ough ROM’s contents can be changed, the 
data and instructions very quickly. Accessing RAM is 
far faster than reading and writing from storage media 
like hard drives or DVDs. When a program is launched, 
it is loaded into and run from RAM. As the program 
needs data, it is loaded into memory for fast access.
RAM is volatile, meaning it loses its contents when 
the computer is shut off  or if there is a power failure. 
Because RAM needs a constant supply of power to 
hold its data, it is not considered to be a form of per-
manent storage.
RAM has a trem endous impact on the com-
puter’s operating effi  ciency. Generally, the more 
RAM a computer has, the more it can do and the 
faster it can perform certain tasks. If the computer 
needs data but doesn’t have enough RAM to hold 
what it needs, it must store some of what is in RAM 
already onto its hard drive in order to make more 
room. Storing and retrieving chunks of data on disk 
is very time consuming, and if the computer is fol-
lowing this process frequently, programs run slowly. 
Adding RAM to a computer system to improve its 
performance is one of the more common system 
upgrades people perform.
Th e most common measurement unit for describ-
ing a compu ter’s memory is the byte—the amount 
TABLE 1.1 UNITS OF MEASURE FOR COMPUTER 
MEMORY AND STORAGE
Unit Abbreviation
Approximate Value 
(bytes) Actual Value (bytes)
Kilobyte KB 1,000 1,024
Megabyte MB 1,000,000 (1 million) 1,048,576
Gigabyte GB 1,000,000,000 (1 billion) 1,073,741,824
Terabyte TB 1,000,000,000,000 (1 trillion) 1,099,511,627,776
Figure 1.18 RAM for a PC comes in modules 
ready to be installed into the motherboard.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   24 9/30/11   8:09 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 25
You could think of storage as an electronic fi le 
cabinet and RAM as an electronic worktable. When 
you need to work with a program or a set of data, the 
computer locates it in the fi le cabinet and puts a copy 
on the table. Aft er you have fi nished working with the 
program or data, you put it back into the fi le cabinet. 
Th e changes you make to data while working on it 
replace the original data in the fi le cabinet (unless you 
store it in a diff erent place).
Th e main types of computer storage are magnetic, 
optical, and fl ash memory. Th e most common type is 
the magnetic disk. A disk is a round, fl at object that 
spins around its center. (Magnetic disks are almost 
always housed inside a case of some kind, so you can’t 
see the disk itself unless you open the case.) Read/
write heads, which work in much the same way as the 
heads of a tape recorder or VCR, read data from the 
disk or write data onto the disk. Th e complete device 
that holds a disk is called a disk drive.
In addition to magnetic storage, nearly every com-
puter sold today includes at least one form of optical 
storage—devices that use lasers to read data from or 
write data to the refl ective surface of an optical disc. 
For a time, the CD-ROM drive was the most com-
mon type of optical storage device, but it has lately 
been surpassed by the use of DVD drives, which in 
turn are rapidly losing ground to the new Blu-ray 
optical storage format. Compact discs (CDs) are a 
type of optical storage, identical to audio CDs. Data 
CDs can hold varying amounts of data up to nearly 
900  MB. CD-Recordable (CD-R) disks allow you 
to create your own CDs, but CD-R disks cannot be 
erased and reused. A CD-ReWritable (CD-RW) disk 
allows you to write and erase data multiple times on 
the same disk.
Th e digital video disc (DVD), which is familiar if 
you rent movies for home viewing, is used not just for 
home theaters but personal computers as well. Using 
sophisticated com pression technologies, the typical 
single-sided DVDs can hold anywhere from 4.7 GB 
to 8.5 GB of data. Th ough this capacity is still far less 
process is much slower than for altering RAM, and that 
makes ROM unsuitable for storing temporary or rap-
idly changing information. ROM is called nonvolatile 
memory because it never loses its contents.
INPUT AND OUTPUT DEVICES
A perso nal computer would be useless if you could 
not interact with it, because the machine could not 
receive instructions or deliver the results of its work. 
Input devices accept data and instructions from the 
user or from another computer system. Examples 
include keyboards, mice, and digital cameras. Output 
devices, including the monitor, printer, and speak-
ers, return processed data to the user or to another 
computer system. Th e computer sends output to the 
monitor (the display screen) when the user needs only 
to see the output. It sends output to the printer when 
the user requests a paper copy—also called a hard 
copy—of a document.
Some types of hardware can act as both input and 
output devices. For users, a touch screen displays out-
put in the form of text or icons you can touch, and 
it accepts input via special sensors on the screen to 
detect the touch of a fi nger. Between two computers, 
the most common types of devices that can perform 
both input and output are  communications devices. 
Th ese devices connect one computer to another—a 
process known as networking. Such hardware devices 
typically are one of two types (both of these will be 
discussed in greater detail later in this chapter):
1. A modem converts in both directions between 
digital data the computer understands and 
analog signals that are transmitted over tele-
phone or cable television wires.
2. Network interface cards (NICs) are digital-to-
digital hardware components that both allow 
communication and can uniquely identify the 
computing device on the network.
STORAGE DEVICES
A computer can function with only processing, mem-
ory, input, and output devices. To be really useful, 
however, a personal computer also needs a place to 
keep program fi les and related data when they are not 
in use. Th e purpose of storage is to hold data perma-
nently, even when the computer is turned off .
Figure 1.19 A peek inside a hard drive 
shows a round platter and one of the 
read/write heads.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   25 9/30/11   8:09 AM
26 • COMPUTING NOW
than the capacity of a hard disk, DVDs are popular for 
permanent, removable storage. 
Modern DVD drives for computers are combina-
tion units, capable of reading from and writing to 
both DVDs and CDs, freeing the user from the need 
to purchase diff erent drives for each type of disk. 
With just one drive, users can install programs and 
data from their standard DVDs and CDs as well as 
listen to music and watch movies on their personal 
computers.
Th e latest advance in optical storage technology is 
called the Blu-ray disc, named aft er the blue- spectrum 
laser that the drive uses. Th ough the disc’s diameter is 
the same as for CD and DVD drives, switching to a 
blue light laser and improving the design of the disc 
itself have resulted in a storage format that can store 
25 to 50 GB of data depending on whether one or two 
storage layers are in use. Th e newest Blu-ray storage 
formats allow for more than 100 GB to be written to 
a single disc. Blu-ray drives are rapidly becoming the 
new standard for both home entertainment media 
and permanent data storage and are included in many 
home theater, game console, and computer systems. 
Most Blu-ray devices can also read CD and DVD disks.
Th e future of data storage may well be the solid 
state drive (SSD), a memory subsystem that relies 
on special kinds of ROM to permanently store data. 
Since SSDs use memory chips for storage, they have 
no moving parts like hard disks; consequently, they 
have no risk of losing data due to mechanical failures, 
and they generally use less power in their operation. 
Th eir lack of mechanical parts also results in a smaller 
size, which along with reduced power requirements 
makes them an ideal match for mobile computing 
devices like notebook computers.
Th ough most PCs still use a hard drive, you may 
very well have recently been using an SSD without 
using the term. Flash drives, commonly found as 
the little storage sticks that plug into a USB port, are 
a regular staple of many computer users. Once used 
to transfer occasional fi les between computers, fl ash 
drives are now produced with enough storage to rival 
hard drives, with recent models providing 256 GB of 
storage. Th is allows users to store entire music and 
video libraries in one small package, or back up their 
PC’s hard drive to a device that can be easily secured 
in a diff erent location. 
Also included in the SSD category are the small, 
thin memory cards used to store data in portable 
devices such as digital cameras and phones. Th e two 
major formats currently in use for these devices are 
CompactFlash (CF) and Secure Digital (SD), and 
manufacturers for each of those formats produce a 
Fact Check
1. What is the purpose of storage?
a. Ensuring the user’s workspace is kept neat 
and tidy
b. Holding data permanently, even when the 
computer is turned off
c. Freeing up resources for the CPU
2. A microprocessor
a. must be isolated from the other hardware 
subsystems
b. integrates several different processing 
functions into a single chip
c. is actually surprisingly large
range of cards in diff erent sizes and storage capacities. 
It’s common to fi nd SSD cards that provide anywhere 
from 2 to 32 GB of storage, but both CF and SD for-
mats are expanding to support storage amounts into 
the terabytes and beyond.
CF and SD cards require little power to run, which 
makes them ideal choices for storage in devices that 
rely on limited battery capacity to operate. Th ey can be 
easily removed from their home device and transferred 
to a special reader on a PC, to allow the quick transfer 
of images or video from the mobile device to the PC.
Th ough SSD technology has been commercially 
available since the 1970s, it is rapidly evolving. Costs are 
Figure 1.20 Solid state drives have no 
moving parts; perfect for small devices 
with limited power.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   26 9/30/11   8:09 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 27
2. An operating system tells the computer how to 
use its own components. An operating system 
is essential for any computer, because it acts as 
an interpreter between the hardware, applica-
tion programs, and the user. Th ree of the most 
common operating systems are Microsoft ’s 
Windows, Apple Computer’s Mac OS X, and 
Linux.
3. A network operating system allows comput-
ers to communicate and share fi les and device 
resources across a network while controlling 
network operations and overseeing the net-
work’s security.
4. A utility is a program that makes the computer 
system easier to use or performs highly spe-
cialized functions. Utilities are used to manage 
disks, troubleshoot hardware problems, and 
perform other tasks that the operating system 
itself may not be able to do.
Application soft ware tells the computer how to 
accomplish specifi c tasks, such as word processing or 
drawing, for the user. Th ousands of applications are 
available for many purposes and for people of all ages. 
Table 1.2 identifi es major categories of applications 
and describes how they are most commonly used.
Th ough application soft ware performs user- 
oriented tasks, it must still be created with hardware 
and the operating system in mind. A game designed 
for an Apple computer, for example, will not run on 
Sony’s Playstation 3 game console without signifi cant 
modifi cation. Not only are the operating system and 
hardware completely diff erent, but the fundamental 
way that people use the two machines are also worlds 
apart. A game console user typically controls the soft -
ware’s actions through a small set of buttons or by 
simply moving a controller pad through the air. A 
desktop computer substitutes a keyboard and mouse 
falling even as design improvements are increasing the 
effi  ciency of the devices. It may not be long before hard 
drives cease to be a common component of desktop 
PCs and notebooks.
1.6  Software Brings the 
Machine to Life
Th e set of instructions that enable a computer to per-
form specifi c tasks is generically called a program or 
soft ware. Th ese instructions tell the machine’s hard-
ware components what to do; without a program, 
a computer could not do anything at all. When a 
computer uses a particular program, it is said to be 
 running or executing that program.
Most programs that run on a computer are not 
built directly into the computer system. Th is allows 
 diff erent users to customize their computer to ide-
ally suit their needs. To make soft ware available to the 
computer, it is installed, which means that the pro-
gram is written into the computer’s permanent stor-
age. For all but the simplest of programs, installation 
also usually includes adding references to the new 
program into the computer’s operating system, so that 
the operating system will know where to fi nd the pro-
gram, and how to start it.
Installation may also include many other tasks, 
such as the creation and placement of data fi les for 
the program to use, establishing connections to 
devices such as printers for the new soft ware to use, 
and updating soft ware modules in other programs 
that are required by the new soft ware. With few 
exceptions, the installation of soft ware for consumer 
devices such as PCs and smart phones is automatic, 
requiring little else from the user than permission to 
perform the installation. 
Although the array of available programs is vast 
and varied, most soft ware falls into two major catego-
ries: system soft ware and application soft ware.
System soft ware is any program that controls the 
computer’s hardware or can be used to maintain the 
computer in some way so it runs more effi  ciently. 
Th ere are four basic types of system soft ware:
1. Firmware is used to directly control hard-
ware devices, such as keyboards, hard drives, 
and memory cards.1 Firmware can also be 
found outside of a personal computer; the 
programs that control your TV remote and 
cell phone would be considered firmware as 
well. Firmware is embedded on microchips 
and placed on the device that it controls.
Fact Check
1. Which type of software is a word processor 
program?
a. An operating system
b. Firmware
c. Application software
2. List the four types of system software.
1 R. Kayne (2010), What is fi rmware? WiseGEEK. Retrieved May 22, 
2010, from http://www.wisegeek.com/what-is-fi rmware.htm
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   27 9/30/11   8:09 AM
28 • COMPUTING NOW
for joysticks, triggers and colored buttons, and may 
assign commands and controls to a wide array of keys 
that the controller simply doesn’t have.
As hardware changes, soft ware may also need to 
adapt in order to operate effi  ciently. For example, 
when manufacturers began producing multi-core 
processors—microprocessors containing more  than 
one CPU—application soft ware could not take 
advantage of the extra computing power without 
making changes to distribute the program’s work to 
the diff erent CPUs.
It is not always necessary for all application soft -
ware to reside on the user’s machine. It is common 
today for part or all of a program to be provided to 
users via a local network or the Internet. For example, 
Google’s Google Docs service allows users to create 
documents such as letters and spreadsheets using 
online editors, and store the data on Google’s serv-
ers instead of their own computers. Th is allows many 
users to access and update those documents in real 
time, and collaborate and coordinate their work at a 
central location without the need to buy soft ware and 
maintain special servers. It’s an ideal solution when 
TABLE 1.2 MAJOR CATEGORIES OF APPLICATION 
SOFTWARE
Type Purpose
Document publishing Creating text-based documents such as newsletters, reports, articles, 
and brochures
Spreadsheets Creating numeric-based documents such as budgets or balance sheets
Database management Building and manipulating large sets of data, such as the names, 
addresses, and phone numbers in a telephone directory
Presentation Creating and presenting electronic slides
Graphics Designing illustrations or manipulating photographs, movies, 
or animations
Multimedia authoring Composing music and building digital movies that incorporate sound, 
video, animation, and interactive features
Business software Managing inventories, client contacts, sales databases, and accounting
Education software Teaching subjects to children and adults, groups or individual learners
Internet applications Designing Web sites, surfi ng the Web, sending e-mail, and much more
Games Playing single-player or multiplayer games ranging from the simple to 
dazzlingly complex strategic games hosted on the Internet
team members for a project may participate from all 
around the world.
1.7 Data and Users
Hardware and soft ware together create a functional 
computer, but all computers require data in order to 
become useful. Without data to process and infor-
mation to create or deconstruct, a computer has no 
value. Data serves as the computer’s raw material for 
performing every task.
Personal computers are designed to work with 
a human user. In fact, the user is a critical part of a 
complete  computer system, especially when a per-
sonal computer is involved. Th is may seem surpris-
ing, since it’s easy to think of computers as intelligent 
devices that can do practically anything. People also 
sometimes believe computers can think and make 
decisions, as humans do, but this is not the case. Even 
the most powerful supercomputers require human 
interaction—if for no other reason than to get them 
started and tell them which problems to solve.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   28 9/30/11   8:09 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 29
COMPUTER DATA
Th e computer is a tool that aids in that process of 
converting data to information. A computer pro-
cesses and manipulates everything as data. All 
letters, numbers, sounds, pictures, and even its 
soft ware are reduced to strings of digits; hence the 
terms “digitize” and “digital.” It accepts the data it 
has been given, processes its instructions in a strict 
sequence, modifi es or replaces data as required by 
the instructions, and returns its result to the user. 
Th e computer’s soft ware is ultimately responsible 
for completing the conversion from data to infor-
mation by displaying the results of the computer’s 
activity in a way that is meaningful for the user.
Within the computer, data is organized into fi les. 
A fi le is simply a set of data that has been grouped 
together and given a name. A fi le that the user can 
open and use is oft en called a document. Although 
many people think of documents simply as text, a 
computer document can include many kinds of data. 
For example, a computer document can be a text fi le 
(such as a letter), a group of numbers (such as a bud-
get), a video clip (which includes images and sounds), 
and so on. Programs are organized into fi les as well; 
these fi les contain the instructions and data that a 
program needs in order to run and perform tasks.
THE USER’S ROLE
When working with a personal computer, the user 
can take on several roles, depending on what he or 
she wants to accomplish:
• Setting up the system. Have you ever bought a 
new PC? When you got it home, you  probably 
had to unpack it, set it up, and make sure it 
worked as expected. If you want to change 
something about the system, you will likely do 
it yourself, whether you want to add a new hard-
ware device, change the way programs look on 
your screen, or customize the way a program 
functions.
• Installing soft ware. Although your new com-
puter probably came with an operating sys-
tem and some applications installed, you need 
to install any other programs you want to use. 
Th is may involve loading soft ware from a disk 
or downloading it from a Web site. Either way, it 
is usually the user’s responsibility to install pro-
grams, unless the computer is used at a school or 
business. In that case, a system administrator or 
technician is more likely to do the job.
• Running programs. Whenever your computer 
is on, several programs are running in the back-
ground, including the soft ware that runs your 
mouse, network connections, and anti-malware 
protection. Such programs do not need any user 
input; in fact, you may not even be aware of 
them. But for the most part, if you want to use 
your computer to perform a task, you need to 
launch and run the soft ware that is designed for 
the task, and work with it to make sure it gives 
you the results you want.
• Managing fi les. As you have already learned, a 
computer saves data in fi les. If you write a letter 
to a friend, you can save it as a fi le, making it 
available to open and use again later. Pictures, 
songs, and other kinds of data are stored as fi les. 
But it is the user’s job to manage these fi les. 
Managing fi les means setting up a logical system 
for storing them on the computer and knowing 
when to delete fi les, move them, or copy them to 
a storage device for safekeeping.
• Maintaining the system. System maintenance 
does not necessarily mean opening the PC and 
fi xing broken parts, as you would repair a car’s 
Figure 1.21 Computers display data in 
ways that help viewers learn new things.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   29 9/30/11   8:09 AM
30 • COMPUTING NOW
engine. But it could! In that case, you might 
call a qualifi ed technician to do the job or roll 
up your sleeves and tackle it yourself. In most 
cases, however, PC maintenance generally 
means running utilities that keep the disks free 
of  clutter and ensure that the computer is using 
its resources effi  ciently.
“USERLESS” COMPUTERS
Many kinds of computers require no human interaction 
once they have been programmed, installed, and started 
up. For example, if you own a car built within the past 
decade, it almost certainly has an  on-board computer 
that controls and monitors engine  functions. Many 
new home appliances, such as washers and dryers, 
have built-in computers that monitor water usage, dry-
ing times, balance, and other operations. Sophisticated 
userless computers  operate security systems, navigation 
systems, communications systems, and many others.
Userless computers are typically controlled by their 
operating systems. In these devices, the operating sys-
tem may be installed on special memory chips rather 
than a disk. Th e operating system is programmed to 
perform a specifi c set of tasks. Th ese systems are not 
set up for human  interaction, except as needed for 
system confi guration or maintenance.
But even without a person directly controlling and 
receiving output from them, these systems still have 
users. A computer that monitors the temperature in 
a refrigerator has an indirect user in the owner who 
is counting on the milk staying fresh for as long as 
possible. No useful computer is completely separated 
from human users.
Fact Check
1. What is the difference, if any, between data 
and information?
a. Data is the raw material used in the 
creation of information.
b. Data is smaller than information.
c. Data and information are essentially 
the same.
2. What is the relationship between data and a 
computer fi le?
a. Files can only hold information, not data.
b. A fi le is the smallest unit of data on a 
computer.
c. A fi le is a set of data that has been 
grouped together and given a name.
3. Which of the following is a role of the user?
a. Auditing fi rmware
b. Installing software
c. Processing data
Figure 1.22 Users put together their own 
choices for hardware and software to 
build a computer tailored to their needs.
Figure 1.23 Newer cars contain 
onboard computers designed to monitor 
and control the engine with only 
occasional user contact.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   30 9/30/11   8:09 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 31
SummaryIN
• A complete computer system includes hard-
ware, soft ware, data, and users. To manipulate 
data, the computer follows a process called the 
information processing cycle, which includes 
data input, processing, output, and storage.
• A computer’s hardware devices fall into four 
categories: processing, memory, input and 
output (I/O), and storage.
• Th e set of instructions that enable a computer to perform specifi c tasks is generically called 
a program or soft ware. Th ere are four basic types of system soft ware: fi rmware, operating 
system, network operating system, and utility.
• Th ere is a diff erence between information and data. Th e computer is a tool that aids in that 
process of converting data to information. Personal computers are designed to work with 
a human user. In fact, the user is a critical part of a complete computer system.
Complete each statement by writing one of the terms listed under 
“Key Terms” in each blank.
1.  A complete  refers to the combination of hardware, 
soft ware, data, and people.
2.  A(n)  is a set of data or program instructions that has 
been given a name.
3. A(n)  is a device that holds a disk.
Key Terms
QUIZ
application soft ware, 27
Blu-ray disc, 26
byte, 24
cards, 23
CD-Recordable (CD-R), 25
CD-ReWritable (CD-RW), 25
CD-ROM drive, 25
central processing unit 
(CPU), 23
circuit board, 22
communications devices, 25
compact discs (CDs), 25
CompactFlash (CF), 26
computer system, 20
data, 20
digital video disc (DVD), 25
disk drive, 25
document, 29
executing, 27
fi le, 29
fi rmware, 27
fl ash drives, 26
gigabyte (GB), 24
hardware, 20
information processing cycle, 21
installed, 27
kilobyte (KB), 24
magnetic disk, 25
megabyte (MB), 24
memory, 23
microprocessor, 23
modem, 25
motherboard, 23
network interface cards 
(NICs), 25
network operating system, 27
networking, 25
nonvolatile, 25
optical storage, 25
processing, 23
processors, 23
program, 20
random access memory 
(RAM), 23
read-only memory 
(ROM), 24
read/write heads, 25
running, 27
Secure Digital (SD), 26
soft ware, 20
solid state drive (SSD), 26
storage, 25
system soft ware, 27
terabyte (TB), 24
users, 21
utility, 27
volatile, 24
Key Terms
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   31 9/30/11   8:09 AM
32 • COMPUTING NOW
In your own words, briefl y answer the following ques-
tions or respond to the statements.
1. List the four parts of a complete computer system.
2.  What are the four phases of the information process-
ing cycle?
3. Identify four categories of computer hardware.
4. Describe the basic purpose of the central processing unit (CPU).
5. List four units of measure for computer memory and storage, not including the byte.
6. Name and diff erentiate the three main categories of storage devices.
 7. Name and diff erentiate the two main categories of computer soft ware.
8. What is the diff erence between data and information?
9. What is a fundamental diff erence between data and programs?
10. List fi ve tasks a user may be responsible for when working with a personal computer.
Review
QUESTIONS
4. Electronic instructions that tell the computer’s hardware what to do are known as .
5. A rectangular card containing microchips is known as a(n) .
6. Data and program instructions are temporarily held in  while the processor is using 
them.
 7. Th e  includes four stages: input, processing, output, and storage.
8. One  is roughly equivalent to 1 million bytes of data.
9. Operating systems fall into the category of  soft ware.
10. In a magnetic disk drive, a special device called the  reads data from and writes data to a 
disk’s surface.
Complete the following exercises as directed by your 
instructor.
1.  What type of computer system do you use in 
class or in the lab? If your computer is running 
Windows 7, you can access this information from 
the Start Menu. Select “Control Panel,” and from 
that window double-click the “System” icon. From 
that window, you can see the type of processor, its 
speed and the number of cores it has. You’ll also see 
the amount of RAM installed in the computer, and the version of Windows 7 that is installed.
LESSON
LAB
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   32 9/30/11   8:09 AM
 Chapter 1 / Introduction to Computers • 33
Team 
EXERCISE
 Diversity
Most workplaces bring together people of varying ages and physical abilities. 
For example, even in a workplace where no one would meet the defi nition 
of “disabled,” there are likely to be individuals who wear glasses or contact 
lenses, and perhaps some older workers who don’t read small type as well as 
they once did. Fortunately, today’s computers typically can be customized 
to meet the needs of a physically diverse workforce. In this exercise, you will 
explore some of these capabilities.
Divide into groups of three or four. Each group will work on this exercise 
at one shared computer. On a sheet of paper, list the group members’ names, 
ages, and whether or not they use glasses, contact lenses, or some other vision 
correction.
Using your computer and an Internet connection, visit the Web site of the Bureau of Labor Statistics (www.
bls.gov). From the list of Economic News Releases, choose a news release about major economic indicators to 
download in PDF format. When the document is displayed, notice the zoom feature in the toolbar of icons 
above the document: a button with a minus sign, one with a plus sign, and a percentage. Give each group 
member a turn to read a paragraph of the text and adjust the document size by clicking on the plus and minus 
buttons or changing the display percentage. Record the preferred display percentage for each person.
Option: If you are able to save the document you downloaded and open it with Adobe Reader, do that, and 
then use the soft ware’s document-reading function. Highlight a paragraph of the document with your cursor. 
Th en, in the toolbar, click on “View,” and select fi rst “Read Out Loud” and then “Activate Read Out Loud.” 
Listen to the computerized voice read the paragraph. On your list, note whether each group member found 
listening helpful or unhelpful. Th en deactivate “Read Out Loud,” using the same drop-down menu.
Were the preferences the same for all group members? If not, what variations did you observe? Be ready to 
compare your group’s experience with that of the other groups in a class discussion.
 Th en, in the bottom left  corner of that “System” window, click on the link that says, 
“Performance Information and Tools.” You will see a rating provided by Windows of the 
relative power of the computer’s main subsystems, using a scale of 1.0 to 7.9. What subsystems 
received the lowest and highest values on your computer?
2.  What kind of soft ware is installed on your computer? To fi nd out, all you have to do is turn 
on your computer. Aft er it starts, you should see a collection of icons—small pictures that 
represent the programs and other resources on your computer. List the icons that appear on 
your screen and the names of the soft ware programs they represent.
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   33 9/30/11   8:09 AM
CH
A
PT
ER
 S
KI
LL
S 
RE
VI
EW
34
  Chapter LABS
1. Th e race to build a faster computer is never ending. Find out who is currently making the 
world’s fastest supercomputer. Open your computer’s Web browser, visit a search engine site 
such as Google (http://www.google.com) or Bing (http://www.bing.com) and search for the 
phrase world’s fastest supercomputer. Look through the search results for recent news stories, 
and follow links to news or encyclopedia sites that have the latest information. If your search 
results contain too many stories about old computers, try including the current year in your 
search phrase (world’s fastest supercomputer 2011, for example). Read the article and compare 
how much more processing power the new computer provides over the previous record holder.
2. Explore some free services that help you use computers and the Internet to share information 
and creativity.
a. Learn more about starting your own blog. Using a Web browser, navigate to http://www.
blogger.com/. From the front page, click the quick tour link to read information about the 
service and what it does. You can also follow the video tutorial link to a YouTube video 
that gives you details about how to set up and start posting to a blog.
b. Read about starting a new Web site. Use your browser to visit http://www.webs.com/. Near 
the bottom of the front page, follow the View Features button to learn more about what 
services are off ered for free and for a fee, and get a feel for the diff erent ways that Web sites 
can quickly be constructed for new users.
c. Investigate wiki soft ware to see how people with a common interest can share informa-
tion about that subject. Go to http://www.wikia.com/ and explore some of the wiki sites 
that have been created. You can do this either by clicking the Random Wiki button near 
the top of the screen to jump to one of the thousands of wikis that Wikia hosts; or you can 
type a subject (for example, a favorite TV show, computer game or hobby) in the nearby 
search box and search for a wiki on that subject. Look through a couple of wikis to see 
how information is organized, and how thoroughly or superfi cially the subject is covered.
3. Replacing or adding RAM modules is a common operation that many home users do them-
selves. Learn more about this process by watching a tutorial online. With a browser, visit 
http://www.youtube.com/ and search on the phrase install ram desktop; you will most likely 
see a long list of results for this query. Pick one or two videos from the list to watch. If you pick 
a tutorial that was posted within the last year or two, you’ll probably see the inside of a com-
puter that is similar to what you might purchase today. But older demonstrations still show 
the same basic concept; the process of installing RAM has been the same for many years.
  Think AND DISCUSS
As directed by your instructor, discuss the following questions in class or in groups.
1. Home computers are used more extensively than ever for tasks such as banking, invest-
ing, shopping, and communicating. Do you see this trend as having a positive or a negative 
impact on our society and economy? Do you plan to use a computer in these ways? Why or 
why not?
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   34 9/30/11   8:09 AM
CH
A
PT
ER
 S
KI
LL
S 
RE
VI
EW
35
2. With the exploding popularity in tablet and handheld PCs, do you think those devices are 
likely to replace (or at least greatly reduce the number of) desktop PCs being used in the 
future? Why or why not? What factors would contribute to the desktop PC’s demise; or, what 
factors will ensure its future survival?
  FACT CHECK ANSWERS
1A:
LO1.1 What Is a Computer?
1: b. analog and digital
2: b. they process all their data and instructions as numbers
LO1.2 Types of Digital Computers
1: a. Desktop computer
2: network servers, mainframes, minicomputers, supercomputers
LO1.3 Computers in Society
1: b. information
2:  Communication; business work at home; schoolwork; entertainment; creativity; 
 personal fi nances; shopping; education.
3: Census bureau; Internal Revenue Service; military; police
1B:
LO1.4 The Parts of a Computer System
1: a. hardware, soft ware, data, and users
2: c. is any part of the computer you can touch
3: b. input, processing, output, and storage
LO1.5 Essential Computer Hardware
1: b. Holding data permanently, even when the computer is turned off 
2: b. integrates several diff erent processing functions into a single chip
LO1.6 Software Brings the Machine to Life
1: c. Application soft ware
2: fi rmware, operating system, network operating system, utility
LO1.7 Data and Users
1: a. Data is the raw material used in the creation of information.
2: c. A fi le is a set of data that has been grouped together and given a name.
3: b. Installing soft ware
comp16856_ch01_002-035.indd   35 9/30/11   8:09 AM

