FIELD METHODSGravlee / M BILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING
Mobile Computer-Assisted
Personal Interviewing with Handheld
Computers: The Entryware System 3.0
CLARENCE C. GRAVLEE
University of Florida
Computer-assisted data collection in survey research offers potentially lower costs,
quicker turnaround time, and improved data quality as compared to traditional
paper-and-pencil methods. The proliferation of handheld computers in recent years
nowmakes these benefits more accessible to field researchers. Handheld computers
are inexpensive, portable, and energy efficient, making them ideal field instruments.
In this article, I review a new software product designed for mobile computer-
assisted personal interviewing (MCAPI) with Palm OS handheld computers. Based
on my experience with MCAPI in the field, I conclude that version 3.0 of Entryware
software is a robust tool for face-to-face or self-administered structured interviews
in field settings. I also consider some implications of this new technology for field
research, including respondents’ reactions and data quality.
Handheld computers have become commonplace, and field researchers
should take note: These small, affordable computers are not just personal
organizers. They offer absolute portability, extended battery life, an intuitive
interface, and surprising computing power. In addition, the connectability of
handhelds to desktop computers provides a mobile interface with standard
software applications, and modem and wireless communications make it
easy to transfer data to and from the field. The potential utility of handheld
computers for field researchers is tremendous (Greene 2001).
This review considers a new product for the Palm platform that makes
good on the promise of mobile computing for field researchers. Version 3.0
of Techneos Systems’ Entryware software consists of two applications for
designing questionnaires, transferring data, and conducting face-to-face
interviews with Palm-powered computers. This technology offers several
key advantages of computer-assisted interviewing in general but stands out
for its true mobility and significantly lower hardware costs.
Here I offer a brief overview of mobile computer-assisted personal inter-
viewing (MCAPI) in general and review the key features of the Entryware
system in particular. I report my own experiences using Entryware software
Field Methods, Vol. 14, No. 3, August 2002 322–336
© 2002 Sage Publications
322
during a recent project in Puerto Rico and consider some implications of this
new technology for doing field research. Like other computer-assisted inter-
viewing software, Entryware software was designed for survey researchers,
so those who conduct primarily unstructured, open-ended interviews will not
find it useful. However, researchers who conduct face-to-face or self-
administered structured interviews in field settings will want to take a serious
look at MCAPI with the Entryware system.
MCAPI: AN OVERVIEW
The use of computers in survey research has a brief yet productive history
(Baker 1992). Couper and Nicholls (1998) suggested that no methodological
development in the past half-century “may have more far-reaching effects on
survey research than the application of computer methods to survey data col-
lection and capture” (p. 1).
This development began in the early 1970s with the invention of computer-
assisted telephone interviewing (CATI) (Fink 1983). By the mid-1980s,
CATI had become standard in survey research organizations, and the avail-
ability of portable computers made it possible to extend the use of computers
to face-to-face interviewing. Computer-assisted personal interviewing
(CAPI) is now used widely in face-to-face interviews by university research-
ers, government agencies, and private-sector survey organizations around
the world (Couper and Nicholls 1998). MCAPI, with handheld computers,
should be seen as the latest step in this trajectory of computer-assisted meth-
ods of survey research.
CAPI methods offer several important advantages over traditional
paper-and-pencil techniques. The first is that CAPI integrates data collec-
tion, data entry, editing, coding, and cleaning into a single process. As a
result, it offers quicker turnaround time to a final product and potentially
lower costs by eliminating postinterview processing. Second, CAPI
improves data quality. CAPI software can help interviewers recognize and
correct data input errors on the spot, and it completely eliminates the
error-prone step of data entry. Third, CAPI facilitates more complex ques-
tionnaire designs than are feasible with paper-and-pencil techniques. It
enables randomization of both question and response sets and makes compli-
cated branching and skip patterns invisible to interviewers. In sum, CAPI
offers a potentially quicker turnaround time, reduced costs, and improved
data quality in survey research (Baker 1992; Couper and Nicholls 1998).
But there are drawbacks. For many researchers, the initial investment in
CAPI software and hardware—generally, laptop computers—is prohibitive.
Gravlee / MOBILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING 323
The overall expense is greatest for large-scale surveys with numerous inter-
viewers and the need for more hardware, but even those carrying out small
projects are likely to find the expense of multiple laptop computers unjustifi-
able. Another significant drawback to standard CAPI techniques is the
restricted portability and relatively short battery life of laptop computers,
which limits the mobility of interviewers. This limitation can be decisive for
researchers who seek respondents in field settings or who work in areas
where power supplies are unpredictable.
The increasing availability and affordability of handheld computers pro-
vide an attractive alternative to standard CAPI technology. Currently, the
most widely available handheld computers are those running the Palm OS
platform, although the Windows CE platform is steadily gaining ground.
Entry-level Palm-powered handhelds such as the Palm m100 and
Handspring Visor models are now available for less than $100, and the most
expensive models, which offer more features than most users need, top out at
about $450. Handhelds for the Windows CE platform generally are more
expensive than Palm devices, starting at about $350. But even at these prices,
it would be feasible to outfit multiple interviewers for the cost of a single lap-
top computer.1
Moreover, handheld computers offer the sort of real portability that field
interviewers need. Specific models vary in size, but all are small enough to
slip into one’s pocket and not distract from the interaction between inter-
viewers and respondents. Handhelds also free users from concerns over bat-
tery life and power supplies since devices with monochrome displays can
easily run for weeks of heavy usage on two AAA batteries. Palm-powered
devices with color screens and all pocket PC models consume battery life
much more quickly and are therefore less desirable field computers, but even
they are more energy efficient than standard CAPI hardware.
The advantages of handheld hardware have sparked interest among sur-
vey researchers since the early days of CAPI. The Netherlands Central
Bureau of Statistics purchased its first handheld computers in 1983 (de Heer
1991), and Statistics Sweden was testing handhelds for CAPI around the
same time (Couper and Nicholls 1998). In recent years, other institutions
have experimented with handheld computers in large-scale national surveys
(Forster and Snow 1995; Bosley, Conrad, and Uglow 1998). However, these
early applications generally required substantial programming experience,
were not widely available, and required expensive handheld computers. For-
tunately, the proliferation of handhelds has brought about a boom in
handheld software and affordable hardware. MCAPI is now available on a
wider scale than ever.
324 FIELD METHODS
ENTRYWARE SYSTEM 3.0
There are several applications designed for field-based data collection
with handheld computers, but few are geared specifically to social research-
ers.2 Among the serious attempts at MCAPI, Entryware software is, to my
knowledge, the only one designed for the Palm OS. I am aware of two other
MCAPI applications, Surveycraft’s scyField-HPC and Mercator’s Snap
PDA Interviewer software.3 Perhaps because these products are add-in mod-
ules for core Windows desktop applications, they are both designed for the
Windows CE handheld platform. This is unfortunate because it means signif-
icantly higher hardware costs, shorter battery life, and no relevant advantage
in computing power over Palm-powered devices.
My experience with a previous version of Entryware software illustrates
the flexibility and power of the Palm platform for mobile data collection.
During a recent project in Puerto Rico, I used the Entryware system to con-
duct one hundred survey interviews in respondents’ homes. These interviews
included up to 268 questions—including multiple choice, yes/no,
open-ended numeric, and open-ended text response—and lasted an average
of sixty-eight minutes (Entryware software automatically records the dura-
tion of each interview). Such long interviews posed no problem for the soft-
ware. Indeed, the Entryware system technically allows up to 32,000 ques-
tions per questionnaire and 1,295 responses per question. By contrast, the
competing Snap PDA Interviewer software for the Windows CE platform
has an upper limit of 50 questions per interview.
Running Entryware software on my Palm-powered device also provided
plenty of battery life and memory for long days of interviewing. My
gray-scale Handspring Visor Deluxe handheld runs for up to forty hours on a
single pair of AAA batteries. Just in case, I always carried a spare pair for
on-the-spot recharging in the field. Like most basic models, this handheld
ships with 8 MB of memory, and the Entryware application itself occupies
only 133 K. My large questionnaire required another 100 K, and each com-
pleted interview added about 20 K of memory. These specifications mean
that I could have completed the entire project several times over before run-
ning out of room to store response data. Thus, my experience suggests that
Entryware designers chose wisely in creating current versions of their soft-
ware for the Palm OS because it maximizes the key advantages of handheld
computers over standard CAPI technology: lower costs and greater mobility.
Gravlee / MOBILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING 325
Software Overview
Version 3.0 of the Entryware line consists of two applications that are
priced and sold separately. The core product is the Entryware Designer pro-
gram, a Windows desktop application for designing questionnaires, transfer-
ring data to and from handhelds, and exporting interview data to other desk-
top applications for analysis. The hardware requirements for this program are
minimal: Users need an IBM-compatible Pentium-class PC or better with
Windows 95/98/2000/XP or NT 4.0, 20 MB of hard disk space, and 32 MB
RAM. There is currently no Macintosh version of the Entryware software.
The second component of the Entryware system is the Entryware Inter-
viewer program, a Palm OS application for collecting interview data on
handheld computers. Version 3.0 includes a free application for Windows
PCs that allows users to download questionnaires to handhelds and upload
response data to PCs without using the Designer application. This applica-
tion allows field staff to manage questionnaires and interview data but does
not permit changes to the questionnaire design itself. The Interviewer soft-
ware runs on any handheld computer with Palm OS 3.1 or later, and it
requires very little RAM. Even entry-level devices with 2 MB RAM can store
dozens of different questionnaires and response data from hundreds of com-
pleted interviews. The low cost and long battery life of such devices, as com-
pared to more expensive models, makes them attractive field computers.
In January 2002, Techneos released version 3.0 of its Entryware Pro prod-
ucts. This major upgrade introduces several key new features (see below) and
carries a new licensing scheme. For commercial users, a perpetual license for
version 3.0 of the Entryware Designer application costs $2,000 for the first
workstation and $1,500 each for the second to the fifth, with additional dis-
counts on larger volumes. A perpetual commercial license for the Inter-
viewer software starts at $140 per handheld. An annual maintenance fee of
20% of the current list price applies to all perpetual licenses, providing
toll-free technical support in the United States and Canada and all product
upgrades. The software comes with a thirty-day money-back guarantee and
an extensive, well-written manual in PDF format.
With version 3.0, Techneos is also introducing an option for annual com-
mercial licenses at $1,065 for the Designer program and $75 for the Inter-
viewer application. This pricing structure reduces the up-front expense and
makes the Entryware system more affordable for one-time or occasional
users. Regular users, on the other hand, will end up paying more over the long
haul.
Many Field Methods readers will be interested in academic pricing. For
academic institutions and full-time staff or students, academic licenses will
326 FIELD METHODS
be available on an annual basis at a 50% discount from the price for commer-
cial use. Annual licenses for academic users cost roughly $530 for the
Designer application and $37 for the Interviewer program. These prices may
still be prohibitive for graduate students and individual researchers without
institutional support, but they should be weighed against potentially
improved data quality, quicker turnaround time, and lower costs in
postinterview processing. Techneos also offers special pricing to institutions
that incorporate the software into course curriculum.
Features and Usability
The main window in the Entryware Designer program provides a straight-
forward, easy-to-use layout with access to the major features of question-
naire design (see Figure 1). Questions consist of three elements: the question
text, responses, and scripts. Question text is used not only for questions but
Gravlee / MOBILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING 327
FIGURE 1
Screen Shot of Questionnaire Design Window
in Entryware Designer Software 3.0
also for messages and instructions to interviewers or respondents. The text
can contain nearly any character, including accents or other single-byte char-
acters required in languages other than English (see Figure 2a–c). By late
2002, Techneos promises support for multibyte characters. The text-editing
functions in the design application are very basic. To insert special characters
required in my Spanish questionnaire, I needed to copy and paste question
and response text from my word processor to the Entryware design window.
Questions must be specified as either single or multiple response. Single-
response questions ask for just a single answer, but multiple-response ques-
tions allow users to ask about an entire list of items. For example, multiple-
response questions are useful for collecting ratings about a series of items or
for asking respondents to “check all that apply.” For both single- and multiple-
response questions, Entryware software supports four response types:
open-ended numeric, open-ended text, yes/no, and user-defined lists. Fig-
ure 2 shows questions from my survey in Puerto Rico that illustrate the
328 FIELD METHODS
FIGURE 2
Screen Shots from Entryware Interviewer Software 3.0
on a Palm OS Handheld
appearance of each response type on the handheld screen. Panels a–d show
single-response questions, whereas panels e and f show different options for
multiple-response questions.
Some researchers may find it useful to give respondents visual cues for
multiple-response questions like those in Figure 2. In Puerto Rico, for
instance, I handed respondents laminated cards with the response options
printed in a large font for multiple-response questions or scale items. For lit-
erate respondents, these cards improved understanding of the question for-
mat and substantially reduced the length of the interview.
Two key advantages of CAPI methods are the ability to simplify complex
branching and skip patterns and to validate data values during data collec-
tion. The Entryware Designer software offers these advantages through its
scripting features. Scripts allow users to display messages (see Figure 2b),
change question routing, and assign or calculate user-defined variables based
on any number of conditions. The interface for building scripts is fairly intu-
itive and requires no programming. Figure 3, for example, shows a
prequestion script from an Entryware questionnaire that I designed to screen
sampled households and to select one adult household member at random to
participate in the survey. This script tells the software to skip to the question
“respondent selection” if the number of eligible household members is less
than three. Simple scripts like this one are very easy to create. The script
examples provided with the software give users a good sense of what’s possi-
ble with more complex scripts.
Researchers who work with multilingual populations will appreciate the
ability to specify question and response text in up to fifteen languages for
each questionnaire.4 Each questionnaire requires users to specify a default
language, but if the questionnaire has been developed in more than one lan-
guage, interviewers can choose an alternative language from the handheld
during the interview. The software then automatically records the language
in which each interview is conducted. This feature is particularly useful
because questionnaire structure is independent of language use. Conse-
quently, any changes in scripts, question order, or the order of response items
will affect questionnaire structure across all languages, thus maintaining the
comparability of response data (within limits of the translation).
The Designer software includes other features to balance the need for
flexibility in questionnaire design versus control over changes that could
result in ambiguous data. One key feature is the ability to choose one of three
project modes—draft, pretest, or live—depending on the stage of question-
naire design.
Draft mode, for example, turns off warning and tracking features in the
Designer application and prevents interviewers from saving response data on
Gravlee / MOBILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING 329
the handheld. In Puerto Rico, I used this mode to pretest branching and skip
patterns and to verify translations and question format with key informants.
When it appeared no more changes were necessary, I switched to pretest
mode, which allowed me to save response data and engaged the modification
log. This log tracks changes in questionnaire design and documents which
version of the questionnaire is used in each interview. If there is a serious
design flaw, the modification log would help researchers identify which data
are unusable and why.
A critical feature of the Entryware system is the ability to work with multi-
ple interviewers, as there is no limit to the number of handhelds used in a sin-
gle project. Response data from multiple handhelds can be uploaded to a sin-
gle PC, where the Designer program consolidates the data into a single file
for processing. It is not even necessary that interviewers be in the same loca-
tion: Response data can be uploaded from the field via a modem connection,
330 FIELD METHODS
FIGURE 3
Script-Building Interface in Entryware Designer Software 3.0
and Techneos promises an Enterprise version with Web-based synchroniza-
tion and reporting in 2002.
Unlike some survey packages, Entryware products offer no data editing or
analysis functions, so response data must be exported to third-party software
for analysis. This limitation is inconsequential, because the Designer appli-
cation processes and exports response data as a delimited or fixed-field
ASCII file, or as a formatted SPSS data set (.sav) in which the question text is
exported as variable labels. Users can define variable names, change variable
order, and set missing values before exporting the data set. In practice, these
features meant that, when I returned home after a long day of interviewing in
Puerto Rico, my response data were instantly ready for analysis.
Like most Palm programs, the Interviewer application has a simple, intu-
itive interface and is easy to learn. It comes with a hands-on tutorial that can
have first-time users up and running with very little practice. My research
assistant in Puerto Rico, who had never seen a Palm-powered computer, mas-
tered the interviewing software after the first few pretest interviews. This
ease of use may translate to lower training costs relative to projects with stan-
dard CAPI technology (Bosley, Conrad, and Uglow 1998). Some interview-
ers may be put off by the small screens of handheld computers, but Entryware
software allows users to improve the appearance of questionnaires on the
handheld. Users can choose between two font sizes (see Figure 2a–c versus
d–f) and can customize the number of lines allotted to question and response
text.
Several new features in version 3.0 incorporate key advantages of CAPI
over paper-and-pencil interviewing and make the software much more com-
pelling than the version I used in Puerto Rico. For example, users can now
minimize the risk of bias from question order by rotating or randomizing
response lists. There are also improved functions for validating response val-
ues, ensuring that case data is complete, filtering response items, and piping
response text to subsequent questions. Frequently used questions can be cop-
ied from one questionnaire to another, complete with response alternatives
and scripts to ensure comparability.
Field Applications
The use of handheld computers in field research raises long-standing con-
cerns about how respondents’ reactions to technology may affect data qual-
ity. After twenty years of research, there remains little evidence of mode
effects in traditional CAPI (Baker 1992; de Leeuw and Nicholls 1996; Lynn
1998). Yet the novelty of handheld computers makes it important to consider
Gravlee / MOBILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING 331
this potential source of bias—especially in settings in which handheld com-
puters are not yet commonplace. In Nepal, Greene (2001) reported that infor-
mants who encounter handheld computers for the first time generally
respond with curiosity. He added that the technology contributes to a “sense
that the interview is an important event” (p. 182) and that it has improved the
quality and efficiency of data collection.
This response resonates with my own experience in Puerto Rico. In the
communities where I worked, few people had ever seen handheld computers.
Many survey respondents were curious about the device, asking, “Is that a
computer?” When I showed them how it allowed me to enter their responses
directly, most seemed impressed by the technology. My research assistant
told me that she felt more professional using the handheld to conduct the
interviews, a common reaction among users of standard CAPI technology
(Baker 1992).
Handheld computers offer a distinct advantage over laptop computers
because they facilitate a more natural interaction between the interviewer and
respondent (Bosley, Conrad, and Uglow 1998). Indeed, I found it easier to
maintain eye contact and a natural flow of conversation using the handheld
computer than is possible with even paper-and-pencil methods. There is also
evidence that computer-assisted interviews are shorter than paper-and-pencil
interviews, which may improve respondents’ willingness to participate
(Lynn 1998). As this technology proliferates, we need more systematic stud-
ies to evaluate the effect of handheld computers on data quality and respon-
dents’ reactions to participation, as compared to other interviewing
technologies.
Handheld MCAPI should be particularly attractive to researchers who
collect survey data about sensitive topics such as sexual behavior, substance
abuse, or criminal activities. Baker (1992) reported that respondents in a
CAPI interview may be more likely to report behavior they perceive as nega-
tive or embarrassing than are respondents in a traditional paper-and-pencil
interview. However, more recent studies argue that computerization itself is
not as important as is mode of administration: Self-administered question-
naires reduce social desirability effects relative to traditional face-to-face
interviews (Tourangeau and Smith 1996; Moon 1998). In an effort to
improve the accuracy of survey data, therefore, many researchers have
moved to computer-assisted self-interviewing.
Handheld computers make it easier to take this technology to the field,
especially since the Entryware handheld interface can be set up for
self-administered interviews. Handhelds running Entryware software can be
used for fully self-administered interviews or in combination with inter-
viewer-administered questions. The portability and intuitive interface of
332 FIELD METHODS
handheld computers make it easy for respondents to interact directly with the
computer.
In some cases, it may be valuable to link MCAPI interviews with
self-administered paper questionnaires that researchers can collect or receive
by mail at a later point in time. This approach would be useful, for example, to
collect a subset of data about sensitive topics or events that take place after
the interview. Using Entryware software for MCAPI together with paper
forms designed for electronic scanning (Weller and Baer 2001) would be a
feasible option in such cases. To link the MCAPI interview with the
self-administered questionnaire, interviewers could simply record a serial
number from each paper questionnaire during the initial MCAPI interview.
For large samples, it might be worth automating this process by scanning a
bar-coded serial number directly into the handheld.5
My experience using the Entryware system confirms that it is a robust tool
for implementing MCAPI in face-to-face structured interviewing. This new
technology can be used in a wide range of field settings and provides the key
benefits of CAPI to field researchers. However, it may not be appropriate for
all types of structured interviewing. For example, in earlier phases of my
work in Puerto Rico, I tried to use the Entryware system in structured
ethnographic interviews with methods for cultural domain analysis (Weller
and Romney 1988). The Entryware system turned out to be too cumbersome
for interviewing techniques such as free lists, pile sorts, and identification
tasks, all of which require greater flexibility to move between questions and
to access response data from previous questions or even from previous inter-
views. This limitation is to be expected since Entryware software is designed
specifically for survey research and therefore assumes a fixed, linear pro-
gression from one question to the next. When this degree of structure is not
appropriate, forms-based data collection software is likely to be a better alter-
native.6
My experience also suggests that the Entryware software is at its best in
surveys that include mainly closed-ended responses. The software does sup-
port open-ended text, but efficient text entry on Palm OS computers requires
either mastery of the Graffiti handwriting system or an alternative text-entry
system. Graffiti handwriting uses an alphabet with simplified characters, and
with practice it can be at least as efficient as normal handwriting. For exam-
ple, I use my handheld daily and enter text with Graffiti handwriting at about
thirty words per minute, slightly faster (and far more legible) than with pencil
and paper. However, my research assistant in Puerto Rico never mastered the
Graffiti system, and eventually we agreed that she would ask only questions
with closed-ended responses. In situations that demand more open-ended
text, I would recommend purchasing an external keyboard. Current models
Gravlee / MOBILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING 333
range in size from so-called thumb boards to full-size QWERTY keyboards
that fold up and fit in your pocket.7
CONCLUSION
Potential users should note that Entryware software is not meant to be an
all-in-one survey package. It does not include data-editing or analysis func-
tions, and it lacks the project and sample management features of some desk-
top survey packages. However, the Entryware system is the best solution for
field researchers who want to capture the power of mobile computing in
face-to-face structured interviewing. This robust product delivers the key
benefits of computer-assisted interviewing to handheld computers. As such,
it offers dramatically lower hardware costs and true interviewer mobility as
compared to standard CAPI technology. The Entryware questionnaire
design tools are intuitive yet powerful, and the Palm OS interviewing soft-
ware is simple and easy to learn. The availability of this new technology has
the potential to improve the conduct and quality of survey research in the
field.
For more information, contact
Techneos Systems, Inc.
302-788 Beatty Street
Vancouver, BC
Canada V6B 2M1
http://www.techneos.com
Phone: 888-282-0641 (toll-free in the United States and Canada)
Fax: 604-435-6007
NOTES
1. For more on the differences among handheld platforms and their use in field research, see
Greene (2001).
2. For example, both Pendragon Forms (http://www.pendragon-software.com/) and Satel-
lite Forms (http://www.pumatech.com/) allow users to design mobile data collection tools for
Palm OS computers—the latter at a significantly higher cost. These products are general-
purpose data collection tools that could be useful for social researchers in many applications.
However, because they are not designed specifically for social research, they lack some key
functionality of computer-assisted personal interviewing software such as randomization and
334 FIELD METHODS
interviewer tracking, and they can be more cumbersome, time-consuming, and error prone in
programming skip patterns or branching.
3. scyField-HPC has never been widely available in North America and soon will be unavail-
able elsewhere, too. The entire Surveycraft line is being phased out by its new owners, SPSS.
SPSS is now an authorized distributor of Techneos’s Entryware system.
4. Entryware software has built-in support for eleven European languages: English, French,
Spanish, Portuguese, German, Dutch, Italian, Swedish, Norwegian, Danish, and Finnish. In
addition, users can specify up to four other languages for each questionnaire.
5. Symbol Technologies (http://www.symbol.com) makes Palm-powered devices with
built-in bar-code scanners. They also produce an add-in module for Handspring Visor devices
that adds bar-code scanning to these popular Palm-powered computers.
6. I used thinkDB database software from thinkingBytes Technology, Inc.
(http://www.thinkingbytes.com) to create data collection forms for structured ethnographic
interviews. Pendragon Forms and Satellite Forms software may also be appropriate for similar
interviewing situations.
7. For more on text-entry alternatives for Palm-powered devices, see the following:
http://www.palm.com
http://www.handspring.com
http://www.thinkoutside.com/
http://www.landware.com/gotype/
http://www.thumbtype.net/
http://www.twsolutions.com/
REFERENCES
Baker, R. P. 1992. New technology in survey research: Computer-assisted personal interview-
ing (CAPI). Social Science Computer Review 10 (2): 145–57.
Bosley, J., F. G. Conrad, and D. Uglow. 1998. Pen CASIC: Design and usability. In Computer
assisted survey information collection, edited by M. P. Couper, R. P. Baker, J. Bethlehem,
C.Z.F. Clark, J. Martin, W. L. Nicholls II, and J. M. O’Reilly, 521–41. New York: John
Wiley.
Couper, M. P., and W. L. Nicholls II. 1998. The history and development of computer assisted
survey information collection methods. InComputer assisted survey information collection,
edited by M. P. Couper, R. P. Baker, J. Bethlehem, C.Z.F. Clark, J. Martin, W. L. Nicholls II,
and J. M. O’Reilly, 1–17. New York: John Wiley.
de Heer, W. F. 1991. The use of handheld computers in social surveys of the Netherlands Central
Bureau of Statistics. The Statistician 40:125–38.
de Leeuw, E., and W. L. Nicholls II. 1996. Technological innovations in data collection: Accep-
tance, data quality and costs. Sociological Research Online 1(4).
Fink, J. C. 1983. CATI’s first decade: The Chilton experience. Sociological Methods &
Research 12 (2): 153–68.
Forster, D., and R. W. Snow. 1995. An assessment of the use of handheld computers during
demographic surveys in developing countries. Survey Methodology 21 (2): 179–84.
Greene, P. D. 2001. Handheld computers as tools for writing and managing field data. Field
Methods 13 (2): 181–97.
Gravlee / MOBILE COMPUTER-ASSISTED PERSONAL INTERVIEWING 335
Lynn, P. 1998. Data collection mode effects on responses to attitudinal questions. Journal of
Official Statistics 14 (1): 1–14.
Moon, Y. 1998. Impression management in computer-based interviews: The effects of input
modality, output modality, and distance. Public Opinion Quarterly 62 (4): 610–22.
Tourangeau, R., and T. W. Smith. 1996. Asking sensitive questions: The impact of data collec-
tion mode, question format, and question context. Public Opinion Quarterly 60 (2):
275–304.
Weller, S. C., and R. D. Baer. 2001. Using electronic scanning forms for data entry. Field
Methods 13 (2): 198–203.
Weller, S. C., and A. K. Romney. 1988. Systematic data collection. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
CLARENCE C. GRAVLEE is a doctoral candidate in anthropology at the University of
Florida. His research interests are in the areas of ethnicity and health, with an emphasis
on measuring the health effects of racism. In September 2002, he will begin a postdoc-
toral fellowship at theUniversity ofMichigan School of PublicHealth as aW.K.Kellogg
Community Health Scholar. His dissertation is titled “Skin Color, Culture, and Blood
Pressure in Southeastern Puerto Rico.”
336 FIELD METHODS

