LECTURE SCHEDULE 1 
 
Introduction to Computers, Anatomy of Computers, Input and Output Devices 
In human affairs we have reached a point where the problems that we must solve are no longer 
solvable without the aid of computers. I fear not computers but the lack of them. 
ISAAC ASIMOV 
 
Introduction to Computers 
A computer can be defined as an electronic device capable of processing the data and 
producing the information. 
The computer system essentially comprises three important parts –  
1. input device, 
2. central processing unit (CPU) and  
3. output device.  
The CPU itself is made of three components namely,  
1. arithmetic logic unit (ALU),  
2. memory unit, and  
3. control unit. 
 
Components of a computer system 
 
 
 
 
On broad basis, a computer performs the following tasks: 
 
Input: Sending the data and command to the computer is known as input. 
 
Processing: Work done by the computer with the help of processing hardware and software to 
produce results is known as processing. 
 
Output: The result displayed by the computer is known as output. 
 
Storage: A place to save result inside or outside the computer is known as storage. 
 
Anatomy of Computers 
The following are the parts of a desktop computer. 
 
Power Supply 
When you plug your power cable into your computer, 
you are actually plugging into a socket in the power 
supply unit that has been fitted inside your case. This 
component is responsible for converting the 240 volt AC 
mains power to low voltage DC power needed by 
computer components. The power supply generates 
+3.3V, +5V, +12V, -5V. These voltages must be 
constant, right up to the maximum current your system 
will draw under load. 
 
 
 
Monitor- Commonly known as a "screen," the monitor gives you a visual display of what your 
computer is up to. Monitor displays are divided into pixels. The higher the pixel count, the higher 
the "resolution." Resolutions are measured in Rows x Columns. Common resolution settings are 
640 x 480, 800 x 600, 1024 x 768, 1280 x 1024, etc. 
 
Mother board 
The mainboard I which is sometimes called a motherboard. This 
is usually the largest circuit-board in the computer, and every 
other component in the computer connects to it. 
                
 
 
 
Central Processing Unit 
The Central Processing Unit (CPU)is usually called either a CPU 
or just a Processor. The CPU is the brain of the system. It 
executes all the program code from the operating system and 
the applications the user runs and processing of data. It sends 
CPU commands to direct the actions of all the other components 
in the computer.  
An Intel CPU 
 
 
 
Main Memory or Random Access Memory (RAM) 
RAM, which stands for Random Access Memory, is the short 
term memory that the computer uses to keep track of what it's 
doing. If the computer loses power, anything stored in RAM is 
lost. 
RAM Chips       
 
 
 
Storage Device 
Computer storage device is any type of hardware that 
stores data. The most common type of storage device, 
which nearly all computers have, is a hard drive.  
A Hard Drive 
 
 
 
INPUT AND OUTPUT DEVICES 
 
Input Devices 
Input device is a hardware device that sends information to the computer. 
 
Mouse  
Mouse is a pointer device.The 
mouse allows an individual to 
control a pointer in a graphical user 
interface (GUI). Utilizing a mouse a 
user has the ability to perform 
various functions such as opening a 
program or file and does not require 
the user to memorize commands. 
 
            
Digital camera  
A type of camera that stores the 
pictures or video it takes in 
electronic format instead of to film. 
 
                  
Web Cam  
A camera connected to a computer 
that allows anyone connected to the 
Internet to view still pictures or 
motion video of a user. 
  
Joystick  
A computer joystick allows an 
individual to easily navigate an 
object in a game such as navigating 
a plane in a flight simulator. 
 
 
              
Keyboard  
One of the main input devices used 
on a computer, a computer 
keyboard looks very similar to the 
keyboards of electric typewriters, 
with some additional keys. 
 
 
Microphone  
Sometimes abbreviated as mic, a 
microphone is a hardware 
peripheral that allows computer 
users to input audio into their 
computers. 
 
 
                       
Scanner  
Input device that allows a user to 
take an image and/or text and 
convert it into a digital file, allowing 
the computer to read and/or display 
the scanned object 
 
 
Output Device 
Any peripheral that receives and/or displays output from a computer. Below are some examples 
of different types of output devices commonly found on a computer. 
Monitor 
A monitor is a video display screen. Monitor is also called as Visual Display Unit (VDU) or Video 
Display Terminal (VDT). 
CRT (Cathode Ray Tube) Monitors are built 
very similarly to older (tube) television sets. 
They are heavy, bulky, take up a lot of desk 
space, and emit radiation. 
LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) Monitors are 
thin and flat. They are light, compact, take up 
very little desk space emit no known radiation. 
 
 
Printer  
A printer is an output device responsible for 
taking computer data and generating a hard 
copy of that data. 
 
 
 
 
 
Projector  
 
 
 
 
Speakers  
 
 
 

