Image registration methods: a survey
Barbara Zitová*, Jan Flusser
Department of Image Processing, Institute of Information Theory and Automation, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic
Pod vodárenskou věžı́ 4, 182 08 Prague 8, Czech Republic
Received 9 November 2001; received in revised form 20 June 2003; accepted 26 June 2003
Abstract
This paper aims to present a review of recent as well as classic image registration methods. Image registration is the process of overlaying
images (two or more) of the same scene taken at different times, from different viewpoints, and/or by different sensors. The registration
geometrically align two images (the reference and sensed images). The reviewed approaches are classified according to their nature (area-
based and feature-based) and according to four basic steps of image registration procedure: feature detection, feature matching, mapping
function design, and image transformation and resampling. Main contributions, advantages, and drawbacks of the methods are mentioned in
the paper. Problematic issues of image registration and outlook for the future research are discussed too. The major goal of the paper is to
provide a comprehensive reference source for the researchers involved in image registration, regardless of particular application areas.
q 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Image registration; Feature detection; Feature matching; Mapping function; Resampling
1. Introduction
Image registration is the process of overlaying two or
more images of the same scene taken at different times,
from different viewpoints, and/or by different sensors. It
geometrically aligns two images—the reference and
sensed images. The present differences between images
are introduced due to different imaging conditions. Image
registration is a crucial step in all image analysis tasks
in which the final information is gained from the
combination of various data sources like in image fusion,
change detection, and multichannel image restoration.
Typically, registration is required in remote sensing
(multispectral classification, environmental monitoring,
change detection, image mosaicing, weather forecasting,
creating super-resolution images, integrating information
into geographic information systems (GIS)), in medicine
(combining computer tomography (CT) and NMR data
to obtain more complete information about the patient,
monitoring tumor growth, treatment verification,
comparison of the patient’s data with anatomical atlases),
in cartography (map updating), and in computer vision
(target localization, automatic quality control), to name
a few.
During the last decades, image acquisition devices have
undergone rapid development and growing amount and
diversity of obtained images invoked the research on
automatic image registration. A comprehensive survey of
image registration methods was published in 1992 by
Brown [26]. The intention of our article is to cover relevant
approaches introduced later and in this way map the current
development of registration techniques. According to the
database of the Institute of Scientific Information (ISI), in
the last 10 years more than 1000 papers were published on
the topic of image registration. Methods published before
1992 that became classic or introduced key ideas, which are
still in use, are included as well to retain the continuity and
to give complete view of image registration research. We do
not contemplate to go into details of particular algorithms or
describe results of comparative experiments, rather we want
to summarize main approaches and point out interesting
parts of the registration methods.
In Section 2 various aspects and problems of image
registration will be discussed. Both area-based and feature-
based approaches to feature selection are described in
Section 3. Section 4 reviews the existing algorithms for
feature matching. Methods for mapping function design are
given in Section 5. Finally, Section 6 surveys main
0262-8856/03/$ - see front matter q 2003 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0262-8856(03)00137-9
Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000
www.elsevier.com/locate/imavis
* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ420-2-6605-2390; fax: þ420-2-8468-
0730.
E-mail address: zitova@utia.cas.cz (B. Zitová), flusser@utia.cas.cz
(J. Flusser)
techniques for image transformation and resampling.
Evaluation of the image registration accuracy is covered
in Section 7. Section 8 concludes main trends in the research
on registration methods and offers the outlook for the future.
2. Image registration methodology
Image registration, as it was mentioned above, is widely
used in remote sensing, medical imaging, computer vision
etc. In general, its applications can be divided into four main
groups according to the manner of the image acquisition:
Different viewpoints (multiview analysis). Images of the
same scene are acquired from different viewpoints. The aim
is to gain larger a 2D view or a 3D representation of the
scanned scene.
Examples of applications: Remote sensing—mosaicing
of images of the surveyed area. Computer vision—shape
recovery (shape from stereo).
Different times (multitemporal analysis). Images of the
same scene are acquired at different times, often on regular
basis, and possibly under different conditions. The aim is to
find and evaluate changes in the scene which appeared
between the consecutive image acquisitions.
Examples of applications: Remote sensing—monitoring
of global land usage, landscape planning. Computer
vision—automatic change detection for security monitor-
ing, motion tracking. Medical imaging—monitoring of the
healing therapy, monitoring of the tumor evolution.
Different sensors (multimodal analysis). Images of the
same scene are acquired by different sensors. The aim is to
integrate the information obtained from different source
streams to gain more complex and detailed scene
representation.
Examples of applications: Remote sensing—fusion of
information from sensors with different characteristics like
panchromatic images, offering better spatial resolution,
color/multispectral images with better spectral resolution, or
radar images independent of cloud cover and solar
illumination. Medical imaging—combination of sensors
recording the anatomical body structure like magnetic
resonance image (MRI), ultrasound or CT with sensors
monitoring functional and metabolic body activities like
positron emission tomography (PET), single photon emis-
sion computed tomography (SPECT) or magnetic resonance
spectroscopy (MRS). Results can be applied, for instance, in
radiotherapy and nuclear medicine.
Scene to model registration. Images of a scene and a
model of the scene are registered. The model can be a
computer representation of the scene, for instance maps or
digital elevation models (DEM) in GIS, another scene with
similar content (another patient), ‘average’ specimen, etc.
The aim is to localize the acquired image in the scene/model
and/or to compare them.
Examples of applications: Remote sensing—registration
of aerial or satellite data into maps or other GIS layers.
Computer vision—target template matching with real-time
images, automatic quality inspection. Medical imaging—
comparison of the patient’s image with digital anatomical
atlases, specimen classification.
Due to the diversity of images to be registered and due to
various types of degradations it is impossible to design a
universal method applicable to all registration tasks. Every
method should take into account not only the assumed type
of geometric deformation between the images but also
radiometric deformations and noise corruption, required
registration accuracy and application-dependent data
characteristics.
Nevertheless, the majority of the registration methods
consists of the following four steps (see Fig. 1):
† Feature detection. Salient and distinctive objects
(closed-boundary regions, edges, contours, line intersec-
tions, corners, etc.) are manually or, preferably, auto-
matically detected. For further processing, these features
can be represented by their point representatives (centers
of gravity, line endings, distinctive points), which are
called control points (CPs) in the literature.
† Feature matching. In this step, the correspondence
between the features detected in the sensed image and
those detected in the reference image is established.
Various feature descriptors and similarity measures
along with spatial relationships among the features are
used for that purpose.
† Transform model estimation. The type and parameters of
the so-called mapping functions, aligning the sensed
image with the reference image, are estimated. The
parameters of the mapping functions are computed by
means of the established feature correspondence.
† Image resampling and transformation. The sensed
image is transformed by means of the mapping
functions. Image values in non-integer coordinates
are computed by the appropriate interpolation
technique.
The implementation of each registration step has its
typical problems. First, we have to decide what kind of
features is appropriate for the given task. The features
should be distinctive objects, which are frequently spread
over the images and which are easily detectable. Usually,
the physical interpretability of the features is demanded.
The detected feature sets in the reference and sensed images
must have enough common elements, even in situations
when the images do not cover exactly the same scene or
when there are object occlusions or other unexpected
changes. The detection methods should have good localiz-
ation accuracy and should not be sensitive to the assumed
image degradation. In an ideal case, the algorithm should be
able to detect the same features in all projections of the
scene regardless of the particular image deformation.
In the feature matching step, problems caused by an
incorrect feature detection or by image degradations can
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000978
arise. Physically corresponding features can be dissimilar
due to the different imaging conditions and/or due to the
different spectral sensitivity of the sensors. The choice of the
feature description and similarity measure has to consider
these factors. The feature descriptors should be invariant to
the assumed degradations. Simultaneously, they have to be
discriminable enough to be able to distinguish among
different features as well as sufficiently stable so as not to be
influenced by slight unexpected feature variations and noise.
The matching algorithm in the space of invariants should be
robust and efficient. Single features without corresponding
counterparts in the other image should not affect its
performance.
The type of the mapping functions should be
chosen according to the a priori known information
about the acquisition process and expected image
degradations. If no a priori information is available, the
model should be flexible and general enough to handle
all possible degradations which might appear. The
accuracy of the feature detection method, the reliability
of feature correspondence estimation, and the acceptable
approximation error need to be considered too. Moreover,
the decision about which differences between images
have to be removed by registration has to be done. It is
desirable not to remove the differences we are searching
for if the aim is a change detection. This issue is very
important and extremely difficult.
Finally, the choice of the appropriate type of resampling
technique depends on the trade-off between the demanded
accuracy of the interpolation and the computational
Fig. 1. Four steps of image registration: top row—feature detection (corners were used as the features in this case). Middle row—feature matching by invariant
descriptors (the corresponding pairs are marked by numbers). Bottom left—transform model estimation exploiting the established correspondence. Bottom
right—image resampling and transformation using appropriate interpolation technique.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 979
complexity. The nearest-neighbor or bilinear interpolation
are sufficient in most cases; however, some applications
require more precise methods.
Because of its importance in various application areas as
well as because of its complicated nature, image registration
has been the topic of much recent research. The historically
first survey paper [64] covers mainly the methods based on
image correlation. Probably the most exhaustive review of
the general-purpose image registration methods is in Ref.
[26]. Registration techniques applied particularly in medical
imaging are summarized in Refs. [86,111,123,195]. In Ref.
[9] the surface based registration methods in medical
imaging are reviewed. Volume-based registration is
reviewed in Ref. [40]. The registration methods applied
mainly in remote sensing are described and evaluated in [59,
81,106]. Big evaluation project of different registration
methods was run in Vanderbilt university [206].
Registration methods can be categorized with respect to
various criteria. The ones usually used are the application
area, dimensionality of data, type and complexity of
assumed image deformations, computational cost, and the
essential ideas of the registration algorithm. Here, the
classification according to the essential ideas is chosen,
considering the decomposition of the registration into the
described four steps. The techniques exceeding this four-
step framework are covered according to their major
contribution.
3. Feature detection
Formerly, the features were objects manually selected by
an expert. During an automation of this registration step,
two main approaches to feature understanding have been
formed.
3.1. Area-based methods
Area-based methods put emphasis rather on the feature
matching step than on their detection. No features are
detected in these approaches so the first step of image
registration is omitted. The methods belonging to this class
will be covered in sections corresponding to the other
registration steps.
3.2. Feature-based methods
The second approach is based on the extraction of salient
structures–features—in the images. Significant regions
(forests, lakes, fields), lines (region boundaries, coastlines,
roads, rivers) or points (region corners, line intersections,
points on curves with high curvature) are understood as
features here. They should be distinct, spread all over the
image and efficiently detectable in both images. They are
expected to be stable in time to stay at fixed positions during
the whole experiment.
The comparability of feature sets in the sensed and
reference images is assured by the invariance and accuracy
of the feature detector and by the overlap criterion. In other
words, the number of common elements of the detected sets
of features should be sufficiently high, regardless of the
change of image geometry, radiometric conditions, presence
of additive noise, and of changes in the scanned scene. The
‘remarkableness’ of the features is implied by their
definition. In contrast to the area-based methods, the
feature-based ones do not work directly with image intensity
values. The features represent information on higher level.
This property makes feature-based methods suitable for
situations when illumination changes are expected or
multisensor analysis is demanded.
Region features. The region-like features can be the
projections of general high contrast closed-boundary
regions of an appropriate size [54,72], water reservoirs,
and lakes [71,88], buildings [92], forests [165], urban areas
[161] or shadows [24]. The general criterion of closed-
boundary regions is prevalent. The regions are often
represented by their centers of gravity, which are invariant
with respect to rotation, scaling, and skewing and stable
under random noise and gray level variation.
Region features are detected by means of segmentation
methods [137]. The accuracy of the segmentation can
significantly influence the resulting registration. Goshtasby
et al. [72] proposed a refinement of the segmentation
process to improve the registration quality. The segmenta-
tion of the image was done iteratively together with the
registration; in every iteration, the rough estimation of the
object correspondence was used to tune the segmentation
parameters. They claimed the subpixel accuracy of
registration could be achieved.
Recently, selection of region features invariant with
respect to change of scale caught attention. Alhichri and
Kamel [2] proposed the idea of virtual circles, using
distance transform. Affinely invariant neighborhoods were
described in [194], based on Harris corner detector [135]
and edges (curved or straight) going through detected
corners. Different approach to this problem using Maxi-
mally Stable Extremal Regions based on homogeneity of
image intensities was presented by Matas et al. [127].
Line features. The line features can be the representations
of general line segments [92,132,205], object contours [36,
74,112], coastal lines, [124,168], roads [114] or elongated
anatomic structures [202] in medical imaging. Line
correspondence is usually expressed by pairs of line ends
or middle points.
Standard edge detection methods, like Canny detector
[28] or a detector based on the Laplacian of Gaussian [126],
are employed for the line feature detection. The survey of
existing edge detection method together with their evalu-
ation can be found in [222]. Li et al. [112] proposed to
exploit the already detected features in the reference image
(optical data) for the detection of lines in the sensed images
(SAR images with speckle noise, which is a typical
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000980
degradation present in this type of data). They applied
elastic contour extraction. The comparison of different
operators for the feature edge detection and the ridge
detection in multimodal medical images is presented by
Maintz et al. [121,122].
Point features. The point features group consists of
methods working with line intersections [175,198], road
crossings [79,161], centroids of water regions, oil and gas
pads [190], high variance points [45], local curvature
discontinuities detected using the Gabor wavelets [125,
219], inflection points of curves [3,11], local extrema of
wavelet transform [58,90], the most distinctive points with
respect to a specified measure of similarity [115], and
corners [20,92,204].
The core algorithms of feature detectors in most cases
follow the definitions of the ‘point’ as line intersection,
centroid of closed-boundary region or local modulus
maxima of the wavelet transform. Corners form specific
class of features, because ‘to-be-a-corner’ property is hard
to define mathematically (intuitively, corners are under-
stood as points of high curvature on the region boundaries).
Much effort has been spent in developing precise, robust,
and fast method for corner detection. A survey of corner
detectors can be found in Refs. [155,172,220] and the most
up-to-date and exhaustive in Ref. [156]. The latter also
analyzes localization properties of the detectors. Corners are
widely used as CPs mainly because of their invariance to
imaging geometry and because they are well perceived by a
human observer.
Kitchen and Rosenfeld [101] proposed to exploit the
second-order partial derivatives of the image function for
corner detection. Dreschler and Nagel [43] searched for the
local extrema of the Gaussian curvature. However, corner
detectors based on the second-order derivatives of the image
function are sensitive to noise. Thus Förstner [62] developed
a more robust, although time consuming, corner detector,
which is based on the first-order derivatives only. The
reputable Harris detector (also referred to as the Plessey
detector) [135] is in fact its inverse. The application of the
Förstner detector is described in Ref. [107], where it is used
for the registration of dental implants images.
More intuitive approach was chosen by Smith and Brady
[173] in their robust SUSAN method. As the criterion they
used the size of the area of the same color as that of the
central pixel. Trajkovic and Hedley [192] designed their
operator using the idea that the change of the image
intensity at the corners should be high in all directions.
Recently, Zitová et al. [224] proposed a parametric corner
detector, which does not employ any derivatives and which
was designed to handle blurred and noisy data. Rohr et al.
designed corner detectors, even for 3D data, allowing user
interaction [158].
The number of detected points can be very high, which
increases the computational time necessary for the regis-
tration. Several authors proposed methods for an efficient
selection of a subset of points (better than random) which
does not degrade the quality of the resulting registration.
Goshtasby [71] used only points belonging to a convex hull
of the whole set. Lavine [104] proposed to use points
forming the minimum spanning trees of sets. Ehlers [45]
merged points into ‘clumps’—large dense clusters.
3.3. Summary
To summarize, the use of feature-based methods is
recommended if the images contain enough distinctive and
easily detectable objects. This is usually the case of
applications in remote sensing and computer vision. The
typical images contain a lot of details (towns, rivers, roads,
forests, room facilities, etc). On the other hand, medical
images are not so rich in such details and thus area-based
methods are usually employed here. Sometimes, the lack of
distinctive objects in medical images is solved by the
interactive selection done by an expert or by introducing
extrinsic features, rigidly positioned with respect to the
patient (skin markers, screw markers, dental adapters, etc.)
[123]. The applicability of area-based and feature-based
methods for images with various contrast and sharpness is
analyzed in Ref. [151]. Recently, registration methods using
simultaneously both area-based and feature-based
approaches have started to appear [85].
4. Feature matching
The detected features in the reference and sensed images
can be matched by means of the image intensity values in
their close neighborhoods, the feature spatial distribution, or
the feature symbolic description. Some methods, while
looking for the feature correspondence, simultaneously
estimate the parameters of mapping functions and thus
merge the second and third registration steps.
In the following paragraphs, the two major categories
(area-based and feature-based methods, respectively), are
retained and further classified into subcategories according
to the basic ideas of the matching methods.
4.1. Area-based methods
Area-based methods, sometimes called correlation-like
methods or template matching [59] merge the feature
detection step with the matching part. These methods deal
with the images without attempting to detect salient objects.
Windows of predefined size or even entire images are used
for the correspondence estimation during the second
registration step, [4,12,145].
The limitations of the area-based methods originate in
their basic idea. Firstly, the rectangular window, which is
most often used, suits the registration of images which
locally differ only by a translation. If images are deformed
by more complex transformations, this type of the window
is not able to cover the same parts of the scene in
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 981
the reference and sensed images (the rectangle can be
transformed to some other shape). Several authors proposed
to use circular shape of the window for mutually rotated
images. However, the comparability of such simple-shaped
windows is violated too if more complicated geometric
deformations (similarity, perspective transforms, etc.) are
present between images.
Another disadvantage of the area-based methods refers to
the ‘remarkableness’ of the window content. There is high
probability that a window containing a smooth area without
any prominent details will be matched incorrectly with other
smooth areas in the reference image due to its non-saliency.
The features for registration should be preferably detected in
distinctive parts of the image. Windows, whose selection is
often not based on their content evaluation, may not have
this property.
Classical area-based methods like cross-correlation (CC)
exploit for matching directly image intensities, without any
structural analysis. Consequently, they are sensitive to the
intensity changes, introduced for instance by noise, varying
illumination, and/or by using different sensor types.
4.1.1. Correlation-like methods
The classical representative of the area-based methods is
the normalized CC and its modifications [146].
CCði; jÞ ¼
P
W ðW 2 EðWÞÞðIði;jÞ 2 EðIði;jÞÞÞffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiP
W ðW 2 EðWÞÞ2
q ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiP
Iði;jÞ ðIði;jÞ 2 EðIði;jÞÞÞ2
q
This measure of similarity is computed for window pairs
from the sensed and reference images and its maximum is
searched. The window pairs for which the maximum is
achieved are set as the corresponding ones (see Fig. 2). If the
subpixel accuracy of the registration is demanded, the
interpolation of the CC measure values needs to be used.
Although the CC based registration can exactly align
mutually translated images only, it can also be successfully
applied when slight rotation and scaling are present.
There are generalized versions of CC for geometrically
more deformed images. They compute the CC for each
assumed geometric transformation of the sensed image
window [83] and are able to handle even more complicated
geometric deformations than the translation-usually the
similarity transform. Berthilsson [17] tried to register in this
manner even affinely deformed images and Simper [170]
proposed to use a divide and conquer system and the CC
technique for registering images differing by perspective
changes as well as changes due to the lens imperfections.
The computational load, however, grows very fast with
the increase of the transformation complexity. In case the
images/objects to be registered are partially occluded the
extended CC method based on increment sign correlation
[98] can be applied [99].
Similar to the CC methods is the sequential similarity
detection algorithm (SSDA) [12]. It uses the sequential
search approach and a computationally simpler distance
measure than the CC. It accumulates the sum of absolute
differences of the image intensity values (matrix l1norm)
and applies the threshold criterion—if the accumulated sum
exceeds the given threshold, the candidate pair of windows
from the reference and sensed images is rejected and the
next pair is tested. The method is likely to be less accurate
than the CC but it is faster. Sum of squared differences
similarity measure was used in Ref. [211] for iterative
estimation of perspective deformation using piecewise
affine estimates for image decomposed to small patches.
Recently big interest in the area of multimodal
registration has been paid to the correlation ratio based
methods. In opposite to classical CC, this similarity measure
can handle intensity differences between images due to the
usage of different sensors—multimodal images. It supposes
that intensity dependence can be represented by some
function. Comparison of this approach to several other
algorithms developed for multimodal data can be found in
Ref. [154]. In case of noisy images with certain character-
istic (fixed-pattern noise), projection-based registration
[27], working with accumulated image rows and columns,
respectively, outperforms classical CC.
Huttenlocher et al. [95] proposed a method working with
other type of similarity measure. They registered binary
images (the output of an edge detector) transformed by
translation or translation plus rotation, by means of the
Hausdorff distance (HD). They compared the HD based
algorithm with the CC. Especially on images with perturbed
pixel locations, which are problematic for CC, HD outper-
forms the CC.
Two main drawbacks of the correlation-like methods are
the flatness of the similarity measure maxima (due to the
self-similarity of the images) and high computational
complexity. The maximum can be sharpened by preproces-
sing or by using the edge or vector correlation. Pratt [145]
applied, prior to the registration, image filtering to improve
the CC performance on noisy or highly correlated images.
Van Wie [196] and Anuta [6] employed the edge-based
correlation, which is computed on the edges extracted from
the images rather than on the original images themselves. In
this way, the method is less sensitive to intensity differences
between the reference and sensed images, too. Extension of
this approach, called vector-based correlation, computes the
similarity measures using various representations of the
window.
Despite the limitations mentioned above, the correlation-
like registration methods are still often in use, particularly
thanks to their easy hardware implementation, which makes
them useful for real-time applications.
4.1.2. Fourier methods
If an acceleration of the computational speed is needed or
if the images were acquired under varying conditions or
they are corrupted by frequency-dependent noise, then
Fourier methods are preferred rather than the correlation-
like methods. They exploit the Fourier representation of
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000982
the images in the frequency domain. The phase correlation
method is based on the Fourier Shift Theorem [23] and was
originally proposed for the registration of translated images.
It computes the cross-power spectrum of the sensed and
reference images and looks for the location of the peak in its
inverse (see Fig. 2).
Fðf ÞFðgÞp
lFðf ÞFðgÞpl ¼ e
2piðux0þvy0Þ
The method shows strong robustness against the correlated
and frequency dependent noise and non-uniform, time
varying illumination disturbances. The computational time
savings are more significant if the images, which are to be
registered, are large.
De Castro and Morandi [29] introduced an extension
of the phase correlation for additional rotation transform.
If the change of image scale is present too, the images
can be registered using the combination of polar-log
mapping of the spectral magnitude (which corresponds to
Fourier–Mellin transform) and the phase correlation [31,
150] or cepstrum filter [107]. The applications of the
extended algorithm in remote sensing (SPOT images) and
medical imaging (MR images) are described in Ref. [31].
The testing of the accuracy of the method in simulated
conditions (registration of deformed and noisy images of
ocular fundus) was performed with satisfying results [34].
Affinely distorted images were registered by means of
phase correlation and log-polar mapping in Ref. [210].
Application of phase correlation in 3D is described in
Ref. [119]. Another application exploiting the Fourier
transform is described in Ref. [6]. The authors proposed
to compute the correlation in frequency domain. This
Fig. 2. Area-based matching methods: registration of small template to the whole image using normalized cross-correlation (middle row) and phase correlation
(bottom row). The maxima identify the matching positions. The template is of the same spectral band as the reference image (the graphs on the left depict red-
red channel matching) and of different spectral band (the graphs on the right demonstrate red-blue channel matching). In a general case the normalized cross-
correlation could fail in case of multimodal data.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 983
method can handle multimodal images when applied to
the edge representations instead of the original graylevel
images. Extension of phase correlation to subpixel
registration by means of the analytic expression of
phase correlation on down sampled images was intro-
duced by Foroosh et al. [61].
4.1.3. Mutual information methods
The mutual information (MI) methods are the last group
of the area-based methods to be reviewed here. They have
appeared recently and represent the leading technique in
multimodal registration. Registration of multimodal images
is the difficult task, but often necessary to solve, especially
in medical imaging. The comparison of anatomical and
functional images of the patient’s body can lead to a
diagnosis, which would be impossible to gain otherwise.
Remote sensing often makes use of the exploitation of more
sensor types, too.
The MI, originating from the information theory, is a
measure of statistical dependency between two data sets and
it is particularly suitable for registration of images from
different modalities. MI between two random variables X
and Y is given by
MIðX;YÞ ¼ HðYÞ2 HðY lXÞ ¼ HðXÞ þ HðYÞ2 HðX;YÞ;
where HðXÞ ¼ 2EXðlogðPðXÞÞÞ represents entropy of ran-
dom variable and PðXÞ is the probability distribution of X:
The method is based on the maximization of MI (Fig. 3)
Often the speed up of the registration is implemented,
exploiting the coarse-to-fine resolution strategy (the pyr-
amidal approach).
One of the first articles proposing this technique is Viola
and Wells [201]. The authors described the application of
MI for the registration by magnetic resonance images as
well as for the 3D object model matching to the real scene.
MI was maximized using the gradient descent optimization
method. Thévenaz and Unser [186–188] tried to combine
various approaches, solving individual steps of MI regis-
tration. They employed the Parzen window for the joint
probability computation and the Jeeves method [187] or the
Marquardt–Levenberg method [186] to maximize the MI.
To speed up the computation, they used spline pyramids
Fig. 3. Mutual information: MI criterion (bottom row) computed in the neighborhood of point P between new and old photographs of the mosaic (top row).
Maximum of MI shows the correct matching position (point A). Point B indicates the false matching position selected previously by the human operator. The
mistake was caused by poor image quality and by complex nature of the image degradations.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000984
[188]. Ritter et al. [152] used hierarchical search strategy
together with simulated annealing to find the maximum of
the MI. Studholme et al. [177] compared three similar
measures of information dependency—the joint entropy, the
MI, and the normalized MI (a new idea, claimed to
outperform the others). They applied discrete histogram
estimates of the joint probability distribution instead of
application of the Parzen window used in previous work.
Maximization was achieved by using a multiresolution hill
climbing algorithm. They registered MR-CT and MR-PET
images of a human brain. Maes et al. [120] optimized the MI
by means of the Brent’s method and the Powell’s multi-
dimensional direction set method to register MR, CT, and
PET images of a human brain that differ by similarity
transform. MI applied to breast MR images is described in
Ref. [162]. The authors proposed to model the global
deformation present between the images by a combination
of the affine transformations and the spline-based free form
deformation. Likar and Pernus [116] studied the perform-
ance of different methods for the joint probability estimation
in registration of muscle fibre images. The comparison of
the basic MI registration with the version employing the
coarse-to-fine speed up was done in Ref. [143]. The
comparison of MI to six other registration methods
including the normalized CC and the gradient correlation
is described in Ref. [142]. The relation of MI to other area-
based similarity (correlation coefficients, correlation ratio)
measures is described in Ref. [153] using the formulation of
maximum likelihood estimation problem.
The above mentioned MI methods work with the entire
image data and directly with image intensities. Rangarajan
et al. [149] applied MI on extracted features (points of the
area borders), but this approach is still rare. Similar to MI,
coming form the theory of information, is similarity
measure based on cross-entropy [221].
4.1.4. Optimization methods
Finding the minimum of dissimilarity measure (penalty
function) or the maximum of similarity measure is a
multidimensional optimization problem, where the number
of dimensions corresponds to the degrees of freedom of the
expected geometrical transformation. The only method
yielding global extreme solution is an exhaustive search
over the entire image. Although it is computationally
demanding, it is often used if only translations are to be
estimated.
In case of transformations with more degrees of freedom
or in case of more complex similarity measures, sophisti-
cated optimization algorithms are required, which help to
localize the maxima or minima, respectively. The appli-
cation of Gauss–Newton numerical minimization algorithm
for minimizing the sum of squared differences is described
in Ref. [166], where the projective geometric deformation
was used. In Ref. [201] maxima of MI was found using the
gradient descent optimization method. Levenberg–Mar-
quardt optimization method was applied in Ref. [164] to
minimize the variance in intensities of corresponding pixels.
The images were registered by means of the projective
transformation model plus the lens distortion model. The
combination of the Levenberg–Marquardt method and the
sum of the squared differences metric is described in Ref.
[185]. Similarly, Wolberg and Zokai [211] used this
combination for registering of perspectively deformed
images. The Powell’s multidimensional direction set
method [96] is applied in Maes et al. [120]. Starink and
Backer [174] tried to minimize a dissimilarity measure
defined on point pairs by means of simulated annealing.
Another optimization method, suited for multimodal data
registration was introduced in Ref. [97] and its applicability
was proved in combination with MI and correlation ratio.
Again, the optimization methods can be speeded up by the
pyramidal approach.
There should be noted one thing with respect to these
optimization methods. Sometimes next to the dissimilarity
measure term the formula to be minimized contains as well
so-called regularization or penalty term, which intercon-
nects the transformation and data to be transformed [82].
These two terms together form the cost function (energy)
associated with the registration and the aim of the
optimization methods is to minimize it. In literature such
methods can be referred to as energy minimization methods.
The regularization term is usually omitted in case of rigid
body transforms, but in non-rigid transformations such as
elastic or fluid registration methods, described more in
detail in Section 5, is present.
4.2. Feature-based methods
We assume that two sets of features in the reference and
sensed images represented by the CPs (points themselves,
end points or centers of line features, centers of gravity of
regions, etc.) have been detected. The aim is to find the pair-
wise correspondence between them using their spatial
relations or various descriptors of features.
4.2.1. Methods using spatial relations
Methods based primarily on the spatial relations among
the features are usually applied if detected features are
ambiguous or if their neighborhoods are locally distorted.
The information about the distance between the CPs and
about their spatial distribution is exploited.
Goshtasby in Ref. [71] described the registration based
on the graph matching algorithm. He was evaluating the
number of features in the sensed image that, after the
particular transformation, fall within a given range next to
the features in the reference image. The transformation
parameters with the highest score were then set as a valid
estimate.
Clustering technique, presented by Stockman et al. [175],
tries to match points connected by abstract edges or line
segments. The assumed geometrical model is the similarity
transform. For every pair of CPs from both the reference and
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 985
sensed images, the parameters of the transformation which
maps the points on each other are computed and represented
as a point in the space of transform parameters. The
parameters of transformations that closely map the highest
number of features tend to form a cluster, while mismatches
fill the parameter space randomly. The cluster is detected
and its centroid is assumed to represent the most probable
vector of matching parameters. Mapping function par-
ameters are thus found simultaneously with the feature
correspondence. Local errors do not influence globally the
registration process. The clustering technique was
implemented, for example, in Refs. [30,72].
Barrow et al. [14] introduced the chamfer matching for
image registration. Line features detected in images are
matched by means of the minimalization of the generalized
distance between them. Borgefors [22] proposed an
improved version, where better measure of correspon-
dence-the sequential distance transform together with the
root mean square average—was applied. The algorithm
employs also the pyramidal speed-up.
Even that this overview does not intend to cover 3D
registration methods, here the well-known Iterative Closest
Point (ICP) algorithm, introduced by Besl and McKay [18]
is mentioned, because it represents a key approach for
registering 3D shapes (including free-form curves and
surfaces).
4.2.2. Methods using invariant descriptors
As an alternative to the methods exploiting the spatial
relations, the correspondence of features can be estimated
using their description, preferably invariant to the
expected image deformation (see Fig. 4). The description
Fig. 4. Feature-based method using invariant descriptors: in these two satellite images, control points (corners) were matched using invariants based on
complex moments [56]. The numbers identify corresponding CP’s. The bottom image shows the registration result.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000986
should fulfill several conditions. The most important ones
are invariance (the descriptions of the corresponding
features from the reference and sensed image have to be
the same), uniqueness (two different features should have
different descriptions), stability (the description of a
feature which is slightly deformed in an unknown manner
should be close to the description of the original feature),
and independence (if the feature description is a vector, its
elements should be functionally independent). However,
usually not all these conditions have to (or can) be
satisfied simultaneously and it is necessary to find an
appropriate trade-off.
Features from the sensed and reference images with the
most similar invariant descriptions are paired as the
corresponding ones. The choice of the type of the invariant
description depends on the feature characteristics and the
assumed geometric deformation of the images. While
searching for the best matching feature pairs in the space
of feature descriptors, the minimum distance rule with
thresholding is usually applied. If a more robust algorithm is
needed, the matching likelihood coefficients [51], which can
better handle questionable situations, can be an appropriate
solution. Guest et al. proposed to select features according
to the reliability of their possible matches [80].
The simplest feature description is the image intensity
function itself, limited to the close neighborhood of the
feature [1,107]. To estimate the feature correspondence,
authors computed the CC on these neighborhoods. Other
types of similarity measures can be used, too. Zheng and
Chellapa make use of the correlation coefficients [219].
They assumed the similarity geometric deformation. In their
approach, firstly the rotation between images was compen-
sated by the estimation of the illuminant direction and then
the coarse-to-fine correlation based registration was per-
formed. In Ref. [223] the MI was used for the improvement
of the feature correspondence.
The following references are examples of the intuitive
descriptions, which usually do not fulfill some of the
mentioned criteria of invariant descriptors. Sester et al.
[165] proposed to describe forests, used as the region
features, by elongation parameter, compactness, number of
holes, and several characteristics of the minimum bounding
rectangle. To register stars with a catalog, Murtagh [133]
assigned to every point feature the description of the spatial
distribution of other features lying around. Vujovic and
Brzakovic in Ref. [202] represented every detected feature
(elongated structure intersections) by its signature formed
by the longest structure and angles between all other
structures, participating in the intersection. Similarly, Zana
[218] described each feature point by means of angles
between relevant intersecting lines. Montesinos et al. [131]
proposed to use differential descriptors of the image
function in the neighborhood of the detected CPs. Yang
and Cohen [216] used border triangles generated by object
convex hull and computed on them affine geometric
invariants.
Many authors used closed-boundary regions as the
features. In principle, any invariant and discriminative
enough shape descriptor can be employed in region
matching. Peli [141] proposed simple and fast description
by radial shape vector but the usage of this method is limited
to star-shape regions only. A generalized shape description
in a form of a binary matrix was proposed in Ref. [65,180].
In Ref. [72], the shape matrices were used for registration of
rotated and scaled satellite images. In Ref. [112] a chain
code representation of contours was proposed as the
invariant description and a chain code correlation-like
measure was used for finding the correspondence. Skea et al.
[171] represented non-collinear triplets of CPs by the
sphericity. Suk [178] proposed the invariant shape descrip-
tion of the regions represented by polygons and further
developed this approach in Ref. [179].
A large group of methods uses moment-based invar-
iants for description of closed-boundary region features.
Considering the most often assumed deformations, Hu
[93] introduced moment invariants to the similarity
transform. Flusser and Suk derived the affine transform
invariants [53] and used them successfully for registration
of SPOT and Landsat images [54]. Holm [88] extracted
closed boundary regions and proposed to represent them
by their perimeter, area, compactness, moments, and
moment invariants. Bhattacharya [20] suggested the
application of complex moments. Brivio et al. [24]
modeled shadow structures in mountain images by
means of their inertia ellipses. The ellipses are here
described by their area, inclination of the main axis and
ellipticity. All these attributes are functions of moments.
Li et al. [112] used first two Hu’s moments as preselectors
for matching of closed contours. The candidate matches
were tested using the chain code representation of the
contours. A similar method was described in Ref. [35],
where the moment invariants are used together with the
chain codes. Sato and Cipolla [163] computed directly,
without correspondence estimation, the parameters of the
present geometric deformations (an affine transform was
expected) using the circular moments of distribution of the
line features orientation. They combined moments and the
scale-space representation of the images. Recently, Flusser
and Suk [55] introduced a new class of moment invariants
that are invariant to image blurring and demonstrated their
performance in registering SPOT and AVHRR satellite
images. Bentoutou et al. [16] registered mutually shifted
and blurred digital subtraction angiography images using
these invariants. Flusser et al. further developed this
approach in Ref. [56] by introducing the combined blur-
rotation invariants. In Ref. [52] they generalized the
previous invariants to register 3D images.
Invariant combination of the basic geometric properties
of features can form geometrically oriented descriptors.
Govindu et al. [74] represented the extracted contours
from possibly rotated images by the slopes of tangents in
the contour points. They did not look for contour
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 987
correspondence, but only for the distributions of the
proposed descriptors. By comparison of the corresponding
distributions from the reference and sensed images the
mutual image rotation can be estimated. They derived a
similar type of descriptors for the affine transform, too. A
detailed study of the practical aspects of the proposed
method can be found in Ref. [73]. Wang and Chen [205]
computed the histogram of line-length ratios and the
histogram of angle differences of any two line segments in
the reference and sensed images. They assumed the
similarity transform. Griffin and Alexopoulos [77] used
the ratio of the smallest enclosing circle radii, the difference
of the locations of centroids of gravity, and the sorting of the
neighbors lexicographically according to the angle with the
x axis and the distance from the centroid. All these methods
skip the step of finding the feature correspondence and
establish directly the mapping function parameters.
Hsieh et al. [91] used the angle histogram computed on
line feature points for the compensation of rotation
difference. After the removal of the rotation difference,
the feature point correspondence is found by means of CC.
They compared their rotation compensation with the one
described in Ref. [219].
Shekhar et al. [167] combined different types of features
and their descriptors. They decomposed the present
geometric deformation into elementary steps and then
estimated transform parameters using the feature consen-
sus—every type of feature descriptor votes for the
corresponding value of the parameter. The value of the
parameter which maximizes the number of votes over all
descriptor types is then chosen.
Ventura et al. [200] described image features by
various descriptors (ellipticity, angle, thinness, etc.) and
represented relations among them by a multivalue logical
tree (MVLT). Then they compared the MVLTs of the
reference and sensed images to find the feature
correspondence. MVLTs are applied also in Ref. [24],
together with moment invariants.
Invariant descriptors can be used as well in situations,
when no precedent feature detection was done and the
invariants are successively computed for the window sliding
across the whole image [55]. For translated and rotated
images, Goshtasby [66] proposed to calculate the moment
invariants [93] from the circular-shaped windows and then
to apply the CC criterion on the moment window
representation. A similar idea was used earlier by Wong
and Hall [213]. Along with the moment-based window
description, they applied hierarchical search strategy to
match radar and optical images.
4.2.3. Relaxation methods
A large group of the registration methods is based on the
relaxation approach, as one of the solutions to the consistent
labeling problem (CLP): to label each feature from the
sensed image with the label of a feature from the reference
image, so it is consistent with the labeling given to the other
feature pairs [130]. The process of recalculating the pair
figures of merit, considering the match quality of the feature
pairs and of matching their neighbors, is iteratively repeated
until a stable situation is reached. The reference work was
done by Ranade and Rosenfeld [148]. Here, the displace-
ment of the feature sets transformed by a certain geometric
transformation defines the figures of merit of the feature
pairs. This method can handle shifted images and it tolerates
local image distortions.
Wang et al. [204] extended the classical relaxation by
including the description of the corner features. They used
corner sharpness, contrast, and slope. This algorithm allows
to handle translation and rotation distortions in the images,
but it is computationally demanding. Medioni and Nevatia
[128] used line features and their descriptors (coordinates,
orientation, average contrast). Cheng and Huang [33]
proposed a star-based registration which considers individ-
ual feature points along with all links to their neighbors. Ton
and Jain [190] speeded up the algorithm by integrating the
MergeSort concept. Their method works with shifted and
rotated images. Relaxation based method even for similarity
transformed images was proposed, for example, by Cheng
[32], Ogawa [136] and Li [113]. Different relaxation
methods are compared in Ref. [147].
Another solution to the CLP problem and consequently
to the image registration is backtracking, where consistent
labeling is generated in recursive manner. A registration
method based on backtracking is described in Ref. [130].
4.2.4. Pyramids and wavelets
We conclude the discussion about the feature matching
by mentioning some works that try to reduce the
computational cost due to the large image size by means
of pyramidal approach.
First attempts were done back in 1977. Vanderbrug and
Rosenfeld concentrated in their work on the amount of
computation needed for the window pair testing. In Ref.
[197], they used a subwindow first to find probable
candidates of the corresponding window in the reference
image and then the full-size window was applied. They
discussed the appropriate choice of the subwindow size to
minimize the expected computational cost. In Ref. [160]
they proposed to use first both the sensed and the reference
images at a coarser resolution and then, on locations with
small error measure, to match higher resolution images.
Althof et al. [4] proposed to decrease the necessary
computational load by taking just a sparse regular grid of
windows for which the cross correlation matching is
performed. These techniques are simple examples of
pyramidal methods.
In general, this coarse-to-fine hierarchical strategy
applies the usual registration methods, but it starts with
the reference and sensed images on a coarse resolution
(generated using Gaussian pyramids, simple averaging or
wavelet transform coefficients, among others). Then they
gradually improve the estimates of the correspondence or of
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000988
the mapping function parameters while going up to the finer
resolutions. At every level, they considerably decrease the
search space and thus save the necessary computational
time. Another important advantage resides in the fact that
the registration with respect to large-scale features is
achieved first and then small corrections are made for
finer details. On the other hand, this strategy fails if a false
match is identified on a coarser level. To overcome this, a
backtracking or consistency check should be incorporated
into the algorithms.
Combining CC with the pyramidal approach that
exploits a summing pyramid (the pixel value at a coarser
level corresponds to the summation of the pixel values
on the previous level), a median pyramid, and an
averaging pyramid was proposed in Refs. [37,208,219],
respectively. Wong and Hall [214] combined the SSDA
method with pyramidal speed-up. Wang and Chen [205]
extracted features (centroids of closed boundary regions)
at every resolution level and found the parameters of
geometric deformation from the histogram of angle
differences and line-length ratios, as mentioned above.
Thévenaz et al. applied a cubic spline based pyramid
along with the minimization of the mean square intensity
difference between the images [184] and the MI
maximization [187], respectively. Sharma and Pavel
[166] used the multiresolution Laplacian pyramid for
the infrared and radar images registration. Kumar et al.
[102] combined different types of pyramids (Laplacian,
Gaussian) with different similarity measures (CC, sum of
squared differences) to register aerial video sequences.
Non-linear min-max filters applied in a pyramidal
scheme was used in Ref. [169].
Recently, wavelet decomposition of the images was
recommended for the pyramidal approach due to its inherent
multiresolution character. Methods can differ in the type of
the applied wavelet and the set of wavelet coefficients used
for finding the correspondence. Most frequently used
methods decompose the image recursively into four sets
of coefficients (LL, HL, LH, HH) by filtering the image
successively with two filters, a low-pass filter L and a high-
pass filter H, both working along the image rows and
columns.
Turcajova and Kautsky [193] tested various orthogonal
and biorthogonal wavelets (they used LL coefficients)
together with CC on a regular grid of points to register
affine transformed images. Spline biorthogonal wavelets
and Haar wavelet outperformed others. Fonseca and Costa
[58] detected the modulus maxima of LH and HL
coefficients and looked for the maxima of the correlation
coefficients, computed from LL coefficients in small
surroundings of the detected maxima. Djamdji et al.
[41] use just HH coefficients. Le Moigne [105] applied the
Daubechies wavelet to register Landsat images and
AVHRR data. They extracted LH and HL frequency
coefficients and found the correspondence by means of
CC. Liu et al. [118] proposed the application of Gabor
wavelet transform and Gaussian model of registration
residua. You and Bhattacharya [217] use the maximum
compact fuzzy sets of wavelet coefficients as features and
HD as similarity measure. The robustness of the
registration by means of the Daubechies and Haar
wavelets was studied in Ref. [176].
4.2.5. Summary
Area-based methods are preferably applied when the
images have not many prominent details and the distinctive
information is provided by graylevels/colors rather than by
local shapes and structure. Area-based methods have two
principal limitations. Reference and sensed images must
have somehow ‘similar’ intensity functions, either identical
(and then correlation-like methods can be used) or at least
statistically dependent (this typically occurs in multimodal
registration).
From the geometric point of view, only shift and small
rotation between the images are allowed when using area-
based methods (although the area-based methods can be
generalized to full rotation and scaling, it is practically
meaningless because of an extreme computational load). To
speed up the searching, area-based methods often employ
pyramidal image representations and sophisticated optim-
ization algorithms to find the maximum of the similarity
matrix.
Feature-based matching methods are typically applied
when the local structural information is more significant
than the information carried by the image intensities. They
allow to register images of completely different nature (like
aerial photograph and map) and can handle complex
between-image distortions. The common drawback of the
feature-based methods is that the respective features might
be hard to detect and/or unstable in time. The crucial point
of all feature-based matching methods is to have discrimi-
native and robust feature descriptors that are invariant to all
assumed differences between the images.
5. Transform model estimation
After the feature correspondence has been established
the mapping function is constructed. It should transform the
sensed image to overlay it over the reference one. The
correspondence of the CPs from the sensed and reference
images together with the fact that the corresponding CP
pairs should be as close as possible after the sensed image
transformation are employed in the mapping function
design.
The task to be solved consists of choosing the type of
the mapping function (see Fig. 5) and its parameter
estimation. The type of the mapping function should
correspond to the assumed geometric deformation of the
sensed image, to the method of image acquisition (e.g.
scanner dependent distortions and errors) and to the
required accuracy of the registration (the analysis of error
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 989
for rigid-body point-based registration was introduced in
Ref. [48]).
In special situations when the geometric deformation is
partially known, e.g. when there exists a model for the
distortion caused by the acquisition device and/or the
scene geometry, the pre-correction based on the inverse of
the deformation can be performed (for example, in Refs.
[94,168,181], the authors model the Earth’s shape and
rotation, the satellite orbit and the scanning geometry of
the sensor).
Models of mapping functions can be divided into two
broad categories according to the amount of image data
they use as their support. Global models use all CPs for
estimating one set of the mapping function parameters
valid for the entire image. On the other hand, the local
mapping functions treat the image as a composition of
patches and the function parameters depend on the
location of their support in the image. It leads to the
tessellation of the image, usually a triangulation, and to
the defining of parameters of the mapping function for
each patch separately.
From another point of view, mapping functions can be
categorized according to the accuracy of overlaying of the
CPs used for computation of the parameters. Interpolating
functions map the sensed image CPs on the reference
image CPs exactly, whereas approximating functions try
to find the best trade-off between the accuracy of the final
mapping and other requirements imposed on the character
of the mapping function. Since the CP coordinates are
usually supposed not to be precise, the approximation
model is more common.
5.1. Global mapping models
One of the most frequently used global models uses
bivariate polynomials of low degrees. Similarity transform
is the simplest model—it consists of rotation, translation
and scaling only
u ¼ sðx cosðwÞ2 y sinðwÞÞ þ tx
v ¼ sðx sinðwÞ þ y cosðwÞÞ þ ty
This model is often called ‘shape-preserving mapping’
because it preserves angles and curvatures and is unam-
biguously determined by two CPs.
Slightly more general but still linear model is an affine
transform
u ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2y
v ¼ b0 þ b1x þ b2y;
which can map a parallelogram onto a square. This model
is defined by three non-collinear CPs, preserves straight
lines and straight line parallelism. It can be used for
multiview registration assuming the distance of the
camera to the scene is large in comparison to the size
of the scanned area, the camera is perfect (a pin-hole
camera), the scene is flat, and the present geometric
distortion has no local factors.
Fig. 5. Examples of various mapping functions: similarity transform (top left), affine transform (top right), perspective projection (bottom left), and elastic
transform (bottom right).
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000990
If the condition on the distance of the camera from the
scene is not satisfied the perspective projection model
u ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2y
1 þ c1x þ c2y
v ¼ b0 þ b1x þ b2y
1 þ c1x þ c2y
should be used. This model exactly describes a deformation
of a flat scene photographed by a pin-hole camera the
optical axis of which is not perpendicular to the scene. It can
map a general quadrangle onto a square while preserving
straight lines and is determined by four independent CPs.
Slight violations of these assumptions may lead to the use
of the second or the third-order polynomial models. Higher
order polynomials usually are not used in practical
applications because they may unnecessarily warp the
sensed image in areas away from the CPs when aligning
with the reference image.
In general, the number of CPs is usually higher than the
minimum number required for the determination of the
mapping function. The parameters of the mapping functions
are then computed by means of the least-square fit, so that
the polynomials minimize the sum of squared errors at the
CPs. Such mapping functions do not map the CPs onto their
counterparts exactly. This approach was proved to be very
effective and accurate for satellite images, for instance.
5.2. Local mapping models
However, a global polynomial mapping cannot properly
handle images deformed locally. This happens, for instance,
in medical imaging and in airborne imaging. The least
square technique averages out the local geometric distortion
equally over the entire image which is not desirable. Local
areas of the image should be registered with the available
information about the local geometric distortion in mind.
Several authors have shown the superiority of the local or
at least locally sensitive registration methods above the
global ones in such situations (Goshtasby [69], Ehlers and
Fogel [46], Wiemker [209], and Flusser [50], among
others). The weighted least square and weighted mean
methods [69] gain the ability to register images locally by
introducing the slight variation to the original least square
method. The local methods called piecewise linear mapping
[67] and piecewise cubic mapping [68], together with the
Akima’s quintic approach [209], apply the combination of
the CP-based image triangulation and of the collection of
local mapping functions each valid within one triangle.
These approaches belong to the group of the interpolating
methods.
5.3. Mapping by radial basis functions
Radial basis functions are representatives of the group of
global mapping methods but they are able to handle even
locally varying geometric distortions. The resulting map-
ping function has a form of a linear combination of
translated radially symmetric function plus a low-degree
polynomial
u ¼ a0 þ a1x þ a2y þ
XN
i¼1
cigðx; xiÞ
and similarly for v:
Originally they were developed for the interpolation of
irregular surfaces. Their name ‘radial’ reflects an important
property of the function value at each point-it depends just
on the distance of the point from the CPs, not on its
particular position. Multiquadrics, reciprocal multiquadrics,
Gaussians, Wendland’s functions, and thin-plate splines are
several examples of the radial basis functions used in image
registration.
The application of the multiquadrics in the airborne
remote sensing, together with the comparison to the third
order polynomial method, is described in Ref. [46]. Its
comparison to the Akima’s method is presented in Ref.
[209]. The medical application of multiquadrics is shown in
Ref. [117]. Wendland’s functions applied in medical image
registration appear in Ref. [60]. These functions have very
small global influence and even significant local defor-
mations can be well registered by this approach. This
property is advantageous for registering medical images,
where changes occur mainly locally.
The most often used representatives of the radial basis
functions are the thin-plate splines (TPS), where the radial
terms have the form
gðx; xiÞ ¼ kx 2 xik2lnðkx 2 xikÞ
(see Duchon [44] and Wahba [203] for the respective
mathematical background). Although they had been used in
mechanics and engineering for decades [84], they were
introduced to image analysis community by Grimson [78]
and Bookstein [21]. The TPS can be viewed as a very thin
plate, which is fixed at the positions determined by the CPs
in the reference image in the heights given by the x or y
coordinates of the corresponding CPs in the sensed image
[70]. The TPS minimizes the quadratic variation functional
of potential energy that reflects the amount of function
variation and which should be small for a good mapping
function. The type of registration can be chosen:exact
interpolation [70], approximation [159] or generalized
approximation taking into account that the anisotropic
landmark errors [157] are possible. A comprehensive study
focused on TPS-based registration of medical images can be
found in Ref. [156].
The TPS registration gives good results but the
computations can be very time consuming, namely if the
number of CPs is high. Considerable attention has been paid
to the methods decreasing the complexity of the TPS
evaluation while preserving reasonable accuracy. Flusser
[50] proposed an adaptive approximation of the TPS on
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 991
square or triangular regions by simpler functions. Beatson
and Newsam [15] adapted an earlier method by Greengard
[75] for multipole expansion of radial functions. Powell
[144] reduced the computational cost by the TPS tabulation.
Barrodale et al. [13] paid attention to fast and robust
calculation of the TPS coefficients.
Numerous papers have dealt with the comparison of
the performance of thin-plate splines and other mapping
functions. In Refs. [57,70,209] they are compared with
polynomials and multiquadrics when registering aerial
images. The comparison of the TPS with the Gaussian
radial basis functions and with multiquadrics considering
their local properties was done in Ref. [8]. It was
concluded that the TPS have favorable properties
when used as mapping functions for image registration,
while the other radial basis functions are more convenient
for other applications such as image warping and
morphing [8].
The TPS are not the only representatives of the spline
family used for the mapping function design. A linear
combination of translated cubic B-splines was used for
the registration of the echo planar images [103]. Another
type of spline-based function, the elastic body spline
(EBS), was proposed in [39]. It evolved from the
description of the equilibrium displacements of homo-
geneous isotropic elastic material subjected to a load.
Body tissues depicted in the image data to be registered
often have properties of elastic material. The EBS was
used for the registration of 3D MRI images of breasts.
The authors claimed the EBS had outperformed the TPS
in their experiments.
5.4. Elastic registration
Another approach to the registration of images with
considerable complex and/or local distortions is not to use
any parametric mapping functions, where the estimation of
the geometric deformation is reduced to the search for the
‘best’ parameters. This idea were introduced by Bajcsy et al.
[10] and is often called elastic registration.
The images are viewed as pieces of a rubber sheet, on
which external forces stretching the image and internal
forces defined by stiffness or smoothness constraints are
applied to bring them into alignment with the minimal
amount of bending and stretching. The feature matching and
mapping function design steps of the registration are done
simultaneously. This is one of the advantages of elastic
methods, because feature descriptors invariant to compli-
cated deformations are not known and the feature
correspondence is difficult to establish in the traditional
way. The registration is achieved by locating the minimum
energy state in an iterative fashion. A pyramidal approach is
often applied. The external forces can be derived from the
local optimization of the similarity function which is
defined by the intensity values or by the correspondence
of boundary structures [38], among others. In Ref. [140], no
external forces were used and the prescribed displacements,
derived from the correspondence of boundary structures,
were incorporated to the elastic image deformation.
Disadvantage of elastic registration is in situations when
image deformations are very localized. This can be handled
by means of fluid registration. Fluid registration methods
make use of the viscous fluid model to control the image
transformation. The reference image is here modelled as a
thick fluid that flows out to match the sensed image under
the control of the derivative of a Gaussian sensor model.
This approach is mainly used in medical applications [25].
The weakness of this approach is blurring introduced during
the registration process. Lester and Arridge [110] proposed
to use fluid model just for finding the correspondence of CPs
and then process the very transformation by means of the
thin plate splines. Comparison of three methods for fluid-
based registration can be found in Ref. [212].
Another examples of non-rigid methods are diffusion-
based registration, level sets registration, and optical flow
based registration. The diffusion registration handles object
contours and other features as membranes, setting the
geometrical constraints. Three variations of this approach
are described in Ref. [189]. Different solution was proposed
by Andersen and Nielsen [5]. Vemuri et al. [199] introduced
elastic registration method, based on evolution of level sets,
moving along their respective normals. Finally, the optical
flow approach was originally motivated by estimation of
relative motion between images [19]. The class of optical
flow registration covers very large number of methods and is
beyond the scope of this survey.
6. Image resampling and transformation
The mapping functions constructed during the previous
step are used to transform the sensed image and thus to
register the images. The transformation can be realized in a
forward or backward manner. Each pixel from the sensed
image can be directly transformed using the estimated
mapping functions. This approach, called a forward method,
is complicated to implement, as it can produce holes and/or
overlaps in the output image (due to the discretization and
rounding). Hence, the backward approach is usually chosen.
The registered image data from the sensed image are
determined using the coordinates of the target pixel (the
same coordinate system as of the reference image) and the
inverse of the estimated mapping function. The image
interpolation takes place in the sensed image on the regular
grid. In this way neither holes nor overlaps can occur in the
output image.
The interpolation itself is usually realized via convolu-
tion of the image with an interpolation kernel. An optimal
interpolant—2D sinc function—is hard to implement in
practice because of its infinite extent. Thus, many simpler
interpolants of bounded support have been investigated in
the literature. In order to reduce the computational cost,
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000992
preferably separable interpolants have been considered. The
separability enables to replace an m £ m 2D convolution by
ðm þ 1Þ 1D convolutions which is much faster.
The nearest neighbor function, the bilinear and bicubic
functions (see Fig. 6), quadratic splines [42,191], cubic B-
splines [89], higher-order B-splines [108], Catmull–Rom
cardinal splines [100,184], Gaussians [7], and truncated sinc
functions [182] belong to the most commonly used
interpolants. Meijering et al. [129] investigated higher-
order polynomial kernels (quintic and septic). However,
their experiments showed only marginal improvement in
comparison with cubic interpolation at an highly increased
computational cost.
Several survey papers on resampling techniques have
been published in the last years. A detailed investigation and
comparison of methods was carried out in Ref. [138] for 2D
images and in Ref. [76] for 3D data. Thevenaz et al. [182]
paid attention to the elimination of undesired interpolation
artifacts. Lehman et al. [109] published a survey article
covering main interpolation methods (various versions of
sinc functions, nearest neighbor, linear, quadratic, cubic,
cubic B-spline, Lagrange and Gaussian kernels) with the
emphasis on medical imaging applications. They compared
them using the spatial and Fourier analysis and tested the
computational complexity as well as interpolation errors.
Most recently, Thevenaz et al. [183] have proposed a
different approach to image resampling. Unlike the other
methods, their resampling functions do not necessarily
interpolate the image graylevels. They rather interpolate
values calculated as certain functions of the graylevels. The
authors have demonstrated this approach outperforms
traditional interpolation techniques.
Even though the bilinear interpolation is outperformed
by higher-order methods in terms of accuracy and visual
appearance of the transformed image, it offers probably the
best trade-off between accuracy and computational com-
plexity and thus it is the most commonly used approach.
Cubic interpolation is recommended when the geometric
transformation involves a significant enlargement of the
sensed image. Nearest neighbor interpolation should be
Fig. 6. Image interpolation methods: the original image (top left) was enlarged five times using three different interpolation techniques—nearest neighbor (top
right), bilinear (bottom left), and bicubic (bottom right).
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 993
avoided in most cases because of artifacts in the resampled
image. The only exclusion is when the image to be
transformed contains low number of intensities and we do
not want to introduce ‘synthetic’ graylevels/colors by higher
order interpolation.
7. Evaluation of the image registration accuracy
Regardless of the particular images, the used registration
method, and the application area, it is highly desirable to
provide the user with an estimate how accurate the
registration actually is. The accuracy evaluation is a non-
trivial problem, partially because the errors can be dragged
into the registration process in each of its stages and
partially because it is hard to distinguish between regis-
tration inaccuracies and actual physical differences in the
image contents. In this Section, we review basic error
classes and methods for measuring the registration
accuracy.
Localization error. Displacement of the CP coordinates
due to their inaccurate detection is called localization error.
Being an intrinsic error of the detection method, the
localization error cannot be measured directly on the
given image. However, the mean precision of most CP
detection methods is known for various image types from
computer simulation studies and ground truth comparisons.
This can be used for estimation of the expected localization
error in the particular case. Localization error can be
reduced by selecting an ‘optimal’ feature detection
algorithm for the given data but usually there is a trade-
off between the number of detected CP candidates and the
mean localization error. Sometimes we prefer to have more
CP with higher localization error rather than only few of
them, yet detected more precisely.
Matching error. Matching error is measured by the
number of false matches when establishing the correspon-
dence between CP candidates. It is a serious mistake which
usually leads to failure of the registration process and should
be avoided. Fortunately, in most cases it can be ensured by
robust matching algorithms. False match can be identified
by consistency check, where two different matching
methods are applied to the same set of the CP candidates.
Only those pairs found by the both methods are considered
as valid CP pairs, the other candidate points are excluded
from the further processing. In case there is no other reliable
matching method, false CP pairs can be identified by cross-
validation. In each step, we exclude one pair from the set of
CP’s and calculate the mapping parameters (translation
vector and rotation angle for instance). Then we check how
well the excluded points are mapped one to the other by this
model. If their displacement is below a given threshold, they
are accepted as a valid CP pair.
Alignment error. By the term alignment error we denote
the difference between the mapping model used for the
registration and the actual between-image geometric
distortion. Alignment error is always present in practice
because of two different reasons. The type of the chosen
mapping model may not correspond to the actual distortion
and/or the parameters of the model were not calculated
precisely. The former case is caused by lack of a priori
information about the geometric distortion while the latter
originates from the insufficient number of CP’s and/or their
localization errors.
Alignment error can be evaluated in several ways. The
simplest measure is a mean square error at the CP’s (CPE).
Although commonly used, it is not good alignment error
measure. In fact, it only quantifies how well the CP
coordinates can be fitted by the chosen mapping model. For
any CP set, zero CPE can be reached just by selection of a
mapping model with enough degrees of freedom (this well-
known phenomenon is in numerical analysis called ‘over-
fitting’). On the other hand, large CPE can be caused by CP
localization errors and does not necessarily reflect poor
registration accuracy.
Very similar to the CPE is so called test point error
(TPE). Test points are CPs that were deliberately excluded
from the calculation of the mapping parameters. TPE cannot
be set to zero by overfitting which makes it more
meaningful than CPE. However, the localization error of
the test points may negatively affect this measure. This
method can be used only if a sufficient number of the CP’s is
available. Otherwise, the exclusion of several CP’s may
result in inaccurate estimation of mapping parameters. In
medical applications, CP’s can be far from the region of
interest. Thus, Fitzpatrick et al. [47,49] proposed to detect
anatomical points within the region of interest and to use
them as test points (the called them ‘target points’). The
concept of TPE can be extended such that the distance
between corresponding ‘test’ lines or surfaces is measured
[134,139].
Another approach to estimation of alignment accuracy is
consistency check using multiple cues. Here, the image
registered by the method under investigation is compared
(by a proper metric in the image space) with the same image
registered by another comparative method. As the com-
parative method we use preferably ‘gold standard method’,
which is a method commonly believed to be the best in the
particular application area or for the given image type (gold
standard method then plays a role similar to ground truth).
This approach is often used in medical imaging [47,207]. In
application areas where any gold standard does not exist,
like in remote sensing, computer vision, and industrial
inspection, we take as the comparative method any method
of different nature. Small difference between the registration
results then indicates (although does not guarantee) good
registration accuracy.
Different consistency check can be employed when a set
of at least two sensed images is registered to the same
reference [34,63,87,215]. The sensed images can be also
registered among themselves using the same set of CP’s,
which provides another set of mapping parameters. Using
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000994
transitivity of mappings, we obtain for each sensed image
two sets of mapping parameters, i.e. two registered images,
which should be theoretically the same. The displacement of
the test points can serve as a quality measure.
Finally, the oldest method of registration accuracy
estimation—visual assessment by a domain expert—should
be mentioned. It is still in use at least as a complement of the
above mentioned objective error measures.
Estimation of accuracy of registration algorithms is an
substantial part of registration process. Without quantitative
evaluation, no registration method can be accepted for
practical utilization. A lot of work has been done on
validation of rigid-body registration (the most comprehen-
sive case-study is probably the Vanderbilt University
project [207]) while validation of non-linear, local and
elastic registration methods is still at the beginning.
8. Current trends and outlook for the future
Image registration is one of the most important tasks
when integrating and analyzing information from various
sources. It is a key stage in image fusion, change detection,
super-resolution imaging, and in building image infor-
mation systems, among others. This paper gives a survey of
the classical and up-to-date registration methods, classify-
ing them according to their nature as well as according to the
four major registration steps. Although a lot of work has
been done, automatic image registration still remains an
open problem. Registration of images with complex non-
linear and local distortions, multimodal registration, and
registration of N-D images (where N . 2) belong to the
most challenging tasks at this moment.
When registering images with non-linear, locally depen-
dent geometric distortions, we are faced with two basic
problems—how to match the CPs and what mapping
functions to use for registration. While the second one can
be solved at least on theoretical level by using appropriate
radial basis functions, the first problem is generally
unsolvable due to its nature. Since the between-image
deformations can be arbitrary, we cannot use any automatic
matching method. Another conceptual question here is how
can we distinguish between image deformations and real
changes of the scene.
In multimodal registration, MI technique has become a
standard reference, mainly in medical imaging. However,
being an area-based technique, the MI has principal
limitations. To overcome them, some authors combined
the MI with other, preferably feature-based, methods to gain
higher robustness and reliability. To speed up the compu-
tation, they often employed pyramidal image representation
along with fast optimization algorithms. Unfortunately,
when the images have significant rotation and/or scaling
differences, these methods either fail or become extremely
time expensive. The future development on this field could
pay more attention to the feature-based methods, where
appropriate invariant and modality-insensitive features can
provide good platform for the registration. Besides, we trust
that new application-specific methods utilizing particular
sensor characteristics appear soon in remote sensing.
The major difficulty of N-D image registration resides
in its computational complexity. Although the speed of
computers has been growing, the need to decrease the
computational time of methods persists. The complexity
of methods as well as the size of data still grows (the
higher resolution, higher dimensionality, larger size of
scanned areas). Moreover, the demand for higher robust-
ness and accuracy of the registration usually enforces
solutions utilizing the iterations or backtracking, which
also produces increase of computational complexity of the
method.
In the future, the idea of an ultimate registration method,
able to recognize the type of given task and to decide by
itself about the most appropriate solution, can motivate the
development of expert systems. They will be based on the
combination of various approaches, looking for consensus
of particular results.
Acknowledgements
This work has been supported by the grant No.
102/01/P065 of the Grant Agency of the Czech Republic.
References
[1] S. Abdelsayed, D. Ionescu, D. Goodenough, Matching and
registration method for remote sensing images, Proceedings of the
International Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium
IGARSS’95, Florence, Italy, 1995, pp. 1029–1031.
[2] H.S. Alhichri, M. Kamel, Virtual circles: a new set of features for fast
image registration, Pattern Recognition Letters 24 (2003)
1181–1190.
[3] W.S.I. Ali, F.S. Cohen, Registering coronal histological 2-D sections
of a rat brain with coronal sections of a 3-D brain atlas using
geometric curve invariants and B-spline representation, IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging 17 (1998) 957–966.
[4] R.J. Althof, M.G.J. Wind, J.T. Dobbins, A rapid and automatic
image registration algorithm with subpixel accuracy, IEEE Trans-
actions on Medical Imaging 16 (1997) 308–316.
[5] P.R. Andersen, M. Nielsen, Non-rigid registration by geometry-
constrained diffusion, Medical Image Analysis 5 (2001) 81–88.
[6] P.E. Anuta, Spatial registration of multispectral and multitemporal
digital imagery using Fast Fourier Transform, IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience Electronics 8 (1970) 353–368.
[7] C.R. Appledorn, A new approach to the interpolation of sampled
data, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 15 (1996) 369–376.
[8] N. Arad, N. Dyn, D. Reisfeld, Y. Yeshurun, Image warping by radial
basis functions: application to facial expressions, CVGIP: Graphical
Models and Image Processing 56 (1994) 161–172.
[9] M.A. Audette, F.P. Ferrie, T.M. Peters, An algorithmic overview of
surface registration techniques for medical imaging, Medical image
Analysis 4 (2000) 201–217.
[10] R. Bajcsy, S. Kovacic, Multiresolution elastic matching, Computer
Vision, Graphics and Image Processing 46 (1989) 1–21.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 995
[11] S. Banerjee, D.P. Mukherjee, D.D. Majumdar, Point landmarks for
registration of CT and NMR images, Pattern Recognition Letters 16
(1995) 1033–1042.
[12] D.I. Barnea, H.F. Silverman, A class of algorithms for fast digital
image registration, IEEE Transactions on Computing 21 (1972)
179–186.
[13] I. Barrodale, D. Skea, M. Berkley, R. Kuwahara, R. Poeckert,
Warping digital images using thin plate splines, Pattern Recognition
26 (1993) 375–376.
[14] H.G. Barrow, J.M. Tenenbaum, R.C. Bolles, H.C. Wolf., Parametric
correspondence and chamfer matching: Two new techniques for
image matching. Proceedings of the Fifth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
1977, pp. 659–663.
[15] R.K. Beatson, G.N. Newsam, Fast evaluation of radial basis
functions, Computers Mathematical Applications 24 (1992) 7–19.
[16] Y. Bentoutou, N. Taleb, M. Chikr El Mezouar, M. Taleb, J. Jetto, An
invariant approach for image registration in digital subtraction
angiography, Pattern Recognition 35 (2002) 2853–2865.
[17] R. Berthilsson, Affine correlation. Proceedings of the International
Conference on Pattern Recognition ICPR’98, Brisbane, Australia,
1998, p. 1458–1461.
[18] P.J. Besl, N.D. McKay, A method for registration of 3D shapes,
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intellinegce 14
(1992) 239–254.
[19] S.S. Beuchemin, J.L. Barron, The computation of optical flow, ACM
Computing Surveys 27 (1995) 433–467.
[20] D. Bhattacharya, S. Sinha, Invariance of stereo images via theory of
complex moments, Pattern Recognition 30 (1997) 1373–1386.
[21] F.L. Bookstein, Principal warps: Thin-plate splines and the
decomposition of deformations, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 11 (1989) 567–585.
[22] G. Borgefors, Hierarchical chamfer matching: a parametric edge
matching algorithm, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 10 (1988) 849–865.
[23] R.N. Bracewell, The Fourier Transform and Its Applications,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1965.
[24] P.A. Brivio, A.D. Ventura, A. Rampini, R. Schettini, Automatic
selection of control points from shadow structures, International
Journal of Remote Sensing 13 (1992) 1853–1860.
[25] M. Bro-Nielsen, C. Gramkow, Fast fluid registration of medical
images, In Proceedings Visualization in Biomedical Computing
(VBC’96), 1131, Springer Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Hamburg, Germany, 1996, pp. 267–276.
[26] L.G. Brown, A survey of image registration techniques, ACM
Computing Surveys 24 (1992) 326–376.
[27] S.C. Cain, M.M. Hayat, E.E. Armstrong, Projection-based image
registration in the presence of fixed-pattern noise, IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing 10 (2001) 1860–1872.
[28] J. Canny, A computational approach to edge detection, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 8 (1986)
679–698.
[29] E.D. Castro, C. Morandi, Registration of translated and rotated
images using finite Fourier transform, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 9 (1987) 700–703.
[30] S.H. Chang, F.H. Cheng, W.H. Hsu, G.Z. Wu, Fast algorithm for
point pattern matching: Invariant to translations, rotations and scale
changes, Pattern Recognition 30 (1997) 311–320.
[31] Q. Chen, M. Defrise, F. Deconinck, Symmetric phase-only matched
filtering of Fourier–Mellin transform for image registration and
recognition, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intellingence 16 (1994) 1156–1168.
[32] F.H. Cheng, Point pattern matching algorithm invariant to
geometrical transformation and distortion, Pattern Recognition
Letters 17 (1996) 1429–1435.
[33] J.K. Cheng, T.S. Huang, Image registration by matching relational
structures, Pattern Recognition 17 (1984) 149–159.
[34] A.V. Cideciyan, Registration of ocular fundus images, IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology 14 (1995) 52–58.
[35] X. Dai, S. Khorram, A feature-based image registration algorithm
using improved chain-code representation combined with invariant
moments, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 37
(1999) 2351–2362.
[36] X. Dai, S. Khorram, Development of a feature-based approach to
automated image registration for multitemporal and multisensor
remotely sensed imagery, International Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS’97, Singapore, 1997, pp.
243–245.
[37] P. Dani, S. Chaudhuri, Automated assembling of images: Image
montage preparation, Pattern Recognition 28 (1995) 431–445.
[38] C. Davatzikos, J.L. Prince, R.N. Bryan, Image registration based on
boundary mapping, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 15
(1996) 112–115.
[39] M.H. Davis, A. Khotanzad, D.P. Flaming, S.E. Harms, A physics-
based coordinate transformation for 3D image matching, IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging 16 (1997) 317–328.
[40] L. Ding, A. Goshtasby, M. Satter, Volume image registration by
template matching, Image and Vision Computing 19 (2001)
821–832.
[41] J.P. Djamdji, A. Bajaoui, R. Maniere, Geometrical registration of
images: the multiresolution approach, Photogrammetric Engineering
and Remote Sensing 53 (1993) 645–653.
[42] N.A. Dodgson, Quadratic interpolation for image resampling, IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 6 (1997) 1322–1326.
[43] L. Dreschler, H. Nagel, Volumetric model and 3-D trajectory of a
moving car derived from monocular TV-frame sequence of a street
scene, Proceedings of the Interantional Joint Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, Vancouver, Canada, 1981, pp. 692–697.
[44] J. Duchon, Interpolation des fonctions de deux variables suivant le
principle de la flexion des plaques minces, RAIRO Analytical
Numéricals 10 (1976) 5–12.
[45] M. Ehlers, Region-based matching for image registration in remote
sensing databases, Proceedings of the International Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS’91, Espoo, Finland, 1991, pp.
2231–2234.
[46] M. Ehlers, D.N. Fogel, High-precision geometric correction of
airborne remote sensing revisited: the multiquadric interpolation,
Proceedings of SPIE: Image and Signal Processing for Remote
Sensing 2315 (1994) 814–824.
[47] J.M. Fitzpatrik, Detection failure, assessing success, in: J.V. Hajnal,
D.L.G. Hill, D.J. Hawkes (Eds.), Medical Image Registration, CRC
Press, Baton Rouge, Florida, 2001, pp. 117–139.
[48] J.M. Fitzpatrik, J.B. West, The distribution of target registration
error in rigid-body point-based registration, IEEE Transactions on
Medical Imaging 20 (2001) 917–927.
[49] J.M. Fitzpatrik, J.B. West, C.R. Maurer Jr., Predicting error in rigid-
body point-based registration, IEEE Trasnactions on Medical
Imaging 17 (1998) 694–702.
[50] J. Flusser, An adaptive method for image registration, Pattern
Recognition 25 (1992) 45–54.
[51] J. Flusser, Object matching by means of matching likelihood
coefficients, Pattern Recognition Letters 16 (1995) 893–900.
[52] J. Flusser, J. Boldys, B. Zitová, Moment forms invariant to
rotation and blur in arbitrary number of dimensions, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 25
(2003) 234–246.
[53] J. Flusser, T. Suk, Pattern recognition by affine moment invariants,
Pattern Recognition 26 (1993) 167–174.
[54] J. Flusser, T. Suk, A moment-based approach to registration of
images with affine geometric distortion, IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 32 (1994) 382–387.
[55] J. Flusser, T. Suk, Degraded image analysis: an invariant approach,
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 20
(1998) 590–603.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000996
[56] J. Flusser, B. Zitová, Combined invariants to linear filtering and
rotation, International Journal of Pattern Recognition and Artificial
Intelligence 13 (1999) 1123–1136.
[57] D.N. Fogel, Image rectification with radial basis functions:
Application to RS/GIS data integration, Proceedings of the Thirrd
International Conference on Integrating GIS and Environmental
Modelling, CD-ROM, Santa Fe, New Mexico, 1996, 19 pp.
[58] L.M.G. Fonseca, M.H.M. Costa, Automatic registration of satellite
images, Proceedings of the Brazilian Symposium on Computer
Graphic and Image Processing, Brazil, 1997, pp. 219–226.
[59] L.M.G. Fonseca, B.S. Manjunath, Registration techniques for
multisensor remotely sensed imagery, Photogrammetric Engineering
and Remote Sensing 62 (1996) 1049–1056.
[60] M. Fornefett, K. Rohr, H.S. Stiehl, Radial basis functions with
compact support for elastic registration of medical images, Image
and Vision Computing 19 (2001) 87–96.
[61] H. Foroosh, J.B. Zerubia, M. Berthod, Extension of phase correlation
to subpixel registration, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 11
(2002) 188–200.
[62] W. Förstner, E. Gülch, A fast operator for detection and precise
location of distinct points, corners and centers of circular features,
Proceedings of the ISPRS Workshop on Fast Processing of
Photogrammetric Data, Interlaken, Switzerland, 1986, pp. 281–305.
[63] P.A. Freeborough, R.P. Woods, N.C. Fox, Accurate registration of
serial 3D MR brain images and its application to visualizing change
in neurodegenerative disorders, Journal of Computer Assisted
Tomography 20 (1996) 1012–1022.
[64] B.K. Ghaffary, A.A. Sawchuk, A survey of new techniques for image
registration and mapping, Proceedings of the SPIE: Applications of
Digital Image Processing 432 (1983) 222–239.
[65] A. Goshtasby, Description and discrimination of planar shapes using
shape matrices, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 7 (1985) 738–743.
[66] A. Goshtasby, Template matching in rotated images, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 7
(1985) 338–344.
[67] A. Goshtasby, Piecewise linear mapping functions for image
registration, Pattern Recognition 19 (1986) 459–466.
[68] A. Goshtasby, Piecewise cubic mapping functions for image
registration, Pattern Recognition 20 (1987) 525–533.
[69] A. Goshtasby, Image registration by local approximation methods,
Image and Vision Computing 6 (1988) 255–261.
[70] A. Goshtasby, Registration of images with geometric distortions,
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 26 (1988)
60–64.
[71] A. Goshtasby, G.C. Stockman, Point pattern matching using convex
hull edges, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 15
(1985) 631–637.
[72] A. Goshtasby, G.C. Stockman, C.V. Page, A region-based approach
to digital image registration with subpixel accuracy, IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 24 (1986)
390–399.
[73] V. Govindu, C. Shekhar, Alignment using distributions of local
geometric properties, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 21 (1999) 1031–1043.
[74] V. Govindu, C. Shekhar, R. Chellapa, Using geometric properties for
correspondence-less image alignment, Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Pattern Recognition ICPR’98, Brisbane,
Australia, 1998, pp. 37–41.
[75] L. Greengard, V. Rokhlin, A fast algorithm for particle simulations,
Journal of Computers and Physics 73 (1987) 325–348.
[76] G.J. Grevera, J.K. Udupa, An objective comparison of 3D image
interpolation methods, IEEE Transactions an Medical Imaging 17
(1998) 642–652.
[77] P.M. Griffin, C. Alexopoulos, Point pattern matching using centroid
bounding, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 19
(1989) 1274–1276.
[78] W.E.L. Grimson, A computational theory of visual surface
interpolation, Philosphical Transactions of the Royal Society of
London, B 298 (1982) 395–427.
[79] S. Growe, R. Tonjes, A knowledge based approach to automatic
image registration, Proceedings of the IEEE International Con-
ference on Image Processing ICIP’97, Santa Barbara, California,
1997, pp. 228–231.
[80] E. Guest, E. Berry, R.A. Baldock, M. Fidrich, M.A. Smith, Robust
point correspondence applied to two- and three-dimensional image
registration, IEEE Transaction on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 23 (2001) 165–179.
[81] E. Gülch, Results of test on image matching of ISPRS WG,
ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing 46 (1991)
1–18.
[82] J.V. Hajnal, D.L.G. Hill, D.J. Hawkes, Medical Image Registration,
CRC Press, Baton Rouge, Florida, 2001, ISBN 0-8493-0064-9.
[83] H. Hanaizumi, S. Fujimura, An automated method for registration of
satellite remote sensing images, Proceedings of the International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS’93, Tokyo,
Japan, 1993, pp. 1348–1350.
[84] R.L. Harder, R.N. Desmarais, Interpolation using surface splines,
Journal of Aircraft 9 (1972) 189–191.
[85] P. Hellier, C. Barillot, Coupling dense and landmark-based
approaches for non rigid registration, IRISA research report, PI
1368:30, France, 2000.
[86] D.L.G. Hill, P.G. Batchelor, M. Holden, D.J. Hawkes, Medical
image registration, Physics in Medicine and Biology 46 (2001)
R1–R45.
[87] M. Holden, D.L.G. Hill, E.R.E. Denton, J.M. Jarosz, T.C.S. Cox, T.
Rohlfing, J. Goodey, D.J. Hawkes, Voxel similarity measures for 3d
serial mr brain image registration, IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 19 (2000) 94–102.
[88] M. Holm, Towards automatic rectification of satellite images using
feature based matching, Proceedings of the International Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS’91, Espoo, Finland, 1991,
pp. 2439–2442.
[89] H.S. Hou, H.C. Andrews, Cubic splines for image interpolation and
digital filtering, IEEE Transactions on Acoustic, Speech and Signal
Processing 26 (1978) 508–517.
[90] J.W. Hsieh, H.Y.M. Liao, K.C. Fan, M.T. Ko, A fast algorithm for
image registration without predetermining correspondence, Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Pattern Recognition
ICPR’96, Vienna, Austria, 1996, pp. 765–769.
[91] J.W. Hsieh, H.Y.M. Liao, K.C. Fan, M.T. Ko, Y.P. Hung, Image
registration using a new edge-based approach, Computer Vision and
Image Understanding 67 (1997) 112–130.
[92] Y.C. Hsieh, D.M. McKeown, F.P. Perlant, Performance evaluation
of scene registration and stereo matching for cartographic feature
extraction, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 14 (1992) 214–237.
[93] M.K. Hu, Visual pattern recognition by moment invariants, IRE
Transactions on Information Theory 8 (1962) 179–187.
[94] R.B. Huseby, O.M. Halck, R. Solberg, A model-based approach for
geometrical correction of optical satellite images, Proceedings of the
International Geoscience Remote Sensing Symposium IGARSS’99,
Hamburg, Germany, 1999, pp. 330–332.
[95] D.P. Huttenlocher, G.A. Klanderman, W.J. Rucklidge, Comparing
images using the Hausdorff distance, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intellinence 15 (1993) 850–863.
[96] Numerical Recipes in C, The art of scientific computing, http://www.
nr.com.
[97] M. Jenkinson, S. Smith, A global optimisation method for robust
affine registration of brain images, Medical Image Analysis 5 (2001)
143–156.
[98] S. Kaneko, I. Murase, S. Igarashi, Robust image registration by
increment sign correlation, Pattern Recognition 35 (2002)
2223–2234.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 997
[99] S. Kaneko, Y. Satoh, S. Igarashi, Using selective correlation
coefficient for robust image registration, Pattern Recognition 36
(2003) 1165–1173.
[100] R.G. Keys, Cubic convolution interpolation for digital image
processing, IEEE Transactions on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing 29 (1981) 1153–1160.
[101] L. Kitchen, A. Rosenfeld, Gray-level corner detection, Pattern
Recognition Letters 1 (1982) 95–102.
[102] R. Kumar, H.S. Sawhney, J.C. Asmuth, A. Pope, S. Hsu, Registration
of video to geo-referenced imagery, Proceedings of the International
Conference on Pattern Recognition ICPR’98, Brisbane, Australia,
1998, pp. 1393–1399.
[103] J. Kybic, P. Thévenaz, M. Unser, Multiresolution spline warping for
EPI registration, Proceedings of the SPIE: Mathematical Imaging-
Wavelet Applications in Signal and Image Processing, Denver,
Colorado, 1999, pp. 571–579.
[104] D. Lavine, B. Lambird, L. Kanal, Recognition of spatial point
patterns, Pattern Recognition 16 (1983) 289–295.
[105] J. le Moigne, Parallel registratin of multi-sensor remotely sensed
imagery using wavelet coefficients, Proceedings of the SPIE:
Wavelet Applications, Orlando, Florida, 2242, 1994, pp. 432–443.
[106] J. le Moigne, First evaluation of automatic image registration
methods, Proceedings of the International Geoscience and Remote
Sensing Symposium IGARSS’98, Seattle, Washington, 1998, pp.
315–317.
[107] T.M. Lehmann, A two stage algorithm for model-based registration
of medical images, Proceedings of the Interantional Conference on
Pattern Recognition ICPR’98, Brisbane, Australia, 1998, pp. 344–
352.
[108] T.M. Lehmann, C. Gönner, K. Spitzer, Addendum: B-spline
interpolation in medical image processing, IEEE Transaction on
Medical Imaging 20 (2001) 660–665.
[109] T.M. Lehmann, C. G̈onner, K. Spitzer, Survey: interpolation
methods in medical image processing, IEEE Transactions on
Medical Imaging 18 (1999) 1049–1075.
[110] H. Lester, S.R. Arridge, Summarising fluid registration by thin-plate
spline warps with many landmarks, In Proceedings of Medical Image
Understanding and Analysis (MIUA97), Oxford, 1997.
[111] H. Lester, S.R. Arridge, A survey of hierarchical non-linear medical
image registration, Pattern Recognition 32 (1999) 129–149.
[112] H. Li, B.S. Manjunath, S.K. Mitra, A contour-based approach to
multisensor image registration, IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing 4 (1995) 320–334.
[113] S.Z. Li, Matching: Invariant to translations, rotations and scale
changes, Pattern Recognition 25 (1992) 583–594.
[114] S.Z. Li, J. Kittler, M. Petrou, Matching and recognition of road
networks from aerial images, Proceedings of the Second European
Conference on Computer Vision ECCV’92, St Margherita, Italy,
1992, pp. 857–861.
[115] B. Likar, F. Pernus, Automatic extraction of corresponding points for
the registration of medical images, Medical Physics 26 (1999)
1678–1686.
[116] B. Likar, F. Pernus, A hierarchical approach to elastic registration
based on mutual information, Image and Vision Computing 19
(2001) 33–44.
[117] J.A. Little, D.L.G. Hill, D.J. Hawkes, Deformations incorporating
rigid structures, Computer Vision and Image Understanding 66
(1997) 223–232.
[118] J. Liu, B.C. Vemuri, J.L. Marroquin, Local frequency represen-
tations for robust multimodal image registration, IEEE Transactions
on Medical Imaging 21 (2002) 462–469.
[119] L. Lucchese, G. Doretto, G.M. Cortelazzo, A frequency domain
technique for range data registration, IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence 24 (2002) 1468–1484.
[120] F. Maes, A. Collignon, D. Vandermeulen, G. Marchal, P. Suetens,
Multimodality image registration by maximization of mutual
information, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 16 (1997)
187–198.
[121] J.B.A. Maintz, P.A. van den Elsen, M.A. Viergever, Comparison of
edge-based and ridge-based registration of CT and MR brain images,
Medical Image Analysis 1 (1996) 151–161.
[122] J.B.A. Maintz, P.A. van den Elsen, M.A. Viergever, Evaluation on
ridge seeking operators for multimodality medical image matching,
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 18
(1996) 353–365.
[123] J.B.A. Maintz, M.A. Viergever, A survey of medical image
registration, Medical Image Analysis 2 (1998) 1–36.
[124] H. Maitre, Y. Wu, Improving dynamic programming to solve image
registration, Pattern Recognition 20 (1987) 443–462.
[125] B.S. Manjunath, C. Shekhar, R. Chellapa, A new approach to image
feature detection with applications, Pattern Recognition 29 (1996)
627–640.
[126] D. Marr, E. Hildreth, Theory of edge detection, Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London, B 207 (1980) 187–217.
[127] J. Matas, Š. Obdržálek, O. Chum, Local affine frames for wide-
baseline stereo, in: R. Kasturi, D. Laurendeau, C. Suen (Eds.), 16th
International Conference on Pattern Recognition ICPR 2002, vol. 4,
2002, pp. 363–366.
[128] G. Medioni, R. Nevatia, Matching images using linear features,
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intellingence 6
(1984) 675–685.
[129] E.H.W. Meijering, K.J. Zuiderveld, M.A. Viergever, Image
reconstruction by convolution with symmetrical piecewise nth-
order polynomial kernels, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 8
(1999) 192–201.
[130] R.S. Mitra, N.N. Murthy, Elastic maximal matching, Pattern
Recognition 24 (1991) 747–753.
[131] P. Montesinos, V. Gouet, R. Deriche, D. Pelé, Matching color
uncalibrated images using differential invariants, Image and Vision
Computing 18 (2000) 659–671.
[132] S. Moss, E.R. Hancock, Multiple line-template matching with EM
algorithm, Pattern Recognition Letters 18 (1997) 1283–1292.
[133] F. Murtagh, A feature based OðN2Þ approach to point pattern
matching, Proceedings of the Internatinal Confernce on Pattern
Recognition ICPR’92, Hague, The Netherlands, 1992, pp. 174–
177.
[134] S.J. Nelson, M.R. Day, P. Buffone, L.L. Wald, T.F. Budinger, R.
Hawkins, W. Dillon, S. Huhn, M. Prados, S. Chang, D.B. Vigneron,
Alignment of volume mri and high resolution f-18 flurodeoxyglu-
cose pet images for evaluation of patients with brain tumors, Journal
of Computed Assisted Tomography 21 (1997) 183–191.
[135] A. Noble, Finding corners, Image and Vision Computing 6 (1988)
121–128.
[136] H. Ogawa, Labeled point pattern matching by fuzzy relaxation,
Pattern Recognition 17 (1984) 569–573.
[137] N.R. Pal, S.K. Pal, A review on image segmentation techniques,
Pattern Recognition 26 (1993) 1277–1294.
[138] J.A. Parker, R.V. Kenyon, D.E. Troxel, Comparison of interpolating
methods for image resampling, IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 2 (1983) 31–39.
[139] E.I. Parsai, K.M. Ayyangar, R.R. Dobelbower, J.A. Siegel, Clinical
fusion of three-dimensional images using bremsstrahlung spect and
ct, Journal of Nuclear Medicine 38 (1997) 319–324.
[140] W. Peckar, C. Schnorr, K. Rohr, H.S. Stiehl, Two step parameter-
free elastic image registration with prescribed point displace-
ments, Journal of Mathematical Imaging and Vision 10 (1999)
143–162.
[141] T. Peli, An algorithm for recognition and localization of rotated and
scaled objects, Proceedings of the IEEE 69 (1981) 483–485.
[142] G.P. Penney, J. Weese, J.A. Little, P. Desmedt, D.L.G. Hill, D.J.
Hawkes, A comparison of similarity measures for use in 2D–3D
medical image registration, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging
17 (1998) 586–595.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000998
[143] J.P.W. Pluim, J.B.A. Maintz, M.A. Viergever, Mutual information
matching in multiresolution contexts, Image and Vision Computing
19 (2001) 45–52.
[144] M.J.D. Powell, Tabulation of thin plate splines on a very fine two-
dimensional grid, Numerical Analysis Report of University of
Cambridge, DAMTP/1992/NA2, Cambridge, UK, 1992.
[145] W.K. Pratt, Correlation techniques of image registration, IEEE
Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 10 (1974)
353–358.
[146] W.K. Pratt, Digital Image Processing, 2nd ed., Wiley, New York,
1991.
[147] K.E. Price, Relaxation matching techniques—a comparison, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intellingence 7
(1985) 617–623.
[148] S. Ranade, A. Rosenfeld, Point pattern matching by relaxation,
Pattern Recognition 12 (1980) 269–275.
[149] A. Rangarajan, H. Chui, J.S. Duncan, Rigid point feature registration
using mutual information, Medical Image Analysis 4 (1999) 1–17.
[150] B.S. Reddy, B.N. Chatterji, An FFT-based technique for translation,
rotation and scale-invariant image registration, IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing 5 (1996) 1266–1271.
[151] B. Rezaie, M.D. Srinath, Algorithms for fast image registration,
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems 20 (1984)
716–728.
[152] N. Ritter, R. Owens, J. Cooper, R.H. Eikelboom, P.P. van Saarloos,
Registration of stereo and temporal images of the retina, IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging 18 (1999) 404–418.
[153] A. Roche, G. Malandain, N. Ayache, Unifying maximum likelihood
approaches in medical image registration, International Journal of
Imaging Systems and Technology 11 (2000) 71–80.
[154] A. Roche, G. Malandain, X. Pennec, N. Ayache, The correlation
ratio as a new similarity measure for multimodal image registration,
Proceedings of the First International Conference on Medical Image
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI’98),
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Cambridge, USA, vol. 1496,
1998, pp. 1115–1124.
[155] K. Rohr, Localization properties of direct corner detectors, Journal of
Mathematical Imaging and Vision 4 (1994) 139–150.
[156] K. Rohr, Landmark-Based Image Analysis: Using Geometric and
Intensity Models, Computational Imaging and Vision Series, vol. 21,
Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 2001.
[157] K. Rohr, H.S. Stiehl, T.M. Buzug, J. Weese, M.H. Kuhn, Landmark-
based elastic registration using approximating thin-plate splines,
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 20 (2001) 526–534.
[158] K. Rohr, H.S. Stiehl, R. Sprengel, W. Beil, T.M. Buzug, J. Wees,
M.H. Kuhn, Point based elastic registration of medical image data
using approximating thin-plate splines, Proceedings of the Visual-
ization in Biomedical Computing VBC’96, Hamburg, Germany,
1996, pp. 297–306.
[159] K. Rohr, H.S. Stiehl, R. Sprengel, W. Beil, T.M. Buzug, J. Weese,
M.H. Kuhn, Nonrigid registration of medical images based on
anatomical point landmarks and approximating thin-plate splines,
Proceedings of the Aacheren Workshop: Bildverarbeiterung für die
Medizin, Aachen, Germany, 1996, pp. 41–46.
[160] A. Rosenfeld, G.J. Vanderbrug, Coarse–fine template matching,
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics 7 (1977)
104–107.
[161] M. Roux, Automatic registration of SPOT images and digitized
maps, Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing ICIP’96, Lausanne, Switzerland, 1996, pp. 625–628.
[162] D. Rueckert, C. Hayes, C. Studholme, P. Summers, M. Leach, D.J.
Hawkes, Non-rigid registration of breast MR images using mutual
information, Proceedings of the Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention MICCAI’98, Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts, 1998, pp. 1144–1152.
[163] J. Sato, R. Cipolla, Image registration using multi-scale texture
moments, Image and Vision Computing 13 (1995) 341–353.
[164] H.S. Sawhney, R. Kumar, True multi-image alignment and its
applications to mosaicing and lens distortion correction, IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intellingece 21
(1999) 235–243.
[165] M. Sester, H. Hild, D. Fritsch, Definition of ground control features
for image registration using GIS data, Proceedings of the
Symposium on Object Recognition and Scene Classification from
Multispectral and Multisensor Pixels, CD-ROM, Columbus, Ohio,
1998, 7 pp.
[166] R.K. Sharma, M. Pavel, Multisensor image registration, Proceedings
of the Society for Information Display XXVIII (1997) 951–954.
[167] C. Shekhar, V. Govindu, R. Chellapa, Multisensor image registration
by feature consensus, Pattern Recognition 32 (1999) 39–52.
[168] D. Shin, J.K. Pollard, J.P. Muller, Accurate geometric correction of
ATSR images, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote
Sensing 35 (1997) 997–1006.
[169] Y. Shinagawa, T.L. Kunii, Unconstrained automatic image matching
using multiresolutional critical-point filters, IEEE Transactions on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 20 (1998) 994–1010.
[170] A. Simper, Correcting general band-to-band misregistrations,
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Image
Processing ICIP’96, Lausanne, Switzerland, 1996, 2, pp. 597–600.
[171] D. Skea, I. Barrodale, R. Kuwahara, R. Poeckert, A control point
matching algorithm, Pattern Recognition 26 (1993) 269–276.
[172] S.M. Smith, SUSAN low level image processing, http://www.fmrib.
ox.ac.uk/~spacesteve/susan.
[173] S.M. Smith, J.M. Brady, SUSAN—a new approach to low level
image processing, International Journal of Computer Vision 23
(1997) 45–78.
[174] J.P.P. Starink, E. Baker, Finding point correspondence using
simulated annealing, Pattern Recognition 28 (1995) 231–240.
[175] G. Stockman, S. Kopstein, S. Benett, Matching images to models for
registration and object detection via clustering, IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 4 (1982) 229–241.
[176] H.S. Stone, J. le Moigne, M. McGuire, The translation sensitivity of
wavelet-based registration, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 21 (1999) 1074–1081.
[177] C. Studholme, D.L.G. Hill, D.J. Hawkes, An overlap invariant
entropy measure of 3D medical image alignment, Pattern Recog-
nition 32 (1999) 71–86.
[178] T. Suk, J. Flusser, Vertex-based features for recognition of
projectively deformed polygons, Pattern Recognition 29 (1996)
361–367.
[179] T. Suk, J. Flusser, Point-based projective invariants, Pattern
Recognition 33 (2000) 251–261.
[180] A. Taza, C.Y. Suen, Description of planar shapes using shape
matrices, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics 19
(1989) 1281–1289.
[181] O. Thepaut, K. Kpalma, J. Ronsin, Automatic registration of ERS
and SPOT multisensor images in a data fusion context, Forest
Ecology and Management 128 (2000) 93–100.
[182] P. Thévenaz, T. Blu, M. Unser, Image interpolation and resampling,
Handbook of Medical Image Processing, Academic Press, New
York, 2003, in press.
[183] P. Thévenaz, T. Blu, M. Unser, Interpolation revisited, IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging 19 (2000) 739–758.
[184] P. Thévenaz, U.E. Ruttimann, M. Unser, A pyramidal approach to
subpixel registration based on intensity, IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing 7 (1998) 27–41.
[185] P. Thévenaz, U.E. Ruttimann, M. Unser, Iterative multiscale
registration without landmarks, Proceedings of the IEEE Inter-
national Confernece on Image Processing ICIP’95, Washington DC,
1995, pp. 228–231.
[186] P. Thévenaz, M. Unser, An efficient mutual information optimizer
for multiresolution image registration, Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Image Processing ICIP’98, Chicago, IL,
1998, pp. 833–837.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–1000 999
[187] P. Thévenaz, M. Unser, A pyramid approach to sub-pixel image
fusion based on mutual information, Proceedings of the IEEE
Interantional Conference on Image Processing ICIP’96, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 1996, pp. 265–268.
[188] P. Thévenaz, M. Unser, Spline pyramids for inter-modal image
registration using mutual information, Proceedings of SPIE: Wavelet
Applications in Signal and Image Processing, San Diego, CA, 1997,
pp. 236–247.
[189] J.-P. Thirion, Image matching as a diffusion process: an analogy with
Maxwell’s demons, Medical Image Analysis 2 (1998) 243–260.
[190] J. Ton, A.K. Jain, Registering landsat images by point matching,
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 27 (1989)
642–651.
[191] K. Toraichi, S. Yang, R. Mori, Two-dimensional spline interpolation
for image reconstruction, Pattern Recognition 21 (1988) 275–284.
[192] M. Trajkovic, M. Hedley, Fast corner detection, Image and Vision
Computing 16 (1998) 75–87.
[193] R. Turcajová, J. Kautsky, A hierarchical multiresolution technique
for image registration, Proceedings of SPIE Mathematical Imaging:
Wavelet Applications in Signal and Image Processing, Colorado,
1996.
[194] T. Tuytelaars, L.V. Gool, Matching widely separated views based on
affinely invariant neighbourhoods, International Journal of Computer
Vision (2003) to appear.
[195] P.A. van den Elsen, E.-J.D. Pol, M.A. Viergever, Medical image
matching-a review with classification, IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology 12 (1993) 26–39.
[196] P. van Wie, M. Stein, A landsat digital image rectification system,
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience Electronics 15 (1977) 130–136.
[197] G.J. Vanderbrug, A. Rosenfeld, Two stage template matching, IEEE
Transactions on Computers 26 (1977) 384–393.
[198] A.S. Vasileisky, B. Zhukov, M. Berger, Automated image co-
registration based on linear feature recognition, Proceedings of the
Second Conference Fusion of Earth Data, Sophia Antipolis, France,
1998, pp. 59–66.
[199] B.C. Vemuri, J. Ye, Y. Chen, C.M. Leonard, Image registration via
level-set motion: Applications to atlas-based segmentation, Medical
Image Analysis 7 (2003) 1–20.
[200] A.D. Ventura, A. Rampini, R. Schettini, Image registration by
recognition of corresponding structures, IEEE Transactions on
Geoscience and Remote Sensing 28 (1990) 305–314.
[201] P. Viola, W.M. Wells, Alignment by maximization of mutual
information, International Journal of Computer Vision 24 (1997)
137–154.
[202] N. Vujovic, D. Brzakovic, Establishing the correspondence between
control points in pairs of mammographic images, IEEE Transactions
on Image Processing 6 (1997) 1388–1399.
[203] G. Wahba, Spline Models for Observational Data, SIAM, Philadel-
phia, 1990.
[204] C.Y. Wang, H. Sun, S. Yadas, A. Rosenfeld, Some experiments in
relaxation image matching using corner features, Pattern Recog-
nition 16 (1983) 167–182.
[205] W.H. Wang, Y.C. Chen, Image registration by control points pairing
using the invariant properties of line segments, Pattern Recognition
Letters 18 (1997) 269–281.
[206] J. West, J.M. Fitzpatrik, M.Y. Wang, B.M. Dawant Jr., C.R. Maurer,
R.M. Kessler, R.J. Maciunas, Retrospective intermodality
registration techniques for images of the head: surface-based versus
volume-based, IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 18 (1999)
144–150.
[207] J. West, et al., Comparison and evaluation of retrospective
intermodality brain image registration techniques, Journal of
Computer Assisted Tomography 21 (1997) 554–566.
[208] A.P. Whichello, H. Yan, Document image mosaicing, Proceedings
of the International Conference on Pattern Recognition ICPR’98,
Brisbane, Australia, 1998, pp. 1081–1084.
[209] R. Wiemker, K. Rohr, L. Binder, R. Sprengel, H.S. Stiehl,
Application of elastic registration to imaginery from airborne
scanners, International Archives for Photogrammetry and Remote
Sensing XXXI-B4 (1996) 949–954.
[210] G. Wolberg, S. Zokai, Robust image registration using log-polar
transform, Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Image Processing, Canada, September 2000.
[211] G. Wolberg, S. Zokai, Image registration for perspective defor-
mation recovery, SPIE Conference on Automatic Target Recognition
X, Orlando, Florida, USA, April 2000, p. 12.
[212] G. Wollny, F. Kruggel, Computational cost of nonrigid registration
algorithms based on fluid dynamics, IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging 21 (2002) 946–952.
[213] R.Y. Wong, E.L. Hall, Scene matching with invariant moments,
Computer Graphics and Image Processing 8 (1978) 16–24.
[214] R.Y. Wong, E.L. Hall, Sequential hierarchical scene matching, IEEE
Transactions on Computers 27 (1978) 359–366.
[215] R.P. Woods, S.T. Grafton, C.J. Holmes, S.R. Cherry, J.C. Mazziotta,
Automated image registration: I. General methods and intrasubject,
intramodality validation, Journal of Computer Assisted Tomography
22 (1998) 141–154.
[216] Z. Yang, F.S. Cohen, Image registration and object recognition using
affine invariants and convex hulls, IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing 8 (1999) 934–946.
[217] Y. You, M. Kaveh, A regularization approach to joint blur
identification and image restoration, IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing 5 (1996) 416–428.
[218] F. Zana, J.C. Klein, A multimodal registration algorithm of eye
fundus images using vessels detection and Hough transform, IEEE
Transactions on Medical Imaging 18 (1999) 419–428.
[219] Q. Zheng, R. Chellapa, A computational vision approach to image
registration, IEEE Transactions on Image Processing 2 (1993)
311–325.
[220] Z. Zheng, H. Wang, E.K. Teoh, Analysis of gray level corner
detection, Pattern Recognition Letters 20 (1999) 149–162.
[221] Y.M. Zhu, Volume image registration by cross-entropy optimization,
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging 21 (2002) 174–180.
[222] D. Ziou, S. Tabbone, Edge detection techniques—an overview,
http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/ziou97edge.html, 1997.
[223] B. Zitová, J. Flusser, F. Sroubek, Application of image processing
for the conservation of the medieval mosaic, Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Image Processing ICIP’02,
Rochester, MI, 2002, pp. 993–996.
[224] B. Zitová, J. Kautsky, G. Peters, J. Flusser, Robust detection of
significant points in multiframe images, Pattern Recognition Letters
20 (1999) 199–206.
B. Zitová, J. Flusser / Image and Vision Computing 21 (2003) 977–10001000

