BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 21 no. 18 2005, pages 3674–3676doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bti610
Sequence analysis
Blast2GO: a universal tool for annotation, visualization and
analysis in functional genomics research
Ana Conesa1,∗,†, Stefan Götz2,†, Juan Miguel García-Gómez2, Javier Terol1,
Manuel Talón1 and Montserrat Robles2
1Centro de Genómica, Instituto Valenciano de Investigaciones Agrarias, Moncada, Valencia, Spain, and
2BET-ITACA, Universidad Politécnica de Valencia, Valencia, Spain
Received on June 27, 2005; revised on July 28, 2005; accepted on July 29, 2005
Advance Access publication August 4, 2005
ABSTRACT
Summary: We present here Blast2GO (B2G), a research tool
designed with the main purpose of enabling Gene Ontology (GO)
based data mining on sequence data for which no GO annotation is
yet available. B2G joints in one application GO annotation based on
similarity searches with statistical analysis and highlighted visualiza-
tion on directed acyclic graphs. This tool offers a suitable platform for
functional genomics research in non-model species. B2G is an intu-
itive and interactive desktop application that allows monitoring and
comprehension of the whole annotation and analysis process.
Availability: Blast2GO is freely available via Java Web Start at
http://www.blast2go.de
Supplementary material: http://www.blast2go.de -> Evaluation
Contact: aconesa@ivia.es; stefang@fis.upv.es
INTRODUCTION
One of the most important aspects in mining genomics data is to asso-
ciate individual sequences and related expression information with
biological function. Automatic functional annotation is an effective
approach to solve this problem. Functional annotation allows cat-
egorization of genes in functional classes, which can be very useful to
understand the physiological meaning of large amounts of genes and
to assess functional differences between subgroups of sequences. The
Gene Ontology (GO) developed at the GO Consortium (Ashburner
et al., 2000) provides a suitable framework for this kind of analysis,
due to the wide scope of biology covered and its directed acyclic
graph (DAG) structure that enables visualization in the context of
biological dependences. Different development teams have released
software to analyze sequences by the use of GO. A variety of desktop
and web applications are available to electronically assign GO terms
to unknown sequences based on similarity (Martin et al., 2004; Groth
et al., 2004; Khan et al., 2003; Zehetner, 2003) or to analyze gen-
omic data in the context of gene annotation (Al-Shahrour et al., 2004;
Doniger et al., 2003). However, when trying to perform GO-based
analysis in poorly characterized organisms we encountered a num-
ber of drawbacks. In general, these tools are either not designed
for high-throughput sequence annotation, are limited in their mining
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed.
†The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors
should be regarded as joint First Authors.
and visualization capabilities, or accept only gene or probe identi-
fiers as input data, making them restrictive to annotated sequences
already deposited in public databases. In order to provide a suitable
solution to these limitations we have developed Blast2GO (B2G), a
universal GO annotation, visualization and statistics framework that
brings advanced functional analysis to the genomics research of non-
model species. B2G has been design to (1) allow automatic and high
throughput sequence annotation and (2) integrate functionality for
annotation-based data mining. Briefly, B2G uses BLAST (Altschul
et al., 1990) to find homologs to fasta formatted input sequences. The
program extracts GO terms to each obtained hit by mapping to exist-
ent annotation associations. An annotation rule finally assigns GO
terms to the query sequence. Annotation and functional analysis can
be visualized in a graph form reconstructing the GO relationships
and color-highlighting the most relevant areas (Fig. 1). B2G was
conceived to be an attractive tool for research environments where
genetic and/or computational resources are limited and where much
work is still done in an explorative fashion. B2G is a user-friendly,
easy to distribute and low maintenance tool. It allows monitoring and
interaction at different steps of the analysis, and emphasizes visual-
ization as an important component of knowledge acquisition. B2G
is a Java application made available by Java Web Start. It is plat-
form independent and has no further requirements than an Internet
connection.
OBTAINING GO TERMS
The first step in B2G is to find sequences similar to a query set
by Blast searching. Homology search can either be done at public
databases (e.g. NCBI nr and est using QBlast) or custom databases
(e.g. GO annotated sequence sets and single species DBs) when a
local www-Blast installation is available. Blast expectation values
(E-value) and hit number thresholds are provided to retrieve signi-
ficant results. To avoid the danger of annotation by short matches
with low E-values, an additional filter can be set to the minimal
alignment length (hsp-length). Annotation, however, will ultimately
be based on sequence similarity levels since similarity percentages
are independent on database size and more intuitive than E-values.
In order to retrieve GO terms associated with the obtained hits,
a quite straight forward mapping is made. By using Blast hit gene
identifiers (gi) and gene accessions B2G retrieves all GO annota-
tions for the hit sequences, together with their evidence codes (EC).
3674 © The Author 2005. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oupjournals.org
 by guest on M
ay 18, 2012
http://bioinform
atics.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
Blast2GO
Fig. 1. Application overview. The figure shows schematically a typical run of B2G. Used symbols are described in the embedded legend. Numbered circles
denote the major application steps. From the left to the right these are (1) Blasting: a group of selected sequences is blasted against either the NCBI or custom
databases, (2) Mapping: GO terms are mapped on the blast results using annotation files provided by the GO Consortium that are downloaded on a monthly basis
at the Blast2GO server, (3) Annotation: sequences are annotated using an annotation rule that takes parameters provided by the user, (4) Statistical analysis:
optionally, analysis of GO term distribution differences between groups of sequences can be performed and (5) Visualization: annotation and statistics results
can be visualized on the GO DAG. At each of these steps, different charts are available to evaluate the progress of the analysis and data can be saved and
exported in different formats.
ECs can be interpreted as an index of the trustworthiness of the
GO annotation. At the end of the mapping processes, for each query
sequence, a set of candidate annotations from different hits of diverse
similarity levels and various annotation sources is gathered.
ANNOTATION ASSIGNMENT
Annotation is performed by applying an annotation rule (AR) to the
obtained ontologies. The rule seeks to find the most specific annota-
tions with a certain level of reliability. This process is adjustable in
specificity and stringency.
For each candidate GO an annotation score (AS) is computed.
The AS is composed of two additive terms. The first, direct term
(DT), represents the highest hit similarity of this GO weighted by a
factor corresponding to its EC. By employing ECs, B2G promotes
the assignment of annotations with experimental evidence and penal-
izes electronic annotations or low traceability. The EC weights have
been taken following recommendations of the GO Consortium and
can be modified if desired. The second term (AT) of the AS provides
the possibility of abstraction. This is defined as annotation to a parent
node when several child nodes are present in the GO candidate col-
lection. This term multiplies the number of total GOs unified at the
node by a user defined GO weight factor that controls the possibility
and strength of abstraction. Finally, the AR selects the lowest term
per branch that lies over a user defined threshold. In an analytical
form, DT, AT and the AR terms are defined as follows:
DT = max(similarity × ECweight)
AT = (#GO − 1) × GOweight
AS = DT + AT
AR : lowest.node(AS ≥ threshold).
To comprehend the results of annotation, graph visualization for
single sequences, showing all involved values, is available.
STATISTICS
Once GO annotation is available through B2G (uploading an existing
annotation file is also supported), the application offers the possibility
of direct statistical analysis on gene function information. A com-
mon analysis is the statistical assessment of GO term enrichments in
a group of interesting genes when compared with a reference group.
This functionality was introduced in B2G by integrating Gossip
(Blüthgen et al., 2004). Gossip computes Fisher’s Exact Test apply-
ing robust FDR (false discovery rate) correction for multiple testing
and returns a list of significant GO terms ranked by their corrected or
one-test P -values. Furthermore B2G offers various statistical charts
summarizing the results obtained at blasting, mapping or annotation.
Bar or pie charts of similarity/E-value distributions, EC distributions
and annotation statistics (GOs/Seqs) can be generated, saved and
printed.
VISUALIZATION
Visualization is an important aspect in B2G. For each sequence, the
progress in the annotation process and the final annotation step are
visualized on the main application table by successive color changes.
This allows the researcher to readily spot sequences that failed the
initial annotation process and, if desired, modify annotation paramet-
ers for those. Furthermore, the joined biological meaning of a set of
sequences can be visualized on the GO DAG by color-intensity high-
lighting of the most relevant nodes in a combined sequence graph.
Those nodes are identified by computing a node score that takes into
account the number of sequences converging at one node and penal-
izes by the distance to the node where each sequence was annotated.
3675
 by guest on M
ay 18, 2012
http://bioinform
atics.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 
A.Conesa et al.
Alternatively, when an enrichment analysis is available, graph color
highlighting by statistical results will show the GO-term specificity
of the query subset.
VALIDATION
The performance of Blast2GO has been tested using a dataset for
which annotation and functional information was available. The
methodology and results of this evaluation are given as supplement-
ary material and are available at the B2G site. Our results show
that Blast2GO reaches an annotation accuracy of 65–70% , which
is commonly reported in automatic GO annotation methods (Martin
et al., 2004; Khan et al., 2003). More interestingly, this evaluation
shows that the tool is successful in extracting relevant functional
features of these sequences based on the use of the predicted
annotation.
CONCLUSIONS
By joining annotation to function analysis B2G provides a power-
ful data mining tool ideally suited to support genomic research in
non-model species. Its species-independent character and different
data input fronts makes it a valuable mining resource for potentially
any organism. B2G combines high-throughput analysis, statistical
evaluation and biology framed visualization with a high degree of
user interaction. Further developments of Blast2GO will include
extension to multiple annotation types and novel statistical analysis
tools.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Dr Timothy Williams for fruitful discussions and
comments on the software and Nils Bluethgen for kindly providing
the Gossip software and supporting integration in B2G. This work
has been funded by MCyT (GEN 2001 - 4885-C05-03) and eTumour
Project (FP6-2002-LIFESCIHEALTH 503094). The authors thank
the INBIOMED G03/160 research thematic network financed by
FIS of the Instituto de Salud Carlos III.
Conflict of Interest: none declared.
REFERENCES
Al-Shahrour,F. et al. (2004) FatiGO: a web tool for finding significant associations of
Gene Ontology terms with groups of genes. Bioinformatics, 20, 578–580.
Altschul,S.F. et al. (1990) Basic local alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol., 215, 403–410.
Ashburner,M. et al. (2000) Gene Ontology: tool for the unification of biology. Nat.
Genet., 25, 25–29.
Blüthgen,N., Brand,K., Cajavec,B., Swat,M., Herzel,H. and Beule,D., (2004) Biolo-
gical Profiling of Gene Groups utilizing Gene Ontology – A Statistical Framework.
arXiv:q-bio.GN/0407034, 1, 1.
Doniger,S. et al. (2003) MAPPFinder: using Gene Ontology and GenMAPP to create a
global gene-expression profile from microarray data. Genome Biol., 4, R7.
Groth,D. et al. (2004) GOblet: a platform for Gene Ontology annotation of anonymous
sequence data. Nucleic Acids Res., 32, 313–317.
Khan,S. et al. (2003) GoFigure: automated Gene OntologyTM annotation. Bioinform-
atics, 19, 2484–2485.
Martin,D. et al. (2004) GOtcha: a new method for prediction of protein function assessed
by the annotation of seven genomes. BMC Bioinformatics, 5, 178.
Zehetner,G. (2003) OntoBlast function: from sequence similarities directly to potential
functional annotations by ontology terms. Nucleic Acids Res., 31, 3799–3803.
3676
 by guest on M
ay 18, 2012
http://bioinform
atics.oxfordjournals.org/
D
ow
nloaded from
 

