A Break in the Clouds: Towards a Cloud Definition
Luis M. Vaquero1, Luis Rodero-Merino1 , Juan Caceres1, Maik Lindner2
1Telefonica Investigacion y Desarrollo and 2SAP Research
1Madrid, Spain, EU and 2Belfast, UK, EU
lmvg@tid.es, rodero@tid.es, caceres@tid.es, m.lindner@sap.com
This article is an editorial note submitted to CCR. It has NOT been peer reviewed. The author takes full
responsibility for this article’s technical content. Comments can be posted through CCR Online.
ABSTRACT
This paper discusses the concept of Cloud Computing to
achieve a complete definition of what a Cloud is, using the
main characteristics typically associated with this paradigm
in the literature. More than 20 definitions have been studied
allowing for the extraction of a consensus definition as well
as a minimum definition containing the essential characteris-
tics. This paper pays much attention to the Grid paradigm,
as it is often confused with Cloud technologies. We also de-
scribe the relationships and distinctions between the Grid
and Cloud approaches.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
H.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Systems and
Software—Distributed Systems; C.2 [Computer Commu-
nication Networks]: Distributed Systems—Network Op-
erating Systems
General Terms
Computing theory
Keywords
Cloud Computing, Cloud Definition, Grid
1. INTRODUCTION
Cloud Computing is associated with a new paradigm for
the provision of computing infrastructure. This paradigm
shifts the location of this infrastructure to the network to
reduce the costs associated with the management of hard-
ware and software resources [16]. The Cloud is drawing the
attention from the Information and Communication Tech-
nology (ICT) community, thanks to the appearance of a set
of services with common characteristics, provided by impor-
tant industry players. However, some of the existing tech-
nologies the Cloud concept draws on (such as virtualization,
utility computing or distributed computing) are not new [29,
18, 23]
The variety of technologies in the Cloud makes the over-
all picture confusing [18]. Moreover, the hype around Cloud
Computing further muddies the message [11, 23]. Of course,
the Cloud is not the first technology that falls into hype.
Gartner’s Hype Cycle [12] characterizes how the hype about
a technology evolves “from overenthusiasm through a period
of disillusionment to an eventual understanding of the tech-
nology relevance and role in a market or domain”.
Arguably, Cloud Computing is now in the first stage of
this hype cycle, labeled as ‘Positive Hype’ (see [12]). This
reinforces the overall confusion about the paradigm and its
capacities, turning the Cloud into an excessively general
term that includes almost any solution that allows the out-
sourcing of all kinds of hosting and computing resources.
Yet, the notions of transparent access to resources on a pay-
per-use basis, relying on an infinitely and instantly scalable
infrastructure managed by a third-party, is a recurrent idea.
The example of what has happened with the Grid illus-
trates the need of a crisp definition for Clouds: although
there are well-known Grid definitions (probably Foster’s [10]
is the most widely accepted), none of them are widely ac-
cepted. A clear Grid definition may have helped to dissemi-
nate what the term ‘Grid’ actually means and what business
benefits can be obtained from it. Thus, it is important to
find a unified definition of what Cloud Computing is, de-
limiting the scope of research and emphasizing the potential
business benefits.
There are many definitions of Cloud Computing, but they
all seem to focus on just certain aspects of the technology
[11, 14, 22, 5, 6, 24, 23, 18]. This paper tries to give a
more comprehensive analysis of all the features of Cloud
Computing, to reach a definition that encompasses them.
This paper proceeds as follows. First, in Section 2, we
present an overview of the Cloud scenario. Section 3 an-
alyzes present Cloud definitions, extracting relevant Cloud
features and combining them to form both an integrative
and a basic Cloud definition. In Section 4 we present the
different approaches of grids and Clouds to clearly distin-
guish these two technologies. Finally, our conclusions are
presented in Section 5.
2. TYPES OF CLOUD SYSTEMS AND AC-
TORS
This section tries to distinguish the kind of systems where
Clouds are used and the actors involved in those deploy-
ments.
Actors.
Many activities use software services as their business ba-
sis. These Service Providers (SPs) make services accessi-
ble to the Service Users through Internet-based interfaces.
Clouds aim to outsource the provision of the computing in-
frastructure required to host services. This infrastructure is
offered ‘as a service’ by Infrastructure Providers (IPs), mov-
ing computing resources from the SPs to the IPs, so the SPs
can gain in flexibility and reduce costs (see Fig 1).
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 50 Volume 39, Number 1, January 2009
Figure 1: Cloud Actors
Depending on the type of provided capability, there are
three scenarios where Clouds are used:
Infrastructure as a Service.
IPs manage a large set of computing resources, such as
storing and processing capacity. Through virtualization,
they are able to split, assign and dynamically resize these re-
sources to build ad-hoc systems as demanded by customers,
the SPs. They deploy the software stacks that run their ser-
vices. This is the Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) scenario.
Platform as a Service.
Cloud systems can offer an additional abstraction level:
instead of supplying a virtualized infrastructure, they can
provide the software platform where systems run on. The
sizing of the hardware resources demanded by the execu-
tion of the services is made in a transparent manner. This
is denoted as Platform as a Service (PaaS). A well-known
example is the Google Apps Engine [1].
Software as a Service.
Finally, there are services of potential interest to a wide
variety of users hosted in Cloud systems. This is an alter-
native to locally run applications. An example of this is
the online alternatives of typical office applications such as
word processors. This scenario is called Software as a Ser-
vice (SaaS).
3. A CLOUD DEFINITION
In this section we will gather together most of the available
Cloud definitions (see Table 1) to get an integrative defini-
tion as well as a minimum common denominator. Specially
interesting is [11], as it gathers the definitions proposed by
many experts. Although it lacks a global analysis of those
proposals to reach a more comprehensive definition, it gives
a clear idea of the different concepts that ICT experts have
about Clouds.
Markus Klems [11] claims that immediate scalability and
resources usage optimization are key elements for the Cloud.
These are provided by increased monitoring, and automa-
tion of resources management [11, 14] in a dynamic environ-
ment [11, 6]. Other authors disagree that this is a require-
ment for an infrastructure to be considered as a Cloud [7].
Some authors focus on the business model (collaboration
and pay-as-you-go) and the reduction in capital expendi-
ture (Jeff Kaplan and Reuven Cohen in [11] and others in
[28, 5, 14]) by the realization of utility computing (Jeff Ka-
plan and Reuven Cohen in [11] and others in [5, 14, 22, 6]).
Until recently, it was often confused with the Cloud itself,
but it seems now agreed that it is just an element of the
Cloud related to the business model. Another major prin-
ciple for the Cloud is user-friendliness [11, 28]. Buyya et
al. [6] added that to reach commercial mainstream it is nec-
essary to strengthen the role of Service-Level Agreements
(SLAs) between the SP and the consumers of that service.
We believe that SLAs should also be established between the
SP and the IP to provide certain Quality of Service (QoS)
guarantees.
Very recently, McFedries [22] described the data center
(conceived as a huge collection of clusters) as the basic unit
of the Cloud offering huge amounts of computing power and
storage by using spare resources. This is related to the con-
cept of massive data scalability proposed by Hand [15].
The role of virtualization in Clouds is also emphasized
by identifying it as a key component [6]. Moreover, Clouds
have been defined just as virtualized hardware and software
plus the previous monitoring and provisioning technologies
(see Douglas Gourlay and Kirill Sheynkman in [11]).
Yet some other experts (see Reuven Cohen, Praising Gaw,
Damon Edwards, Ben Kepes definitions in [11], and the
Bragg study in [5]) do not stress Cloud capabilities, but
rather believe that Cloud Computing is a “buzz word” en-
compassing a wide variety of aspects such as deployment,
load balancing, provisioning, and data and processing out-
sourcing. Table 2 shows the Cloud features identified from
each of the definitions above.
Proposed Definition.
Taking these features into account we can provide an en-
compassing definition of the Cloud. Obviously, the Cloud
concept is still changing and these definitions show how
the Cloud is conceived today: Clouds are a large pool
of easily usable and accessible virtualized resources
(such as hardware, development platforms and/or
services). These resources can be dynamically re-
configured to adjust to a variable load (scale), allow-
ing also for an optimum resource utilization. This
pool of resources is typically exploited by a pay-
per-use model in which guarantees are offered by
the Infrastructure Provider by means of customized
SLAs. On the other hand, looking for the minimum com-
mon denominator would lead us to no definition as no single
feature is proposed by all definitions. The set of features
that most closely resemble this minimum definition would
be scalability, pay-per-use utility model and virtual-
ization.
4. CLOUDS AND GRIDS COMPARISON
A source of confusion around the Cloud concept is its rela-
tion with Grid Computing [24, 19]. The distinctions are not
clear maybe because Clouds and grids share similar visions:
reduce computing costs and increase flexibility and reliabil-
ity by using third-party operated hardware. We will use well
established definitions of the Grid and compare them to our
global and essential definitions of the Cloud.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 51 Volume 39, Number 1, January 2009
Author/Reference Year Definition/Excerpt
M. Klems [11] 2008 you can scale your infrastructure on demand within minutes or even seconds, instead of days
or weeks, thereby avoiding under-utilization (idle servers) and over-utilization (blue screen)
of in-house resources...
P. Gaw [11] 2008 using the internet to allow people to access technology-enabled services. Those services must
be ’massively scalable...
R. Buyya [6] 2008 A Cloud is a type of parallel and distributed system consisting of a collection of interconnected
and virtualized computers that are dynamically provisioned and presented as one or more
unified computing resources based on service-level agreements established through negotiation
between the service provider and consumers
R. Cohen [11] 2008 Cloud computing is one of those catch all buzz words that tries to encompass a variety of
aspects ranging from deployment, load balancing, provisioning, business model and architec-
ture (like Web2.0). It’s the next logical step in software (software 10.0). For me the simplest
explanation for Cloud Computing is describing it as, ”internet centric software...
J. Kaplan [11] 2008 a broad array of web-based services aimed at allowing users to obtain a wide range of
functional capabilities on a ’pay-as-you-go’ basis that previously required tremendous hard-
ware/software investments and professional skills to acquire. Cloud computing is the realiza-
tion of the earlier ideals of utility computing without the technical complexities or complicated
deployment worries...
D. Gourlay [11] 2008 ...the next hype-term...building off of the software models that virtualization enabled
D. Edwards [11] 2008 ...what is possible when you leverage web-scale infrastructure (application and physical) in
an on-demand way...
B. de Haff [11] 2008 ...There really are only three types of services that are Cloud based: SaaS, PaaS, and Cloud
Computing Platforms. I am not sure being massively scalable is a requirement to fit into
any one category.
B. Kepes [11] 2008 ...Put simply Cloud Computing is the infrastructural paradigm shift that enables the ascen-
sion of SaaS. ... It is a broad array of web-based services aimed at allowing users to obtain
a wide range of functional capabilities on a pay-as-you-go basis that previously required
tremendous hardware/software investments and professional skills to acquire
K. Sheynkman [11] 2008 Clouds focused on making the hardware layer consumable as on-demand compute and storage
capacity. This is an important first step, but for companies to harness the power of the Cloud,
complete application infrastructure needs to be easily configured, deployed, dynamically-scaled
and managed in these virtualized hardware environments
O. Sultan [11] 2008 ...In a fully implemented Data Center 3.0 environment, you can decide if an app is run
locally (cook at home), in someone elses data center (take-out) and you can change your
mind on the fly in case you are short on data center resources (pantry is empty) or you
having environmental/facilities issues (too hot to cook). In fact, with automation, a lot of
this can can be done with policy and real-time triggers...
K. Hartig [11] 2008 ..really is accessing resources and services needed to perform functions with dynamically
changing needs...is a virtualization of resources that maintains and manages itself.
J. Pritzker [11] 2008 Clouds are vast resource pools with on-demand resource allocation...virtualized ...and priced
like utilities
T. Doerksen [11] 2008 Cloud computing is ... the user-friendly version of Grid computing
T. von Eicken [11] 2008 outsourced, pay-as-you-go, on-demand, somewhere in the Internet, etc
M. Sheedan [11] 2008 ...’Cloud Pyramid’ to help differentiate the various Cloud offerings out there...Top: SaaS;
Middle: PaaS; Bottom: IaaS
A. Ricadela [11] 2008 ...Cloud Computing projects are more powerful and crash-proof than Grid systems developed
even in recent years
I. Wladawsky Berger [11] 2008 ...the key thing we want to virtualize or hide from the user is complexity...all that software
will be virtualized or hidden from us and taken care of by systems and/or professionals that
are somewhere else - out there in The Cloud
B. Martin [11] 2008 Cloud computing encompasses any subscription-based or pay-per-use service that, in real
time over the Internet, extends IT’s existing capabilities
R. Bragg [5] 2008 The key concept behind the Cloud is Web application... a more developed and reliable Cloud.
Many find it’s now cheaper to migrate to the Web Cloud than invest in their own server
farm ... it is a desktop for people without a computer
G. Gruman and E. Knorr [14] 2008 Cloud is all about: SaaS...utility computing...Web Services... PaaS...Internet integra-
tion...commerce platforms....
P. McFedries [22, 15] 2008 Cloud Computing, in which not just our data but even our software resides within the Cloud,
and we access everything not only through our PCs but also Cloud-friendly devices, such
as smart phones, PDAs... the megacomputer enabled by virtualization and software as a
service...This is utility computing powered by massive utility data centers.
Table 1: Cloud Definitions
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 52 Volume 39, Number 1, January 2009
Feature Reference
User Friendliness [11, 6, 24]
Virtualization [11, 6, 24, 5]
Internet Centric [11, 6, 24, 5]
Variety of Resources [11, 24, 22]
Automatic Adaptation [11, 14]
Scalability [11, 6, 24, 22, 15]
Resource Optimization [11, 24, 22]
Pay per Use [11, 14, 6, 24, 5]
Service SLAs [11, 6]
Infrastructure SLAs [11]
Table 2: Cloud Characteristics
4.1 A Grid Definition
Although the essential principles of grids have not changed
much in the last decade, there are still different conceptions
about what a Grid really is. In 2002, Ian Foster [10] pro-
posed a definition of the Grid as “a system that coordinates
resources which are not subject to centralized control, using
standard, open, general-purpose protocols and interfaces to
deliver nontrivial qualities of service”. More recent defini-
tions emphasize the ability to combine resources from dif-
ferent organizations for a common goal [4]). In [26, 20] the
concern is not so much the coordination of resources from
different domains, but how those resources must be man-
aged and presented. In fact, is this divergence of conceptions
about the Grid what this work aims to avoid for Clouds.
4.2 Feature Comparison
In this subsection we present the main features of a cur-
rent Grid [4, 10, 26, 20] in order to compare them with
Cloud main characteristics extracted from the definitions
above [11, 6, 24], to differentiate both paradigms.
Table 3 compares different features of grids and Clouds.
The remaining of this section highlights the similarities and
differences between both paradigms.
4.2.1 Resource Sharing
Grids enhance fair share of resources across organizations,
whereas Clouds provide the resources that the SP requires
on demand, giving the impression of a single dedicated re-
source. Hence, there is no actual sharing of resources due to
the isolation provided through virtualization.
4.2.2 Heterogeneity
Both models support the aggregation of heterogeneous
hardware and software resources.
4.2.3 Virtualization
Grid services are provided with interfaces that hide the
heterogeneity of the underlying resources. Therefore, a Grid
provides the ability to virtualize the sum of parts into a sin-
gular wide-area resource pool. Virtualization covers both,
data (flat files, databases etc.) and computing resources [24].
Cloud Computing adds the virtualization of hardware re-
sources too.
4.2.4 Security
Virtualization is related to security since it enables the
isolation of environments. While in Clouds each user has
unique access to its individual virtualized environment, Grids
often do not deal with end user security. Thus, some authors
argue that security has not been seriously explored [19].
Feature Grid Cloud
Resource Shar-
ing
Collaboration (VOs,
fair share).
Assigned resources
are not shared.
Resource Het-
erogeneity
Aggregation of het-
erogeneous resources.
Aggregation of het-
erogeneous resources.
Virtualization
Virtualization of data
and computing re-
sources.
Virtualization of
hardware and soft-
ware platforms.
Security
Security through cre-
dential delegations.
Security through iso-
lation.
High Level Ser-
vices
Plenty of high level
services.
No high level services
defined yet.
Architecture Service orientated.
User chosen architec-
ture.
Software De-
pendencies
Application domain-
dependent software.
Application domain-
independent soft-
ware.
Platform
Awareness
The client software
must be Grid-
enabled.
The SP software
works on a cus-
tomized environ-
ment.
Software
Workflow
Applications require
a predefined workflow
of services.
Workflow is not es-
sential for most appli-
cations.
Scalability
Nodes and sites scal-
ability.
Nodes, sites, and
hardware scalability.
Self-
Management
Reconfigurability.
Reconfigurability,
self-healing.
Centralization
Degree
Decentralized con-
trol.
Centralized control
(until now).
Usability Hard to manage. User friendliness.
Standardization
Standardization and
interoperability.
Lack of standards for
Clouds interoperabil-
ity.
User Access
Access transparency
for the end user.
Access transparency
for the end user.
Payment
Model
Rigid. Flexible.
QoS Guaran-
tees
Limited support, of-
ten best-effort only.
Limited support, fo-
cused on availability
and uptime.
Table 3: Grid vs. Cloud Characteristics
Grids, nonetheless, offer security services and credential del-
egation to access all the resources available in a Virtual Or-
ganization [24].
4.2.5 High Level Services
Grids offer a handful of services such as metadata search,
data transfer... [24, 26]. Unlike Grids, Clouds still suffer
a certain lack of high level services, which is probably re-
lated to the lower level of maturity of the paradigm. Clouds
let these issues to be treated at the application level [27],
although federated Clouds will likely require several mecha-
nisms to deal with these topics [25].
4.2.6 Architecture, Dependencies and Platform Aware-
ness
Virtualization is a key enabler of architecture-agnostic
Cloud applications. For example, SPs can deploy Enterprise
Java Beans-based applications just as they can deploy a set
of Grid services instead. The Cloud will treat them both
equally. However, by definition grids accept only “gridified”
applications [26], thus imposing hard requirements to the
developers.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 53 Volume 39, Number 1, January 2009
4.2.7 Software Workflow
Since grids are essentially service and job oriented, they
imply the need to perform the coordination of the services
workflow and location which is not necessary in on-demand
deployments such as those in the Clouds.
4.2.8 Scalability and Self-Management
Both grids and Clouds free programmers of dealing with
scalability issues [8]. Grid scalability is mainly enabled by
increasing the number of working nodes; Clouds offer the
automatic resizing of virtualized hardware resources. Scala-
bility requires dynamic reconfiguration: as the system scales
it needs to be reconfigured in an automated manner.
Scalability and self-management is simpler in a single ad-
ministrative domain, but many problems can be found across
organizational frontiers. In grids, many difficulties lay ex-
actly in not having a single owner of the whole system [26].
Up-to-date Clouds are operated by single companies, but we
envision federated Clouds facing similar problems as grids [25,
30, 28].
4.2.9 Usability
Clouds are easily usable, hiding the deployment details
from the user [28, 6, 11]. This reduced entry point is a long-
standing, yet unaccomplished, requirement of Grids [24].
Comparing a complex, invasive, and management-intensive
vs. a simple and externally managed environment helps to
explain the attention paid to Clouds.
4.2.10 Standardization
Grids have devoted huge efforts to reach standardization
both in the user interface and in the inner interfaces (for
accessing resources) (see [3]), and so reach seamless interop-
erability [21].
The user access interface to the Cloud is very often based
on standard technologies such as those used in grids, how-
ever inner interfaces standardization is still a major issue.
These internal interfaces are kept hidden by the enterprises,
thus hampering the interoperability among different Clouds
and the possibility of a worldwide federation of Clouds [24,
25, 30, 28]. Some of the challenges ahead for the Clouds,
like monitoring, storage, QoS, federation of different orga-
nizations, etc. have been previously addressed by grids.
Clouds present, however, specific elements that call for stan-
dardization too; e. g. virtual images format or instantia-
tion/migration APIs [24]. So enhancing existing standards
is granted to ensure the required interoperability. For in-
stance, the OGF experience could be very important to ac-
complish this task [19].
4.2.11 Payment Model
Initial Grid efforts were mostly based on public funding
while the Cloud has been driven by commercial offers. Typ-
ically, Grid services are billed using a fixed rate per ser-
vice or different organizations sharing idle resources. On
the other hand, Cloud users are usually billed using a pay-
per-use model. More advanced payment models and SLA
enforcement in a federated Cloud are just starting to be ex-
plored [25] that will tear down one of the barriers to moving
traditional applications to the Cloud: the loss of cost con-
trol [17].
4.2.12 Quality of Service
In general, grids are not committed to a concrete QoS
level beyond best-effort, likely due to its collaboration and
resource sharing principles. Rather, it is the application
built on top of the Grid who has to supply any service guar-
antees by itself. Mechanisms for SLA enactment between
infrastructure providers in the Grid have been set [24].
On the contrary, QoS is an inherent features of many
Clouds, e.g. Amazon has already included a rough attempt
to provide a certain QoS by means of basic SLAs (99.9%
infrastructure uptime) [27]. It is worth noting that the
‘Amazon Web Service Customer Agreement’ (Section 7.1)
frees Amazon of any responsibility under ‘...power outages,
system failures or other interruptions...’. Hopefully, more
advanced/customizable SLAs are being supported [9] or im-
plemented [25].
4.3 Convergence of Grids and Clouds
The Next Generation Grid expert group (NGG) [13] has
developed a vision which “underpins the evolution of Grid
from a tool to solve compute- and data-intensive problems to-
wards a general-purpose utility infrastructure”. Grids need
to accelerate the incorporation of virtualization technologies
to gain some advantages that Clouds natively present (mi-
grability, hardware level scalability). In addition, grids need
to provide easier entry points so as to enable a wider adop-
tion by end users, i.e., Grids are meant to be userfriendly,
virtualized and automatically scalable utilities, which clearly
shows a convergence with current Clouds.
Several approaches exist that combine Clouds and Grids
together, which can also be seen as a combination of ad-
vanced networking with sophisticated virtualization. How-
ever, Clouds are also said to offer a limited set of features
exposed (i.e. they present a higher abstraction level to the
user). For instance, the Simple Storage Service by Ama-
zon [2] can be regarded as a limited data Grid when com-
pared to the CERN data Grid [19].
5. CONCLUSIONS
Clouds do not have a clear and complete definition in the
literature yet, which is an important task that will help to
determine the areas of research and explore new application
domains for the usage of the Clouds. To tackle this problem,
the main available definitions extracted from the literature
have been analyzed to provide both an integrative and an
essential Cloud definition.
Although our encompassing definition is overlapped with
many grid concepts, our common denominator definition
highlights the major features of Clouds, that make them
different to Grids. Virtualization is the key enabler tech-
nology of Clouds, as it is the basis for features such as, on
demand sharing of resources, security by isolation, etc. Us-
ability is also an important property of Clouds. Also, secu-
rity enhancements are needed so that enterprises could rely
sensitive data on the Cloud infrastructure. Finally, QoS and
SLA enforcement will also be essential before ICT compa-
nies reach high levels of confidence in the Cloud. Usability
and virtualization could also be applied to grids to ease their
usage, enhance their scalability, and allow on-demand ser-
vices. NGG and OGF efforts are highly devoted to this task,
enforcing standardization to enable a Cloud federation that
can then deal with the required massive scalability.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 54 Volume 39, Number 1, January 2009
6. DISCLAIMER
The opinions herein expressed do not represent the views
of TID and SAP. The information in this document is pro-
vided ”as is”, no guarantee is given that the information is
fit for any particular purpose. The above companies shall
have no liability for damages of any kind that may result
from the use of these materials. This work is partially sup-
ported by the EU FP7 RESERVOIR project under grant
#215605. We thank Pablo Arroyo for his valuable critique.
7. REFERENCES
[1] Google app engine web site. Web Resource, Sept 2008.
[2] Amazon simple storage service. Web Page
http://www.amazon.com/gp/browse.html?node=16427261.
[3] Mark Baker, Amy Apon, Clayton Ferner, and Jeff Brown.
Emerging grid standards. Computer, (4):43–50, April 2005.
[4] Miguel L. Bote-Lorenzo, Yannis A. Dimitriadis, and Eduardo
Gómez-Sánchez. Grid characteristics and uses: a grid definion.
pages 291–298, February 2004.
[5] Roy Bragg. Cloud computing: When computers really rule.
Tech News World, July 2008. Electronic Magazine, available at
http://www.technewsworld.com/story/63954.html.
[6] Rajkumar Buyya, Chee Shin Yeo, and Srikumar Venugopal.
Market-oriented cloud computing: Vision, hype, and reality for
delivering it services as computing utilities. CoRR,
(abs/0808.3558), 2008.
[7] Brian de Haaff. Cloud computing - the jargon is back! Cloud
Computing Journal, August 2008. Electronic Magazine, article
available at http://cloudcomputing.sys-con.com/node/613070.
[8] Kemal A. Delic and Martin Anthony Walker. Emergence of the
academic computing clouds. ACM Ubiquity, (31), 2008.
[9] Flexiscale web site. http://www.flexiscale.com, last visited:
August 2008.
[10] Ian Foster. What is the grid? - a three point checklist.
GRIDtoday, (6), July 2002. Available at
http://www.gridtoday.com/02/0722/100136.html.
[11] Jeremy Geelan. Twenty one experts define cloud computing.
Virtualization, August 2008. Electronic Magazine, article
available at http://virtualization.sys-con.com/node/612375.
[12] Gartner Group. Gartner’s hype cycle report, 2008. Technical
report, Gartner Group, July 2008. Available at
http://www.gartner.com/.
[13] Next Generation Grids (NGG) Experts Group. Requirements
and options for european grids research 2005-2010 and beyond
(ngg expert group report). Technical report, European
Commission, 2004. Available at
http://www.semanticgrid.org/docs/ngg2 eg final.pdf, Last
visited: August 2008.
[14] Galen Gruman and Eric Knorr. What cloud computing really
means. InfoWorld, April 2008. Electronic Magazine, available
at http://www.infoworld.com/article/08/04/07/15FE-cloud-
computing-reality 1.html.
[15] E. Hand. Head in the clouds. Nature, (449):963, Oct 2007.
[16] Brian Hayes. Cloud computing. Communications of the ACM,
(7):9–11, July 2008.
[17] Dion Hinchcliffe. 2007: The year enterprises open their soas to
the internet? ZD Net, January 2007. Electronic magazine,
article available at http://blogs.zdnet.com/Hinchcliffe/?p=77.
[18] Kai Hwang. Keynote. massively distributed systems: From
grids and p2p to clouds. In The 3rd International Conference
on Grid and Pervasive Computing - gpc-workshops, page xxii,
2008.
[19] Shantenu Jha, Andre Merzky, and Geoofrey Fox. Using clouds
to provide grids higher-levels of abstraction and explicit
support for usage modes. Technical report, Open Grid Forum,
April 2008. Available at
http://grids.ucs.indiana.edu/ptliupages/publications/cloud-
grid-saga.pdf.
[20] H. Kurdi, M. Li, and H. Al-Raweshidy. A classification of
emerging and traditional grid systems. Distributed Systems
Online, (3), March 2008.
[21] Moreno Marzolla, Paolo Andreetto, Valerio Venturi, Andrea
Ferraro, and Shiraz Memon et al. Open standards-based
interoperability of job submission and management interfaces
across the grid middleware platforms glite and unicore. In
Proceedings of the Third IEEE International Conference on
e-Science and Grid Computing, pages 592–601. IEEE CS
Press, December 2007.
[22] Paul McFedries. The cloud is the computer. IEEE Spectrum
Online, August 2008. Electronic Magazine, available at
http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/aug08/6490.
[23] Dejan Milojicic. Cloud computing: Interview with russ daniels
and franco travostino. IEEE Internet Computing, (5):7–9,
Sept/Oct 2008.
[24] Members of EGEE-II. An egee comparative study: Grids and
clouds - evolution or revolution. Technical report, Enabling
Grids for E-sciencE Project, June 2008. Electronic version
available at https://edms.cern.ch/document/925013/.
[25] B. Rochwerger, D. Breitgand, E. Levy, A. Galis, and K. Nagin
et al. The reservoir model and architecture for open federated
cloud computing. IBM Systems Journal. Submitted for
publication.
[26] Heinz Stockinger. Defining the grid: a snapshot on the current
view. The Journal of Supercomputing, (1):3–17, October 2007.
[27] J. Varia. Amazon white paper on cloud architectures, Sept
2008. Available:
http://aws.typepad.com/aws/2008/07/white-paper-on.html.
[28] Paul Watson, Phillip Lord, Frank Gibson, Panayiotis
Periorellis, and Georgios Pitsilis. Cloud computing for e-science
with carmen. pages 1–5, 2008.
[29] Aaron Weiss. Computing in the clouds. netWorker, (4):16–25,
December 2007.
[30] Irving Wladawsky-Berger. Cloud computing, grids and the
upcoming cambrian explosion in it. Keynote at the 22nd Open
Grid Forum, abstract available at http://www.ogf.org/OGF22/.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 55 Volume 39, Number 1, January 2009

