International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
38 
Techniques of Data Mining In Healthcare: A Review 
 
Parvez Ahmad 
Dept. Of Computer Science 
Aligarh Muslim University 
Aligarh 
 
Saqib Qamar 
Dept. Of Computer Science 
Aligarh Muslim University 
Aligarh 
 
Syed Qasim Afser Rizvi 
Dept. Of Computer Science 
Aligarh Muslim University 
Aligarh 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Data mining is gaining popularity in disparate research fields 
due to its boundless applications and approaches to mine the 
data in an appropriate manner. Owing to the changes, the 
current world acquiring, it is one of the optimal approach for 
approximating the nearby future consequences. Along with 
advanced researches in healthcare monstrous of data are 
available, but the main difficulty is how to cultivate the 
existing information into a useful practices. To unfold this 
hurdle the concept of data mining is the best suited. Data 
mining have a great potential to enable healthcare systems to 
use data more efficiently and effectively. Hence, it improves 
care and reduces costs. This paper reviews various Data 
Mining techniques such as classification, clustering, 
association, regression in health domain. It also highlights 
applications, challenges and future work of Data Mining in 
healthcare.   
Keywords 
Data Mining, Classification, Clustering, Association, 
Healthcare 
1. INTRODUCTION 
In the early 1970’s, it was very costly to store the data or 
information. But due to the advancement in the field of 
information gathering tools and WWW in the last twenty-five 
years, we have seen huge amount of information or data are 
available in electronic format. To store such a large amount of 
data or information the sizes of databases are increased very 
rapidly. Such type of databases consist very useful 
information. This information may be very useful for decision 
making process in any field. It becomes possible with the help 
of data mining or Knowledge Discovery in Databases (KDD). 
Data mining is the process of extracting the useful 
information from a large collection of data which was 
previously unknown [1]. A number of relationships are hidden 
among such a large collection of data for example a 
relationship between patient data and their number of days of 
stay [2]. 
With the help of figure 1 five stages are identified in 
knowledge discovery process [3, 4, and 5]. 
With the help of raw data the first stage starts and ends with 
extracted knowledge which was captured as a result of 
following stages as shown in figure 1: 
 Selection  
The data is selected according to some criteria in this stage. 
For example, a bicycle owns by all those people, we can 
determine subsets of data in this way. 
 Preprocessing 
This stage removes that information which is not necessary 
for example while doing pregnancy test it is not necessary to 
note the sex of a patient. It is also known as data cleansing 
stage. 
 Transformation 
This stage transformed only those data which are useful in a 
particular research for example only data related to a 
particular demography is useful in market research. 
 Data mining 
Data mining is a stage knowledge discovery process. This 
stage is useful for extracting the meaningful patterns from 
data. 
 Interpretation and evaluation 
The meaningful patterns which the system identified are 
interpreted into knowledge in this stage. This knowledge may 
be then useful for making useful decisions.  
1.1 Significance of Data Mining in 
Healthcare 
Generally all the healthcare organizations across the world 
stored the healthcare data in electronic format. Healthcare data 
mainly contains all the information regarding patients as well 
as the parties involved in healthcare industries. The storage of 
such type of data is increased at a very rapidly rate. Due to 
continuous increasing the size of electronic healthcare data a 
type of complexity is exist in it. In other words, we can say 
that healthcare data becomes very complex. By using the 
traditional methods it becomes very difficult in order to 
extract the meaningful information from it. But due to 
advancement in field of statistics, mathematics and very other 
disciplines it is now possible to extract the meaningful 
patterns from it. Data mining is beneficial in such a situation 
where large collections of healthcare data are available. 
  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
39 
 
Figure 1: Stages of Knowledge Discovery Process
Data Mining mainly extracts the meaningful patterns which 
were previously not known. These patterns can be then 
integrated into the knowledge and with the help of this 
knowledge essential decisions can becomes possible. A 
number of benefits are provided by the data mining. Some of 
them are as follows: it plays a very important role in the 
detection of fraud and abuse, provides better medical 
treatments at reasonable price, detection of diseases at early 
stages, intelligent healthcare decision support systems etc. 
Data mining techniques are very useful in healthcare domain. 
They provide better medical services to the patients and helps 
to the healthcare organizations in various medical 
management decisions. Some of the services provided by the 
data mining techniques in healthcare are: number of days of 
stay in a hospital, ranking of hospitals, better effective 
treatments, fraud insurance claims by patients as well as by 
providers, readmission of patients, identifies better treatments 
methods for a particular group of patients, construction of 
effective drug recommendation systems, etc [2]. Due to all 
these reasons researchers are greatly influenced by the 
capabilities of data mining. In the healthcare field researchers 
widely used the data mining techniques. There are various 
techniques of data mining. Some of them are classification, 
clustering, regression, etc. Each and every medical 
information related to patient as well as to healthcare 
organizations is useful. With the help of such a powerful tool 
known as data mining plays a very important role in 
healthcare industry. Recently researchers uses data mining 
tools in distributed medical environment in order to provide 
better medical services to a large proportion of population at a 
very low cost, better customer relationship management, 
better management of healthcare resources, etc. It provides 
meaningful information in the field of healthcare which may 
be then useful for management to take decisions such as 
estimation of medical staff, decision regarding health 
insurance policy, selection of treatments, disease prediction 
etc., [6-9]. Dealing with the issues and challenges of data 
mining in healthcare [10, 11].  In order to predict the various 
diseases effective analysis of data mining is used [12-21]. 
Proposed a data mining methodology in order to improve the 
result [22-24] and proposed new data mining methodology 
[25, 26] and proposed framework in order to improved the 
healthcare system [27-31].  
2. Data Mining Techniques 
2.1 Classification  
Classification is one of the most popularly used methods of 
Data Mining in Healthcare sector. It divides data samples into 
target classes. The classification technique predicts the target 
class for each data points. With the help of classification 
approach a risk factor can be associated to patients by 
analyzing their patterns of diseases. It is a supervised learning 
approach having known class categories. Binary and 
multilevel are the two methods of classification. In binary 
classification, only two possible classes such as, “high” or 
“low” risk patient may be considered while the multiclass 
approach has more than two targets for example, “high”, 
“medium” and “low” risk patient. Data set is partitioned as 
training and testing dataset. It consists of predicting a certain 
outcome based on a given input. Training set is the algorithm 
which consists of a set of attributes in order to predict the 
outcome. In order to predict the outcome it attempts to 
discover the relationship between attributes. Goal or 
prediction is its outcome. There is another algorithm known as 
prediction set. It consists of same set of attributes as that of 
training set. But in prediction set, prediction attribute is yet to 
be known. In order to process the prediction it mainly 
analyses the input. The term which defines how “good” the 
algorithm is its accuracy. Consider a medical database of 
Pawti Medical Center, training set consists all the information 
regarding patient which were recorded previously. Whether a 
patient had a heart problem or not is the prediction attribute 
there.  With the help of table 1 given below we demonstrates 
the training sets of such database. 
Table 1 – TRAINING AND PREDICTION SETS FOR 
PAWTI MEDICAL DATABASE 
Training Set 
Age Heart rate Blood 
pressure 
Heart 
problem 
45 75 140/64 Yes 
28 85 101/60 No 
38 62 105/55 No 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
40 
Prediction Set 
Age Heart rate Blood 
pressure 
Heart 
problem 
33 89 142/82 ? 
45 52 102/56 ? 
87 83 138/61 ? 
 
In order to disembosom the knowledge, classification predicts 
rules. Prediction rules are divulged in the form of IF-THEN 
rules.  With the help of above example, a rule predicting the 
first row in the training set may be represented as follows: 
IF (Age=45 AND Heart rate>75) OR (Age>44 AND Blood 
pressure>139/60) THEN Heart problem=yes 
Following are the various classification algorithms used in 
healthcare: 
2.1.1 K-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN) 
K-Nearest Neighbor (K-NN) classifier is one of the simplest 
classifier that discovers the unidentified data point using the 
previously known data points (nearest neighbor) and 
classified data points according to the voting system [6].  
Consider there are various objects. It would be beneficial for 
us if we know the characteristics features of one of the objects 
in order to predict it for its nearest neighbors because nearest 
neighbor objects have similar characteristics. The majority 
votes of K-NN can play a very important role in order to 
classify any new instance, where k is any positive integer 
(small number). It is one of the most simple data mining 
techniques. It is mainly known as Memory-based 
classification because at run time training examples must 
always be in memory [32]. Euclidean distance is calculated 
when we take the difference between the attributes in case of 
continuous attributes. But it suffers from a very serious 
problem when large values bear down the smaller ones. 
Continuous attributes must be normalized in order to take 
over this major problem so that they have same influence on 
the distance measure between distances [33]. 
K-NN has a number of applications in different areas such as 
health datasets, image field, cluster analysis, pattern 
recognition, online marketing etc. There are various 
advantages of KNN classifiers. These are: ease, efficacy, 
intuitiveness and competitive classification performance in 
many domains. If the training data is large then it is effective 
and it is robust to noisy training data. A main disadvantage of 
KNN classifiers is the large memory requirement needed to 
store the whole sample. If there is a big sample then its 
response time on a sequential computer will also large. 
2.1.2  Decision Tree (DT) 
DT is considered to be one of the most popular approaches for 
representing classifier. We can construct a decision tree by 
using available data which can deal with the problems related 
to various research areas. It is equivalent  to the flowchart in 
which every non-leaf nodes denotes a test on a particular 
attribute and every branch denotes an outcome of that test and 
every leaf node have a class label. Root node is the top most 
node of a decision tree. For example, with the help of medical 
readmission decision tree we can decide whether a particular 
patient requires readmission or not. Knowledge of domain is 
not required for building decision regarding any problem. The 
most common use of Decision Tree is in operations research 
analysis for calculating conditional probabilities [34]. Using 
Decision Tree, decision makers can choose best alternative 
and traversal from root to leaf indicates unique class 
separation based on maximum information gain [35]. 
Decision Tree is widely used by many researchers in 
healthcare field. Several advantages of decision tree as 
follows: Decision trees are self–explanatory and when 
compacted they are also easy to follow. Even set of rules can 
also be constructed with the help of decision trees. Hence, 
representation of decision tree plays a very important role in 
order to represent any discrete-value classifier because it can 
be capable to handle both type of attributes, nominal as well 
as numeric input attributes. If any datasets have missing or 
erroneous values, such type of datasets can be easily handled 
by decision trees. Due to this reason decision tree can be 
considered to be nonparametric method.  The meaning of 
above sentence is that there is no need to make assumptions 
regarding distribution of space and structure of classifier. 
Decision trees have several disadvantages. These are as 
follows: Most of the algorithms (like ID3 and C4.5) require 
that the target attributes have only discrete values because 
decision trees use the divide and conquer method. If there are 
more complex interactions among attributes exist then 
performance of decision trees is low. Their performance is 
better only when there exist a few highly relevant attributes. 
One of the reasons for this is that other classifiers can 
compactly describe a classifier that would be very challenging 
to represent using a decision tree. A simple illustration of this 
phenomenon is replication problem of decision trees [36], and 
the greedy characteristic of decision trees leads to another 
disadvantage. This is its over-sensitivity to the training set, 
irreverent attributes and to noise [37]. 
2.1.3 Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
Vapnik et al. [38- 39] was the first one who gave the notion of 
SVM.  Among all the available algorithms it provides very 
accurate results. It is gaining popularity because it can be 
easily extended to problems related to multiclass though it 
was mainly developed for problems related to binary 
classification [40-41]. In order to be useful for various 
effective and efficient tasks it is capable of creating single as 
well as multiple hyper planes in high dimensional space. The 
main aim of creating hyper plane by SVM in order to separate 
the data points. There are two ways of implementing SVM. 
The first technique employs mathematical programming and 
second technique involves kernel functions. With the help of 
training datasets non linear functions can be easily mapped to 
high dimensional space. Such situation can only be possible 
when we use kernel functions. Gaussian, polynomial, sigmoid 
etc. are some examples of kernel functions. For the 
classification of data points hyper plane is used. The primary 
task of hyper plane is to maximize the separation between 
data points. Support vectors are used in order to construct the 
hyper plane.  There are various advantages of SVM. Some of 
them as follow: First one is that, it is effective in high 
dimensional spaces. Another one is that, it is effective in cases 
where number of dimensions is greater than the number of 
samples. Third one is that, it is memory efficient because it 
uses a subset of training points in the decision function (called 
support vectors), and next is that, it is versatile because 
different kernel functions can be specified for the decision 
function. Some of the disadvantages of SVM as follow: First 
one is that, if the number of features is much greater than 
number of samples then SVM is more likely to give poor 
performances, and the another one is that, it does not directly 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
41 
provide probability estimates. These are calculated using an 
expansive five –fold cross-validation. 
2.1.4 Neural Network (NN) 
In the early 20th century it was developed [42]. Before the 
introduction of decision trees and the Support Vector Machine 
(SVM) it was regarded as the best classification algorithm 
[43]. This was one of the reasons which encouraged NN as the 
most widely used classification algorithm in various 
biomedicine and healthcare fields [44, 45, 46]. For example, 
NN has been widely used as the algorithm supporting the 
diagnosis of diseases including cancers [47-51] and predict 
outcomes [52-54]. In NN, basic elements are neurons or 
nodes. These neurons are interconnected and within the 
network they worked together in parallel in order to produce 
the output functions. From existing observations they are 
capable to produce new observations even in those situations 
where some neurons or nodes within the network fails or go 
down due to their capability of working in parallel. An 
activation number is associated to each neuron and a weight is 
assigned to each edge within a neural network. In order to 
perform the tasks of classification and pattern recognition 
neural network is mainly used [55]. The basic property of an 
NN is that it can minimize the error by adjusting its weight 
and by making changes in its structure. It minimizes the error 
only due to its adaptive nature. NN are capable to produce 
predictions of greater accuracy. One of the major advantages 
of NN is that it can properly handle noisy data for training and 
can reasonably classify new types of data that is different 
from training data. There are also various disadvantages of 
NN. First is that it requires many parameters, including the 
optimum number of hidden layer nodes that are empirically 
determined, and its classification performance is very 
sensitive to the parameters selected [56]. Second is that its 
training or learning process is very slow and computationally 
very expensive. Another is that they do not provide any 
internal details regarding to that phenomena which is 
currently under investigation. Hence, this approach is like a 
“black-box” approach for us.  
2.1.5 Bayesian Methods 
For probabilistic learning method Bayesian classification is 
used. With the help of classification algorithm we can easily 
obtained it [6]. Bayes theorem of statistics plays a very 
important role in it. While in medical domain attributes such 
as patient symptoms and their health state are correlated with 
each other but Naïve Bayes Classifier assumes that all 
attributes are independent with each other. This is the major 
disadvantage with Naïve Bayes Classifier. If attributes are 
independent with each other then Naïve Bayesian classifier 
has shown great performance in terms of accuracy. In 
healthcare field they play very important roles. Hence, 
researchers across the world used them there are various 
advantages of BBN. One of them is that it helps to makes 
computation process very easy. Another one is that for huge 
datasets it has better speed and accuracy. 
Classification Techniques Examples in 
Healthcare 
Hu et al., used different types of classification methods such 
as decision trees, SVMs, Bagging, Boosting and Random 
Forest for analyzing microarray data [57]. In this research, 
experimental comparisons of LibSVMs, C4.5, BaggingC4.5, 
AdaBoostingC4.5, and Random Forest on seven micro-array 
cancer data sets were conducted using 10-fold cross validation 
approach on the data sets obtained from Kent Ridge Bio 
Medical Dataset repository. On the basis of the experimental 
results, it has been found that Random Forest classification 
method performs better than all the other used classification 
methods [57]. 
Breast cancer is one of the fatal and dangerous diseases in 
women. Potter et al., had performed experiment on the breast 
cancer data set using WEKA tool and then analyzed the 
performance of different classifier using 10-fold cross 
validation method [58]. 
Huang et al., constructed a hybrid SVM-based diagnosis 
model in order to find out the important risk factor for breast 
cancer because in Taiwan, women especially young women 
suffered from breast cancer. In order to construct the 
diagnosis model, several types of DNA viruses in this 
research are studied. These DNA viruses are HSV-1 (herpes 
simplex virus type-1), EBV (Epstein-Barr virus), CMV 
(cytomegalovirus), HPV (human papillomavirus), and HHV-8 
(human hepesvirus-8). On the basis of experimental results, 
either {HSV-1,HHV-8} or {HSV-1,HHV-8,CMV}can 
achieved the identical high accuracy. The main aim of the 
study was to obtain the bioinformatics about the breast cancer 
and DNA viruses. Apart from SVM-based model, another 
type of diagnosis model called LDA (Linear discriminate 
analysis) was also constructed in this research. After 
comparing the accuracies of both SVM and LDA, the 
accuracy of SVM was far better than that of LDA [59]. 
Classification techniques were used for predicting the 
treatment cost of healthcare services which was increased 
with rapid growth every year and was becoming a main 
concern for everyone [60]. 
Khan et al., used decision tree for predicting the survivability 
of breast cancer patient [61]. 
Chang et al., used an integrated decision tree model for 
characterize the skin diseases in adults and children. The main 
focus of this research was to analyze the results of five 
experiments on the six major skin diseases. The main aim of 
this research was to construct the best predictive model in 
dermatology by using the decision tree and combine this 
decision tree with the neural network classification methods. 
On the basis of experimental result, it has been found that 
neural network has 92.62% accuracy in prediction of skin 
diseases [62]. 
Das et al., proposed a intelligent medical decision support 
system based on SAS software for the diagnosis of heat 
diseases. In order to construct the proposed system, neural 
networks method was mainly used. In this research, 
experiments were performed on the data taken from Cleveland 
heart disease database. On this basis of experiments, it has 
been found that neural networks have 89.01% accuracy [63].  
Curiac et al., analyzed the psychiatric patient data using BBN 
in order to identify the most significant factors of psychiatric 
diseases and their correlations by performing experiment on 
real data obtained from Lugoj Municipal Hospital. In this 
research, it has been found that BBN plays a very important 
role in medical decision making process in order to predicate 
the probability of a psychiatric patient on the basis detected 
symptoms [64]. 
Liu et al., develop a decision support system using BBN for 
better analyzing risks that were associated with health. With 
the help of using BBN in order to construct dose-response 
relationship and in order to predict the human disease and 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
42 
cancer risks due to specific toxic substance are the major 
objectives of this research [65]. 
E.Avci et al., proposed an intelligent system on the basis of 
genetic support vector machines (GVSM) for better analyzing 
the heart valve disease. This system extracts the important 
feature and classifies the signal obtained from the ultrasound 
of heart valve. In this research, the proposed system was 
mainly used for the diagnosis of the heart valve diseases. In 
this research, the proposed system was evaluated in 215 
samples. On the basis of samples result, it has been found that 
the proposed system was very effective to detect Doppler 
heart sounds [66]. 
Gunasundari et al., used ANN for discovering the lung 
diseases. This research work analyze the chest Computed 
Tomography (CT) and extract significant lung tissue feature 
to reduce the data size from the Chest CT and then extracted 
textual attributes were given to neural network as input to 
discover the various diseases regarding lung [67]. 
Soni et al., proposed the associative classification approach 
for better analyzing the healthcare data. The proposed 
approach was the combined approach that integrated the 
association rules as well as classification rules. This integrated 
approach was useful for discovering rules in the database and 
then using these rules to construct an efficient classifier. In 
this research, experiments on the data of heart patients were 
performed in order to find out that accuracy of associative 
classifiers was better than accuracy of traditional classifiers. 
Apart from this, the research also generated the rules using 
weighted associative classifier [68]. 
Fei et al., proposed Particle Swarm Optimization – Support 
Vector Machines (PSO-SVM) model for better analyzing the 
arrhythmia cordis to ensure the health of humans and save 
humans life. In this research, PSO was used to determined the 
parameters of SVM. This research demonstrates the 
performance of proposed model by using MIT-BIH ECG 
database on which experiments were performed. On the basis 
of experimental results, it has been found that the accuracy of 
proposed model was better than the accuracy of artificial 
neural network in diagnosis of arrhythmia cordis [69]. 
Er et al., constructed a model using Artificial Neural Network 
(ANN) for analyzing chest diseases and a comparative 
analysis of chest diseases was performed using multilayer, 
generalized regression, probabilistic neural networks [70]. 
DNA repair genes were considered by Chuang et al., fin order 
to better prediction of oral cancer by choosing a single 
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) dataset. The chosen dataset 
had certain samples of oral cancer’s patients. In this research, 
by using the support vector machines all prediction 
experiments were performed. On the basis of experimental 
result, it has been found that the performance of holdout cross 
validation was better than the performance of 10-fold cross 
validation. Apart from this, it has been also found that the 
accuracy of classification was 64.2% [71]. 
Bakar et al., proposed predictive models by using multiple 
rule based classifiers for the better early detection of dengue 
disease. In this research, the multiple rule based classifiers 
which were used in the proposed models were decision tree, 
rough set classifier, naïve bayes, and associative classifier. In 
order to predict the early detection of dengue disease several 
classifiers were investigated in this research. The classifiers 
were investigated individually and also in combination in 
order to study their performance. On the basis of experimental 
results, it has been found that the accuracy of multiple 
classifiers was better than the accuracy of single classifier 
[72]. 
Moon et al., used decision tree algorithm in order to 
characterize the smoking behaviors among smokers by 
assessing their psychological distress, psychological health 
status, consumption of alcohol, and demographic variables. 
The classification analysis was conducted on the basis of 
decision tree algorithm in order to find the relationship 
between the average numbers of cigarette consumption per 
day [73]. 
Jena et al., used K-NN and Linear Discriminate Analysis 
(LDA) for classification of chronic disease in order to 
generate early warning system. This research work used K-
NN to analyze the relationship between cardiovascular disease 
and hypertension and the risk factors of various chronic 
diseases in order to construct an early warning system to 
reduce the complication occurrence of these diseases [74]. 
Chien et al., proposed a universal hybrid decision tree 
classifier for classifying the activity of patient having chronic 
disease [75]. They further improved the existing decision tree 
model to classify different activities of patients in more 
accurate way. 
Shouman et al., used K-NN classifier for analyzing the 
patients suffering from heart disease [76]. The data was 
collected from UCI and experiment was performed using 
without voting or with voting K-NN classifier and it was 
found that K-NN achieved better accuracy without voting in 
diagnosis of heart diseases as compared to with voting K-NN. 
Liu et al., proposed an improved Fuzzy K-NN classifier for 
diagnosing thyroid disease. Particle Swarm Optimization 
(PSO) was also used for specifying fuzzy strength constraint 
and neighborhood size [77]. 
Hattice et al., discussed the classifier in medical field to 
diagnosis the skin disease using weighted KNN classifier 
[78]. 
Abdi et al., was constructed a PSO based SVM model for 
identifying erythemato-squamous diseases which consists two 
stages. In the first stage optimal feature were extracted using 
association rule and in second phase the PSO was used to 
discovered best kernel parameters for SVM in order to 
improve the accuracy of classifier model [79]. 
Zuoa et al., introduced an adaptive Fuzzy K-NN approach for 
Parkinson disease [80]. 
Rusdah et al., reviewed the various latest data mining 
methods in order to better diagnosis of tuberculosis. After 
reviewing, it has been found that the support vector machines 
(SVM) outperformed the other methods in the diagnosis of 
tuberculosis [81]. 
Johnson et al., proposed a multistage methodology in order to 
better detection of fraud committed by patients as well as by 
providers for healthcare insurance companies. The proposed 
methodology also helps in reducing significant costs for 
insurance companies. The proposed methodology was made 
up of various stages including risk determination stage. The 
risk threshold was determined by using a decision tree based 
method. The proposed methodology was compared with 
unsupervised and supervised neural network techniques. After 
comparison, it has been found that the proposed methodology 
outperforms unsupervised and supervised neural network 
techniques in order to detect the fraud. Apart from this, 
proposed methodology plays a significant role in validated the 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
43 
legitimated claims by obtaining the information from 
insurance claim forms [82]. 
Govaert et al., reviwed the relationship between surgical 
auditing and healthcare costs in order to evaluate that the 
surgical auditing has the potential to reduce the overall costs 
of hospitals only if when it focused on high-risk procedures 
like colorectal cancer surgery [83].  
Peng Z et al., explored the embryonic stem cell (ESC) gene 
signatures importance in order to estimated the survival of 
prostate cancer (PCa) patients at the time of their diagnosis. In 
the research, a total of 641 ESC gene predictors (ESCGPs) 
were identified by using microarray data sets. For estimating 
the survival a k-nearest neighbor (K-NN) algorithm was used 
to estimate the overall survival [84].    
2.2 Regression 
Regression is very important technique of data mining. With 
the help of it, we can easily identify those functions that are 
useful in order to demonstrates the correlation among 
different various variables. It is mainly a mathematical tool. 
With the help of training dataset we can easily construct it. 
Consider two variables ‘P’ and ‘Q’. These two types of 
variables are mainly used in the field of statistics. One of them 
is known as dependent and another one is independent 
variables. The maximum number of dependent variables 
cannot be more than one while independent can be exceeds 
one. Regression is mostly used in order to inspect the certain 
relationship between variables. With the help of regression 
technique we can easily entrenched the addiction of one 
variable upon others [85]. Regression can be classified into 
linear and non-linear on the basis of certain count of 
independent variables. In order to appraisal associations 
between two types of variables in which one is dependent 
variable and another one is independent variables (one or 
more), linear regression used. In order to construct the linear 
model, linear function is utilized by linear regression. But 
there is limitation while we use linear approach because both 
types of variables are known already and hence, its main 
purpose is to trace a line that correlates between both these 
variables [86]. We cannot use linear regression for categorized 
data. It is restricted only to numerical data. With the help of 
logistic regression the categorical data can be used. Such type 
of data is used by non-linear regression and logistic regression 
is basically a type of non-linear regression. Logistic 
regression with the help of logit function can predict the 
probability of occurrence. However, between variables 
logistic regression cannot consider linear relationship [87]. 
Due to all these reasons regression is widely used in medical 
field for predicting the diseases or survivability of a patient. 
Regression Examples in Healthcare 
Divya et al., proposed Weighted Support Vector Regression 
(WSVR) which used weight factor on the basis of sensor 
reading for providing continuous monitoring to patients in 
order to provide them better healthcare services. In this 
research, on the basis of experimental result, it has been found 
that the proposed approach had better accuracy than simple 
vector regression [88]. 
Logistic regression for the estimation of relative risk for 
various medical conditions such as Diabetes, Angina, stroke 
etc [89]. 
Xie et al., proposed a regression decision tree algorithm in 
order to predict the number of hospitalization days in a 
population. Proposed algorithm was developed using 
extensive health insurance claims data sets. Experimental 
results displayed that proposed algorithm was performed 
significantly in general population as well as in sub-
populations in order to predict future hospitalization [90]. 
Alapont et al., used WEKA for different learning methods 
like LinearRegression, LeastMedSq, SMOreg, Multilayer 
Percepton, KStart, Tree M5P etc. In the research, experiments 
were carried out using 10-fold cross validation. After 
experiments were carried out, it has been found that 
LinearRegression and Tree M5P gave best results for the 
effective utilization of hospital resources, improved hospital 
ranking and better customer relationship services [91]. 
2.3 Clustering  
Clustering is defined as unsupervised learning that occurs by 
observing only independent variables while supervised 
learning analyzing both independent and dependent variables. 
It is different from classification which is a supervised 
learning method. It has no predefined classes. Because of this 
reason, clustering may be best used for studies of an 
exploratory nature, mainly if those studies encompass large 
amount of data, but not very much known about data (such as 
mass of data generated by microarray analysis). The goal of 
clustering is descriptive while goal of classification is 
predictive (Veyssieres and Plant, 1998). The main task of 
unsupervised learning method means clustering method is to 
form the clusters from large database on the basis of similarity 
measure [6]. The goal of clustering is to discover a new set of 
categories, the new groups are of interest in themselves, and 
their assessment is intrinsic. In classification tasks, an 
important part of the assessment is extrinsic. Clustering 
partitioned the data points based on the similarity measure [6]. 
Clustering groups data instances into subsets in such a manner 
that similar instances are grouped together, while different 
instances belongs to different groups. Clustering approach is 
used to identify similarities between data points. Each data 
points within the same cluster are having greater similarity as 
compare to the data points belongs to other cluster. Clustering 
of objects is as ancient as the human need for describing the 
salient characteristics of men and objects and identifying them 
with a type. Therefore, it grasp various scientific disciplines: 
from mathematics and statistics to biology and genetics, each 
of which uses different terms to describe the topologies 
formed using this analysis. From biological “taxonomies”, to 
medical “syndromes” and genetic “genotypes” to 
manufacturing “group technology”— the problem is identical: 
forming categories of entities and assigning individuals to the 
proper groups within it. Following are the various clustering 
algorithms used in healthcare: 
2.3.1 Partitional Clustering 
The maximum number of data points in the datasets is ‘n’. 
With the help of ‘n’ data points the maximum possible 
number of ‘k’ clusters is obtained. In order to obtained the ‘k’ 
clusters from ‘n’ data points partitional clustering method is 
used. In this method, each ‘n’ data points is relates to one and 
only ‘k’ clusters while each ‘k’ clusters can relates to more 
than ‘n’ data points. Partitional clustering algorithms require a 
user to input k, (which is the number of clusters). Generally, 
partitional algorithms directly relocate objects to k clusters. 
Partitional algorithms are categorized according to how they 
relocate objects, how they select a cluster centroid (or 
representative) among objects within a (incomplete) cluster, 
and how they measure similarities between objects and cluster 
centroids. Before we obtained the clusters this method 
requires to define the required number of cluster which we 
may have to obtained from datasets. On the basis of 
similarities between objects and cluster centroids this method 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
44 
is partitioned into two categories. These are K-means and K-
Mediods. One of the most popular algorithms of this approach 
is K-means [3]. First of all it randomly selects k objects and 
then decomposes these objects into k disjoint groups by 
iteratively relocating objects based on the similarity between 
the centroids and objects [92, 93]. In k-means, a cluster 
centriod is mean value of objects in the cluster. The next 
algorithm is K-mediods. In order to group the cluster it used 
mediods. Mediod is very important because in the database it 
is that data point which is most centrally located. In order to 
improve the healthcare services related to public healthcare 
domain Lenert et al., utilize the application of k-means 
clustering  [94] and by using the clustering technique  Belciug 
et al. detect the recurrence of breast cancer  [95].  Escudero et 
al., used the concept of Bioprofile and K-means clustering for 
early detection of Alzheimer’s disease [96]. The major 
advantage of partitional clustering algorithms is their superior 
clustering accuracy as compared with hierarchal clustering 
algorithms that is the result of their global optimization 
strategy (i.e., the recursive relocations of objects) [97,98]. 
Another advantage is, partitional algorithms can handle large 
data sets which hierarchal algorithms cannot (i.e., better 
scalability) and can more quickly cluster data [97, 98]. In 
other words we can say that, partitional algorithms are more 
effective and efficient than hierarchical algorithms. One major 
drawback to the use of partitional algorithms is that their 
clustering results depend on the initial cluster centroids to 
some degree because the centroids are randomly selected. 
Each time when partitional algorithms run different clustering 
results are obtained. 
2.3.2 Hierarchical Clustering 
In order to partition the data points this method can be used 
two approaches. Data points can be partitioned in a tree way 
known as hierarchical way by using either top down or bottom 
up approaches. On the basis of partitioned process this method 
can be classified as Agglomerative and Divisive. The 
maximum number of data points can be n. A number of data 
points among n data points may have similarity with each 
other. The main aim of agglomerative approach is to merge 
such data points into a single group [3]. Divisive approach 
initially takes this single group and iteratively partitioned it 
into smaller group until and unless each data point relates to 
one and only one cluster [3]. There are three types of 
hierarchical clustering algorithms: First one is single-link, 
another one is complete-link, and the last one is average-link. 
The single-link clustering algorithm select the closet pair of 
objects from two groups and measure the similarity between 
objects as group similarity. The complete-link algorithm 
calculates the similarity between the most distant pair of 
objects from two groups. The average-link algorithm selects 
all pairs of objects from two groups and averages all possible 
distances between objects. The most similar two groups, those 
having the shortest distance are merged together after 
calculating similarities or distances between groups. Among 
the various hierarchical algorithms the average-link algorithm 
provides the best accuracy in most cases [97]. A main 
advantage of the use of hierarchical clustering algorithms is 
the visualization capability that shows how much objects in 
the data set are similar one another. In addition, with the 
utilization of a dendrogram, researchers can reasonably guess 
the number of clusters. This is a distinguishing feature of 
hierarchical algorithms because other clustering algorithms 
cannot provide this very useful feature, especially when there 
is no additional information available about the data itself. 
2.3.3 Density Based Clustering 
Density based clustering methods play a very important role 
in biomedical research because they are capable of handle any 
cluster of arbitrary shape. Recent researches prove that this 
method can be efficiently and effectively beneficial in order to 
extract the meaningful patterns from a very large database 
which mainly consist biomedical images. Besides density 
based clustering method, partitional clustering and 
hierarchical clustering methods do not extract the meaningful 
patterns from biomedical images database because these two 
methods are capable to handle only the clusters of spherical 
shape not the clusters of arbitrary shape. To remove the 
problem of patitional clustering and hierarchical clustering 
methods density based clustering method evolved. On the 
basis of density distribution function following are the main 
approaches of density based clustering: DBSCAN, OPTICS, 
and DENCLUE [3]. Celebi et al., used density based 
clustering approach in order to obtained the useful patterns 
from a very large biomedical images database. These patterns 
play a very important role in order to determine homogeneous 
colour [99]. There are various advantages of the density based 
clustering. First one is that in density based clustering 
approach in advance the number of clusters does not required. 
Another one is that, it can easily handle the clusters of any 
arbitrary shape. And the last one is that it can be used very 
effectively and efficiently even in noisy situations. In other 
words it is performed equally well in noisy situations. One 
major disadvantage of density based clustering is that, if there 
is a lot of variation in densities along with data points  then it 
cannot be able to handle such variations in data points. 
Another one disadvantage is that, distance measure is the 
primary factor which calculates its result. 
Clustering Examples in Healthcare 
Chen et al., proposed hierarchical K-means regulating 
divisive or agglomerative approach for better analyzing large 
micro-array data. It was reported that divisive hierarchical K-
means was superior to hierarchical and K-means clustering on 
cluster quality as well as on computational speed. Apart from 
this, it was also mentioned that divisive hierarchical K-means 
establishes a better clustering algorithm satisfying 
researcher’s demand [100]. 
Chipman et al., proposed the hybrid hierarchical clustering 
approach for analyzing microarray data [101]. In this research, 
the proposed hybrid clustering approach combines bottom-up 
as well as top-down hierarchical clustering concepts in order 
to effectively and efficiently utilizes the strength of both 
concepts for analyzing micro-array data. The proposed 
approach was built on a mutual cluster. A mutual cluster is a 
group of points closer to each other than to any other points. 
The research demonstrates the proposed technique on 
simulated as well as on real micro-array data. 
Bertsimas et al., used the approaches of classifications trees 
and clustering algorithms in order to predict the cost of 
healthcare [102] by using the dataset of three years collected 
from the insurance companies to perform the experiment. On 
the basis of analysis, following results were obtained in this 
research. First result shows that in order to provide accurate 
prediction of medical costs and to represent a powerful tool 
for prediction of healthcare costs data mining methods 
provide better accuracy. Another result shows that in order to 
predict the future costs pattern of past data was useful. 
Belciug et al., used the agglomerative hierarchical clustering 
approach for grouping the patients according to their length of 
stay in the hospital in order to provide better utilization of 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
45 
hospital resources and provide better services to patients 
[103]. 
Tapia et al., analyzed the gene expression data with the help 
of a new hierarchical clustering approach using genetic 
algorithm. In this research, the main focus was on 
regeneration of protein-protein functional interactions from 
genomic data. In this research, the proposed algorithm can 
predicate the functional associations accurately by considering 
genomic data [104]. 
Soliman et al., proposed a hybrid approach for better 
analyzing the cancer diseases on the basis of informative 
genes. The proposed approach used the K-means clustering 
with statistical analysis (ANOVA) for gene selection and 
SVM to classify the cancer diseases. On the basis of 
experiments that were performed on micro-array data, it has 
been found that the accuracy of K-means clustering with the 
combination of statistical analysis was better [105]. 
Schulam et al., proposed a Probabilistic Subtyping Model 
(PSM) which was mainly designed in order to discovered 
subtypes of complex, systematic diseases using longitudinal 
clinical markers collected in electronic health record (EHR) 
databases and patient registries. Proposed model was a model 
for clustering time series of clinical markers obtained from 
routine visits in order to identify homogeneous patient 
subgroups [106]. 
Belciug et al., concluded that among hierarchical, partitional, 
and density based clustering, the hierarchical clustering was 
provided effective utilization of hospital resources and 
provided improved patient care services in healthcare [103]. 
Lu et al., proposed an Adaptive Benford Algorithm in the 
application area of healthcare insurance claims. The proposed 
algorithm was a digital analysis technique that utilizes an 
unsupervised learning approach in order to handle incomplete 
or missing data. This technique was applied to the detection of 
fraud and abuse in the health insurance claims using dataset, 
real health insurance data. The dataset was analyzed. After the 
experimental analysis of dataset, it has been found that the 
proposed algorithm has significantly enhanced precision than 
the traditional Benford Approach in the detection of fraud and 
abuse in health insurance claims. Apart from this, it has been 
also found that the proposed algorithm was not restricted to 
already known instances of fraud [107]. 
Peng Y et al., used clustering technique in order to detect the 
suspicious healthcare fraudsfrom large databases. In the 
research, two clustering methods, SAS EM and CLUTO were 
used to a large real-life health insurance dataset. After 
comparison, it has been found that SAS EM outperforms the 
CLUTO [108]. 
2.4 Association 
In 1991, Piatetsky-Shapiro introduced the first association rule 
mining algorithm (called KID3) [109]. But this algorithm did 
not receive much attention because of its inefficiency and its 
serious scalability issues. But after R.Agarwal and his 
colleagues at IBM Almaden Research Center introduced a 
novel association rule algorithm called Apriori [110,111], 
association mining has received significant attention. This 
attention occurred because Apriori resolved the issues 
identified in KID3 using the “Apriori property” so that 
association mining can be applied to real databases to extract 
association rules. In order to find out the frequent patterns, 
interesting relationships among a set of data items in the data 
repository association is one of the most essential approaches 
of data mining is used. It has great impact in the healthcare 
field to detect the relationships among diseases, health state 
and symptoms. Researchers currently used this approach in 
order to determine the relationships between various diseases 
and their prescribed drugs. This approach is widely used by 
the healthcare insurance companies in order to determine the 
fraud and abuse. Accuracy is not an evaluation factor in 
association mining because every association algorithm mines 
all association rules. Efficiency is the only evaluation factor 
and the main goal of association mining algorithms. 
2.4.1 Apriori Algorithm 
It was coined by R.Agarwal et al [110,111], in 1994. The 
Apriori algorithm requires two user inputs: first one is support 
and second is confidence (as percentages). This is because 
users are interested in association rules (sets of transactions) 
that frequently occur in a database (i.e., support) and which 
are accurate (i.e., confidence). Thus, support and confidence 
are used to filter out many uninteresting association rules. The 
core property of the algorithm is its use of the Apriori 
property. Thus, if an item is not frequent (i.e., not satisfying 
support in terms of transaction), its descendants are not 
frequent (e.g., if male breast cancer cases are not frequent, no 
association rules related to the disease are generated.). This 
property significantly limits the search for frequent item sets 
and considerably improves the efficiency of the algorithm. 
Hash table and other methods are currently analyzed in order 
to improve the efficiency of this approach. [112] [113].  
Association Examples in Healthcare 
Medical practices, insurance companies and various other 
types of health organizations are involved in order to collect 
very huge amounts of data. Due to this a number of 
researchers are attracted towards it in order to explorer it and 
tries to find out something beneficent from it. In order to find 
out some beneficent from such a huge amounts of data apriori 
algorithm is very useful. Abdullah et al., used this algorithm 
in order to find out the associations between diagnosis and 
treatments [114]. In this research, on the basis of results it has 
been found that the apriori algorithm was equally beneficent 
for finding large item sets as well as for generating 
associations rules in medical billing data. In this research, the 
main motivation of using apriori algorithm was the similarity 
between medical bill and purchase bill [114]. 
Patil et al., used apriori algorithm in order to generate 
association rules. In this research, by using association rules 
the patients suffering from type-2 diabetes were classified. In 
this research, an approach for discretizing the attributes 
having continuous value using equal width bining interval 
which was selected on the basis of medical expert’s opinion 
has been proposed [115]. 
Ying et al., proposed a data mining association approach on 
the basis of fuzzy recognition-prime decision (RPD) model 
for developing the relationship between drugs and their 
associated adverse drug reactions (ADRs). The proposed 
approach was tested on the real patient data which is obtained 
from Veterans Affair Medical Center in Detroit, Michigan 
[116]. 
Ilayaraja et al., used Apriori algorithm to discover frequent 
diseases in medical data. This study proposed a method for 
detecting the occurrence of diseases using Apriori algorithm 
in particular geographical locations at particular period of 
time [117].  
  
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
46 
Nahar et al., used predictive apriori approach for generating 
the rules for heart diseasepatients. In this research work rules 
were produced for healthy and sick people. Based on these 
rules, this research discovered the factors which caused heart 
problem in men and women. After analyzing the rules authors 
conclude that women have less possibility of having coronary 
heart disease as compare to men [118]. 
Kai et al., proposed a clinical decision support system in order 
to helps the healthcare workers to identify the 
noncommunicable diseases in non-reachable communities. 
Proposed system was a remote healthcare consultancy system. 
Associate rule technique was applied in order to build 
proposed system [119]. 
3. DATA MINING CHALLENGES IN 
HEALTHCARE 
As we know that a lot of healthcare data is generated and 
stored by various healthcare organizations. But there are 
various challenges related to healthcare data which may play 
serious hurdles in the making proper decisions. The first 
challenge with healthcare data is the format of data being 
stored is different in different healthcare organizations. Till 
date there is no standard format is laid down for data being 
stored. In epidemic situations this lack of standard format can 
make the epidemic situations even more worse. Suppose that 
an epidemic disease is spread within a country at its different 
geographical regions. The country health ministry requires 
that all the healthcare organizations must share their 
healthcare data with its centralized data warehouse for 
analysis in order to take all the essential steps so that epidemic 
situation may get resolve. But since the formats of data is 
different. Hence, the analysis of data may take longer time 
than usual. Due to this it may be possible that the situation 
may become out of control. The healthcare data is very useful 
in order to extract the meaningful information from it for 
improving the healthcare services for the patients. To do this 
quality of data is very important because we cannot extract the 
meaningful information from that data which have no quality. 
Hence, the quality of data is another very important challenge. 
The quality of data depends on various factors such as 
removal of noisy data, free from missing of data etc. All the 
necessary steps must be taken in order to maintain the quality 
in healthcare data. Data sharing is another major challenge. 
Neither patients nor healthcare organizations are interested in 
sharing of their private data. Due to this the epidemic 
situations may get worse, planning to provide better 
treatments for a large population may not be possible, and 
difficulty in the detection of fraud and abuse in healthcare 
insurance companies etc. Another challenge is that in order to 
build the data warehouse where all the healthcare 
organizations within a country share their data is very costly 
and time consuming process. 
4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
For any algorithm its accuracy and performance is of greater 
importance. But due to presence of some factors any 
algorithm can greatly lost the above mentioned property of 
accuracy and performance. Classification is also belongs to 
such an algorithm. Classification algorithm is very sensitive to 
noisy data. If any noisy data is present then it causes very 
serious problems regarding to the processing power of 
classification. It not only slows down the task of classification 
algorithm but also degrades its performance. Hence, before 
applying classification algorithm it must be necessary to 
remove all those attributes from datasets who later on acts as 
noisy attributes. Feature selection methods play a very 
important role in order to select those attributes who improves 
the performance of classification algorithm. 
Clustering techniques are very useful especially in pattern 
recognitions. But they suffer from a problem on choosing the 
appropriate algorithm because regarding datasets they do not 
have information. We can choose partitional algorithm only 
when we know the number of clusters. Hierarchical clustering 
is used even when we do not know about the number of 
clusters. Hierarchical clustering provides better performance 
when there is less datasets but as soon as volume of datasets 
increases its performance degrades. To overcome this problem 
random sampling is very beneficial. 
In hierarchical clustering, if the data is too large to be 
presented in a dendrogram, the visualization capability is very 
poor. One possible solution to this problem is to randomly 
sample the data so that users can properly understand the 
overall grouping/similarity of the data using the dendrogram 
that is generated with the sampled data. The main drawback to 
the use of hierarchical clustering algorithms is cubic time 
complexity. This complexity is such that the algorithms are 
very much limited for very large data sets. As the result, the 
hierarchical algorithms are much slower (in computational 
time) than partitional clustering algorithms. They also use a 
huge amount of system memory to calculate distances 
between objects. 
The privacy regarding to patient’s confidential information is 
very important. Such type of privacy may be lost during 
sharing of data in distributed healthcare environment. 
Necessary steps must be taken in order to provide proper 
security so that their confidential information must not be 
accessed by any unauthorized organizations. But in situations 
like epidemic, planning better healthcare services for a very 
large population etc. some confidential data may be provided 
to the researchers and government organizations or any 
authorized organizations. 
In order to achieve better accuracy in the prediction of 
diseases, improving survivability rate regarding serious death 
related problems etc. various data mining techniques must be 
used in combination. 
To achieve medical data of higher quality all the necessary 
steps must be taken in order to build the better medical 
information systems which provides accurate information 
regarding to patients medical history rather than the 
information regarding to their billing invoices. Because high 
quality healthcare data is useful for providing better medical 
services only to the patients but also to the healthcare 
organizations or any other organizations who are involved in 
healthcare industry. 
Takes all necessary steps in order to minimize the semantic 
gap in data sharing between distributed healthcare databases 
environment so that meaningful patterns can be obtained. 
These patterns can be very useful in order to improve the 
treatment effectiveness services, to better detection of fraud 
and abuse, improved customer relationship management 
across the world. 
5. REFERENCES 
[1] D. Hand, H. Mannila and P. Smyth, “Principles of data 
mining”, MIT, (2001).  
[2] H. C. Koh and G. Tan, “Data Mining Application in 
Healthcare”, Journal of Healthcare Information 
Management, vol. 19, no. 2, (2005).  
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
47 
[3] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro and P. Smyth, “The 
KDD process of extracting useful knowledge form 
volumes of data.commun.”, ACM, vol. 39, no. 11, 
(1996), pp. 27-34.  
[4] J. Han and M. Kamber, “Data mining: concepts and 
techniques”, 2nd ed. The Morgan Kaufmann Series, 
(2006).  
[5] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro and P. Smyth, “From 
data mining to knowledge discovery in databases”, 
Commun. ACM, vol. 39, no. 11, (1996), pp. 24-26.  
[6] C. McGregor, C. Christina and J. Andrew, “A process 
mining driven framework for clinical guideline 
improvement in critical care”, Learning from Medical 
Data Streams 13th Conference on Artificial Intelligence 
in Medicine (LEMEDS). http://ceur-ws. org, vol. 765, 
(2012).  
[7] P. R. Harper, “A review and comparison of classification 
algorithms for medical decision making”, Health Policy, 
vol. 71, (2005), pp. 315-331.  
[8] V. S. Stel, S. M. Pluijm, D. J. Deeg, J. H. Smit, L. M. 
Bouter and P. Lips, “A classification tree for predicting 
recurrent falling in community-dwelling older persons”, 
J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., vol. 51, (2003), pp. 1356-1364.  
[9] R. Bellazzi and B. Zupan, “Predictive data mining in 
clinical medicine: current issues and guidelines”, Int. J. 
Med. Inform., vol. 77, (2008), pp. 81-97.  
[10]  R. D. Canlas Jr., “Data Mining in Healthcare:Current 
Applications and Issues”, (2009).  
[11] F. Hosseinkhah, H. Ashktorab, R. Veen, M. M. Owrang 
O., “Challenges in Data Mining on Medical Databases”, 
IGI Global, (2009), pp. 502-511.  
[12] M. Kumari and S. Godara, “Comparative Study of Data 
Mining Classification Methods in Cardiovascular 
Disease Prediction”, IJCST ISSN: 2229- 4333, vol. 2, no. 
2, (2011) June.  
[13] J. Soni, U. Ansari, D. Sharma and S. Soni, “Predictive 
Data Mining for Medical Diagnosis: An Overview of 
Heart Disease Prediction”, (2011).  
[14] C. S. Dangare and S. S. Apte, “Improved Study of Heart 
Disease Prediction System Using Data Mining 
Classification Techniques”, (2012).  
[15] K. Srinivas, B. Kavihta Rani and Dr. A.Govrdhan, 
“Applications of Data Mining Techniques in Healthcare 
and Prediction of Heart Attacks”, International Journal 
on Computer Science and Engineering, vol. 02, no. 02, 
(2010), pp. 250-255.  
[16] A. Aljumah, M. G.Ahamad and M. K. Siddiqui, 
“Predictive Analysis on Hypertension Treatment Using 
Data Mining Approach in Saudi Arabia”, Intelligent 
Information Management, vol. 3, (2011), pp. 252-261.  
[17] D. Delen, “Analysis of cancer data: a data mining 
approach”, (2009).  
[18] O. Osofisan, O. O. Adeyemo, B. A. Sawyerr and O. 
Eweje, “Prediction of Kidney Failure Using Artificial 
Neural Networks”, (2011).  
[19] S. Floyd, “Data Mining Techniques for Prognosis in 
Pancreatic Cancer”, (2007).  
[20] M.-J. Huang, M.-Y. Chen and S.-C. Lee, “Integrating 
data mining with case-based reasoning for chronic 
diseases prognosis and diagnosis”, Expert Systems with 
Applications, vol. 32, (2007), pp. 856-867.  
[21] S. Gupta, D. Kumar and A. Sharma, “Data Mining 
Classification Techniques Applied For Breast Cancer 
Diagnosis And Prognosis”, (2011).  
[22] K. S. Kavitha, K. V. Ramakrishnan and M. K. Singh, 
“Modeling and design of evolutionary neural network for 
heart disease detection”, IJCSI International Journal of 
Computer Science Issues, ISSN (Online): 1694-0814, 
vol. 7, no. 5, (2010) September, pp. 272-283. 
[23] S. H. Ha and S. H. Joo, “A Hybrid Data Mining Method 
for the Medical Classification of Chest Pain”, 
International Journal of Computer and Information 
Engineering, vol. 4, no. 1, (2010), pp. 33-38.  
[24] R. Parvathi and S. Palaniammalì, “An Improved Medical 
Diagnosing Technique Using Spatial Association Rules”, 
European Journal of Scientific Research ISSN 1450-
216X, vol. 61, no. 1, (2011), pp. 49-59.  
[25] S. Chao and F. Wong, “An Incremental Decision Tree 
Learning Methodology Regarding Attributes in Medical 
Data Mining”, (2009).  
[26] Habrard, M. Bernard and F. Jacquenet, “Multi-Relational 
Data Mining in Medical Databases”, Springer-Verlag, 
(2003).  
[27] S. B. Patil and Y. S. Kumaraswamy, “Intelligent and 
Effective Heart Attack Prediction System Using Data 
Mining and Artificial Neural Network”, European 
Journal of Scientific Research ISSN 1450-216X, © 
EuroJournals Publishing, Inc., vol. 31, no. 4, (2009), pp. 
642-656.  
[28] A.Shukla, R. Tiwari, P. Kaur, Knowledge Based 
Approach for Diagnosis of Breast Cancer, IEEE 
International Advance Computing Conference,IACC 
2009.  
[29] L. Duan, W. N. Street & E. Xu, Healthcare information 
systems: data mining methods in the creation of a clinical 
recommender system, Enterprise Information Systems, 
5:2, pp169-181 , 2011.  
[30] D. S. Kumar, G. Sathyadevi and S. Sivanesh, “Decision 
Support System for Medical Diagnosis Using Data 
Mining”, (2011).  
[31] S. Palaniappan and R. Awang, “Intelligent Heart Disease 
Prediction System Using Data Mining Techniques”, 
(2008).  
[32] Alpaydin, E. (1997), Voting over Multiple Condensed 
Nearest Neighbors. Artificial Intelligence Review, p. 
115–132.  
[33] Bramer, M., (2007) Principles of data mining: Springer.  
[34] Goharian & Grossman, Data Mining Classification, 
Illinois Institute of Technology, 
http://ir.iit.edu/~nazli/cs422/CS422-Slides/DM-
Classification.pdf, (2003).  
[35] Apte & S.M. Weiss, Data Mining with Decision Trees 
and Decision Rules, T.J. Watson Research Center, 
http://www.research.ibm.com/dar/papers/pdf/fgcsaptewe 
issue_with_cover.pdf, (1997).  
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
48 
[36] Pagallo, G. and Huassler, D., Boolean feature discovery 
in empirical learning, Machine Learning, 5(1): 71-99, 
1990. 
[37] Quinlan, J. R., C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning, 
Morgan Kaufmann, Los Altos, 1993. 
[38] V. Vapnik, “Statistical Learning Theory”, Wiley, (1998).  
[39] V. Vapnik, “The support vector method of function 
estimation”, (1998).  
[40] N. Chistianini and J. Shawe-Taylor, “An Introduction to 
Support Vector Machines, and other kernel-based 
learning methods”, Cambridge University Press, (2000).  
[41] N. Cristianini and J. Shawe-Taylor, “An Introduction to 
Support Vector Machines”, Cambridge University Press, 
(2000).  
[42] Anderson, J. A., and Davis, J., An introduction to neural 
networks. MIT, Cambride, 1995. 
[43] Obenshain, M. K., Application of data mining techniques 
to healthcare data. Infect. Control Hosp. Epidemiol. 
25(8):690–695, 2004. 
[44] Bellazzi, R., and Zupan, B., Predictive data mining in 
clinical medicine: current issues and guidelines. Int. J. 
Med. Inform. 77:81–97, 2008. 
[45] Übeyli, E. D., Comparison of different classification 
algorithms in clinical decision making. Expert syst 
24(1):17–31, 2007. 
[46] Kaur, H., and Wasan, S. K., Empirical study on 
applications of data mining techniques in healthcare. J. 
Comput. Sci. 2(2):194–200 2006. 
[47] Romeo, M., Burden, F., Quinn, M., Wood, B., and 
McNaughton, D., Infrared microspectroscopy and 
artificial neural networks in the diagnosis of cervical 
cancer. Cell. Mol. Biol. (Noisy-le-Grand, France) 
44(1):179, 1998. 
[48] Ball, G., Mian, S., Holding, F., Allibone, R., Lowe, J., 
Ali, S., et al., An integrated approach utilizing artificial 
neural networks and SELDI mass spectrometry for the 
classification of human tumours and rapid identification 
of potential biomarkers. Bioinformatics 18(3):395–404, 
2002. 
[49] Aleynikov, S., and Micheli-Tzanakou, E., Classification 
of retinal damage by a neural network based system. J. 
Med. Syst. 22(3):129–136, 1998. 
[50] Potter, R., Comparison of classification algorithms 
applied to breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis, 
advances in data mining,7th Industrial Conference, 
ICDM 2007, Leipzig, Germany, July 2007, pp.40–49. 
[51] Kononenko, I., Bratko, I., and Kukar, M., Application of 
machine learning to medical diagnosis. Machine 
Learning and Data Mining: Methods and Applications 
389:408, 1997. 
[52] Sharma, A., and Roy, R. J., Design of a recognition 
system to predict movement during anesthesia. IEEE 
Trans. Biomed. Eng.44(6):505–511, 1997. 
[53] Einstein, A. J., Wu, H. S., Sanchez, M., and Gil, J., 
Fractal characterization of chromatin appearance for 
diagnosis in breast cytology. J. Pathol. 185(4):366–381, 
1998. 
[54] Brickley, M., Shepherd, J. P., and Armstrong, R. A., 
Neural networks: a new technique for development of 
decision support systems in dentistry. J. Dent. 26(4):305–
309, 1998. 
[55] M. H. Dunham, “Data mining introductory and advanced 
topics”, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Education, 
Inc., (2003).  
[56] Schwarzer, G., Vach, W., and Schumacher, M., On the 
misuses of artificial neural networks for prognostic and 
diagnostic classification in oncology. Stat. Med. 19:541–
561, 2000. 
[57] H. Hu, J. Li, A. Plank, H. Wang and G. Daggard, “A 
Comparative Study of Classification Methods For 
Microarray Data Analysis”, Proc. Fifth Australasian Data 
Mining Conference (AusDM2006), Sydney, Australia. 
CRPIT, ACS, vol. 61, (2006), pp. 33-37.  
[58] R. Potter, “Comparison of classification algorithms 
applied to breast cancer diagnosis and prognosis”, 
advances in data mining, 7th Industrial Conference, 
ICDM 2007, Leipzig, Germany, (2007) July, pp. 40-49.  
[59] L. Huang, H. C. Liao and M. C. Chen, “Prediction model 
building and feature selection with support vector 
machines in breast cancer diagnosis”, Expert Systems 
with Applications, vol. 34, (2008), pp. 578-587.  
[60] G. Beller, “The rising cost of health care in the United 
States: is it making the United States globally 
noncompetitive?”, J. Nucl. Cardiol., vol. 15, no. 4, 
(2008), pp. 481-482.  
[61] M. U. Khan, J. P. Choi, H. Shin and M. Kim, “Predicting 
Breast Cancer Survivability Using Fuzzy Decision Trees 
for Personalized Healthcare”, 30th Annual International 
IEEE EMBS Conference Vancouver, British Columbia, 
Canada, (2008) August 20-24.  
[62] L. Chang and C. H. Chen, “Applying decision tree and 
neural network to increase quality of dermatologic 
diagnosis”, Expert Systems with Applications, Elsevier, 
vol. 36, (2009), pp. 4035-4041.  
[63] R. Das, I. Turkoglub and A. Sengur, “Effective diagnosis 
of heart disease through neural networks ensembles”, 
Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 36, (2009), pp. 
7675-7680.  
[64] I. Curiac, G. Vasile, O. Banias, C. Volosencu and A. 
Albu, “Bayesian Network Model for Diagnosis of 
Psychiatric Diseases”, Proceedings of the ITI 2009 31st 
Int. Conf. on Information Technology Interfaces, Cavtat, 
Croatia, (2009) June 22-25. 
[65] K. F. R. Liu and C. F. Lu, “BBN-Based Decision 
Support for Health Risk Analysis”, Fifth International 
Joint Conference on INC, IMS and IDC, (2009).  
[66] Avci, “A new intelligent diagnosis system for the heart 
valve diseases by using genetic-SVM classifier”, Expert 
Systems with Applications, Elsevier, vol. 36, (2009), pp. 
10618-10626.  
[67] S. Gunasundari and S. Baskar, “Application of Artificial 
Neural Network in identification of Lung Diseases”, 
Nature & Biologically Inspired Computing, 2009. NaBIC 
2009. World Congress on. IEEE, (2009).  
[68] S. Soni and O. P. Vyas, “Using Associative Classifiers 
for Predictive Analysis in Health Care Data Mining”, 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
49 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 
8887), vol. 4, no. 5, (2010) July.  
[69] S. W. Fei, “Diagnostic study on arrhythmia cordis based 
on particle swarm optimization-based support vector 
machine”, Expert Systems with Applications, Elsevier, 
vol. 37, (2010), pp. 6748-6752.  
[70] O. Er, N. Yumusakc and F. Temurtas, “Chest diseases 
diagnosis using artificial neural networks”, Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 37, (2010), pp. 7648-
7655.  
[71] Chuang, L.Y., Wu, K.C., Chang, H.W. and Yang, C.H. 
(2011) “Support Vector Machine-Based Prediction for 
Oral Cancer Using Four SNPs in DNA Repair Genes”. 
Proceedings of the International Multi Conference of 
Engineers and Computer Scientists, Hong Kong,16-18 
March 2011, 16-18. 
[72] A. Bakar, Z. Kefli, S. Abdullah and M. Sahani, 
“Predictive Models for Dengue Outbreak Using Multiple 
Rulebase Classifiers”, 2011 International Conference on 
Electrical Engineering and Informatics, Bandung, 
Indonesia, (2011) July 17-19.  
[73] S. S. Moon, S. Y. Kang, W. Jitpitaklert and S. B. Kim, 
“Decision tree models for characterizing smoking 
patterns of older adults”, Expert Systems with 
Applications, Elsevier, vol. 39, (2012), pp. 445-451.  
[74] H. Jena, C. C. Wang, B. C. Jiangc, Y. H. Chub and M. S. 
Chen, “Application of classification techniques on 
development an early-warning systemfor chronic 
illnesses”, Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 39, 
(2012), pp. 8852-8858.  
[75] Chien and G. J. Pottie, “A Universal Hybrid Decision 
Tree Classifier Design for Human Activity 
Classification”, 34th Annual International Conference of 
the IEEE EMBS San Diego, California USA, (2012) 
August 28-September 1.  
[76] M. Shouman, T. Turner and R. Stocker, “Applying K-
Nearest Neighbour in Diagnosing Heart Disease 
Patients”, International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery (ICKD-2012), (2012).  
[77] Y. Liu, H. L. Chen, B. Yang, X. E. Lv, N. L. Li and J. 
Liu, “Design of an Enhanced Fuzzy k-nearest Neighbor 
Classifier Based Computer Aided Diagnostic System for 
Thyroid Disease”, Journal of Medical System, Springer, 
(2012). 
[78] Hattice and K. Metin, “A Diagnostic Software tool for 
Skin Diseases with Basic and Weighted K-NN”, 
Innovations in Intelligent Systems and Applications 
(INISTA), (2012).  
[79] M. J. Abdi and D. Giveki, “Automatic detection of 
erythemato-squamous diseases using PSO–SVM based 
on association rules”, Engineering Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 26, (2013), pp. 603-608.  
[80] W. L. Zuoa, Z. Y. Wanga, T. Liua and H. L. Chenc, 
“Effective detection of Parkinson’s disease using an 
adaptive fuzzy k-nearest neighbor approach”, Biomedical 
Signal Processing and Control, Elsevier, (2013), pp. 364-
373.  
[81] Rusdah and Edi Winarko, “Review on Data Mining 
Methods for Tuberculosis Diagnosis” Information 
Systems International Conference (ISICO), 2 – 4 
December 2013. 
[82] Marina Evrim Johnson and Nagen Nagarur, “Multi-stage 
methodology to detect health insurance claim fraud”, 
Health Care Management Science, DOI 10.1007/s10729-
015-9317-3, Springer, 20 January 2015.  
[83] Johannes Arthuur Govaert, Anne Charlotte Madeline van 
Bommel, Wouter Antonie van Dijk, Nicoline Johanneke 
van Leersum, Robertus Alexandre Eduard Mattheus 
Tollenaar and Michael Wilhemus Jacobus Maria 
Wouters, “Reducing Healthcare Costs Facilitated by 
Surgical Auditing: A Systematic Review”, Worls J Surg, 
DOI 10.1007/s00268-015-3005-9, Springer, 18 February 
2015.  
[84] Peng Z et al., “An expression signature at diagnosis to 
estimate prostate cancer patients’ overall survival”, 
Prostate Cancer and Prostatic Disease (2014) 17, 81-90, 
doi 10.1038/pcan.2013.57; January 2014, Nature.  
[85] J. Fox, “Applied Regression Analysis, Linear Models, 
and Related Methods”, (1997).  
[86] Gennings, R. Ellis and J. K. Ritter, “Linking empirical 
estimates of body burden of environmental chemicals 
and wellness using NHANES data”, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2011.09.002,2011.  
[87] P. A. Gutiérrez, C. Hervás-Martínez and F. J. Martínez-
Estudillo, “Logistic Regression by Means of 
Evolutionary Radial Basis Function Neural Networks”, 
IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, vol. 22, no. 2, 
(2011), pp. 246-263. 
[88] Divya and S. Agarwal, “Weighted Support Vector 
Regression approach for Remote Healthcare 
monitoring”, IEEE-International Conference on Recent 
Trends in Information Technology, ICRTIT 2011, 978-1-
4577-0590-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE MIT, Anna 
University, Chennai, (2011) June 3-5.  
[89] Gennings, R. Ellis and J. K. Ritter, “Linking empirical 
estimates of body burden of environmental chemicals 
and wellness using NHANES data”, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.envint.2011.09.002,2011.  
[90] Xie et al., “Predicting Days in Hospital Using Health 
Insurance Claims”, IEEE Journal of Biomedical and 
Health Informatics, DOI 
10.1109/JBHI.2015.2402692,ISSN 2168-291, IEEE 
Transactions, 2015. 
[91] J. Alapont, A. Bella-Sanjuán, C. Ferri, J. Hernández-
Orallo, J. D. Llopis-Llopis and M. J. Ramírez-Quintana, 
“Specialised Tools for Automating Data Mining for 
Hospital Management”, 
http://www.dsic.upv.es/~abella/papers/HIS_DM.pdf, 
(2005).  
[92] K. Jain, M. N. Murty and P. J. Flynn, “Data Clustering: a 
review”, ACM Compute, Surveys, vol. 31, (1996).  
[93] Hamerly and C. Elkan, “Learning the K in K-means”, 
Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference on Neural 
Information Processing Systems, British Columbia, 
Canada, (2003).  
[94] L. Lenert, A. Lin, R. Olshen and C. Sugar, “Clustering in 
the Service of the Public's Health”, http://www-
stat.stanford.edu/~olshen/manuscripts/helsinki.PDF. 
International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 120 – No.15, June 2015 
50 
[95] S. Belciug, F. Gorunescu, A. Salem and M. Gorunescu, 
“Clustering-based approach for detecting breast cancer 
recurrence”, 10th International Conference on Intelligent 
Systems Design and Applications, (2010).  
[96] J. Escudero, J. P. Zajicek and E. Ifeachor, “Early 
Detection and Characterization of Alzheimer’s Disease 
in Clinical Scenarios Using Bioprofile Concepts and K-
Means”, 33rd Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE EMBS Boston, Massachusetts USA, (2011) August 
30-September 3.  
[97] Yoo, I., and Hu, X., A comprehensive comparison study 
of document clustering for a biomedical digital library 
MDELINE. ACM/IEEE Joint Conference on Digital 
Libraries 11–15:220–229, 2006. Chapel Hill, NC, June 
11–15, 2006. 
[98] Yoo, I., Hu, X., and Song, I.-Y., Biomedical ontology 
improves biomedical literature clustering performance: a 
comparison study. Int. J. Bioinform. Res. Appl. 
3(3):414–428, 2007. 
[99] M. E. Celebi, Y. A. Aslandogan and R. P. Bergstresser, 
“Mining Biomedical Images with Density-based 
Clustering”, Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Information Technology: Coding and Computing 
(ITCC’05), (2005).  
[100] T. S. Chen, T. H. Tsai, Y. T. Chen, C. C. Lin, R. C. 
Chen, S. Y. Li and H. Y. Chen, “A Combined K-Means 
and Hierarchical Clustering Method for improving the 
Clustering Efficiency of Microarray”, Proceedings of 
2005 International Symposium on Intelligent Signal 
Processing and Communication Systems, (2005).  
[101] Chipman and R. Tibshirani, “Hybrid hierarchical 
clustering with applications to microarray data”, 
Biostatistics, vol. 7, no. 2, (2006), pp. 286-301.  
[102] Bertsimas, M. V. Bjarnadóttir, M. A. Kane, J. C. 
Kryder, R. Pandey, S. Vempala and G. Wang, 
“Algorithmic prediction of health-care costs”, Oper. 
Res., vol. 56, no. 6, (2008), pp. 1382-1392.  
[103] S. Belciug, “Patients length of stay grouping using 
the hierarchical clustering algorithm”, Annals of 
University of Craiova, Math. Comp. Sci. Ser., ISSN: 
1223-6934, vol. 36, no. 2, (2009), pp. 79-84.  
[104] J. J. Tapia, E. Morett and E. E. Vallejo, “A 
Clustering Genetic Algorithm for Genomic Data 
Mining”, Foundations of Computational Intelligence, 
vol. 4 Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol. 204, 
(2009), pp. 249-275.  
[105] T. H. A. Soliman, A. A. Sewissy and H. A. Latif, 
“A Gene Selection Approach for Classifying Diseases 
Based on Microarray Datasets”, 2nd International 
Conference on Computer Technology and Development 
(lCCTD 2010), (2010).  
[106] Schulam et al., “Clustering Longitudinal Clinical 
Marker Trajectories from Electronic Health Data: 
Applications to Phenotyping and Endotype Discovery”, 
Associations for the Advancements of Artificial 
Intelligence, 2015. 
[107] Fletcher Lu and J. Efrim Boritz, “Detection Fraud in 
Health Insurance Data: Learning to Model Incomplete 
Benford’s Law Distributions”, Machine Learning: 
EMCL 2005 16th European Conference on Machine 
Learning, Porto, Portugal,October 3-7, 2005 Volume 
3720, pages 633-640, Springer. 
[108] Peng Y, Kou G, Sabatka A, Chen Z, Khazanchil D 
and Shi Y,” Application Of clustering methods to health 
insurance fraud detection”, Int Conf Serv Syst Serv 
Manag 1:116-120, 2006. 
[109] Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., Discovery, analysis, and 
presentation of strong rules. In: Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., 
(Ed.), Knowledge Discovery in Databases. AAAI/MIT 
Press, 1991, pp. 229–248. 
[110] Agrawal, R., Imielinski, T., and Swami, A., Mining 
association rules between sets of items in large databases, 
Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD International 
Conference on the Management of Data. ACM, 
Washington DC, pp. 207–216, 1993. 
[111] Agrawal, R., and Srikant, R., Fast algorithms for 
mining association rules, Proceedings of the 20th 
International Conference on Very Large Data Bases 
(VLDB’94). Morgan Kaufmann, Santiago, pp. 487–499, 
1994. 
[112] J. Yanqing, H. Ying, J. Tran, P. Dews, A. Mansour 
and R. Michael Massanari, “Mining Infrequent Causal 
Associations in Electronic Health Databases”, 11th IEEE 
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, 
(2011).  
[113] R. Agrawal and R. Srikant, “Fast Algorithms for 
Mining Association Rules”, VLDB, Chile, ISBN 1-
55860-153-8, (1994) September 12-15, pp. 487-99.  
[114] U. Abdullah, J. Ahmad and A. Ahmed, “Analysis of 
Effectiveness of Apriori Algorithm in Medical Billing 
Data Mining”, 2008 International Conference on 
Emerging Technologies, IEEE-ICET 2008, Rawalpindi, 
Pakistan, (2008) October 18-19.  
[115] M. Patil, R. C. Joshi and D. Toshniwal, 
“Association rule for classification of type -2 diabetic 
patients”, Second International Conference on Machine 
Learning and Computing, (2010).  
[116] J. Yanqing, H. Ying, J. Tran, P. Dews, A. Mansour 
and R. Michael Massanari, “Mining Infrequent Causal 
Associations in Electronic Health Databases”, 11th IEEE 
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, 
(2011).  
[117] M. Ilayaraja and T. Meyyappan, “Mining Medical 
Data to Identify Frequent Diseases using Apriori 
Algorithm”, Proceedings of the 2013 International 
Conference on Pattern Recognition, Informatics and 
Mobile Engineering, (2013) February 21-22.  
[118] J. Nahar, T. Imam, K. S. Tickle and Y. P. Chen, 
“Association rule mining to detect factors which 
contribute to heart disease in males and females”, Expert 
Systems with Applications, vol. 40, pp. 1086-1093, 
(2013).  
[119] Eiko Kai et al., ”Enpowering the healthcare worker 
using the Portable Health Clinic”, IEEE Transactions, 
DOI 10.1109/AINA.2014.108, 2014. 
[120] Divya et al.,” A Survey on Data Mining Approaches 
for Healthcare”, International Journal Of Bio-Science 
and Bio-Technology Vol.5, No.5 (2013),pp.241-266 
http://dx.doi.org/10.14257/ijbsbt.2013.5.5.25. 
IJCATM : www.ijcaonline.org 

