MANAGING PUBLIC 
SECTOR RECORDS 
 
 A Training Programme 
 
Understanding Computers: 
An Overview for Records 
and Archives Staff 
 
  
 
INTERNATIONAL 
COUNCIL ON ARCHIVES 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL RECORDS  
MANAGEMENT TRUST 
 
 
MANAGING PUBLIC SECTOR RECORDS: A STUDY PROGRAMME 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS: AN 
OVERVIEW FOR RECORDS AND 
ARCHIVES STAFF 
MANAGING PUBLIC SECTOR RECORDS 
A STUDY PROGRAMME 
General Editor, Michael Roper; Managing Editor, Laura Millar 
 
 
UNDERSTANDING 
COMPUTERS: AN OVERVIEW 
FOR RECORDS AND 
ARCHIVES STAFF 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
INTERNATIONAL RECORDS INTERNATIONAL 
MANAGEMENT TRUST COUNCIL ON ARCHIVES 
MANAGING PUBLIC SECTOR RECORDS: A STUDY PROGRAMME 
Understanding Computers: An Overview for Records and Archives Staff 
 
 
© International Records Management Trust, 1999. 
Reproduction in whole or in part, without the express written 
permission of the International Records Management Trust, 
is strictly prohibited.  
Produced by the International Records Management Trust 
12 John Street 
London WC1N 2EB 
UK 
 
Printed in the United Kingdom. 
Inquiries concerning reproduction or rights and requests for 
additional training materials should be addressed to 
International Records Management Trust 
12 John Street 
London WC1N 2EB 
UK 
Tel: +44 (0) 20 7831 4101 
Fax: +44 (0) 20 7831 7404 
E-mail: info@irmt.org 
Website: http://www.irmt.org 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Version 1/1999 
MPSR Project Personnel 
Project Director 
Anne Thurston has been working to define international solutions for the management 
of public sector records for nearly three decades.  Between 1970 and 1980 she lived in 
Kenya, initially conducting research and then as an employee of the Kenya National 
Archives.  She joined the staff of the School of Library, Archive and Information 
Studies at University College London in 1980, where she developed the MA course in 
Records and Archives Management (International) and a post-graduate research 
programme.  Between 1984 and 1988 she undertook an onsite survey of 
record-keeping systems in the Commonwealth.  This study led to the foundation of the 
International Records Management Trust to support the development of records 
management through technical and capacity-building projects and through research 
and education projects. 
General Editor 
Michael Roper has had a wide range of experience in the management of records and 
archives.  He served for thirty-three years in the Public Record Office of the United 
Kingdom, from which he retired as Keeper of Public Records in 1992.  He has also 
taught on the archives courses at University College London and the University of 
British Columbia, Canada.  From 1988 to 1992 he was Secretary General of the 
International Council on Archives and since 1996 he has been Honorary Secretary of 
the Association of Commonwealth Archivists and Records Managers (ACARM).  He 
has undertaken consultancy missions and participated in the delivery of training 
programmes in many countries and has written extensively on all aspects of records 
and archives management. 
Managing Editor 
Laura Millar has worked extensively not only as a records and archives management 
consultant but also in publishing and distance education, as an editor, production 
manager and instructional designer.  She received her MAS degree in archival studies 
from the University of British Columbia, Canada, in 1984 and her PhD in archival 
studies from the University of London in 1996.  She has developed and taught 
archival education courses both in Canada and internationally, including at the 
University of British Columbia, Simon Fraser University and the University of 
Alberta.  She is the author of a number of books and articles on various aspects of 
archival management, including A Manual for Small Archives (1988), Archival Gold: 
Managing and Preserving Publishers’ Records (1989) and A Handbook for Records 
Management and College Archives in British Columbia (1989). 
Project Steering Group 
Additional members of the Project Steering Group include 
Association of Records Managers and  
Administrators (ARMA International):  Hella Jean Bartolo 
International Council on Archives:   George MacKenzie 
Project Management Consultant:   Tony Williams 
University College London:    Elizabeth Shepherd 
Video Production Co-ordinator:   Janet Rogers 
Educational Advisers 
Moi University:     Justus Wamukoya 
Universiti Teknologi Mara:    Rusnah Johare 
University of Botswana:    Nathan Mnjama 
University of Ghana:     Harry Akussah, Pino Akotia 
University of New South Wales:   Ann Pederson 
University of West Indies:    Victoria Lemieux 
Project Managers 
Lynn Coleman (1994-6) 
Laura Millar (1996-7) 
Elizabeth Box (1997-8) 
Dawn Routledge (1999) 
Production Team 
Additional members of the production team include 
Jane Cowan 
Nicki Hall 
Greg Holoboff 
Barbara Lange 
Jennifer Leijten 
Leanne Nash 
Donors 
The International Records Management Trust would like to acknowledge the support 
and assistance of the following: 
Association of Records Managers and Administrators (ARMA International) 
British Council 
British High Commission Ghana 
British High Commission Kenya 
Caribbean Centre for Development Administration (CARICAD) 
Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) 
Commonwealth Secretariat 
Department for International Development (East Africa) 
Department for International Development (UK) 
DHL International (UK) Limited 
Foreign and Commonwealth Office Human Rights Fund 
Hays Information Management 
International Council on Archives 
Nuffield Foundation 
Organisation of American States 
Royal Bank of Scotland 
United Nations Development Program 
Understanding Computers: An Overview for Records 
and Archives Staff 
Principal Author 
KIMBERLY BARATA 
Kimberly Barata is a Research Officer and Consultant for the International Records 
Management Trust.  She is a specialist in electronic records and has advised the 
Governments of Ghana, Malta and the Secretariat for the Commission for East 
African Co-operation. Prior to her appointment with the Trust, she was the UK 
Representative for Archives and Museum Informatics (A&MI) and a senior research 
fellow at the School of Library, Archive and Information Studies at University 
College London.  Kimberly is a graduate of the University of Pittsburgh School of 
Information Sciences and participated in the latter end of the Functional Requirements 
for Recordkeeping Project. 
Contributors 
Elizabeth Box 
John McDonald 
Laura Millar 
Reviewers 
Terry Cook, (formerly) National Archives of Canada 
Tony Leviston, State Records Authority of New South Wales 
Testers 
Kenya National Archives and Documentation Service 
State Archives and Heraldic Services, South Africa 
CONTENTS 
Introduction           1 
Lesson 1 An Introduction to Computer Technology     4 
Lesson 2 Computing Environments     27 
Lesson 3 Computer Applications     41 
Lesson 4 What to Do Next?      55 
FIGURES 
1.  Sample Home Page       35 
2.  Relational Tables       45 
3. Examples of Data Records      46 
4.  Sample Electronic Mail Message     50 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
INTRODUCTION TO UNDERSTANDING 
COMPUTERS: AN OVERVIEW FOR RECORDS 
AND ARCHIVES STAFF 
This introductory module is designed as support for other MPSR modules in the series 
that refer to the use of computers to varying degrees.  It aims to familiarise those who 
may be unacquainted with some of these basic computer concepts.  As well as 
describing the concepts associated with computer technology, this module explains 
some of the key terms students will encounter as they establish relationships with 
specialists in the information technology community.  
Understanding Computers: An Overview for Records and Archives Staff should be 
read before the other computer-related modules in this programme, Automating 
Records Services and Managing Electronic Records, as much of the basic information 
important to those modules is introduced here and so is not explained in those 
modules.  
This module includes the following lessons: 
Lesson 1: An Introduction to Computer Technology 
Lesson 2: Computing Environments 
Lesson 3: Computer Applications 
Lesson 4: What to Do Next?. 
AIMS AND OUTCOMES 
Aims 
This module has six primary aims.  These are to 
1. introduce the key components of a computer system (hardware, software, data) 
2. acquaint readers with how computers work 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
2 
3. present the basic concepts of various computing environments 
4. give a broad view of how technology is improving communications through the use of 
electronic mail and the Internet. 
5. discuss the various kinds of storage media and recording formats and methods 
commonly associated with a computer 
6. explain how to obtain more information on computerisation. 
Outcomes 
At the end of this module, you should understand 
1. the key components of a computer system (hardware, software, data) 
2. the basics of how computers work 
3. the basic concepts of various computing environments 
4. how technology is improving communications 
5. the various kinds of storage media and recording formats and methods available 
6. where to go for more information on computerisation. 
METHOD OF STUDY AND ASSESSMENT 
This module of four lessons should occupy about 45 hours of your time.  You should 
plan to spend about: 
 15 hours on Lesson 1 
 12 hours on Lesson 2 
 10 hours on Lesson 3 
   8 hours on Lesson 4. 
This includes time spent doing the reading and considering the study questions. 
At the end of each lesson there is a summary of the major points.  Sources for 
additional information are provided in Lesson 5. 
Throughout each lesson, activities have been included to help you think about the 
information provided.  Each activity is a ‘self-assessed’ project; there is no ‘right’ or 
‘wrong’ answer.  Rather, the activity is designed to encourage you to explore the ideas 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
3 
presented and relate them to the environment in which you are studying or working.  If 
you are studying these modules independently and are not part of a records or archives 
management organisation, you should try to complete the activities with a 
hypothetical situation if possible.  If the activity suggests writing something, you 
should keep this brief and to the point; this is not a marked or graded exercise and you 
should only spend as much time on the activity as you feel necessary to understand the 
information being taught.  At the end of each lesson are comments on the activities 
that will help you assess your work. 
Following the summary at the end of each lesson are a number of self-study questions.  
Note that these self-study questions are designed to help you review the material in 
this module.  They are not intended to be graded or marked exercises.  You should 
complete as many of the questions as you feel will help you to understand the 
concepts presented.  External assessments, such as assignments or exams, will be 
included separately when this module becomes part of a graded educational 
programme. 
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 
This module discusses basic computer concepts, and it is not necessary to be working 
in a records office, records centre or archival institution to understand the information 
conveyed here.  However, this module is intended to introduce ideas of importance for 
later discussions of records issues, so readers are encouraged to think of the records 
issues involved as they work through these lessons.  The various activities may ask 
you to draw on your own experiences and compare those with the information 
provided in the lessons.  If you do not have access to facilities that allow you to create 
real scenarios for activities, you may need to develop a fictitious scenario for your 
activities.  Alternately, you may wish to discuss this module with friends or colleagues 
who work with computers so that you can discuss principles and concepts with them 
and compare your understanding with theirs. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
4 
LESSON 1 
AN INTRODUCTION TO COMPUTER 
TECHNOLOGY 
This lesson introduces key concepts related to how computers work.  Computer-
related terms are defined and basic computer functions are explained.  In particular, 
the following topics are addressed. 
• What is a computer? 
• What are the components of a computer? 
• How does a computer work? 
• How does the software work? 
• How does a computer process information? 
• How does the computer’s memory work? 
• How is data stored? 
• Why is documentation important? 
• What are viruses? 
Please remember, this introductory lesson is not intended to provide a comprehensive 
explanation of the technical details of computerisation.  Information is provided in 
order to introduce you to key computer concepts and provide an overview of 
computerisation.  
The average computer user, as apposed to those pursuing a career in computing, do 
not need to know more than the information provided here in order to work effectively 
with information technologies.  
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
5 
WHAT IS A COMPUTER? 
A computer allows users to store and process information 
quickly and automatically. 
A computer is a programmable machine.  It allows the user to store all sorts of 
information and then ‘process’ that information, or data, or carry out actions with the 
information, such as calculating numbers or organising words. 
Computer: A machine that can receive and store 
information and change or process it. 
Information: Knowledge that is communicated. 
Data (pl.): The representation of information in a 
formalised manner suitable for communication, 
interpretation and processing, generally by a computer 
system.  Note: the term ‘raw data’ refers to 
unprocessed information.  
Computers can be generally classified by size and power, although there can be 
considerable overlap.  Following are descriptions of several different types of 
computers.  
Mainframe computers are large-sized, powerful multi-user computers that can 
support concurrent programs.  That means, they can perform different actions or 
‘processes’ at the same time.  Mainframe computers can be used by as many as 
hundreds or thousands of users at the same time.  Large organisations may use a 
mainframe computer to execute large-scale processes such as processing the 
organisation’s payroll. 
Mini-computers are mid-sized multi-processing computers.  Again, they can perform 
several actions at the same time and can support from 4 to 200 users simultaneously.  
In recent years the distinction between mini-computers and small mainframes has 
become blurred.  Often the distinction depends upon how the manufacturer wants to 
market its machines.  Organisations may use a mini-computer for such tasks as 
managing the information in a small financial system or maintaining a small database 
of information about registrations or applications. 
Workstations are powerful, single-user computers.  They have the capacity to store 
and process large quantities of data, but they are only used by one person at a time.  
However, workstations are typically linked together to form a computer network 
called a local area network, which means that several people, such as staff in an office, 
can communicate with each other and share electronic files and data. 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
6 
Computer network: A grouping of computers and 
peripherals connected together by telecommunications 
links to enable a group of users to share and exchange 
information. 
Networks are discussed in more detail later in this 
module. 
A workstation is similar to a personal computer but is more powerful and often comes 
with a higher-quality monitor.  In terms of computing power, workstations lie in 
between personal computers and mini-computers.  Workstations commonly support 
applications that require relatively high-quality graphics capabilities and a lot of 
memory, such as desktop publishing, software development and engineering 
applications. 
Personal computers (PCs), also called microcomputers, are the most popular type of 
computer in use today.  The PC is a small-sized, relatively inexpensive computer 
designed for an individual user. Today, the world of PCs is basically divided between 
IBM-compatible and Macintosh-compatible machines, named after the two computer 
manufacturers.  Computers may be called ‘desktop’ computers, which stay on the 
desk, or ‘laptop’ computers, which are lightweight and portable.  Organisations and 
individuals use PCs for a wide range of tasks, including word processing, accounting, 
desktop publishing, preparation and delivery of presentations, organisation of 
spreadsheets and database management.  Entry-level PCs are much more powerful 
than a few years ago, and today there is little distinction between PCs and 
workstations. 
 
Activity 1 
If your office has computers, find out the type or types.  Are they mainframe 
computers, mini-computers, workstations or personal computers?  What ‘processes’ 
or actions are the computers used for?  Write a brief description of the types of 
computers in place and their main uses.  If your office has more than one type of 
computer, find out why?  What different tasks are the different computers intended to 
do? 
If your office does not have computers, try to contact a colleague or friend who has a 
computer and ask him or her what type he or she has and what primary functions it is 
used for. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
7 
WHAT ARE THE COMPONENTS OF A 
COMPUTER? 
Computers are made up of two parts: the hardware and the software.  
Hardware: The physical equipment required to create, 
use, manipulate and store electronic data. 
Software: The computerised instructions that operate a 
computer, manipulate the data and execute particular 
functions or tasks. 
All computers require the following hardware components: 
• central processing unit (CPU) 
Central processing unit (CPU): The chip or chips at 
the heart of a computer that enable it to process data. 
Also known as a processor. 
• memory 
Memory: An area within a computer system that holds 
data waiting to be processed.  
• storage device 
Storage device: The place where a computer puts data. 
• input devices : the devices that allow data and instructions to enter a computer 
(such as a keyboard, mouse, scanner) 
Input: Any resource required for the functioning of a 
process, in the course of which it will be transformed 
into one or more outputs. 
• output devices: the devices that allow information to be represented (that is, 
given out) to the user, such as a display screen or printer) 
Output: The product of the transformation of inputs by 
a process. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
8 
Printers, scanners and external disk drives that may be connected to the computer are 
also sometimes called ‘peripheral devices’.  
Peripheral device: Any piece of equipment in a 
computer system that is not actually inside the 
computer itself. 
The central processing unit (CPU) is the heart of the computer.  It carries out all of the 
instructions given in a program, such as a word processing or spreadsheet program.  
The CPU consists of one or more chips (another name for “integrated circuits”).  
Chip: A small piece of semi-conducting material (such 
as silicon) about 1 centimetre (¼ inch) square on which 
an integrated circuit is embedded.  An integrated circuit 
is a number of electronic components joined together to 
form a path for electricity.  Central processing unit 
chips contain the circuits representing the CPU. 
A microprocessor is a particular type of chip.  The original IBM personal computer 
used the Intel 8088 microprocessor.  Most of today’s microcomputers are designed 
around a microprocessor from one of two product families: x86 or Power.  The 80286, 
80386, and 80486 models that followed were referred to by the last three digits, 286, 
386, and 486.  For the next generation, however, Intel broke with tradition and 
introduced the Pentium in 1993.  In 1997, it introduced the Pentium II to address 
multi-media applications, and most recently the Pentium III to address the new 
opportunities provided by access to large volumes of information on the world wide 
Web.  Other manufacturers of chips (such as Cyrix) produce chips of similar power 
and capabilities. 
CPU’s are not all equal.  Some process data faster than others.  A computer contains a 
system clock that emits pulses to establish the timing of all systems operations.  The 
system clock operates at a speed quite different from a clock that keeps track of the 
time of the day.  The system clock determines the speed at which the computer can 
execute an instruction, and therefore limits the number of instructions the computer 
can complete within a specific amount of time.  The time to complete an instruction 
execution cycle is measured in megahertz (MHz) or millions of cycles per second.  
Although some instructions require multiple cycles to complete, the processor speed 
should be thought of in terms of the number of instructions the processor can execute 
in one second.  Today, microprocessor speeds exceed 300 MHz.  If all other 
specifications are identical, then higher megahertz ratings means faster processing.  
When determining what type of computer you are using or considering what type of 
computer to acquire, it is important to know that these terms – 286, 386, 486, Pentium 
– refer to the type of processor in the computer.  Newer computers will come with 
Pentium microprocessors (or the equivalent from other manufacturers); older ones 
with microprocessors from the x86 family.  
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
9 
It is important to know the type of processor in your computer.  Some newer computer 
programs will not run on older processors, and some newer processors are too 
sophisticated for older software. 
The faster the processor in a computer, the more quickly the 
computer will perform operations. 
The most common type of memory that most users are familiar with is ‘main memory’ 
or ‘RAM’ (random-access memory).  
Random access memory (RAM): An area in the 
computer system unit that temporarily holds a user’s 
data, operating system instructions and program 
instructions.  
The word ‘main’ is used to distinguish it from external mass storage devices such as 
the hard drive or disk drives.  Note that the term ‘mass storage’ refers to various 
techniques and devices for storing large amounts of data; mass storage is distinct from 
memory because it retains data even when the computer is turned off.  Thus mass 
storage is sometimes referred to as ‘auxiliary storage’.  Following are definitions of 
common storage devices: 
Storage: The area within a computer system where 
data can be left on a longer term basis while it is not 
needed for processing.  
Diskette. A small, removable, flexible mylar plastic 
disk covered with a thin layer of a magnetisable 
substance, onto which digital data can be recorded and 
stored.  Also known as a floppy disk. 
Hard drive: The storage area within the computer 
itself, where megabytes of space are available to store 
bits of information.  Also known as a hard disk. 
Optical disk: A storage device that uses reflecting 
surfaces and laser technology to read and write data on 
a disk.  Also known as a laser disk. 
Magnetic tape: A continuous plastic strip covered with 
magnetic oxide; the tape is divided into parallel tracks 
onto which data may be recorded by selectively 
magnetising parts of the surface, or spots, in each of 
the tracks.  The data can then be stored and reused. 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
10 
Activity 2 
If your office has a microcomputer, look at the manuals that come with it.  Review the 
manuals to find out what type of microprocessor is in the computer.  Look also at the 
computer screen when the computer is turned on to see if information about the 
computer is shown there.  Then examine two types of software used by your 
organisation.  What are the minimum requirements for a microprocessor for each type 
of software?  Does the computer meet the minimum requirements for the software?  
Does it exceed the requirements (that is, is the computer’s microprocessor newer or 
more powerful than the software requires)?  Again, look in the software manuals for 
information, or ask a friend or colleague to help you.  Do not remove the back from 
the computer or try to unload or reload the software. 
HOW DOES A COMPUTER WORK? 
A computer functions in the following manner: 
• The computer accepts input.  Computer input is whatever is entered or fed into a 
computer system.  Input can be supplied by a person (such as by using a keyboard) 
or by another computer or device (such as a diskette or CD-ROM).  Some 
examples of input include the words and symbols in a document, numbers for a 
calculation, instructions for completing a process, pictures, and so on. 
• The computer performs useful operations, manipulating the data in many ways.  
This manipulation is called processing.  Examples of processing include 
performing calculations, sorting lists of words or numbers, modifying documents 
and pictures according to user instructions, and drawing graphs.  A computer 
processes data in the CPU. 
Process: A systematic series of actions a computer uses 
to manipulate data. 
• The computer stores data.  A computer must store data so that it is available for 
processing.  Most computers have more than one location for storing data (the 
hard drive or C:\, and the floppy drive or A:\).  The place where the computer 
stores the data depends on how the data is being used.  The computer puts the data 
in one place while it is waiting to be processed and another place when it is not 
needed for immediate processing.  The storage of data in the computer is called 
‘online storage’ while the storage of data on computer tapes, diskettes or 
CD-ROMs is called ‘offline storage’.  
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
11 
• The computer produces output.  Computer output is information that has been 
produced by a computer.  Some examples of computer output include reports, 
documents, music, graphs, and pictures.  Output can be in several different 
formats, such as paper, diskette, or on screen. 
A computer receives data as input, processes it, stores it and 
then produces output. 
 
Activity 3 
Describe, in terms of input, processing and data, the production of a letter using a 
computer.  What happens first?  What happens last? 
HOW DOES THE SOFTWARE WORK? 
Software is the computerised instructions that operate the computer, execute particular 
functions or tasks, and manipulate the data.  For software (the instructions) to perform 
various functions, it must be programmed.  That is, the instructions need to be written 
in a programming language that the computer can understand.  Without a program, a 
computer is useless.  
Programming language: An artificial set of rules, 
vocabulary and syntax used to instruct the computer to 
execute certain tasks. 
Computer program: A sequence of instructions that 
can be executed by a computer to carry out a process. 
Over the years, a wide range of programming languages have been developed, 
including BASIC, FORTRAN, PASCAL, C++, JAVA, and so on.  Each language has 
a unique set of words (codes) that it understands and a special syntax for organising 
program instructions.  
The language the computer actually understands is called machine language, which 
comprises numbers only.  This language is used by the computer to understand the 
programming language and translate the terms into executable instructions.  Lying 
between programming languages and machine languages are assembly languages.  
Assembly languages have the same structure and set of commands as machine 
languages but they enable a program to use names instead of numbers. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
12 
Please note: most people who use computers today do not need to worry about 
programming, machine, or assembly languages.  This is because the software being 
used today is written in a highly user-friendly manner and in a way that does not 
require knowledge of the computer languages which were used to create and use it.  
User friendly: Computer software or hardware that is 
simple to set up, run and use. 
There are two kinds of software, systems software and applications software.  
Systems software includes the operating system and all the utilities that enable the 
computer to function.  The most important program that runs on a computer is the 
operating system.  Every general-purpose computer must have an operating system in 
order to run other programs.  This includes controlling functions such as the 
coordination of the hardware and applications software, allocating storage facilities, 
controlling the input and output devices and managing time sharing for linked or 
networked computers.  In many respects an operating system works like an air traffic 
controller to coordinate activities within the computer.  Examples of operating 
systems are Windows NT, DOS and OS/2.  The Windows family of operating systems 
includes a Graphical User Interface (GUI) that makes the software user friendly. 
Operating system: A collection of software that allows 
a computer to function. 
Applications software includes programs that users access to carry out work.  They 
include applications for the following functions. 
• Word processing is the most common applications software.  The great advantage 
of word processing over using a typewriter is that you can make changes without 
retyping the entire document.  Word processors make it easy to manipulate and 
format documents. 
• Spreadsheets are computer programs that let people electronically create and 
manipulate spreadsheets (tables of values arranged in rows and columns with 
predefined relationships to each other).  Spreadsheets are used for mathematical 
calculations such as accounts, budgets, statistics and so on. 
• Database management applications are computer programs that let people create 
and manipulate data in a database.  A database is a collection of related 
information that can be manipulated and used to sort information, conduct 
statistical analyses or generate reports. 
• Presentation packages and graphics are computer programs that enable users to 
create highly stylised images for slide presentations and reports.  They can also be 
used to produce various types of charts and graphs.  Many software applications 
include graphics components including: paint programs, desktop publishing 
applications and so on. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
13 
• Communications applications typically include software to enable people to send 
faxes and emails and dial into other computers. 
Software programs are continually being written or 
upgraded to undertake certain tasks. As a result the software 
can become obsolete quickly. 
Software can be either ‘proprietary’ (also called ‘closed’) or ‘open’.  Proprietary 
software is privately owned and controlled.  A proprietary software design or 
technique is one that is owned by a company, which will usually not divulge 
specifications that would allow other companies to duplicate the product.  
Increasingly, proprietary software is seen as a disadvantage in many organisations; 
users prefer to use ‘open’ software, which is software designed using specifications 
that are publicly accessible.  The great advantage of open software is that anyone can 
create add-on products for it because they can understand how it was designed.  
People using open software can mix and match products from different manufacturers. 
By making software public, however, a manufacturer allows others to duplicate its 
product, which many manufacturers do not want. 
 
Activity 4 
Choose a computer and switch it on.  What operating system does it use?  What 
version?  What software applications are being run on the computer?  For help, look 
at the computer and software manuals and have a friend or colleague work with you. 
HOW DOES A COMPUTER PROCESS 
INFORMATION? 
When data is input into a computer, the numbers or words we understand are 
translated into a binary numbers system.  Binary is the language of computers.  
Everything you type, input, output, send, retrieve, draw and so on is, in the end, 
converted to the computer’s native language: binary. 
Binary number system: A numerical system wherein 
each digit stands for a power of two.  The binary 
system uses only two symbols, 0 and 1, to represent 
values. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
14 
In the decimal system, commonly used in most countries, each digit represents a value 
of 10.  For example, the number 103 would break down as follows: 
 
1 x 100 = 100
0 x 10 = 0
3 x 1 = 3
103 = 103
 
In the binary system, each digit position represents a value of 2.  Because computers 
use the binary system, powers of 2 play an important role.  This is why everything in 
computers seems to come in 8s (2 to the 3rd power), 64s (2 to the 6th power), 128s (2 
to the 7th power), and 256s (2 to the 8th power).  Therefore, in the binary system, the 
number 103 would break down as follows: 
 
1 x 64 = 64
1 x 32 = 32
0 x 16 = 0
0 x 8 = 0
1 x 4 = 4
1 x 2 = 2
1 x 1 = 1
1100111 = 103
 
The values in a binary system -- the 0s and 1s -- are called ‘binary digits’ or bits. 
Binary digit (bit): A digit within the binary number 
system.  A bit is the smallest unit of information held in 
a computer. 
The computer’s electronic circuits have only two states, on or off, and therefore can 
only understand 0s and 1s, which may represent such opposites as on or off, yes or no, 
or up or down.  This is why all computers use the binary system.  In order to make the 
bits useful, they are combined into ‘bytes’ of information. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
15 
Byte: A combination of bits that represent one 
character.  A byte is usually composed of 8 bits. 
Computer programmers have developed codes for various bytes of information, so 
that they may be read by different computer programs.  For example, one code might 
define the letter A as ‘11000001’ and the letter B as 11000010’.  The number 6 might 
be defined as ‘11110110’ and the number 8 as ‘11111000’.  When the person entering 
data strikes the A key on the keyboard, the computer registers it as ‘11000001’.  When 
he or she enters the B, the computer reads it as ‘11000010’.  Similarly, the number 6 
is understood by the computer as ‘11110110’ and the number 8 as ‘1111100’.  In this 
way, the computer can store words and numbers as binary digits and then retrieve 
them and convert them back into words or numbers as required.  
As discussed earlier, this work of manipulating, storing and processing the data takes 
place in the Central Processing Unit, the computer’s main memory.  The CPU consists 
of an arithmetic and logic unit, or ALU, a control unit, and a set of registers. 
• The arithmetic and logic unit is the portion of the CPU where arithmetic and 
logical operations take place. 
• The control unit is the part of the CPU that supervises the general operations of 
the computer. 
• The registers are devices that hold data inside the computer’s memory long 
enough to execute a particular function, such as indexing, calculating, sorting or 
otherwise manipulating data.  They are the CPU’s own internal memory. 
Data travels from one part of the computer to another through a kind of path known as 
a bus.  
Bus: The channel or path that lets the parts of a 
computer communicate with each other. 
Similar to a school bus for school children, a computer data bus picks up a load of 
data from one of the components on the main computer board and then transfers the 
data to another component on the main computer board.  The main circuit board of a 
microcomputer is also known as the motherboard.  The motherboard is the principal 
board that has connectors for attaching devices to the bus.  Typically, it contains the 
CPU, memory and basic controllers for the system. The data bus is really a series of 
electrical circuits that connect the various electrical elements on the main board.  
The data are input into the computer and processed in the CPU.  They travel along the 
bus to be stored in the computer’s memory.  The amount of memory available is 
described in bytes of information, referring to the combination of bits representing 
characters.  The higher the number of bytes the more memory the computer has.  
Today’s computers hold ‘megabytes’ or even ‘gigabytes’ of data.  A megabyte is a 
unit of one million bytes; a gigabyte is one billion bytes, and a terabyte is one trillion 
bytes.  If a computer has a memory of 64 megabytes, then it can hold 64 million bytes 
of information.  
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
16 
Data can be stored so that it is readable again only using the software with which it 
was created, or it can be stored in other formats, so that it may be transferred or used 
by other software programs.  There is a standard character code used to store data so 
that it may be used by other software programs; this code is called ASCII or American 
Standard Code for Information Interchange.  The ASCII code assigns a specific 
pattern of bits to each character, as described above. Another code that may be found, 
especially in IBM-brand mainframe computers, is EBCDIC, or Extended Binary 
Coded Decimal Interchange Code.  The important point to remember about these 
codes is that their main value is to store information so that it is readable by other 
computers.  By using ASCII or EBCDIC, it is possible for people to retrieve and use 
someone else’s data using a different type of hardware or software.  The main 
disadvantage of using ASCII or EBCDIC is that the formatting or other special 
qualities of computerised information may be lost. 
WHAT IS COMPUTER MEMORY? 
As defined earlier, memory refers to the temporary internal storage areas within a 
computer.  The term memory is usually used as shorthand for ‘physical memory’, 
which refers to the actual chips capable of holding data.  Some computers also use 
‘virtual memory’, which expands physical memory onto a hard drive. 
The main type of memory and the most familiar to users is random access memory 
(RAM).  RAM is the same as main memory.  A computer can both write data into 
RAM and read data from RAM. 
Every time a user turns on his or her computer, a set of operating instructions is 
copied from the hard disk into RAM.  These instructions, which help control basic 
computer functions, remain in RAM until the computer is turned off.  Most RAM is 
volatile, which means that it requires a steady flow of electricity to maintain its 
contents.  As soon as the power is turned off, whatever data was in RAM disappears.  
The contents of RAM are necessary for the computer to process data.  The results of 
the processing are kept temporarily in RAM until they are needed again or until they 
are saved onto the hard disk or other storage device. 
 Today the storage capacity of RAM is measured in megabytes (MB).  PCs 
(microcomputers) typically have between 16 and 64 MB of RAM, which means they 
can hold between 16 and 64 million bytes of data (a standard A4 page of text typically 
holds about 2,000 bytes or characters of text). 
Other types of memory include 
• ROM (read only memory): unlike RAM, ROM is non-volatile and only permits 
the user to read data.  Computers almost always contain a small amount of 
read-only memory that holds instructions for starting up the computer. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
17 
• PROM (programmable read-only memory): a PROM is a memory chip on which 
you can store a program.  Once the PROM has been used, you cannot wipe it clean 
and use it to store something else.  Like ROMs, PROMs are non-volatile. 
• EPROM (erasable programmable read-only memory): an EPROM is a special type 
of PROM that can be erased by exposing it to ultraviolet light. 
• EEPROM (electrically erasable programmable read-only memory): an EEPROM 
is a special type of PROM that can be erased by exposing it to an electrical charge. 
 
Activity 5 
Ask the person or persons responsible for computer management in your organisation 
how much random access memory (RAM) your organisation’s computer has.  Find 
out if they think the computer has enough RAM and why or why not.  
HOW ARE DATA STORED? 
It is very important to distinguish between memory, which refers to the circuitry that 
has a direct link to the computer processor, and the storage, which refers to media 
such as disks that are not directly linked to the processor.  Remember, a storage device 
is anything that is used to store computer data.  Floppy disks, hard disks, optical disks, 
CDs and magnetic tapes are all types of storage device. 
Physical storage refers to how data are actually kept on the storage disk.  The most 
commonly used medium for storage is magnetic storage.  With magnetic storage the 
computer stores data on disks and tape by magnetising selected particles of an 
oxide-based surface coating.  The particles retain their magnetic orientation until that 
orientation is changed.  Thus magnetic disks and tapes are modifiable storage media.  
The two most popular types of magnetic storage media are hard disks and diskettes.  
Magnetic tape provides a third type of magnetic storage, and optical disk is a new 
storage medium.  Following is a discussion of each; the definitions included earlier 
are repeated. 
Hard drive or hard disk storage provides faster access to files than a diskette.  
Hard drive: The storage area within the computer 
itself, where megabytes of space are available to store 
bits of information.  Also known as a hard disk. 
A hard disk platter is a flat, rigid disk made of aluminium or glass and coated with a 
magnetic oxide.  A hard disk consists of one or more platters and their read-write 
heads.  A read-write head is the device that reads the data from the disk platter into the 
computer.  It also records (or ‘writes’) data onto the platters.  Hard disk platters in 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
18 
microcomputers are typically 3½ inches (about 10 centimetres) in diameter: the same 
size as the circular mylar disk in a diskette.  However, the storage capacity of a hard 
disk far exceeds that of a floppy disk.  Also, the access time of a hard disk is 
significantly faster than a diskette.  Unlike diskettes, which begin to rotate when one 
requests data, hard disks are continually in motion, so there is no delay as the disk 
spins up to speed.  Like diskettes, hard disks provide random access to files by 
positioning the read-write head over the sector that contains the requested data. 
Diskette. A small, removable, flexible mylar plastic 
disk covered with a thin layer of a magnetisable 
substance, onto which digital data can be recorded and 
stored.  Also known as a floppy disk. 
Diskettes get another name – floppy disk – from the thin mylar disk.  If one cuts open 
the disk casing (not recommended because the disk will be ruined) one would see that 
the mylar disk inside is thin and “floppy”.  Diskettes are also called floppies.  
Although today’s microcomputers typically use 3½ inch (about 10 centimetre) disks, 
you may still find 5¼ inch (about 15 centimetre) disks that were popular many years 
ago.  Finding a disk drive to read 5¼ inch disks may be very difficult.  
Diskettes are generally used for transporting or shipping data files or for making 
duplicate copies of data files for back-up purposes.  The storage capacity of a diskette 
varies but is considerably smaller than that of a hard drive. 
Since the 1960s, magnetic tape has been a popular form of mainframe computer 
storage. 
Magnetic tape: A continuous plastic strip covered with 
magnetic oxide; the tape is divided into parallel tracks 
onto which data may be recorded by selectively 
magnetising parts of the surface, or spots, in each of 
the tracks.  The data can then be stored and reused. 
When IBM introduced its first microcomputer in 1981, the legacy of tape storage 
continued in the form of a cassette tape drive, similar to those used for audio 
recording and playback.  Using tape as a primary storage device, however, instead of a 
hard disk is slow and inconvenient because tape requires sequential access rather than 
random access.  
Sequential access means that data is stored and read as a sequence of bytes along the 
length of the tape.  To find a file stored on a microcomputer tape storage device, one 
has to advance the tape to the appropriate location of the file, then wait for the 
computer to slowly read each byte until it finds the beginning of the file.  Like an 
audio cassette, for example, a user must go through the tape in sequence to find the 
part he or she wants.  
Microcomputer users quickly abandoned tape storage for the convenience and speed 
of random access disk drives.  Recently, however, tape storage for microcomputers 
has experienced a revival, not as a principal storage device but for making backup 
copies of the data stored on hard disks.  The data on magnetic storage can be easily 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
19 
destroyed, erased, or otherwise lost.  Protecting the data on the hard disk is of 
particular concern to users because it contains so much data, which could be difficult 
and time consuming to reconstruct.  This is why backups are so important.  
Back up: To copy a computer file or collection of files 
to a second medium, usually on a diskette or magnetic 
tape, so that the data are safe in case the original file is 
damaged or lost.  Backups are usually copied to storage 
devices that can be removed from the computer and 
kept separately from the original. 
A tape backup is a copy of the data from a hard disk, stored on magnetic tape and used 
to recover lost data.  A tape backup is relatively inexpensive and can rescue an 
organisation from the overwhelming task of trying to reconstruct lost data. 
Backing up electronic data is critical to protecting it from 
loss or damage. 
For more information on backing up data and 
protecting information, see Automating Records 
Services and Emergency Planning for Records and 
Archives Services. 
The most popular types of tape drives for microcomputers also use tape cartridges, but 
there are several tape specifications and cartridge sizes.  A tape cartridge is a 
removable magnetic tape module similar to a sound or video cassette tape.  Quarter 
inch tape, called QIC, is a tape cartridge that contains ¼ inch (approximately ½ 
centimetre) wide tape. Depending on tape length, QIC tape capacities range from 340 
MB to 2 gigabytes.  Digital audio tape, called DAT, was originally an audio recording 
format, but is now also used for data storage.  The 4mm wide DAT tape format 
storage capacity ranges from 2 gigabytes to 12 gigabytes. 
In addition to magnetic storage, there is also optical storage. 
Optical disk: A storage device that uses reflecting 
surfaces and laser technology to read and write data on 
a disk.  Also known as a laser disk. 
With optical storage, data is burned into the storage medium using beams of laser 
light.  The burns form patterns of small pits in the disk surface to represent data.  The 
pits on optical media are permanent, so the data cannot be changed.  Optical media are 
very durable, but they do not provide the flexibility of magnetic media for changing 
the data once they are stored. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
20 
There are three types of optical disks. 
• CD-ROM’s are the most popular type of optical storage.  CD-ROM stands for 
Compact Disc Read Only Memory.  A computer CD-ROM disk, like its audio 
counterpart, contains data that has been stamped on the disk surface as a series of 
pits.  To read the data on a CD-ROM an optical read head distinguishes the 
patterns of pits that represent bytes.  CD-ROM disks provide tremendous storage 
capacity.  CD-ROMs usually come with data already written onto them.  These 
days most applications software is provided on CD-ROM. 
• It is now possible for computer users to write data to an optical disk.  These are 
known as WORM disks, which stands for ‘Write Once Read Many’.  A single CD 
holds up to 680 megabytes, equivalent to over 300,000 pages of text in character 
format, and these disks are quite durable.  These CDs are know as CD 
re-recordable (CD-R).  There are other types of WORM disks, although there is no 
standard for these. 
• There is a third type of optical disk which can be erased and use to rewrite new 
information.  These are sometimes known as EO (erasable optical) disks and 
CD-RW (CD rewritable). 
Magneto-optical disks combine magnetic disk and CD-ROM technologies.  Like 
magnetic media they can read and written to and like floppy disks they are removable.  
They can store over 200 MB of data, and speed of access to this data is faster than a 
floppy but slower than a hard drive.  There is no universal standard for these yet.  
CD-ROMs and magnet-optical disks are very useful for storing images.  These take up 
much more storage space than data in character format, such as in word-processed 
files. 
 
Activity 6 
Are there procedures for backing up data in your organisation?  If so, how often are 
backups done?  What are the data stored on? If the computer stopped working, would 
the organisation be able to retrieve the data? 
THE IMPORTANCE OF DOCUMENTATION 
The computer hardware, software and peripherals will be accompanied by 
documentation, which explains how the various systems or programs operate.  
Documentation: Information needed to develop, use or 
maintain computer hardware and software and to 
permit access and retrieval of the data. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
21 
Although documentation usually comes in the form of printed manuals, guide books, 
it may also come in electronic form, such as in ‘help screens’ contained within the 
computer software or documentation in data dictionaries and so on.  Often, 
documentation is created when a specific computer application is used.  For example, 
if a government office creates a data base of employees in order to administer payroll, 
documentation may be created describing how the database was established, what it is 
to be used for and what data fields have been created.  This documentation can be 
critical to understanding the database system, particularly if it is being managed in an 
archival environment long after the creators of the system have left. 
Documentation should always be retained.  
Disposing of documentation can cause problems in the future, particularly if you have 
to reload software from the beginning.  Documentation can also contain licences for 
the legitimate use of the software.  Therefore it is critical to protect documentation and 
ensure it is readily available. 
PROTECTING AGAINST VIRUSES 
Virus: A computer program that is planted in one 
computer and then transferred, hidden in useful 
information, to one or more other computers with the 
intention of corrupting or wiping out information in the 
recipient computer. 
Viruses are extremely common.  Many different types of viruses exist, ranging from 
ones that prevent you from opening up word-processed documents through to ones 
that destroy the entire contents of a hard drive.  Viruses can be caught in several ways, 
for example by exchanging floppy disks, via electronic mail messages and through 
downloading documents from the Web.  Networks make it much easier for viruses to 
move around.  Once a virus gets into an organisation’s computer system it can spread 
very quickly.  New viruses appear each week, so it is essential that users have up-to-
date anti-virus software to combat this problem. 
If users have software that is unlicenced it could mean that it is ‘pirate’ or ‘bootleg’ 
software.  This is software that has been illegally copied.  Software of this nature 
sometimes contains viruses that can be extremely damaging to computers. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
22 
SUMMARY 
This lesson introduced basic information about how computers work, including 
information about 
• the components of a computer 
• how a computer works 
• how software works 
• how the computer’s memory works 
• how data is stored. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
23 
STUDY QUESTIONS 
1. In your own words, explain what a computer is. 
2. Describe four different types of computers. 
3. Briefly explain how a computer works. 
4. What is hardware? 
5. What is software? 
6. What is the central processing unit of a computer?  Why is it so important to the 
operation of the computer? 
7. Describe at least four different applications, or uses, of computers. 
8. What is a binary number system? 
9. What is a bit? 
10. What is a byte? 
11. What is the meaning of computer ‘memory’? 
12. What is RAM? 
13. What is a storage device? 
14. What is a diskette? 
15. What is a hard drive? 
16. What is a database? 
17. What are the key differences between a diskette and a hard drive? 
18. What is magnetic tape and how is it different from a hard drive? 
19. Explain the concept of backing up files. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
24 
20. What is an optical disk? 
21. What is documentation and why is it so important? 
22. How can viruses damage computers? 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
25 
ACTIVITIES: COMMENTS 
Activity 1 
One of the key objectives of this module is to help you think about the types of 
computers that may exist in your organisation and the processes involved with 
deciding how to computerise office procedures.  These decisions should be made after 
considerable consideration and planning, so that computer systems are compatible and 
suit the needs of the organisation.  
This issue is addressed in more detail in other modules, 
particularly Automating Records Services. Managing 
Resources for Records and Archives Services also 
discusses the issue of planning for equipment purchases.  
It is also important to consider the types of computer used because, as a records 
professional, you will be involved with receiving the records created by those 
computer technologies.  In order to manage those records well, it is critical to 
understand the equipment used and the tasks it was intended to perform.  
This issue is discussed in more detail in Managing 
Electronic Records. 
Activity 2 
This activity follows on the investigations you made in Activity 1.  It is important to 
understand that computers must meet certain requirements before software packages 
can work with them.  Before acquiring any new software, check that it can run on the 
computer you have.  Again, computer purchasing requires short- and long-range 
planning, so that you can be sure the equipment you have suits current needs and will 
need future needs for a certain time before it needs to be replaced. 
Activity 3 
You could draw a simple flow chart that showed the following: 
The input for the letter is received from keyboarding, scanning or 
copying data from a disk 
 
The data are processed by the computer 
 
The data are stored in a storage device, such as a floppy disk, hard 
disk or magnetic tape 
 
The computer produces output in the form of a printed letter and an 
electronic version that may remain in the computer for future use or 
reference. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
26 
Activity 4 
This activity is designed to help you consider exactly what types of computers and 
software are used in your organisation and to familiarise yourself with the various 
components of the computer.  
Activity 5 
As with other activities, this one is designed to emphasise the importance of knowing 
all the components of your computer.  Knowing how much memory it has it important 
when you are deciding what types of software to install or whether to keep create large 
computer files or break the information into smaller computer files. 
You may want to ask the person in your organisation responsible for computer 
management about the decision-making process involved with purchasing computers 
or software.  Find out as much as you can about how this is done, so that you can learn 
as much as possible about this aspect of computerisation. 
Activity 6 
Again, this activity is designed to help you understand how computers are used in 
your organisation.  Backing up is critical to protecting information and records.  
This issue is discussed in more detail in Managing 
Electronic Records and Automating Records 
Services. 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
27 
LESSON 2 
COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS 
This lesson examines three computer environments: mainframe computing, networks 
(such as Intranets), and the Internet.  It introduces key concepts related to how 
mainframes, networks and the Internet work.  
Please remember, this lesson is not intended to provide a comprehensive explanation 
of the technical details of mainframe computing, networks and the Internet.  
Information is provided in order to introduce you to key concepts and provide an 
overview of these computing environments.  
MAINFRAME COMPUTING 
Mainframe computing developed at a time when computational power was an 
expensive and scarce resource.  In order to use the expensive computer technologies 
efficiently, organisations had to share their resources.  Many of computerised 
applications, such as invoicing, purchasing, payroll, accounting and so on, involved 
the organisation as a whole.  
If the original reasons for the mainframe computing model were cost and scarcity of 
resources, the current reasons for sharing computer power are 
• security: the protection of data from outside or unauthorised access 
• integrity: the guarantee that the data is not corrupted and that repeatability is 
achievable using the same applications and data 
• system availability: centralised facilities can be operated by teams in shifts 
24 hours a day, maximising the investment in IT equipment and allowing large 
data processing activities to be carried out efficiently 
• data sharing: data input or created in one part of the organisation becomes 
available to other parts 
• applications: many modern applications, such as personnel management systems, 
require access to a shared pool of resources. 
Today, mainframe computing is no longer an expensive resource; sharing is still a 
cost-effective means of providing computational power.  Recent studies have shown 
that on a per-user basis, mainframe computing provides the least expensive form of 
computing. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
28 
A mainframe environment involves not just the hardware.  The security, integrity and 
availability of the mainframe system can only be achieved if the computer centre is 
staffed by people with the necessary skills, operated according to a set of practices and 
managed with the discipline (that is, the processes and procedures) that ensures the 
appropriate levels of security, integrity and availability.  This is the ‘mainframe 
environment’. 
In a mainframe environment, many people share access to a 
mainframe computer. 
A large central processor is kept in a purpose-built computer centre staffed by 
personnel responsible for maintaining it.  Individuals in the organisation access the 
mainframe computer through terminals on their desktops in order to share common 
organisational resources, such as software programs or electronic data.  As we use the 
term today, a mainframe is actually identified more by the ‘environment’ in which the 
mainframe is operated.  In other words, the physical environment: the controlled 
temperature and humidity and the physical security of having the mainframe behind 
locked doors. 
Mainframe computers are used as tools to support a given ‘business’ application such 
as 
• processing applications for licences 
• processing government payroll information 
• processing financial accounts 
• processing environmental resource information. 
In all of these applications, the common denominator is the work process and the rules 
for undertaking the process.  Everyone is undertaking a part of the whole work process 
and everyone must complete his or her work in accordance with the procedures 
required to make sure the job is done satisfactorily and the data are complete and 
consistent. 
For example, if ten people are responsible for managing government payroll, each will 
have a separate responsibility.  They will all have access to the same database through 
the mainframe computer, and each person must complete his or her task adequately 
before the ‘job’ can be considered complete. 
The automation of a given work process, such as processing government payroll 
information, is often viewed as an information system.  
Information system: The combination of information, 
technology, processes and people brought together to 
support a given business objective. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
29 
The mainframe is the data and application repository for most organisations.  It is also 
the hub for most online business activities.  It is believed that mainframes still house 
90 per cent of the data major organisations rely on to conduct their business.  Despite 
claims that mainframe technology is dying out, sales of mainframe hardware and 
software remain steady.  The term ‘mainframe’ has always had the image of being 
something large in size.  Yet, however big the early ‘room-filling’ mainframes were, 
today’s modern versions are no bigger than the size of a household refrigerator.  The 
level of mainframe sophistication has grown over the more than thirty years of its 
evolution; organisations still recognise its advantages in terms of performance, 
reliability and security. 
NETWORK COMPUTING 
A network computing environment is one in which an organisation has linked together 
personal computers that have been connected into a network.  
There are a number of types of computer networks. 
Local area network: A computer network located 
within a relatively limited area such as a building, 
agency or university campus.  Also known as a LAN. 
Wide area network (WAN): A computer network that 
covers a large geographical area. 
There are an estimated 25 million computers connected to local area networks world 
wide.  The purpose of networking personal computers and even mainframes together 
is to permit employees in the organisation to 
• communicate with one another as well as others outside the organisation, normally 
through the use of electronic messages 
• access information and services supported on the World Wide Web 
• share documents and data 
• support various work processes in the organisation based on the automation of 
specific tasks. 
A network environment can range in sophistication from very simple to very complex.  
Some networks are used to support simple electronic mail communication.  In other 
networks, employees may be able to share documents with each other and carry out 
the work of their work groups, project teams, etc. by exchanging electronic documents 
through e-mail.  The most sophisticated organisations may have automated entire 
work processes.  For instance, draft documents such as responses to letters sent to 
senior officials, are sent through various approval levels (such as action officer to 
manager to director to senior official) without ever being printed onto paper (except 
perhaps the final version, which needs to be signed by the senior official). 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
30 
A computer network can be simple and limited to a small 
number of computers or complex, linking a large number of 
computers.  
A computer that is not connected to a network is referred to as a stand-alone 
computer.  When a computer is physically connected to a local area network, using a 
cable or other communications channel, the computer becomes a workstation on the 
network.  Each device on the network including workstations, servers, and printers is 
referred to as a node. 
Node: A processing location on a network. 
A workstation normally has all of the usual resources found in the personal computing 
environment (hard drive, software, data and printer).  However, users of workstations 
will also have access to network resources, which typically include application 
software, storage space for data files, and printers other than those on the local 
workstation.  On a network, the network server typically provides the applications 
software and storage space for data files.  
Network server: A computer that is connected to the 
network and that ‘serves’ or distributes resources to 
network users. 
Networks use different kinds of servers to carry out specialised functions.  For 
example, a file server is a computer and storage device dedicated to storing files. 
File server: A computer that serves or distributes 
application programs and data files to workstations 
within a computer network.  The hard drive of the file 
server is shared by the workstations on the network.  
Any user on the network can store files on the server.  Other types of servers include a 
print server to manage one or more printers and a database server to process database 
queries. 
Most network users will need to understand file servers because this is where they will 
store their files on the network.  A typical local area network uses a powerful PC as a 
file server.  However, a minicomputer or mainframe computer can also be a file 
server. File servers fall into three categories; dedicated, non-dedicated and application 
servers. 
A dedicated file server is devoted only to the task of delivering programs and data 
files to workstations.  A dedicated file server does not process data or run programs 
for the workstations.  Instead, programs run using the memory and processor of the 
workstation.  
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
31 
In some cases, a network computer performs a dual role as both file server and 
workstation.  When a non-dedicated file server is used, the computer workstation 
functions like a normal workstation, but other workstations can access programs and 
data files from the hard disk of the user’s computer workstation.  
An application server is a computer that runs applications software and runs the 
results of processing to workstations as requested.  An application server makes it 
possible to use the processing power of both the server and the workstation.  Use of an 
application server splits processing between the workstation client and the network 
server.  The method is also referred to as client/server architecture.  
Some networks include a host computer, usually a minicomputer or mainframe 
attached with terminals.  A terminal has a keyboard and screen but does not have a 
local storage device and does no processing on its own.  When a terminal is connected 
to a host computer, all processing takes place on the host.  
The software on a local area network typically includes many of the same applications 
one might use in a personal computing environment, such as word processing, 
spreadsheet, database management and so on.  As the use of networks increase, 
however, organisations have begun to demand software that facilitate the flow and 
sharing of documents.  This software includes groupware and workflow software. 
Groupware: Applications software that supports 
collaborative work between a group of users by 
managing schedules, sharing documents and 
undertaking intragroup communications. 
Essentially, groupware manages a pool of documents and allows users to access those 
documents simultaneously.  A key feature of groupware is document version 
management which maintains all revisions within a document when more than one 
group member revises a document. 
Workflow software: Software that automates the 
process of electronically routing documents from one 
person to another in a specified sequence and time. 
Workflow software facilitates a process or a series of steps.  Workflow is based on a 
‘process-centred model’ as opposed to groupware’s ‘information-centred model’.  
With workflow software, the focus is on a series of steps.  With groupware software, 
the documents are the focus.  
Peer-to-peer network: A type of network in which each 
workstation has equivalent capabilities and 
responsibilities. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
32 
Peer-to-peer networks simply link a number of PCs together with no network server.  
This is a cheaper way of networking, and while files and printers can be shared the 
wider advantages of having a network server are lost. 
The main advantage of a computer network is that all the users can share resources, 
rather than have users each maintain his or her own resources.  It is not necessary to 
purchase multiple copies of software; instead a licence can be purchased to use the 
software within the network which allows everyone to use the program at the same 
time.  
When a computer network is used, finding, retrieving, and storing files on a network 
is not very different from the process used on a stand-alone computer.  However, 
when using a network, security is much more of an issue.  Information is now 
accessible to a wide group of people, and sensitive or personal information needs to be 
protected. 
An internal network that belongs to an organisation and is accessible only by that 
organisation’s members is often referred to as an Intranet. 
Intranet: An internal computer network that belongs to 
an organisation and is accessible only by that 
organisation’s members. 
 
Activity 7 
Does your organisation have stand-alone computers, mainframe computers or 
networked computers?  Ask the person or persons responsible for computer 
management why these types of computer have been chosen.  Find out if there are any 
plans to change computer systems in the future?  Why or why not?  
THE INTERNET 
The Internet evolved over the past thirty years from a fledging experiment with four 
computers into a vast information network that connects millions of microcomputers, 
minicomputers and mainframe computers.  As of 1998, the Internet had more than 100 
million users world wide, and that number is growing rapidly.  The Internet is 
decentralised by design and, remarkably, this anarchy by design works well.  
Internet: A collection of local, regional and national 
computer networks that are linked together to exchange 
data and distribute processing tasks. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
33 
There are a variety of ways to access the Internet, the most common being through an 
Internet Service Provider (ISP).  An ISP is a company that charges an ongoing fee for 
providing Internet access to businesses, organisations and individuals.  The ISP 
provides the user with the necessary communications software (such as e-mail) and 
user account.  The user supplies a modem that connects the computer to the user’s 
phone line.  The user’s computer dials the ISP’s computer and establishes a 
connection over the phone line.  Once connected the ISP routes data between the 
user’s computer and the Internet.  Most ISPs offer dial-up Internet connections and 
electronic mail access, along with additional services.  Some ISPs offer direct access 
to the Internet without the use of proprietary software. 
The Internet connects millions of people through a collection 
of computer networks. 
A connection that uses a phone line to establish a temporary connection to the Internet 
is referred to as a dial-up connection.  When the user’s computer hangs up, the 
connection is broken.  A phone line provides a very narrow pipe for transmitting data.  
Its typical capacity is only 28.8 thousand bits per second (bps).  Using a phone line, 
the time to transfer the contents of a 680 megabyte CD-ROM would be over 53 hours.  
More rapid digital data transmission is now available from some telecoms providers in 
various parts of the world. 
The World Wide Web was created in 1990 as an easy-to-use source of information.  
World Wide Web: A computer network system that 
allows users to browse through information available 
on computers round the world. 
The World Wide Web opened the Internet to millions of people interested in finding 
information. There are over one million Web sites around the world and the number is 
growing very quickly.  The World Wide Web consists of documents called Web pages 
that contain information on a particular topic.  A Web page might also contain one or 
more links that point to other Web pages.  
Link: A reference to another document in an 
environment like the World Wide Web, that users can 
go to directly by clicking on the on-screen reference 
with the computer’s mouse. 
Links make it easy to follow a thread of related information, even if the pages are 
stored on computers located in different countries.  Every Web page is stored as an 
HTML (HyperText Markup Language) document.  
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
34 
HyperText Markup Language (HTML): One of the 
main standards that controls how the World Wide Web 
works; it is an SGML document type definition that 
determines how Web pages are formatted and 
displayed and thus enables information to be 
exchanged on the World Wide Web. 
Standardised General Mark-up Language (SGML): A 
metalanguage that can be applied to documents in order 
to maintain their structure and context. 
An HTML document contains special instructions called HTML tags that tell a Web 
browser how to display the text, graphics, and background of a Web page.  
Web browsers are used to view Web pages, transfer files between computers, access 
commercial information services, send e-mail, and interact with other Internet users.  
Web browser: A software application that enables a 
user to locate and view pages on a Web site.  Also 
known as a browser. 
To request a Web page the user either types in the URL (Uniform Resource Locator) 
address or uses a ‘mouse’ to click on a Web page link.  
Uniform Resource Locator (URL): The global address 
of documents and other resources on the World Wide 
Web.  URLs can point to executable files that can be 
fetched using FTP (file transfer protocol, ftp://) or a 
Web page that can be retrieved using HTTP (hypertext 
transfer protocol, http://). 
After the http://, the next segment of the address is the server name.  The server is the 
computer and software that make the data available.  A Web server, for instance, is a 
computer that uses Web server software to transmit Web pages over the Internet.  
Most Web servers have domain names prefixed with WWW.  By entering the Web 
server name, one accesses the site’s home page.  
Home page: The main page of a Website. Typically, 
the home page serves as an index or table of contents to 
other documents stored at the site (that is, the address). 
Website: A location on the World Wide Web. 
A home page is similar to the title page and table of contents in a book.  It identifies 
the site and contains links to other pages at the site.  The following is an example of a 
home page belonging to the ICA, viewed using a particular type of browser software 
called Microsoft Explorer. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
35 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Sample Home Page 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
36 
The Web browser is the gateway to commercial information services as well as the 
free sites on the Internet.  A commercial information service provides access to 
computer-based information for a fee. In 1997, approximately 17 million people 
subscribed to the top four commercial information services: America On-Line, 
Compuserve, Microsoft Network and Prodigy.  
The server sends the data for the Web page over the Internet to the computer.  The 
data includes two things: the information the user wants to view and a set of 
instructions that tells the browser how to display it.  The instructions include 
specifications for the colour of the background, the size of the text, and the placement 
of the graphics.  Additional instructions tell the browser what to do when the user 
clicks on a link.  The browser’s menu and tool bars help users navigate the Web as 
they follow the links.  The Back and Forward buttons trace and retrace the users’ path 
through the links being followed from one Web page to another.  The browser stores 
and can display a list of the pages being visited during each session.  The browser can 
also store a list of favourite sites, often called bookmarks, to permit the user to jump 
directly to the site they wish to see instead of having to enter its URL every time.  
Users can find information on the Web by using a search engine.  There are a number 
of Web sites that provide search facilities, and the Internet Service Provider will links 
to these sites. 
Search engine: A program that searches documents for 
specified keywords and returns a list of documents 
where the keywords were found. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
37 
 
Activity 8 
If possible, try to get access to a computer that can connect to the Internet.  If you are 
not already familiar with accessing the Internet, have someone help you get connected 
and then ‘play’ with the Internet and see if you can find and use the following: 
 back button 
 forward button 
 bookmark. 
Can you find the following Websites by typing in the ‘URLs’?  
International Council on Archives: http://www.archives.ca/ICA/ 
UNESCO: http://www.unesco.org/webworld 
Public Record Office (UK): http://www.pro.gov/uk/ 
When you have finished, write down which sites you were able to access and whether 
you had any difficulty. 
Can you find the following Websites by searching under key words?  For each search, 
write down each of the steps you took.  
 National Archives of Canada 
 National Archives and Records Administration (US) 
 National Archives of Australia 
 International Records Management Trust 
Can you find your government’s Website?  Does your records or archives institution 
have a Website? Can you find it? 
When you are finished, discuss this activity and your results with a friend or colleague 
who has also used the Internet and discuss how you might have worked differently, 
perhaps to speed up your results or increase the accuracy of your searches. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
38 
SUMMARY 
This lesson has introduced basic information about three computer environments: 
mainframe computing, networks (such as Intranets), and the Internet, explaining key 
terminology and discussing how these environments work. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
39 
STUDY QUESTIONS 
1. What is a computing environment? 
2. What is a mainframe environment? 
3. Explain the concept of an information system. 
4. What is a personal computing environment? 
5. What is a network computing environment? 
6. Why might a network computing environment be a valuable way for someone to work 
within an organisation? 
7. What four things does a network allow an employee to do? 
8. What is a local area network? 
9. What is a wide area network? 
10. What is a network server? 
11. What is an Intranet? 
12. What are the advantages and disadvantages of a computer network? 
13. What is the Internet? 
14. What is an Internet Service Provider? 
15. What is the World Wide Web? 
16. What is a URL? 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
40 
ACTIVITIES: COMMENTS 
Activity 7 
This activity is intended to help you understand the concepts addressed in this lesson 
and apply them to the reality of your own work situation.  Your organisation may have 
few computers and no networks or it may have an extensive system of networked 
computers.  It is important to consider the purpose behind a particular computing 
environments and not simply to choose a method because it is the easiest one at the 
moment.  
This issue is discussed in more detail in Automating 
Records Services. Planning is discussed in Strategic 
Planning for Records and Archives Services and in 
Analysing Business Systems. 
Activity 8 
If you have been able to get access to the Internet and ‘play’ with some of the features, 
you will have discovered both the amazing diversity of options and the complexity – 
and perhaps frustration! – of trying to find information easily or quickly.  
Were the URLs easily accessed?  Sometimes organisations change their electronic 
addresses and it becomes very difficult to find the new sites.  It is rather like changing 
a phone number; if it isn’t updated in the telephone directory people will not know 
where to find it.  And since many people may refer to URLs in their publications or 
communications, others may try to access these URLs long after they are out of date.  
The URLs for the three Websites you were asked to search for are 
National Archives of Canada:  
http://www.archives.ca/ 
National Archives and Records Administration (US): 
http://www.nara.gov/ 
National Archives of Australia: 
http://www. naa.gov.au/ 
International Records Management Trust: 
http://www.irmt.org 
If you were able to discuss this activity with a colleague, you might have been able to 
exchange ideas about how to make more efficient use of the Internet. 
Internet issues are discussed in more detail in 
Automating Records Services. 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
41 
LESSON 3 
COMPUTER APPLICATIONS 
Applications software includes programs that users access to carry out work.  This 
lesson examines two applications that may be of particular use to the student: 
databases and electronic mail (‘e-mail’).  It introduces key concepts related to how 
databases and e-mail work. 
Please remember, this lesson is not intended to provide a comprehensive explanation 
of the technical details of all applications.  Other applications would be word 
processing, spreadsheets and presentations.  A brief description of these types of 
software can be found in Lesson 1. 
DATABASES 
A database is a collection of information stored on one or several computers.  
Database: A structured assembly of logically related 
data designed to meet various applications but managed 
independently of them. 
More specifically, a database is a self-describing collection of integrated records.  A 
database is self-describing in that it contains, in addition to the user’s source data, a 
description of its own structure (such as in a data dictionary).  It is the data dictionary 
that make data independence possible (for example, the database management system 
maps the data fields into records and handles other similar transformation). 
A database is a collection of information stored on 
computers. 
In the mid-1960s, large organisations began to apply the power of mainframe database 
technology to administrative functions.  As the term ‘computer’ implies, originally 
most administrative uses of computers were to process figures rather than text.  These 
were usually activities involving high volumes of numerical calculations, where the 
workflow was highly predictable and routine.  Typical examples include payroll, 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
42 
accounts administration or personnel data.  These database applications were 
primarily organisation-wide transaction processing systems. 
The limitations of file processing prevented the easy integration of data.  Database 
technology held the promise of solving these problems so large organisations began to 
develop organisational databases.  Companies centralised their operational data, such 
as purchase orders, inventory and accounting data in these databases; these database 
applications were primarily organisation-wide, transaction processing systems.  
Originally, database processing was developed for use in the mainframe environment.  
However, in the late 1970s to early 1980s, database technology began to move from 
mainframes to PCs.  As a result, database management systems gradually became 
more powerful and easier to use.  By the mid to late-1980s, PCs were beginning to be 
linked together with the aid of networking, which enabled computers to send data to 
one another at previously unimaginable rates.  In time, users wanted to share their 
databases as well; this led to the development of multi-user database applications on 
local area networks (LANs). 
Databases were originally developed using mainframe 
computers but are now common on personal computers and 
in networked environments. 
Following is a brief description of the concept of databases.  In order to understand 
databases, it is important to begin with the data field.  
Data field: A space allocated for a particular item of 
information.  In a database, fields are the smallest units 
of information you can access. 
A data field contains a single piece of information (first name, family name, ministry, 
employee number, salary and so on).  A collection of data fields comprise a record 
such as, in this example, an employee record.  
Database record: A complete set of information in a 
database; records are composed of fields, each of which 
contains one item of information. 
A collection of records (in this case, employee records) comprises a database.  
Structured databases typically store data that describes a collection of similar entities.  
‘Salaries and benefits’ is an example of an entity; ‘education/training’ is another 
entity. A n employee database stores data about the employees in an organisation.  A 
medical database stores data for a collection of patients.  An inventory database stores 
data for a collection of items stocked in a warehouse. 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
43 
Activity 9 
Does your organisation use databases?  For what purposes?  What kinds of 
information are entered into the databases?  Who is responsible for maintaining them?  
Who can access them?  
If your organisation does not use databases, write down at least three functions that 
you think could be managed using databases (such as maintaining lists of personnel, 
keeping inventories of supplies and so on).  If your organisation does use databases, 
write down three functions, other than those currently performed, that you think could 
be managed more efficiently using databases. 
 
A data structure refers to the overall design for records in a database, such as the fields 
contained in a certain view and the configuration of fields and sub-fields for data 
entry.  The data structure should present a uniform format to facilitate information 
exchange. 
Data structure: A scheme for organising related pieces 
of information.  The basic types of structures include: 
files, lists, arrays, records, trees, tables.  Each of these 
basic structures has many variations and allows 
different operations to be performed on the data. 
There are three basic database models.  
• Hierarchical databases exhibit a branching structure, with information arranged 
into sets and sub-sets; getting to a particular piece of data may require going 
through several vertically ordered files.  An example is the process involved in 
finding a distant cousin on a family tree.  
• Network databases offer many more direct connections between files, but, 
similar to hierarchies, the links are predefined and are difficult to change or adjust.  
• Object-oriented databases link self contained entities (or objects) together.  
Objects can be text, a picture, a piece of film or any item that can be individually 
selected and manipulated.  This kind of database is particularly useful for 
organising large amounts of disparate information, but they are not designed for 
structured numerical analysis.  
The limitations found with these types of databases explain why most organisations 
have turned to relational databases.  Relational databases not only accommodate 
multiple views but allow new links to be forged as needs arise.  Relational databases 
are powerful because they require few assumptions about how data is related or how it 
will be extracted from the database.  As a result, the same database can be viewed in 
many different ways. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
44 
Relational database: A database that spreads 
information across different tables while maintaining 
links between them. 
A relational database stores facts in tables called relations.  The only requirement is 
that the information must be capable of being laid out in rows and columns (similar to 
a list of names, addresses and phone numbers).  An example from a university might 
help to illustrate the concept. In a very simplified view of a university database, each 
facet of the university’s administration would be represented by a table containing 
information within the remit of a single department.  The admissions office, for 
instance, keeps track of students by ID number, name and major field of study.  The 
personnel office keeps records of the department, rank, names, and social identity 
numbers of the teaching staff, and so on.  The following figure shows examples of 
relational tables. 
A relational database stores information across different 
tables and connects them with links in the computer. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
45 
 
Admissions Office 
Students 
ID Last name First name  Dept 
7016639 Morgan  George  Engl 
0010534 Deal  Sue  Math 
9105977 Conrad  Mark  Hist 
2053021 McDowell  Tina  Chem 
4344891 Gomez  David  Bio 
0355703 Frear  Robert  Engl 
9470825 Whitney  Pam  Fr 
3171386 Smith  Steven  Bio 
8200461 Heinz  Judith  Engl 
 
Personnel Office 
Staff 
Dept Rank Last name First name 
Engl Asso Register  Chris 
Bio Asst Cohn  Denise 
Math Prof York  Carla 
Chem Asst Sawyer  John 
Fr Inst Durham  Paul 
Engl Prof Syng   Kim 
Chem Prof Franco  Henry 
Hist Inst Preston  Lydia 
Bio Assoc Kelly  Susan 
 
Finance Office 
Classrooms 
Bldg Room Dept  Section 
Thompson 210  Hist  2943 
Seeley 34  Eng  2107 
Douglas 308  Chem  3376 
Wright 15  Fr  5601 
Douglas 112  Bio  3641 
Douglas 225  Math  4603 
Thompson 120  Engl  5864 
Wright 31  Bio  3780 
Thompson 233  Engl  1885 
 
Registrar’s Office 
Registration 
Section   ID 
5601   9105977 
3376   2053021 
2107   7016639 
4603   3171386 
3780   4344891 
1885   8200461 
3641   0010534 
1885   9470825 
2943   8200461 
 
 
Figure 2: Relational Tables 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
46 
Isolated from one another, these tables would be nothing more than a simple 
computerised filing system.  Tied together, however, they become a database, with 
each table offering access to the information held by all of the others.  This versatility 
stems from deliberate duplication of columns in two or more tables, resulting in a tool 
called a common key.  If, for example, two tables containing information about 
students each possess a column containing student identification numbers (ID) then 
this number can be used to find the row in each table that contains information 
applicable to any student. 
Each column in a table represents a single data attribute, or characteristic, of the 
table’s subject.  A column might contain, for instance, the identification numbers of 
the students or each professor’s department. 
Each row, or record, in a table contains all the information about a single entry.  In the 
case of a student, a record might include, in addition to an identification number, the 
individual’s first and last names and major course of study.  
Name Title Department ID Number Hire Date
John Doe Director Personnel 654321 01/07/87
Sune Jones Manager Personnel 123456 30/09/88
Jane Brown Supervisor Personnel 456123 03/03/97
Attribute
Data field
Record
 
Figure 3: Examples of Data Records 
Belonging to both a row and a column, an occurrence is the basic unit of a relational 
database table.  The occurrence contains the value of an attribute of a single record. In 
some cases, the value is a string of letters making up a word or words, in others a set 
of numerals, such as a student’s identification number or job title. 
Officials in the admissions, personnel, and finance offices have direct access to each 
other’s information through the ‘Dept’ attribute, common to all the tables.  Similarly, 
tables in the admissions and registrar’s offices are joined by the ‘ID’ attribute for the 
student identification number.  Relations in the registrar’s and finance offices are 
connected by a ‘section’ attribute that identifies subdivisions of courses.  
Attribute 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
47 
Activity 10 
Imagine you wish to create a database of information about records in your archival 
institution.  You want users to be able to search the database to find out what 
information you have in the archival institution on what topic.  Write a list of the 
fields you would need to include in order to make the database useful.  (For help, take 
a look at your organisation’s finding aids and see how that information was broken up 
into categories; these categories can become fields in the database.) 
 
Database management software is used to create and manipulate databases.  Data 
access software is usually used to search databases.  The data access software 
understands the structure and details of the database which means the user simply has 
to enter his or her search specifications, using either a menu, a keyword search engine, 
a query language or a natural language (among others).  
Menu: A collection of onscreen choices given to the 
user to help him or her interact with a computer system. 
Database menus are similar to those used in most software.  They are typically 
arranged as a hierarchy so that after the user makes a choice at the first level of the 
menu, a second series of choices appears. 
Keyword searching permits access to databases through the use of keywords.  
Keyword search engine: A program that allows a user 
to search a database by an index entry that identifies a 
specific record or document. 
Keyword search engines are especially popular for searching the many documents 
stored in a free form database such as the World Wide Web.  To use a keyword search 
engine, the user types in a word and the search engine locates areas in the database 
where the word or related information can be found.  
When information in a database needs to be accessed quickly, it is usually stored as a 
structured database.  However, the structure in structured databases can cause a 
problem for users who might not know the format for the records in a database.  One 
way to help users search structured databases is by providing a ‘query by example’ 
user interface based on the use of a query language.  
Query language: A set of command words that can be 
used to direct a computer to create databases, locate 
information, sort records and change the data in those 
records. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
48 
One query language is called SQL (structured query language).  The use of query 
language is based on knowledge of the command word and the grammar or syntax that 
will let one construct valid query sentences.  For example, the SQL command word 
for finding records is SELECT.  WHERE is used to specify that only certain rows of 
the table are displayed. For example, SELECT employee ID no from employee 
statistics table WHERE position = ‘Manager’.  
In more sophisticated systems, queries can also be formulated in a natural language 
such as standard English, French, or Japanese.  In order to use the natural language, 
the user is not required to learn a query language.  Queries can be straightforward such 
as: ‘What records of World War Two are available in the archival institution’?  This 
form of searching is still under development although examples of its use are 
spreading rapidly.  
Users can ask questions of the database using a variety of 
query languages, which formulate questions so that the 
computer can perform operations and provide results. 
COMMUNICATING BY COMPUTER 
Communicating via e-mail is rapidly becoming as important as telephone and fax 
communication and forms an important component of any office automation system.  
Electronic mail (e-mail): A way of sending messages 
between people anywhere within an organisation or in 
the world using a computer that can communicate with 
another computer through a computer network.  The 
message or document can be viewed on a computer 
screen and printed out. 
E-mail is handled by a variety of software programs such as Microsoft Outlook 
Express, Eudora, elm, pine and so on.  The message originator creates a message file 
in the e-mail software editor.  When complete, the message is posted to a message 
transport system that assumes the responsibility for delivering that message to its 
recipient(s) ‘mailbox’. 
To receive and read the message, the recipient runs a software program that retrieves 
incoming messages, allowing the messages to be filed, listed, forwarded or replied to.  
Generally a single user-interface program is used to send and receive messages both 
locally and worldwide.  Users do not need to have the same e-mail software program 
as the person they are corresponding with.  The e-mail itself may consist of simply a 
message or may carry with it attachments containing files created in a variety of 
software applications, for example word processed documents or spreadsheets. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
49 
Electronic mail is a method for communicating messages 
electronically using computer networks. 
The ability to send email depends on having an Internet Service Provider and a 
modem, or being linked into a larger university, government or company network.  
Being linked into a larger network requires a user to have a network card in the 
computer and access to network cabling.  There are various networking standards.  
One of the most common is ‘ethernet’. 
Ethernet: A local area network (LAN) protocol that 
supports data transfer. 
Open networks allow users to send e-mail internally, to colleagues in the same 
organisation, and externally via the Internet.  Some organisations have private 
networks that allow staff to send e-mail all over the world, but not outside the 
organisation. 
Network administrators or Internet Service Providers will give users an email address.  
This is usually in the format xxx@yyy.zzz.  The first part of the address before the @ 
sign is the individual user’s name or identifier.  The second part of the address is split 
into at least two parts (sometimes more), each part divided by a full stop or period.  
This part of the address indicates which company or university the user works for, or 
which ISP they are using, or even which country they are based in.  
For example a user on America-Online would have the address: auser@aol.com.  A 
user in the British University College London may have the email address: 
zzz999@ucl.ac.uk.  In this address, the user has been given the code ‘zzz999’ by the 
university. The rest of the address shows that ‘ucl’ is University College London, that 
it is an academic institution (‘ac’) and that it is based in the UK (‘uk’).  There are a 
number of different types of email addresses, including .com, .org, .co.uk and so on. 
The following figure is an example of an e-mail message received using Microsoft 
Outlook Express electronic mail software that includes attachments. 
 
Activity 11 
Does your organisation use electronic mail?  For what purposes?  What kinds of 
information are conveyed using electronic mail?  Who has access to the electronic 
mail systems?  
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
50 
Header information Message text
Attached
Documents  
 
 
Figure 4: Sample Electronic Mail Message 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
51 
SUMMARY 
This lesson examines two particular applications of particular use to the student: 
databases and electronic mail (‘e-mail’), examining key concepts related to how 
databases and electronic communications work. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
52 
STUDY QUESTIONS 
1. What is a database? 
2. What is a data field? 
3. What is a database record? 
4. Explain the value of storing information in a database. 
5. What is a relational database? 
6. What is the concept of query language? 
7. What is electronic mail? 
8. Briefly explain how electronic mail works. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
53 
ACTIVITIES: COMMENTS 
Activity 9 
Databases can be used for a wide range of activities, such as managing long lists of 
information, names and addresses, inventories of equipment and so on.  Almost any 
information that could be quantified or organised can be managed in a database.  
However, developing databases takes time, so it is important to use this technology 
only when it is really useful to the organisation. 
Activity 10 
You may wish to include the following fields in your database, in order to make 
information available about the holdings of your archival institution. 
1. Unique identification number for each computer record 
2. Title of the records being described 
3. Name of the creating department, agency or individual 
4. Beginning date of records 
5. Ending date of records 
6. Additional information about the date  
7. Linear metric measurement, of the extent of the records 
8. Information about any restrictions on access 
9. Information about any related materials 
10. Administrative history or biography of the creator of the records 
11. Physical description of the records (what media or format they are in) 
12. General description of the scope and contents of the records 
13. Key words or access points for searching 
14. Date the information was entered/updated in the computer 
15. Name or initials of the person responsible for entering or updating the computer entry. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
54 
You may not have thought of all these data fields.  When working with a database it is 
critical to divide each separate piece of information into a unique field, so that it can 
be searched and sorted along with other fields containing the same information.  For 
example, if you put in one field both the name of the person entering the data (15), 
and the date the information was entered (14), you would not be able to sort by name 
or by date; the computer would not be able to distinguish those pieces of information 
in one line or field.  Separating them allows you to search for names and dates 
separately. In many databases, you can combine searches and so conduct even more 
sophisticated research.  For example, someone could access this database and ask for 
all records beginning after 1940 (4) and ending before 1950 (5) and created by the 
Department of Agriculture (3). Such a search would not be possible in a word 
processed document. 
The issue of automating such systems is discussed in 
more detail in Automating Records and Archives 
Services. 
Activity 11 
This activity helps you start to consider the issue of creating and managing electronic 
data.  It is useful to learn as much as you can about your organisation’s electronic mail 
system and keep this information in mind as you study this and the other 
computer-related modules in this study programme. 
 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
55 
LESSON 4 
WHAT TO DO NEXT? 
Understanding Computers: An Overview for Records and Archives Staff has been 
written to familiarise records and archives staff with some of the basic concepts of 
computers.  As well, this module has explained some of the key terms people will 
encounter as they work more and more often with information technology specialists.  
The module introduces important terminology, offers definitions and explains how the 
concept in question may affect records or archives work.  This module has presented 
introductory information and should not be considered by any means a complete 
discussion of computerisation.  
ESTABLISHING PRIORITIES FOR ACTION 
This module has introduced basic information about computers.  Once you understand 
these concepts, the next step is for you to consider what to do next.  As this is a basic 
module on computerisation, you need to determine the best course of action for you as 
a student and for you as a representative of your organisation.  Should you continue 
with further reading on the topic?  Should you proceed with the study of related 
modules in the study programme?  Each institution will make different decisions 
based on its administrative environment and short- and long-term plans.  However, it 
is possible to offer some recommendations for action, to help the institution 
understand its computer needs.  Complete the activity below then consider the 
suggestions offered. 
 
Activity 12 
Based on the work you have done for this module, what priorities would you establish 
for yourself in order to study more about computerisation and make yourself 
sufficiently comfortable with the topics included in here?  What would you do first?  
What next?  Why? 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
56 
Priority 1: Discuss Computers with Colleagues and 
Friends 
Take every opportunity to discuss computers with your colleagues, with friends or 
with others in the field.  You can only benefit from reviewing topics with others, even 
though their opinions might leave you confused from time to time!  It is important to 
ask as many questions as possible, as some topics that seem straightforward are in fact 
quite complex and require considerable thought. 
Priority 2: Practice Using Computers 
If you have access to a computer, practice using it as much as possible.  You may be 
familiar with some functions; try to learn about others.  You may not know how to 
type; take advantage of any free time to learn how to use the keyboard comfortably.  If 
you have access to databases or the Internet, work with them whenever you can to 
learn more about how they work.  Bear in mind, though, that you could soon suffer 
from ‘information overload’.  Be sure to balance your work on computers with 
reading other modules or doing other work.  
Priority 3: Attend Training Courses 
Whenever possible, try to attend training courses, workshops or seminars on computer 
issues.  Perhaps your organisation offers in-house training, or a local college or 
institute provides courses on computer issues.  Try to study as much as you can, but 
remember it is wise to focus first on those skills that you can use and practice in your 
day-to-day work.  It is difficult to learn and remember computer skills if you do not 
practice them regularly. 
Priority 4: Study Associated Modules in the MPSR 
Study Programme  
This module has only introduced you to basic concepts about computers.  It may be 
useful to read the two associated modules: Automating Records Services and 
Managing Electronic Records.  You will want to keep this module close at hand while 
you work through those modules, so you can refer back to basic information as 
needed.  You may not fully understand all the issues discussed the first time; you are 
advised to work through all these modules slowly and carefully, so that you allow 
enough time to absorb the information provided. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
57 
GETTING HELP 
Many institutions, particularly in countries with limited resources, have limited access 
to information about computerisation.  However, there are places you can go to get 
more information or to obtain assistance.  Following are names and addresses of 
agencies that could be contacted for assistance. 
See the Additional Resources document for 
information on other organisations and associations 
involved with records and archives management 
generally. 
International Organisations 
Commonwealth Network of Information Technology for Development 
(COMNET-IT) 
Gattard House 
National Road 
Blata I-Bajda  
HMR 02, Malta 
Tel: +356 2599 2186 or +356 234710 
Fax: +356 2599 2701 
E-mail: comnet@magnet.mt 
Web site: http://www.comnet.mt 
COMNET-IT is an international foundation sponsored by the Commonwealth 
Secretariat and the Government of Malta.  It provides for its members a forum for the 
interchange of knowledge and ideas through regional and in-country seminars and 
workshops, its journal COMET-IT Forum and access to databases and discussion 
groups. 
International Federation for Information Processing (IFIP) 
Secretariat 
Hofstrasse 3 
A-2361 Laxenburg 
Austria 
Tel: +43 2236 73616 
Fax: +43 2236 736 169 
E-mail: ifip@ifip.or.at 
Web site: http://www.ifip.or.at/ 
The IFIP began its official existence in 1960 under the auspices of UNESCO.  It is a 
non-governmental, non-profit umbrella organisation for national societies working in 
the field of information processing.  IPIP’s aims are to: promote information science 
and technology, advance international co-operation in the field of information 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
58 
processing, stimulate research, development and application of information processing 
in science and human activity; further the dissemination and exchange of information 
on information processing; and encourage education in information processing. 
International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 
Case postale 56 
CH-1211 Geneva 20 
Switzerland 
Tel: +41 22 749 01 11 
Fax: +44 22 733 34 
Website: http://www.iso.ch 
The ISO has established many standards that affect computerisation; see in particular 
the ISO committee work on information technology and image technology.  See the 
ISO website for more information.  
National Organisations 
The American Society for Information Science (ASIS) 
8720 Georgia Avenue, Suite 501 
Silver Spring, MD 
20910, US 
Tel: +1 301 495 0900 
Fax: +1 301495 0810 
E-mail: asis@asis.org 
Web site: http://www.asis.org/ 
ASIS brings together diverse streams of knowledge, focusing what might be disparate 
approaches into novel solutions to common problems.  ASIS bridges the gaps not only 
between disciplines but also between the research that drives and the practices that 
sustain new developments.  ASIS counts among its membership some 4,000 
information specialists from such fields as computer science, linguistics, management, 
librarianship, engineering, law, medicine, chemistry and education; individuals who 
share a common interest in improving the ways society stores, retrieves, analyses, 
manages, archives and disseminates information. 
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) 
One Astor Plaza (Headquarters) 
1515 Broadway 
New York, NY  
10036, US 
Tel: +1 212 869 7440 
Fax: +1 212 944 1318 
E-mail: ACMHELP@acm.org 
Web site: http://info.acm.org 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
59 
ACM is the world’s oldest and largest educational and scientific computing society.  
Since 1947 ACM has provided a vital forum for the exchange of information, ideas 
and discoveries.  Today, ACM serves a membership of more than 80,000 computing 
professionals in more than 100 countries in all areas of industry, academia and 
government. 
British Computer Society 
1 Sanford Street 
Swindon, Wiltshire 
SN1 1HJ, UK 
Tel: +44 01793 417417 
Fax: +44 01793 480270 
E-mail bcshq@hq.bcs.org.uk 
Web site: http://www.bcs.org.uk/ 
The British Computer Society is the only chartered professional institution for the 
field of information systems engineering.  It exists to provide service and support to 
the information science community, including individual practitioners, employers and 
the general public. 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Computer Society 
(Headquarters) 
1730 Massachusetts Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 
20036-1922, US 
(Branch offices: Europe and Asia/Pacific) 
Tel: +1 202 371 0101 
Fax: +1 202 728 9614 
E-mail: membership@computer.org 
Web site: http://www.computer.org/ 
The IEEE Computer Society is the world’s leading organisation of computer 
professionals.  The society promotes an active exchange of information, ideas, and 
technological innovation among its members. 
 
Activity 13 
Find out if your institution has any information about any of the agencies listed above.  
Does your organisation receive publications, participate in conferences or meetings or 
otherwise work with any of these groups?  
In your opinion, which groups should your institution consider communicating with 
first, if any, and what would you expect to achieve by doing so?  How would you go 
about building a productive relationship? 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
60 
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 
The information for this module was derived from various sources including 
publications, presentations, guidelines and other primers.  A particularly valuable 
source was Parsons and Oja, Computer Concepts. Additional sources on computer 
basics are below. Core publications are identified with an asterisk (*). 
Core publications are also identified in the 
Additional Resources document; refer to that 
document for information on more general 
publications on records and archives management. 
Derfler, Frank and Les Freed. How Networks Work. How It Works Series. 
Emeryville, CA: QUE Corp, 1998.  
Gralla, Preston and Mina Reimer. How Intranets Work. How It Works Series. 
Emeryville, CA: QUE Corp, 1996.  
* IDG Books. …for Dummies. Computer Book Series. Chicago, IL: IDG Books, 
various years. 
This series of introductory books, called Word for Dummies, Windows 95 for 
Dummies, PCs for Dummies and The Internet for Dummies, explain computers in 
clear language, with practical examples and valuable illustrations. More 
information is available at http://www.dummies.com. 
* Parsons, June Jamrich and Dan Oja. Computer Concepts. Cambridge, MA: Course 
Technology, 1999.  
White, Ron. How Computers Work. How It Works Series. Emeryville, CA: QUE 
Corp, 1998.  
This illustrated computer anatomy book is filled with basic, useful information on 
the workings of a computer and the advanced technology that is making the 
computer a part of everyday life. This edition includes an updated CD-ROM that 
takes the reader inside the computer.  
 
Activity 14 
Check your institution’s library or resource centre.  What books or other resources do 
you have about computer issues?  Are any of the publications listed above available in 
your institution?  If so, examine two or three of them and assess their currency and 
value to your institution. If not, identify two or three publications you think would be 
most useful to help develop or expand your library.  Devise a plan outlining how you 
could realistically obtain copies of these 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
61 
SUMMARY 
This lesson has provided an overview of the entire module, Understanding 
Computers: An Overview for Records and Archives Staff.  This lesson has then 
discussed how to establish priorities for action and suggested that the main priorities 
for action are often as follows: 
• Priority 1: Discuss computers with colleagues and friends 
• Priority 2: Practice using computers 
• Priority 3: Attend training courses 
• Priority 4: Study associated modules in the MPSR Study Programme. 
The lesson then outlined ways to find out more information or get help with records 
issues.  The lesson concluded with a discussion of valuable information resources 
relevant to current records management. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
62 
STUDY QUESTIONS 
1. Outline three question you would ask a computer professional to ensure he or she had 
appropriate qualifications? 
2. Indicate two of the organisations listed in this lesson that you would choose to contact 
first and explain why. 
3. Indicate two of the publications listed in this lesson that you would choose to purchase 
first and explain why. 
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
63 
ACTIVITIES: COMMENTS 
Activity 12 
Every institution will find itself at a different stage of development in terms of records 
and archives management.  Similarly, every person will have a different level of 
knowledge of records and archives issues.  It is important to study core materials first 
and become comfortable with key principles and concepts before exploring those with 
colleagues or reading into more complex literature.  However, contact with colleagues 
and access to other literature is valuable, and joining and participating in professional 
associations is one way to expand your horizons and those of your institution. 
Activity 13 
If resources are limited, it is wise to communicate with international organisations 
first, as they often obtain and filter information from national or regional associations.  
Thus valuable information is passed on to your organisation through the international 
group, which can save resources for all.  It is also advisable to focus on general 
information before obtaining specialised publications or information. 
Activity 14 
As mentioned in relation to the earlier activity, it is important to begin with general 
information and ensure you have a good resource library of introductory and overview 
publications before developing a more specialised library. 

