AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 1
THE JOURNAL OF CHINA UNIVERSITIES OF
POSTS AND TELECOMMUNICATIONS
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
.
XXX
.
•       Description
•       Abstracting and Indexing
•       Editorial Board
•       Guide for Authors
p.1
p.1
p.1
p.4
ISSN: 1005-8885
DESCRIPTION
.
The Journal of China Universities of Posts & Telecommunications (English Version) is sponsored jointly
by six universities affiliated with the former Ministry of Posts & Telecommunications, China. It is a
key openly distributed academic journal that is devoted to information related scientific subjects. It
mainly publishes academic papers, research reports, surveys, research briefings, and degree theses
in the field of communications & information systems, signal & information processing, computer
software and computer theory, computer application technology, electromagnetism & microwave
technology, microelectronics & solid electronics, control theory and control engineering, management
science & engineering, and other related basic theories and technologies. It aims to promote academic
communications, facilitate technology innovation, realize the modernization of telecommunication,
and speed up the progress of science and technology. The readerships are universities faculties and
students, scientists in research institutions, and engineers and managers in enterprises, and etc.
ABSTRACTING AND INDEXING
.
Scopus
EDITORIAL BOARD
.
Advisory Members
Lemin Li, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
Shenggang Liu, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
Hequan Wu, Chinese Academy of Engineering, Beijing, China
Bingqun Xiong, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Eryuan Zhao, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Zisen Zhao, Wuhan Research Institute of Posts and Telecommunications, Wuhan, China
Honorary Chairman
Junliang Chen, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Jintong Lin, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Zhiyuan Song, Ministry of Industry and Information Technology-People's Republic of China
Chairman
Yixin Zhong, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 2
Vice-Chairmen
Liuting Chen, School of Computer Science amd Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
Qiuhong Lang, Shijiazhuang Post and Telecommunication Technical College, Shijiazhuang, China
Yantao Tian, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Xiaozheng Wen, Xi' an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi'an, China
Zhen Yang, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Editor-in-Chief
Yixian Yang, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Deputy Editor-in-Chief
Weining Wang, Academic Committee Office of BUPT, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Beijing, China
Editorial Board Members
Xiren Cao, Department of ECE, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
Qianbin Chen, School of Communication and Information Engineering, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
Key-Sun Choi, Dept. of Computer Science, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST),
Daejeon, The Republic of Korea
Robert Dale, Centre for Language Technology, Department of Computing Faculty of Science, Macquarie
University, NSW 2109, Sydney, Australia
Huiping Du, School of Computer Science amd Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
Wanyi Gu, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Harald Haas, School of Engineering & Electronics, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Xiangang He, School of Computer Science amd Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
Eduard Hovy, University of Southern California (USC)/Information Sciences Institute, Marina del Rey, USA
Wei Huang, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Hiromasa Ito, Tohoku University, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan
Guoping Jiang, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Tsujii Junichi, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Tan Lee, Department of Electronic Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong
Xuedong Li, Shijiazhuang Post and Telecommunication Technical College, Shijiazhuang, China
Yinguo Li, School of Computer Science amd Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
Chongqing, China
Shu Lin, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA, USA
Hong Liu, School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Oklahoma, USA
Wenhong Liu, Shijiazhuang Post and Telecommunication Technical College, Shijiazhuang, China
Yinghua Lv, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Huadong Ma, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Izutsu Masayuki , Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
Elisabeth Metais, Conservatoire National des Arts et Métiers (CNAM), Paris, France
Jianping Pan, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Victoria, Victoria, Canada
Su Pan, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Feng Qi, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Fuji Ren, The University of Tokushima, Tokushima, Japan
Subin Shen, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Qinfen Shi, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Grigori Sidorov, Center for Research in Computer Science, Instituto Politécnico Nacional, Mexico City, Mexico
Qinghua Sun, Shijiazhuang Post and Telecommunication Technical College, Shijiazhuang, China
Bo Tian, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Hongzhi Tian, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Xiaojian Tian, Jilin University, Changchun, China
G. Oklobdzija Vojin, The University of Texas, Texas, USA
Branka Vucetic, Telecommunications Laboratory，School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Guoyin Wang, School of Computer Science amd Technology, Chongqing University of Posts and
Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
Shumin Wang, Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg,
Sweden
Shumin Wang, Department of Microtechnology and Nanoscience, Chalmers University of Technology, Göteborg,
Sweden
Weimin Wang, Shijiazhuang Post and Telecommunication Technical College, Shijiazhuang, China
Jianping Wu, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 3
Meng Wu, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Zhanhong Xin, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Geng Yang, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Jianping Yao, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Okuno Yoichi, Computer Science and Electrical Engineering Graduate School of Science and Technology,
Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan
Guangxin Yue, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
Yerong Zhang, Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing, China
Dongfan Zhao, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Xiaohui Zhao, Jilin University, Changchun, China
Zhixiang Zhu, Xi' an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi'an, China
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 4
GUIDE FOR AUTHORS
.
INTRODUCTION
Types of paper
Contributions falling into the following categories will be considered for publication: academic papers,
research reports, surveys, research briefings, and degree theses.
Please ensure that you select the appropriate article type from the list of options when making your
submission. Authors contributing to special issues should ensure that they select the special issue
article type from this list.
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
Ethics in publishing
Please see our information pages on Ethics in publishing and Ethical guidelines for journal publication.
Declaration of interest
All authors must disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations
that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work. Examples of potential conflicts of interest include
employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, paid expert testimony, patent applications/
registrations, and grants or other funding. If there are no conflicts of interest then please state this:
'Conflicts of interest: none'. More information.
Submission declaration
Submission of an article implies that the work described has not been published previously (except in
the form of an abstract or as part of a published lecture or academic thesis or as an electronic preprint,
see 'Multiple, redundant or concurrent publication' section of our ethics policy for more information),
that it is not under consideration for publication elsewhere, that its publication is approved by all
authors and tacitly or explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was carried out, and
that, if accepted, it will not be published elsewhere including electronically in the same form, in English
or in any other language, without the written consent of the copyright-holder.
Changes to authorship
Authors are expected to consider carefully the list and order of authors before submitting their
manuscript and provide the definitive list of authors at the time of the original submission. Any
addition, deletion or rearrangement of author names in the authorship list should be made only
before the manuscript has been accepted and only if approved by the journal Editor. To request such
a change, the Editor must receive the following from the corresponding author: (a) the reason
for the change in author list and (b) written confirmation (e-mail, letter) from all authors that they
agree with the addition, removal or rearrangement. In the case of addition or removal of authors,
this includes confirmation from the author being added or removed.
Only in exceptional circumstances will the Editor consider the addition, deletion or rearrangement of
authors after the manuscript has been accepted. While the Editor considers the request, publication
of the manuscript will be suspended. If the manuscript has already been published in an online issue,
any requests approved by the Editor will result in a corrigendum.
Copyright
Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' (see
more information on this). An e-mail will be sent to the corresponding author confirming receipt of
the manuscript together with a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' form or a link to the online version
of this agreement.
Subscribers may reproduce tables of contents or prepare lists of articles including abstracts for internal
circulation within their institutions. Permission of the Publisher is required for resale or distribution
outside the institution and for all other derivative works, including compilations and translations. If
excerpts from other copyrighted works are included, the author(s) must obtain written permission
from the copyright owners and credit the source(s) in the article. Elsevier has preprinted forms for
use by authors in these cases.
For open access articles: Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete an
'Exclusive License Agreement' (more information). Permitted third party reuse of open access articles
is determined by the author's choice of user license.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 5
Author rights
As an author you (or your employer or institution) have certain rights to reuse your work. More
information.
Elsevier supports responsible sharing
Find out how you can share your research published in Elsevier journals.
Role of the funding source
You are requested to identify who provided financial support for the conduct of the research and/or
preparation of the article and to briefly describe the role of the sponsor(s), if any, in study design; in
the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; and in the decision to
submit the paper for publication. If the funding source(s) had no such involvement then this should
be stated. Please see http://www.elsevier.com/funding.
Green open access
Authors can share their research in a variety of different ways and Elsevier has a number of
green open access options available. We recommend authors see our green open access page for
further information. Authors can also self-archive their manuscripts immediately and enable public
access from their institution's repository after an embargo period. This is the version that has been
accepted for publication and which typically includes author-incorporated changes suggested during
submission, peer review and in editor-author communications. Embargo period: For subscription
articles, an appropriate amount of time is needed for journals to deliver value to subscribing customers
before an article becomes freely available to the public. This is the embargo period and it begins from
the date the article is formally published online in its final and fully citable form. Find out more.
This journal has an embargo period of 24 months.
Elsevier Publishing Campus
The Elsevier Publishing Campus (www.publishingcampus.com) is an online platform offering free
lectures, interactive training and professional advice to support you in publishing your research. The
College of Skills training offers modules on how to prepare, write and structure your article and
explains how editors will look at your paper when it is submitted for publication. Use these resources,
and more, to ensure that your submission will be the best that you can make it.
Language and language services
Please write your text in good English (American or British usage is accepted, but not a mixture of
these). Authors who require information about language editing and copyediting services pre- and
post-submission please visit http://webshop.elsevier.com/languageediting or our customer support
site at http://support.elsevier.com for more information.
Submission
Submission to this journal proceeds totally online. Use the following guidelines to prepare your article.
Via the homepage of this journal (http://ees.elsevier.com/XXXXX) you will be guided stepwise through
the creation and uploading of the various files. The system automatically converts source files to a
single Adobe Acrobat PDF version of the article, which is used in the peer-review process. Please
note that even though manuscript source files are converted to PDF at submission for the review
process, these source files are needed for further processing after acceptance. All correspondence,
including notification of the Editor's decision and requests for revision, takes place by e-mail and via
the author's homepage, removing the need for a hard-copy paper trail. If you are unable to provide an
electronic version, please contact the editorial office prior to submission [e-mail: jchupt@bupt.edu.cn;
telephone: 86-010-62282493; or fax: 86-010-62283461].
Referees
Please submit, with the names, addresses and e-mail addresses of three potential referees. Note that
the editor retains the sole right to decide whether or not the suggested reviewers are used.
Additional Information
Tables and figures may be presented with captions within the main body of the manuscript; if so,
figures should additionally be uploaded as high resolution files.
PREPARATION
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 6
Use of wordprocessing software
It is important that the file be saved in the native format of the wordprocessor used. The text should
be in single-column format. Keep the layout of the text as simple as possible. Most formatting codes
will be removed and replaced on processing the article. In particular, do not use the wordprocessor's
options to justify text or to hyphenate words. However, do use bold face, italics, subscripts,
superscripts etc. When preparing tables, if you are using a table grid, use only one grid for each
individual table and not a grid for each row. If no grid is used, use tabs, not spaces, to align columns.
The electronic text should be prepared in a way very similar to that of conventional manuscripts (see
also the Guide to Publishing with Elsevier:
http://www.elsevier.com/guidepublication). Note that source files of figures, tables and text graphics
will be required whether or not you embed your figures in the text. See also the section on Electronic
illustrations.
To avoid unnecessary errors you are strongly advised to use the "spell-check" and "grammar-check"
functions of your wordprocessor.
Article structure
Subdivision - numbered sections
Divide your article into clearly defined and numbered sections. Subsections should be numbered
1.1 (then 1.1.1, 1.1.2, ...), 1.2, etc. (the abstract is not included in section numbering). Use this
numbering also for internal cross-referencing: do not just refer to 'the text'. Any subsection may be
given a brief heading. Each heading should appear on its own separate line.
Introduction
State the objectives of the work and provide an adequate background, avoiding a detailed literature
survey or a summary of the results.
Material and methods
Provide sufficient detail to allow the work to be reproduced. Methods already published should be
indicated by a reference: only relevant modifications should be described.
Theory/calculation
A Theory section should extend, not repeat, the background to the article already dealt with in the
Introduction and lay the foundation for further work. In contrast, a Calculation section represents a
practical development from a theoretical basis.
Results
Results should be clear and concise.
Discussion
This should explore the significance of the results of the work, not repeat them. A combined Results
and Discussion section is often appropriate. Avoid extensive citations and discussion of published
literature.
Conclusions
The main conclusions of the study may be presented in a short Conclusions section, which may stand
alone or form a subsection of a Discussion or Results and Discussion section.
Appendices
If there is more than one appendix, they should be identified as A, B, etc. Formulae and equations in
appendices should be given separate numbering: Eq. (A.1), Eq. (A.2), etc.; in a subsequent appendix,
Eq. (B.1) and so on. Similarly for tables and figures: Table A.1; Fig. A.1, etc.
Essential title page information
• Title. Concise and informative. Titles are often used in information-retrieval systems. Avoid
abbreviations and formulae where possible.
• Author names and affiliations. Please clearly indicate the given name(s) and family name(s)
of each author and check that all names are accurately spelled. Present the authors' affiliation
addresses (where the actual work was done) below the names. Indicate all affiliations with a lower-
case superscript letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the appropriate address.
Provide the full postal address of each affiliation, including the country name and, if available, the
e-mail address of each author.
• Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence at all stages of refereeing
and publication, also post-publication. Ensure that the e-mail address is given and that contact
details are kept up to date by the corresponding author.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 7
• Present/permanent address. If an author has moved since the work described in the article was
done, or was visiting at the time, a 'Present address' (or 'Permanent address') may be indicated as
a footnote to that author's name. The address at which the author actually did the work must be
retained as the main, affiliation address. Superscript Arabic numerals are used for such footnotes.
Abstract
A concise and factual abstract is required. The abstract should state briefly the purpose of the
research, the principal results and major conclusions. An abstract is often presented separately from
the article, so it must be able to stand alone. For this reason, Math formulae and References should
be avoided, but if essential, then cite the author(s) and year(s). Also, non-standard or uncommon
abbreviations should be avoided, but if essential they must be defined at their first mention in the
abstract itself.
Keywords
Immediately after the abstract, provide 3，8 keywords, avoiding general and plural terms and multiple
concepts (avoid, for example, 'and', 'of'). Be sparing with abbreviations: only abbreviations firmly
established in the field may be eligible. These keywords will be used for indexing purposes.
Abbreviations
Define abbreviations that are not standard in this field in a footnote to be placed on the first page
of the article. Such abbreviations that are unavoidable in the abstract must be defined at their first
mention there, as well as in the footnote. Ensure consistency of abbreviations throughout the article.
Acknowledgements
Collate acknowledgements in a separate section at the end of the article before the references and do
not, therefore, include them on the title page, as a footnote to the title or otherwise. List here those
individuals who provided help during the research (e.g., providing language help, writing assistance
or proof reading the article, etc.).
Nomenclature and units
Follow internationally accepted rules and conventions: use the international system of units (SI). If
other quantities are mentioned, give their equivalent in SI. Authors wishing to present a table of
nomenclature should do so on the second page of their manuscript.
Math formulae
Present simple formulae in the line of normal text. In principle, variables are to be presented in italics.
Matrices and vectors are to be presented in Black italics. Number consecutively any equations that
have to be displayed separately from the text (if referred to explicitly in the text).
Footnotes
Footnotes should be used sparingly. Number them consecutively throughout the article. Many word
processors can build footnotes into the text, and this feature may be used. Otherwise, please indicate
the position of footnotes in the text and list the footnotes themselves separately at the end of the
article. Do not include footnotes in the Reference list.
Artwork
Electronic Artwork
General points
• Make sure you use uniform lettering and sizing of your original artwork.
• Save text illustrations as "graphics" or enclose the font.
• Only use the following fonts in your illustrations: Arial, Courier, Times New Roman, Symbol, or use
fonts that look similar.
• Number the illustrations according to their sequence in the text.
• Use a logical naming convention for your artwork files.
• Provide captions to illustrations separately.
• Produce images near to the desired size of the printed version.
• Submit each illustration as a separate file.
A detailed guide on electronic artwork is available on our website:
http://www.elsevier.com/artworkinstructions
You are urged to visit this site; some excerpts from the detailed information are given here.
Formats
Regardless of the application used other than Microsoft Office, when your electronic artwork is
finalized, please 'Save as' or convert the images to one of the following formats (note the resolution
requirements for line drawings, halftones, and line/halftone combinations given below):
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 8
EPS (or PDF): Embed the font or save the text as "graphics".
TIFF (or JPEG): Color or grayscale photographs (halftones), keep to a minimum of 300 dpi.
TIFF (or JPEG): Bitmapped (pure black • white pixels) line drawings, keep to a minimum of 1000 dpi.
TIFF (or JPEG): Combinations bitmapped line/half-tone (color or grayscale), keep to a minimum of
500 dpi.
If your electronic artwork is created in a Microsoft Office application (Word, PowerPoint, Excel) then
please supply "as is".
Please do not:
• Supply files that are optimized for screen use (e.g., GIF, BMP, PICT, WPG); these typically have a
low number of pixels and limited set of colors;
• Supply files that are too low in resolution;
• Submit graphics that are disproportionately large for the content.
Color artwork
Please make sure that artwork files are in an acceptable format (TIFF, EPS or MS Office files) and
with the correct resolution. If, together with your accepted article, you submit usable color figures
then Elsevier will ensure, at no additional charge, that these figures will appear in color on the Web
(e.g., ScienceDirect and other sites) regardless of whether or not these illustrations are reproduced
in color in the printed version.
Figure captions
Ensure that each illustration has a caption. Supply captions separately, not attached to the figure. A
caption should comprise a brief title (not on the figure itself) and a description of the illustration. Keep
text in the illustrations themselves to a minimum but explain all symbols and abbreviations used.
Tables
Number tables consecutively in accordance with their appearance in the text. Place footnotes to tables
below the table body and indicate them with superscript lowercase letters. Tables should be drawn
with three-line tables. Avoid vertical rules. Be sparing in the use of tables and ensure that the data
presented in tables do not duplicate results described elsewhere in the article.
References
Citation in text
Please ensure that every reference cited in the text is also present in the reference list (and vice
versa). Any references cited in the abstract must be given in full. Unpublished results and personal
communications are not recommended in the reference list, but may be mentioned in the text. If these
references are included in the reference list they should follow the standard reference style of the
journal and should include a substitution of the publication date with either 'Unpublished results' or
'Personal communication'. Citation of a reference as 'in press' implies that the item has been accepted
for publication.
Web references
As a minimum, the full URL should be given and the date when the reference was last accessed. Any
further information, if known (DOI, author names, dates, reference to a source publication, etc.),
should also be given. Web references can be listed separately (e.g., after the reference list) under a
different heading if desired, or can be included in the reference list.
Data references
This journal encourages you to cite underlying or relevant datasets in your manuscript by citing them
in your text and including a data reference in your Reference List. Data references should include the
following elements: author name(s), dataset title, data repository, version (where available), year,
and global persistent identifier. Add [dataset] immediately before the reference so we can properly
identify it as a data reference. The [dataset] identifier will not appear in your published article.
References in a special issue
Please ensure that the words 'this issue' are added to any references in the list (and any citations in
the text) to other articles in the same Special Issue.
Reference management software
Most Elsevier journals have their reference template available in many of the most popular reference
management software products. These include all products that support Citation Style Language
styles, such as Mendeley and Zotero, as well as EndNote. Using the word processor plug-ins from
these products, authors only need to select the appropriate journal template when preparing their
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 9
article, after which citations and bibliographies will be automatically formatted in the journal's style.
If no template is yet available for this journal, please follow the format of the sample references and
citations as shown in this Guide.
Reference style
Text: The citation order shall correspond with that in the references. Each reference item shall be
cited in the article.
List: References should be arranged in accordance with their appearance in the text. Three or more
authors: the 3rd author's name followed by "et al."
Examples:
Reference to a journal publication:
Li N, Qu L J, Qi W F, et al. On the construction of Boolean functions with optimal algebraic immunity.
IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2008, 54(3): 1330，1334
Reference to a book:
Hofbauer J, Sigmund K. The theory of evolution and dynamical systems. London, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 1988: 25-27
Reference to a chapter in an edited book:
Mettam, G.R., Adams, L.B., How to prepare an electronic version of your article, in: Jones, B.S., Smith ,
R.Z. (Eds.), Introduction to the Electronic Age. E-Publishing Inc., New York, 1999, pp. 281–304.
Reference to Proceedings:
Lei M, Zhang P. Subband bit and power loading for adaptive OFDM. Proceedings of IEEE 58 th
Vehicular Technology Conference(VTC'2003-Fall): Vol 3, Oct 7-11, 2003, Orlando,FL,USA. Piscataway,
NJ, USA:IEEE, 2003:1482-1486
Journal abbreviations source
Journal names should be abbreviated according to
Index Medicus journal abbreviations: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/tsd/serials/lji.html;
List of title word abbreviations: http://www.issn.org/2-22661-LTWA-online.php;
CAS (Chemical Abstracts Service): http://www.cas.org/sent.html.
Submission checklist
The following list will be useful during the final checking of an article prior to sending it to the journal
for review. Please consult this Guide for Authors for further details of any item.
Ensure that the following items are present:
One author has been designated as the corresponding author with contact details:
• E-mail address
• Full postal address
• Phone numbers
All necessary files have been uploaded, and contain:
• Keywords
• All figure captions
• All tables (including title, description, footnotes)
Further considerations
• Manuscript has been 'spell-checked' and 'grammar-checked'
• References are in the correct format for this journal
• All references mentioned in the Reference list are cited in the text, and vice versa
• Permission has been obtained for use of copyrighted material from other sources (including the Web)
For any further information please visit our customer support site at http://support.elsevier.com.
AFTER ACCEPTANCE
Proofs
One set of page proofs (as PDF files) will be sent by e-mail to the corresponding author (if we do
not have an e-mail address then paper proofs will be sent by post) or, a link will be provided in
the e-mail so that authors can download the files themselves. Elsevier now provides authors with
PDF proofs which can be annotated; for this you will need to download Adobe Reader version 7
(or higher) available free from http://get.adobe.com/reader. Instructions on how to annotate PDF
files will accompany the proofs (also given online). The exact system requirements are given at the
Adobe site: http://www.adobe.com/products/reader/systemreqs. If you do not wish to use the PDF
annotations function, you may list the corrections (including replies to the Query Form) and return
them to Elsevier in an e-mail. Please list your corrections quoting line number. If, for any reason, this is
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 3 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/jcupt 10
not possible, then mark the corrections and any other comments (including replies to the Query Form)
on a printout of your proof and return by fax, or scan the pages and e-mail, or by post. Please use
this proof only for checking the typesetting, editing, completeness and correctness of the text, tables
and figures. Significant changes to the article as accepted for publication will only be considered at
this stage with permission from the Editor. We will do everything possible to get your article published
quickly and accurately - please let us have all your corrections within 72 hours. It is important to
ensure that all corrections are sent back to us in one communication: please check carefully before
replying, as inclusion of any subsequent corrections cannot be guaranteed. Proofreading is solely your
responsibility. Note that Elsevier may proceed with the publication of your article if no response is
received.
Offprints
The corresponding author, at no cost, will be provided with a PDF file of the article via e-mail (the PDF
file is a watermarked version of the published article and includes a cover sheet with the journal cover
image and a disclaimer outlining the terms and conditions of use). For an extra charge, paper offprints
can be ordered via the offprint order form which is sent once the article is accepted for publication.
Both corresponding and co-authors may order offprints at any time via Elsevier's WebShop. Authors
requiring printed copies of multiple articles may use Elsevier WebShop's 'Create Your Own Book'
service to collate multiple articles within a single cover.
AUTHOR INQUIRIES
Visit the Elsevier Support Center to find the answers you need. Here you will find everything from
Frequently Asked Questions to ways to get in touch.
You can also check the status of your submitted article or find out when your accepted article will
be published.
© Copyright 2014 Elsevier | http://www.elsevier.com

