
UNESCO Report
Engineering: 
Issues
Challenges and 
Opportunities 
for Development
Produced in conjunction with:
World Federation of Engineering Organizations (•	 WFEO)
International Council of Academies of Engineering and Technological Sciences (•	 CAETS)
International Federation of Consulting Engineers (•	 FIDIC)
UNESCO
Publishing
United Nations
Educational, Scientific and
Cultural Organization
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
2
Published in 2010 by the United Nations Educational, Scientifi c and Cultural Organization 
7, place de Fontenoy, 75352 Paris 07 SP, France
© UNESCO, 2010
All rights reserved.
ISBN 978-92-3-104156-3
Th e ideas and opinions expressed in this publication are those of the authors and are not 
necessarily those of UNESCO and do not commit the Organization.
Th e designations employed and the presentation of material throughout this publication 
do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNESCO 
concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities or 
concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries.
Cover photos: Drew Corbyn, EWB-UK; Paula West, Australia; fl ickr garion007ph; Angela 
Sevin, Flickr; imageafter; Tony Marjoram; SAICE; UKRC; Joe Mulligan, EWB-UK.
All full-page images from chapter introduction pages are by kind courtesy of Arup.
Typeset and graphic design: Gérard Prosper
Cover design: Maro Haas
Printed by: UNESCO
Printed in France
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   2 14/09/10   15:33:55
 
3
Th is landmark report on engineering and development is the fi rst of its kind to be produced by UNESCO, or indeed by any inter-
national organization.
Containing highly informative and insightful contributions from 120 experts from all over the world, the report gives a new per-
spective on the very great importance of the engineer’s role in development. 
Advances in engineering have been central to human progress ever since the invention of the wheel. In the past hundred and 
fi fty years in particular, engineering and technology have transformed the world we live in, contributing to signifi cantly longer life 
expectancy and enhanced quality of life for large numbers of the world’s population.
Yet improved healthcare, housing, nutrition, transport,  communications, and the many other benefi ts engineering brings are dis-
tributed unevenly throughout the world. Millions of people do not have clean drinking water and proper sanitation, they do not 
have access to a medical centre, they may travel many miles on foot along unmade tracks every day to get to work or school.
As we look ahead to 2015, and the fast-approaching deadline for achieving the United Nations’ eight  Millennium Development 
Goals, it is vital that we take the full measure of engineering’s capacity to make a diff erence in the developing world.
Th e goal of primary  education for all will require that new schools and roads be built, just as improving maternal healthcare will 
require better and more accessible facilities. Environmental sustainability will require better pollution control, clean technology, 
and improvements in farming practices.
Th is is why engineering deserves our attention, and why its contribution to development must be acknowledged fully.
If engineering’s role is more visible and better understood more people would be attracted to it as a career. Now and in the years 
to come, we need to ensure that motivated young women and men concerned about problems in the developing world continue 
to enter the fi eld in suffi  cient numbers. It is estimated that some 2.5 million new engineers and  technicians will be needed in 
sub-Saharan  Africa alone if that region is to achieve the Millennium Development Goal of improved access to clean water and 
sanitation.
Th e current  economic crisis presents challenges and opportunities for engineering. Th e risk is great that cuts in  education funding 
will reduce training opportunities for potential engineering students. However, there are encouraging signs that world leaders 
recognize the importance of continuing to fund engineering, science and technology at a time when investments in  infrastruc-
ture, technology for  climate change mitigation and adaptation in such areas as  renewable  energy may provide a path to economic 
recovery and  sustainable development.
Engineering is often the unsung partner to science – I hope Engineering: Issues Challenges and Opportunities, UNESCO’s fi rst report 
on engineering, will contribute to changing that.
Forew
ord
Irin
a B
okova, D
irector-G
en
eral, U
N
ESC
O
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   3 14/09/10   15:33:55
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   4 14/09/10   15:33:55
 
5
Th e critical roles of engineering in addressing the large-scale pressing challenges facing our societies worldwide are widely rec-
ognized. Such large-scale challenges include access to aff ordable health care; tackling the coupled issues of  energy,  transporta-
tion and  climate change; providing more equitable access to information for our populations; clean drinking water; natural and 
man-made  disaster mitigation, environmental protection and natural resource management, among numerous others. As such, 
mobilizing the engineering community to become more eff ective in delivering real products and services of benefi t to  society, 
especially in the developing world, is a vitally important international responsibility.
Engineering as a human endeavour is also facing numerous additional challenges of its own, including attracting and retain-
ing broader cross-sections of our youth, particularly women; strengthening the educational enterprise; forging more eff ective 
interdisciplinary alliances with the natural and social sciences and the arts; enhancing our focus on  innovation, entrepreneurship 
and job creation, and; promoting increased public awareness and support for the engineering enterprise. Th is volume, the fi rst 
UNESCO Report on engineering, is an attempt to contribute to greater international understanding of the issues, challenges and 
opportunities facing engineering, with a particular focus on contributions of our discipline to  sustainable development.
Th e Report, one of the most cost-eff ective reports UNESCO has published, is based almost entirely on voluntary contributions 
from the international engineering community. I would like to begin by thanking the over hundred contributors. I would also like 
to commend the coordinating and editorial team for their eff orts – Tony Marjoram, Andrew Lamb, Francoise Lee, Cornelia Hauke 
and Christina Rafaela Garcia, supported by Maciej Nalecz, Director of UNESCO’s Basic and Engineering Sciences Division. I would 
also like to off er my heartfelt appreciation to our partners – Tahani Youssef, Barry Grear and colleagues in the World Federation 
of Engineering Organisations, Peter Boswell, John Boyd and colleagues in the International Federation of Consulting Engineers, 
Bill Salmon, Gerard van Oortmerssen and colleagues in the International Council of Academies of Engineering and Technological 
Sciences. I also thank the members of the editorial advisory committee, and especially the co-chair, Kamel Ayadi, for their help in 
getting the Report off  the ground.
Th is Report is a worthy partner to four UNESCO Science Reports, the fi rst of which was published in 1998. Although engineer-
ing is considered a component of “science” in the broad sense, engineering was not prominent in these reports. Th is opened the 
door to increasing calls from the international engineering community for an international study of engineering, and particularly 
of the role of engineering in international development. Th is Report helps address the balance and need for such a study. As the 
Director-General has noted, the future for engineering at UNESCO is also looking brighter following the proposal for an Interna-
tional Engineering Programme that was adopted at our recent Executive Board and General Conference in October 2009.
Given its pervasiveness, engineering is indeed a deep and diverse topic, as this report illustrates. We have tried to cover the 
breadth and depth of engineering as best we can, given the constraints we faced, and indeed Tony Marjoram and his team have 
done a wonderful job in pulling it all together. We hope the Report will prove useful to a broad community, and are committed 
to continue to work together with our partners in the design of appropriate follow-up activities.
Preface
G
retch
en
 K
alon
ji, A
ssistan
t D
irector-G
en
eral for N
atu
ral Scien
ces, U
N
ESC
O
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   5 14/09/10   15:33:55
6
Ex
ec
ut
iv
e 
Su
m
m
ar
y An agenda for engineering
Th is is the fi rst UNESCO report on engineering, and indeed the fi rst report on engineering at the international level. With a focus 
on development, the Report has been produced in response to calls to address what was perceived as a particular need and 
serious gap in the literature. Th e Report has been developed by UNESCO, the intergovernmental organization responsible for 
science, including engineering, in conjunction with individual engineers and the main international engineering organizations: the 
World Federation of Engineering Organizations (WFEO), the International Council of Academies of Engineering and Technological 
Sciences (CAETS) and the International Federation of Consulting Engineers (FIDIC). Many distinguished engineers and engineering 
organizations were invited to contribute to the Report, and responded overwhelmingly with articles, photographs and their time 
on an entirely voluntary basis – underlining the commitment and enthusiasm of the engineering community to this pioneering 
enterprise. 
Th e Report is a platform for the presentation and discussion of the role of engineering in development, with particular reference 
to issues, challenges and opportunities. Overall global issues and challenges include: the need to reduce poverty, promote 
sustainable social and economic development and address the other UN Millennium Development Goals; globalization; and 
the need to bridge the digital and broader technological and knowledge divides. Specifi c emerging issues and challenges include: 
climate change mitigation and adaptation and the urgent need to move to a low-carbon future; the recent fi nancial and economic 
crisis and recession – the worst since the 1930s; and calls for increased investment in infrastructure, engineering capacity and 
associated research and development. At the same time, many countries are concerned about the apparent decline in interest 
and enrolment of young people, especially young women, in engineering, science and technology. What eff ect will this have on 
capacity and development, particularly in developing countries already aff ected by brain-drain?
Th e Report sheds new light on the need to: 
develop public and policy awareness and understanding of engineering, affi  rming the role of engineering as the driver of  ■
innovation, social and economic development;
develop information on engineering, highlighting the urgent need for better statistics and indicators on engineering (such as  ■
how many and what types of engineers a country has and needs – which was beyond the scope of this Report);
transform engineering education, curricula and teaching methods to emphasize relevance and a problem-solving approach to  ■
engineering;
more eff ectively innovate and apply engineering and technology to global issues and challenges such as poverty reduction,  ■
sustainable development and climate change – and urgently develop greener engineering and lower carbon technology. 
Th e Report shows that the possible solutions to many of these issues, challenges and opportunities are interconnected. For 
example, a clear fi nding is that when young people, the wider public and policy-makers see information and indicators showing 
that engineering, innovation and technology are part of the solution to global issues, their attention and interest are raised and 
they are attracted to engineering. Th e Report is an international response to the pressing need for the engineering community 
to engage with both these wider audiences and the private sector in promoting such an agenda for engineering – and for the 
world.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   6 22/09/10   9:45:16
 
7
Th is Report presents an important opportunity. As the fi rst 
ever international report on engineering, it gives the world’s 
engineering community a chance to present the signifi cant 
contribution that engineering makes to our world.
The Report explores the main issues and challenges facing 
engineering for development – for the development of 
engineering and the crucial role of engineering in international 
development.
Th e concerns, ideas and examples of good practice captured in 
this Report provide valuable information for government policy-
makers, engineering organizations, international development 
organizations, engineering colleagues and the wider public to 
understand the future of engineering, capacity needs, engineer-
ing and technical  education, and  engineering applications.
I congratulate and thank all who have contributed to the 
development of the book and particularly the editor, Dr Tony 
Marjoram, who has been an encourager to the engineering 
community through his role at UNESCO.
The World Federation of Engineering Organizations was 
founded by a group of regional engineering organizations and 
in 2008 we celebrated forty years of its existence as an interna-
tional non-governmental organization.  WFEO brings together 
regional and national engineering organizations from more 
than ninety countries, representing approximately fi fteen mil-
lion engineers; we are honoured to be associated with the pro-
duction of this fi rst UNESCO Engineering Report.
Statem
ents
 CAETS, the International Council of Academies of Engineer-
ing and Technological Sciences, recognizes the importance of 
revitalizing engineering as a profession. 
Engineers are responsible for technological development that 
has created our modern  society; they have built  infrastruc-
ture, industrial production, mechanized agriculture, modern 
 transportation systems, and technological  innovations such 
as mass media, computers and communication systems. 
Technological development is continuing at an ever-increas-
ing pace, especially in new areas such as  information and 
communication technology, nanotechnology and biotech-
nology. Th ese developments are exciting, require increased 
engineering capacity and deserve public acclaim. Technologi-
cal  innovations have created wealth, facilitated our life and 
provided comfort. 
For some. But not for all.
Prosperity and  economic development are not distributed 
equally over the world. Realization of the United Nations  Mil-
lennium Development Goals will require signifi cant eff ort by 
engineers, but also creativity because the contexts of develop-
ing countries often requires new ways of doing things or the 
rediscovery of traditional techniques. 
In addition, there are new challenges for engineers. Our  society 
is facing problems, which, to some degree, have been caused by 
developments for which engineers are responsible: the deple-
tion of natural resources, environmental problems and  climate 
change. Talented engineers are needed to provide solutions 
for these problems through greater effi  ciency in production 
processes and  transportation systems, new sustainable  energy 
sources, more effi  cient use of materials, the recovery of materi-
als from waste... the list is long.
Th ere is growing demand for engineering talent from a growing 
and developing global population. And the nature of engineer-
ing is changing. Engineering has always been multi-disciplinary 
in nature, combining physics, chemistry and mathematics 
with creative design, invention and  innovation; but its scope 
is increasing. Engineers, more and more, have to be aware of 
the social and environmental impacts of technology, and have 
to work in complex teams, interacting and cooperating with 
 society. 
It is unfortunate that, under these circumstances of growing 
need for multi-talented engineers, the interest in engineering 
among young people is waning in so many countries. Aware-
ness of the importance and the changing nature of engineer-
ing should be raised in circles of government as well as the 
general public.
 CAETS therefore very much welcomes this UNESCO eff ort to 
explore the current state of engineering, and the issues and 
challenges for its development and for global development.
World Federation of Engineering Organizations
Barry J .  Grear AO, President  WFEO 2007–09
International Council of Academies of Engineering and Technological Sciences
Gerard van Oortmerssen, President  CAETS, 2008
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   7 14/09/10   15:33:56
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
8
Th e International Federation of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC) 
is the international organization that represents the business 
of  consulting engineering worldwide. Th is Report deals with 
issues that are key to the ongoing success of our industry, pro-
fession and  society, and we are very pleased to have partici-
pated in its preparation. It comes at an important time. Th e 
profession of engineering is diminishing particularly in devel-
oped countries where our services, like our profession, have 
become invisible. We have in many ways created this problem 
ourselves. Ironically, this has come at a time when the need for 
engineering  innovation has never been more apparent.
Issues of  sustainable development,  poverty reduction and 
 climate change are fundamentally engineering issues. We have 
to learn to broaden our design brief beyond the traditional 
objectives of schedule, cost and conventional scope. We 
have to learn to include broader societal necessities such as 
minimizing water,  energy and materials use, respecting human 
and cultural rights, and looking out for health and safety, not 
only within the work but also in its impacts.
Th is is a challenge that needs true engineering  innovation. 
Leadership in this issue requires us to go beyond our comfort 
zone, to engage in the debates of our  society, and to stand up 
for values regardless of their popularity.
Th is is our challenge, and this is our opportunity.
International Federation of Consulting Engineers
John Boyd, President  FIDIC 2007–09
 Wright brothers, fi rst 
powered aircraft fl ight, 1903.
©
 W
ik
im
ed
ia
 co
m
m
on
s
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   8 14/09/10   15:33:56
 
9
Th e inception, development, and production of this UNESCO 
Report was facilitated, supported, and promoted by more 
than 150 individuals, organizations and institutions in the 
professional, public and private sectors. Without their vol-
untary generosity, commitment and support, this world-fi rst 
international Report may not have been possible. All are to be 
warmly congratulated on behalf of the engineering and wider 
communities for their enthusiastic patronage of a project 
attempting to fi ll the gap in the paucity of information regard-
ing the important role of engineering in sustainable social and 
 economic development. Initial acknowledgements are there-
fore due to the Executive Board and colleagues of the World 
Federation of Engineering Organizations ( WFEO), including 
Bill Rourke, Peter Greenwood and Barry Grear, who discussed 
and endorsed the idea of an international engineering report 
in 2005, to Kamel Ayadi,  WFEO President in 2006–07, who 
presented a proposal for a UNESCO Engineering Report to 
UNESCO in 2006, and to Koïchiro Matsuura, former Director-
General of UNESCO, who approved the proposal, leading to 
the beginning of work on the Report in October 2006. Barry 
Grear,  WFEO President in 2008–09, and Maria Prieto-Laff argue, 
President from 2010, are also acknowledged as enthusiastic 
supporters of the Report, as is Director-General Irina Bokova, 
who has emphasized the important role of engineering in sus-
tainable social and  economic development.
Work on the Report began with invitations to and discussions 
with Bill Salmon and colleagues from the International Coun-
cil of Academies of Engineering and Technological Sciences 
( CAETS), Peter Boswell and colleagues at the International 
Federation of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC), whose support 
as partner organizations is gratefully acknowledged. An edito-
rial advisory committee was then formed, drawn from engi-
neering organizations around the world, and consulted on an 
actual and virtual basis regarding the structure and format 
of the Report. Th e editorial advisory committee consisted 
of co-chairs Walter Erdelen, then Assistant Director-General 
for Natural Sciences at UNESCO and Kamel Ayadi, together 
with Peter Boswell ( FIDIC), George Bugliarello, Brian Figaji, 
Monique Frize, Willi Fuchs, Issié Yvonne Gueye, Charlie Har-
groves, Yumio Ishii, Paul Jowitt, Andrew Lamb, Eriabu Lugujjo, 
Najat Rochdi, Bill Salmon ( CAETS), Luiz Scavarda, Moham-
med Sheya, Vladimir Yackovlev, Tahani Youssef, Miguel Angel 
Yadarola, Zhong Yixin and Lidia Żakowska. Many were also 
invited to contribute and all are thanked for their help in 
organizing the Report.
Th e Report consists essentially of invited contributions, sub-
mitted on an honorary basis, and the generous support of 
the following contributors is highly appreciated: Menhem 
Alameddine, Sam Amod, Felix Atume, Margaret Austin, 
Kamel Ayadi, Gérard Baron, Conrado Bauer, Jim Birch, Peggy 
Oti-Boateng, Nelius Boshoff , Peter Boswell, David Botha, John 
Boyd, Damir Brdjanovic, George Bugliarello, Lars Bytoff , Jean-
A
cknow
ledgem
ents
Claude Charpentier, Tan Seng Chuan, Andrew Cleland, Regina 
Clewlow, Daniel D. Clinton Jr., Jo da Silva, Mona Dahms, Cláu-
dio Dall’Acqua, Darrel Danyluk, Irenilza de Alencar Nääs, Erik 
de Graaff , Cheryl Desha, Allison Dickert, Christelle Didier, Gary 
Downey, Xiangyun Du, Wendy Faulkner, Monique Frize, Willi 
Fuchs, Jacques Gaillard, Pat Galloway, P.S. Goel, Barry Grear, 
Phillip Greenish, Peter Greenwood, Yvonnne Issié Gueye, 
Leanne Hardwicke, Charlie Hargroves, Rohani Hashim, Sascha 
Hermann, Bob Hodgson, Hans Jürgen Hoyer, Youssef Ibrahim, 
Azni Idris, Yumio Ishii, Mervyn Jones, Russ Jones, the Jordan 
Engineers Association, Paul Jowitt, Jan Kaczmarek, Marlene 
Kanga, Anette Kolmos, Sam Kundishora, Andrew Lamb, Ally-
son Lawless, Leizer Lerner, Antje Lienert, Simon Lovatt, Juan 
Lucena, Eriabu Lugujjo, Takaaki Maekawa, Don Mansell, Tony 
Marjoram, Petter Matthews, Jose Medem, Jean Michel, James 
R. Mihelcic, Ian Miles, Victor Miranda, Włodzimierz Miszal-
ski, Mokubung Mokubung, Jacques Moulot, Johann Mouton, 
Solomon Mwangi, Douglas Oakervee, Gossett Oliver, Rajendra 
Pachauri, Beverley Parkin, Stuart Parkinson, Waldimir Pirró e 
Longo, Arvind K. Poothia, Krishnamurthy Ramanathan, Tony 
Ridley, Badaoui Rouhban, Bill Salmon, Luiz Scavarda, David 
Singleton, Vladimir Sitsev, Jorge Spitalnik, Catherine Stans-
bury, Neill Stansbury, Don Stewart, Mario Telichevsky, Leia-
taua Tom Tinai, Susan Th omas, K. Vairavamoorthy, Charles 
Vest, Kevin Wall, Iring Wasser, Ron Watermeyer, Philippe 
Wauters, Andrew West, John Woodcock, Vladimir Yackovlev, 
Miguel Angel Yadarola and Zhong Yixin. Gunnar Westholm 
and Alison Young consulted on the complexities of  statistics 
and indicators relating to science and engineering, and their 
contribution helped identify some of the issues and challenges 
regarding the urgent need for more detailed data collection 
and disaggregation. Th e UNESCO Institute of Statistics pro-
vided data for this Report, and their role in developing data is 
of obvious importance. Further details of the contributors are 
listed separately.
Several of the above and other contributors also contributed 
photographs and other materials to illustrate the text, and 
special thanks in this context go to Arup, a global technical 
consulting company, for the use of photographs of some of 
their projects around the world and their Drivers of Change 
publication, developed to help identify and explore issues fac-
ing and aff ecting our world, to the South African Institution 
of Civil Engineers (SAICE) and the UK Institution of Civil Engi-
neers (ICE) – no report on engineering would be complete 
without a photograph of Isambard Kingdom Brunel – one of 
the most famous founders of modern engineering.
The editorial team was based in the Engineering Sciences 
programme of the Basic and Engineering Sciences Division 
in the Natural Sciences Sector of UNESCO, and consisted of 
Tony Marjoram, Senior Programme Specialist responsible for 
the engineering sciences as coordinator and editor, Andrew 
Lamb, consultant technical editor and editorial advisor, 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   9 14/09/10   15:33:56
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
10
 Cornelia Hauke and Christina Rafaela Garcia, administrative 
editorial assistants, and Françoise Lee, programme secretary. 
In the Natural Sciences Sector, this team was supported by 
Walter Erdelen, former Assistant Director-General for Natu-
ral Sciences, Maciej Nalecz, Director of Basic and Engineering 
Sciences, Badaoui Rouhban, Mohan Perera, Guetta Alemash, 
Rosana Karam, Djaff ar Moussa-Elkadhum, Sylvie Venter, Eloise 
Loh, Pilar Chiang-Joo and Patricia Niango. Ian Denison, Marie 
Renault, Isabelle Nonain-Semelin, Gérard Prosper and col-
leagues at the UNESCO Publications Unit in the Bureau of 
 Public Information helped develop, arrange copy-editing, lay-
out and printing of the Report, and manage over 120 individual 
contracts that were required for the Report. Particular thanks 
go to Andrew Lamb, whose assistance in putting together and 
editing a diversity of styles and lengths of contribution into 
the 200,000 words of the Report has been invaluable, and to 
Tomoko Honda, for her understanding and support as the 
Report has developed over the last two years. Finally, acknowl-
edgement is due to the many thousands of engineers and the 
engineering community – present and past – whose work and 
enthusiasm we hope is refl ected in this Report. Th eir spirit and 
commitment in overcoming issues and challenges has created 
opportunities for development that we hope more of us will 
be able to enjoy.
© ARUP
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   10 14/09/10   15:33:56
 
11
3 Foreword
5 Preface
6 Executive Summary
7 Statements
9 Acknowledgements
15 Introduction to the Reportport
23 1 What is Engineering?
24 1.1 What engineering is, what engineers do
27 1.2 Engineers, technologists and technicians
29 2 Engineering and Human Development
30 2.1 History of engineering; engineering at 
UNESCO
30 2.1.1 A very short history of engineering
32 2.1.2 Engineering at UNESCO
39 2.2  Engineering, innovation, social and 
economic development
43 2.3 Engineering, technology and society
44 2.4 Engineers and social responsibility
44 2.4.1 Th e big issues
47 2.4.2 Engineering Social Responsibility
50 2.4.3 Corporate Social Responsibility
53 3 Engineering: Emerging Issues and Challenges
54 3.1 Engineering, foresight and forecasts of the 
future
56 3.2 Emerging and future areas of engineering
59 3.3 A changing climate and engineers of the 
future
63 3.4 Th e engineering message – getting it 
across
65 3.5 Engineering and technology in the third 
millennium
69 4 An Overview of Engineering
70 4.1  Engineering indicators – measurement 
and metrics
71 4.1.1 Th e need for science and technology 
data and indicators 
71 4.1.2 Th e statistical dilemma: What is 
engineering? Who is an engineer?
71 4.1.3 Th e OECD Frascati Manual on 
the measurement of research and 
development resources 
74 4.1.4 UNESCO statistics and indicators 
in Science & Technology, Research 
& Development
74 4.1.5 Th e OECD/Eurostat Canberra 
Manual on the measurement of 
stocks and fl ows of S&T personnel
76 4.1.6 Th e international study of careers of 
doctorate holders 
79 4.1.7 Statistics and an analysis of engineers 
in education and employment
82 4.1.8 Engineering indicators – Tables 
124 4.2 Fields of engineering
124 4.2.1 Civil engineering
125 4.2.2 Mechanical engineering
127 4.2.3 Electrical and Electronic engineering
128 4.2.4 Chemical engineering
131 4.2.5 Environmental engineering
132 4.2.6 Agricultural engineering
133 4.2.7 Medical Engineering
135 4.3 Th e engineering profession and its 
organization
135 4.3.1 An introduction to the organization 
of the profession
137 4.3.2 International cooperation
138 4.3.3 Th e World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations (WFEO)
139 4.3.4 International Council of Academies 
of Engineering and Technological 
Sciences (CAETS)
140 4.3.5 International Federation of 
Consulting Engineers (FIDIC)
144 4.3.6 European Federation of National 
Engineering Associations (FEANI)
146 4.3.7 Federation of Engineering Institutions 
of Asia and the Pacifi c (FEIAP)
147 4.3.8 Association for Engineering 
Education in Southeast and East Asia 
and the Pacifi c (AEESEAP)
149 4.3.9 Asian and Pacifi c Centre for Transfer 
of Technology (APCTT)
150 4.3.10 Th e African Network of Scientifi c and 
Technological Institutions (ANSTI)
C
ontents
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   11 22/09/10   9:45:17
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
12
151 4.3.11 Th e Africa Engineers Forum and AEF 
Protocol of Understanding
152 4.3.12 International Federation of 
Engineering Education Societies 
(IFEES)
154 4.4  Engineering International Development 
Organizations
154 4.4.1 Practical Action - and the changing 
face of technology in international 
development
159 4.4.2 Engineers Without Borders
164 4.4.3 Engineers Against Poverty
166 4.4.4 Engineers for a Sustainable World
167 4.5  Engineering studies, science and 
technology and public policy
167 4.5.1 Engineering studies
171 4.5.2 Engineering, science and technology 
policy
175 4.5.3 Engineers in government and public 
policy
178 4.5.4 Transformation of national science 
and engineering systems
178 4.5.4.1 New Zealand
181 4.5.4.2 South Africa
184 4.6 Engineering ethics and anti-corruption
184 4.6.1 Engineering ethics: overview
186 4.6.2 Engineering ethics: further discussion
189 4.6.3 WFEO Model Code of Ethics
192 4.6.4 Engineers against corruption 
Preventing corruption in 
the infrastructure sector – What can 
engineers do?
195 4.6.5 Business Integrity Management 
Systems in the consulting engineering 
industry 
196 4.7 Women and gender issues in engineering
196 4.7.1 Women in engineering: Gender 
dynamics and engineering – how 
to attract and retain women 
in engineering
199 4.7.2 Women in engineering: Th e next 
steps
200 4.7.3 Women and gender issues 
in engineering: an Australian 
perspective
205 5 Engineering  around the world
206 5.1 Introductory overview
208 5.2 Regional perspectives on engineering
213 5.3 Country perspectives
213 5.3.1 Africa
218 5.3.2 Arab States
221 5.3.3 Asia and Pacifi c
229 5.3.4 Europe
236 5.3.5 Th e Americas and Caribbean
247 6 Engineering for Development:  Applications 
and Infrastructure
250 6.1  Engineering, the MDGs and other 
international development goals
250 6.1.1 Engineering and the Millennium 
Development Goals
255 6.1.2 Poverty reduction
256 6.1.3 Poverty reduction: case study of 
infrastructure in South Africa
258 6.1.4 Sustainable development
261 6.1.5 Sustainable Development and the 
WEHAB Agenda 
263 6.1.6 Sustainable development and 
standards: the construction industry 
264 6.1.7 MDGs and standards
266 6.1.8 Climate change: technology, 
mitigation, adaptation
272 6.1.9 Disaster risk reduction
275 6.1.10 Engineering in emergencies
277 6.1.11 Appropriate technology
279 6.1.12 Appropriate technology: case study 
on building technologies
283 6.2 Engineering infrastructure
283 6.2.1 Water supply and sanitation
288 6.2.2 Environmental health
289 6.2.3 Energy
292 6.2.4 Transportation
294 6.2.5 Communications
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   12 14/09/10   15:33:57
13
CO N T E N T S 
295 6.2.6 Asset, reliability and maintenance 
management
298 6.2.7 Infrastructure development in 
developing countries 
299 6.2.8 Infrastructure Report Cards
307 7 Engineering Capacity: Education, Training 
and Mobility
308 7.1 Engineers in education
310 7.2 Engineering capacity
310 7.2.1 Needs and numbers – and the need 
for better numbers
313 7.2.2 Technical capacity-building and 
WFEO
315 7.2.3 Capacity-building for sustainability in 
Africa
319 7.2.4 Needs and numbers in civil 
engineering in South Africa
326 7.2.5 Enrolment and capacity in Australia
329 7.2.6 Continuing engineering education 
and professional development
332 7.2.7 Brain drain, gain, circulation and the 
diaspora
335 7.2.8 Industry Capacity Index
337 7.3 Transformation of engineering education
337 7.3.1 Problem-based Learning
340 7.3.2 Sustainability into the engineering 
curriculum
343 7.3.3 Rapid Curriculum Renewal
345 7.3.4 Environmental education 
in engineering
347 7.3.5 Research in engineering education
349 7.4 Engineering education for development
349 7.4.1 International Development 
Technologies Centre, Australia
352 7.4.2 Botswana Technology Centre
356 7.4.3 Technology Consultancy Centre, 
Ghana
358 7.5 Engineering accreditation, standards and 
mobility
358 7.5.1 Mobility of engineers: the European 
experience
360 7.5.2 Washington Accord, Engineers 
Mobility Forum, APEC Engineer
363 7.5.3 Th e Eur Ing and Bologna Accord
367 8 Afterword
371 9 Appendices
373 9.1 Engineering at UNESCO in facts and 
fi gures
375 9.2 Biographies of Contributors
389 9.3 List of acronyms abbreviations
394 9.4 Index
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   13 14/09/10   15:33:57
 Introduction 
to the Report
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   15 14/09/10   15:33:59
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
16
Th is is the fi rst report at the international level on engineer-
ing, and the fi rst with a specifi c focus on engineering in the 
context of human, social, economic and cultural development 
in developed/industrial countries and particularly in lower-
income, developing countries. 
Engineering has given us the world we live in. It is an incred-
ibly diverse activity covering many diff erent areas and levels. 
Engineering is regarded diff erently in diff erent places and at 
diff erent times. Th is diversity, and the constraints of size and 
the resources available to produce this fi rst Report, requires 
that such a potentially comprehensive study must have a cer-
tain focus.
Th e Report is therefore intended as a platform for the bet-
ter understanding of engineering around the world, and was 
conceived to meet this urgent and overdue need. Th e Report 
is a health-check rather than a ‘state of the profession’ review 
with refl ections from more than one hundred distinguished 
engineers and engineering organizations from around the 
world. It highlights the links between engineering, economic 
growth and  human development, and aims to bring engi-
neering out of the shadows for policy-makers and the public. 
It positions engineering as a central actor in the global issues 
and challenges – such as  poverty reduction,  climate change 
and the need for  sustainable development – that we face 
around the world. Technology is often emphasized by world 
leaders as providing the solutions to global problems; engi-
neers need to get involved in the conversation and help to 
put words into practice. Governments for example, might be 
encouraged to have chief engineering advisors.
Another idea behind the Report was to present engineering 
as a human and social as well as a scientifi c, technological 
and innovative activity, in social, economic and cultural con-
texts; engineering is one of the few activities that connects 
with almost all others. It is intended to be a human rather 
than a technical report on engineering. It aims to discuss 
human as well as engineering issues and to try to under-
stand and address some perceptions about engineering 
such as engineering is a boring and diffi  cult subject which 
is poorly paid and environmentally negative. Th ese are vital 
issues and engineering is vital in  sustainable development, 
addressing  climate change mitigation and adaptation, and 
the reduction of poverty. As a problem-solving profession, 
engineering needs to focus on these issues in a rigorous, 
problem-solving approach. In an attempt to understand how 
it might do this better in the future, this Report also consid-
ers engineering  education suggesting that it might benefi t 
from less formulaic and more problem-based, project-based 
and just-in-time approaches in order that the next genera-
tion of engineer can rise to the challenges and opportunities 
that they are inheriting.
To examine these issues and challenges, a wide variety of peo-
ple were invited to contribute to this Report, including engi-
neers, economists, scientists, politicians, policy-makers and 
planners, from the public and private sectors, and from the 
profession and universities. Amid busy lives, almost all invited 
contributors responded to our requests for shorter contribu-
tions, which they wrote on a voluntary basis. Th is Report is a 
tribute to their commitment to engineering and a testament 
to their shared, heartfelt need for such a document. 
Given the issues and challenges facing the Report itself, while 
many issues and challenges facing engineering have been iden-
tifi ed and discussed, others have only become more apparent. 
As the Director-General observes, this Report raises almost as 
many questions as it answers.
Th ere is, in particular, a need for improved  statistics and indi-
cators on engineering. It was hoped, for example, to compare 
the number of engineers per capita around the world, as can 
be done for doctors and teachers. Rather surprisingly, this was 
not possible due to fact that such data collected at the inter-
national level aggregates ‘scientists and engineers’ together 
(although such data does exist at the national level in some 
countries). UNESCO data shows that developed, industrialized 
countries have between twenty and fi fty scientists and engi-
neers per 10,000 population, compared to around fi ve scien-
tists and engineers on average for developing countries, down 
to one or less for some poorer African countries. Given the 
importance of engineering, science and technology in devel-
opment, this lack of information is a serious constraint to the 
development and future of developing countries.
Th is Report therefore highlights that there is a clear need for 
the introduction of disaggregated data for engineering as an 
input to policy making and planning, together with diff er-
ent types and levels of engineer (for which clearer defi nitions 
would also be useful). Th ere is also a need for better data on 
the important contribution of engineering to  innovation, and 
the importance of engineering,  innovation and entrepreneur-
ship to development. Th is would be of particular relevance 
for developing countries given the estimate that around 90 
per cent of the world’s engineers work for 10 per cent of the 
world’s population (the richest 10 per cent).
 Blériot XI.
©
 W
ik
im
ed
ia
 co
m
m
on
s/
 D
eu
ts
ch
es
 B
un
de
sa
rc
hi
v
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   16 14/09/10   15:34:00
I N T R O D U C T I O N
17
Th is Report appears at an important time of need, challenge 
and opportunity for engineering. Th is is refl ected in the pro-
posal for an International Engineering Programme that was 
adopted at UNESCO’s Executive Board and General Confer-
ence in October 2009. In this new decade it is hoped that this 
Report will help to mobilize interest in fi nding answers to the 
questions it poses, to emphasize the need for future editions 
of this UNESCO Report on engineering, to renew awareness of 
the importance of engineering in development, and to help 
fi nd solutions to the problems of  human development itself.
Background 
Th e idea for a UNESCO report on engineering, developed 
through the 1990s and into the 2000s, was partly a response 
to calls from the engineering community regarding the need 
for such a report, and partly to comments from the engineer-
ing and broader science and technology communities that the 
World Science Report (published by UNESCO in 1993, 1996, 
1998 and superseded by the UNESCO Science Report in 2005) 
contained very little reference to engineering and technol-
ogy. Th ese calls reinforced the need for a specifi c report on 
engineering by UNESCO as the United Nations organization 
responsible for science, including engineering. It was regarded 
that the founders of UNESCO intended the ‘S’ in UNESCO to 
be a broad defi nition of science, including engineering and 
technology, and therefore that UNESCO should report on the 
whole of this noble knowledge enterprise. 
Th is refl ects the decision of a United Nations Conference for 
the establishment of an educational and cultural organiza-
tion (ECO/CONF) convened in London in November 1945, 
where thirty-seven countries signed the constitution that 
founded the United Nations Educational, Scientifi c and Cul-
tural Organization that came into force after ratifi cation in 
November 1946. In November 1945, this Conference accepted 
science in the title of the organization and in the content of 
its programmes, refl ecting the proposal of Joseph Needham, 
supported by Julian Huxley, that ‘science and technology are 
now playing, and will increasingly play, so predominant a part 
in all human civilization.’ Engineering was also included from 
the beginning; this Conference took place at the Institution of 
Civil Engineers in London, with Julian Huxley becoming the 
fi rst Director-General and Joseph Needham becoming the fi rst 
Head of the Natural Sciences Section of UNESCO. Needham, 
a biochemist, is best known for his Science and Civilisation in 
China series that began in 1954 and is now in twenty-seven 
volumes, and includes engineering and technology as a central 
component of science and civilization. Without Needham and 
Huxley this Report may not have been possible.
Th e need for a UNESCO Report on engineering is based on 
the importance of engineering in social, economic and  human 
development, the particular importance of engineering in 
 poverty reduction,  sustainable development,  climate change 
mitigation and adaptation, and the importance of better 
communicating this to policy-makers, decision-takers and 
the wider public audience. Th is need increases as these issues 
increase in importance, and as the pace of change in engi-
neering also increases; the rate of knowledge production and 
application has increased dramatically in terms of the amount 
of knowledge created and the speed of application. From the 
fi rst wave of the Industrial Revolution from 1750–1850, to the 
fourth wave when we went from early steam to internal com-
bustion engines and the crossing of the 34 km of the English 
Channel by Louis Bleriot in his 20 kW monoplane in 1909. Sixty 
years later, in 1969, the 140,000,000 kW Saturn V rocket took 
the Apollo 11 mission across 400,000 km of space – a giant 
leap for mankind, and for engineering. Th e 230,000 kW Airbus 
A380 was introduced thirty years later in 2009, and routinely 
carries up to 850 passengers a distance of 15,000 km taking 
people of all backgrounds across continents at 900 km/h.
And yet, despite such achievements and feats, engineering 
is routinely overlooked in many countries around our world. 
Why is there such a poor general understanding and percep-
tion of engineering around the world, and what impact is 
this having? Is this perhaps even related to the awe-inspiring 
impact of engineering as a complicated, sometimes fearful 
entity, appealing to complicated people? Perhaps engineering 
also needs to become more human and humane to develop 
a wider appeal. Th is is at a time when there is an urgent need 
for engineers to develop the technologies that will be essential 
in the next wave of  innovation based on environmentally sus-
tainable ‘green’ engineering and technology that we will need 
if we are to address  climate change mitigation and adaptation 
– if we are to save spaceship Earth.
Following the development of the idea for such a report on 
engineering in the 1990s and into the 2000s, as mentioned 
above, the Executive Board of the World Federation of Engi-
neering Organizations ( WFEO) – the main international 
umbrella organization for national engineering organizations 
 Th e Airbus A380 – the world’s largest passenger aircraft.
©
 G
FD
L 
- W
ik
im
ed
ia
 - 
Lo
ve
rO
fD
ub
ai
)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   17 14/09/10   15:34:01
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
18
based at UNESCO and established at UNESCO in 1968 – dis-
cussed the idea of an engineering report with the UNESCO 
Engineering Programme in 2005, and a proposal for such a 
report was prepared by the Engineering Programme. Th is 
proposal was presented to the (then) UNESCO Director-
General, Koïchiro Matsuura, in October 2005, with the ini-
tial response that the next UNESCO Science Report could 
perhaps include a chapter on engineering. Th e President 
of  WFEO, Kamel Ayadi, then requested a meeting with the 
Director-General, whom he met in March 2006. Following 
further discussions, and the submission of a revised pro-
posal, production of the Report was approved in October 
2006 with work beginning in January 2007. Th is Report is an 
attempt to address the above needs, and to at least begin to 
fi ll a critical gap at the international level. 
Production and presentation of the Report
An Editorial Board and Advisory Committee for the Report 
were formed, with meetings in March 2007 in Paris and in 
November 2007 in Delhi. Th ese soon merged into an Edito-
rial Advisory Committee. Th e outline of the Report was devel-
oped, with particular reference to the contents and possible 
contributors. It was decided that the Report be as compre-
hensive as possible, covering the many fi elds of engineering 
around the world, with a particular emphasis on issues, chal-
lenges and opportunities for development – using the term 
development in a broad sense to refer to both national and 
international development, and the development of engineer-
ing itself. Th is decision in favour of a thematic focus was also 
in response to the regional reports focus of the UNESCO World 
Science Report. In view of the desire to be as comprehensive 
as possible, and cognisant of the limited human and fi nancial 
resources available to produce the Report, it was also decided 
to invite relatively short voluntary contributions from around 
one hundred contributors in diff erent fi elds and areas of engi-
neering around the world in order to produce a Report of 
around 250 printed pages. An initial round of one hundred 
contributions and potential contributors were identifi ed by 
December 2007 and they were invited to contribute in early 
2008. By mid-2008, a total of 115 contributions had been iden-
tifi ed and collected, with eighty contributions received and 
twenty promised contributions in the pipeline. 
For the remainder of 2008 and into 2009, contributions were 
reviewed to check for gaps in content to see where further 
contributions were required. Gaps were identifi ed, further 
contributions invited and remaining contributions encour-
aged. Th e Report was presented at a soft launch at the World 
Engineers Convention in Brasília in December 2008. A fi rst 
draft of the Report was prepared in June 2009. In all, a total 
of over 120 contributions have been made. Only three invited 
contributors were unable to contribute, due to time pressure 
and other activities. Th is underlines the commitment of the 
engineering community around the world to this Report, 
and the rather ambitious initial schedule given the scale of 
the project. In November to December 2009 a second draft 
was prepared for copy-editing, design, layout and printing in 
time for publication in mid-2010 and a planned launch at the 
UNESCO Executive Board in October 2010. 
Th e range of perspective and variety of approach of over 120 
contributions has enabled a richness and depth that would not 
have been achieved with fewer contributors. Contributions 
for example include both personal refl ections and academic 
presentations. A greater eff ort has been needed in editing to 
consider a length, consistent style, overlap and balance, whilst 
at the same time attempting to retain the original fl avour of 
the contributions, allowing for some overlap. Th is approach 
has also restricted the space available for reporting at regional 
and national levels, with a focus on some national perspec-
 Girl at rope well.
© EWB-UK
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   18 14/09/10   15:34:01
I N T R O D U C T I O N
19
tives rather than full country reports. Th e diverse availability 
of comparable  statistics and indicators also occasioned this 
approach. It is to be hoped that these issues – especially the 
need for better  statistics and indicators on engineering – will 
be addressed in forthcoming editions of the Report. However, 
this fi rst Report would not have been possible without such 
an approach, and the contributors are to be warmly thanked 
for their commitment and contributions, with apologies for 
the limited time available for feedback and discussion in the 
editing process.
Objectives of the Report
Th e overall objectives of the Report are to identify and explore 
the main issues and challenges facing engineering around the 
world, with particular reference to issues and challenges for 
development, and the opportunities for engineering to face 
and address them. External issues and challenges facing engi-
neering include: the need for better public and policy-level 
understanding of what engineering is and what engineers do; 
how engineering and technology drive development; how 
many engineers a country or industry needs and in what areas 
and levels; why young people are turning away from engineer-
ing; what the consequences are of not having enough engineers; 
and why it is that engineering is so often overlooked. Th ese 
external factors link to internal issues and challenges within 
engineering, including such questions as how can engineers 
promote public awareness and understanding of engineering, 
how does this refl ect the changing needs for engineering and 
need for engineering and engineering  education to change, 
regenerate and transform, and what can we do. Th ese external 
and internal factors are further linked – the poor public per-
ception of engineering refl ects the urgent need to understand 
and address these issues and challenges as well as the need for 
engineering to face the challenge of change. Failure to do so 
will have obvious impacts on capacity and the application of 
engineering and technology for development.
The main target audience for the Report includes policy-
makers and decision takers, the engineering community, the 
wider public and young people. Th e Report is intended to 
share information, experience, practical ideas and examples 
with policy-makers, planners and governments, and promote 
the engagement and application of engineering to important 
global challenges of  poverty reduction,  sustainable develop-
ment and  climate change. Th ese are connected, and provide 
an opportunity for change and the engagement of young peo-
ple, who are concerned about such issues and are attracted to 
the engineering challenge to address them. 
Layout of the Report
In addition to this introduction on the background, main focus, 
objectives and target audience of the Report, the fi rst chapter 
includes discussion of what engineering is and what engineers 
do, and the diff erences between engineers,  technologists and 
 technicians. Th e second chapter focuses on engineering and 
 human development and includes sections on the  history of 
engineering and engineering at UNESCO: engineering,  inno-
vation, social and  economic development; engineering, tech-
nology and  society; engineers and social responsibility, and 
includes a review of the big issues and pieces on engineering 
and social responsibility and corporate social responsibility. 
Th e third chapter examines engineering and emerging issues 
and challenges and includes sections on  foresight and forecasts 
of the future, emerging and future areas of engineering and 
engineers of the future, getting the engineering message across 
and engineering and technology in the third millennium.
Th e fourth chapter is one of the main chapters and attempts to 
give an overview of engineering. It begins with a review of  sta-
tistics and indicators on engineering followed by fi eld reviews 
covering civil, chemical, environmental, agricultural and  medi-
cal engineering. Th e engineering profession and its organiza-
tion is then discussed, with reference to the organization of the 
profession,  international cooperation and reference to leading 
organizations including the World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations ( WFEO), the International Council of Acade-
mies of Engineering and Technological Sciences ( CAETS), the 
International Federation of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC), the 
European Federation of National Engineering Associations 
(FEANI), the Federation of Engineering Institutions of  Asia and 
the Pacifi c (FEIAP), the Association for Engineering Education 
in Southeast and East  Asia and the Pacifi c (AEESEAP), the Asian 
and Pacifi c Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT) and the 
African Network of Scientifi c and Technological Institutions 
(ANSTI). International development and engineering organi-
zations are discussed in sections on  Practical Action,  Engineers 
Without Borders,  Engineers Against Poverty and  Engineers for 
a Sustainable World. Th e following section introduces  engi-
neering studies and gives an overview of  engineering,  science 
and technology policy and the transformation of national sci-
ence and engineering systems, with reference to  New Zealand 
and South  Africa. Key issues of engineering  ethics and  anti-
corruption eff orts are described, with the concluding section 
focusing on  women and gender issues in engineering. 
Th e fi fth chapter presents perspectives of engineering around 
the world. It begins with an introductory overview and 
regional perspectives on  Africa, the  Arab States,  Asia and 
the Pacifi c,  Europe, the Americas and the Caribbean. Several 
country perspectives are off ered from  Africa in Côte d’Ivoire, 
Uganda,  Ghana and Nigeria; from the  Arab States in Tunisia, 
Lebanon and Jordan; from  Asia and the Pacifi c in China, India, 
Malaysia, Japan,  Australia and the South Pacifi c; from  Europe 
in Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Russia and Poland, 
and from the Americas and the Caribbean in the USA, Canada, 
Brazil, Venezuela, Argentina and the Caribbean.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   19 14/09/10   15:34:02
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
20
Th e sixth chapter is a more in-depth look at the main theme of 
this report – engineering for development – with reference to 
development applications and  infrastructure. Engineering and 
the  Millennium Development Goals and related international 
development goals, including particular references to:  poverty 
reduction (with a case study from South  Africa);  sustainable 
development (and study on the MDGs,  sustainable develop-
ment and  standards);  climate change technology, mitigation, 
adaptation;  disaster risk reduction; engineering in  emergencies; 
and  appropriate technology (with a case study on appropriate 
 building technologies). Sections on engineering  infrastructure 
include water and sanitation,  energy,  transportation,  commu-
nications, asset management and maintenance, and  infrastruc-
ture development in developing countries as well as a look at 
 Infrastructure Report Cards (with case studies on South  Africa, 
USA and  Australia).
Th e seventh and last substantive chapter is on engineering 
capacity in  education, training and mobility, and begins with 
a discussion of engineering  education. Th e discussion of engi-
neering capacity includes an introductory discussion of needs 
and numbers (demand and supply of engineers), followed by 
contributions on: technical capacity-building and the  WFEO; 
capacity-building for sustainability in  Africa; a case study on 
needs and numbers in civil engineering in South  Africa;  enrol-
ment and capacity in  Australia; and  continuing engineering 
 education, professional development and the  brain drain, gain, 
circulation and the diaspora. A section on the transformation 
of engineering  education includes contributions on:  problem-
based learning; sustainability and the engineering  curriculum 
in  Australia; rapid  curriculum renewal; and the evolution of 
environmental  education in engineering and  research in engi-
neering  education. A section on engineering  education for 
development includes case studies on centres for engineering 
and technology for international development in  Australia, 
 Botswana and  Ghana. Th is chapter concludes with a discus-
sion on engineering  accreditation,  standards, and  mobility of 
engineers, with particular reference to the  Washington Accord, 
 Engineers Mobility Forum,  APEC Engineer and European per-
spective on the Eur Ing and  Bologna Accord.
Recent issues and challenges -  economic crisis and 
climate Change
Since this Report was conceived and many contributions 
were invited and submitted, the world was overtaken by 
the fi nancial and  economic crisis. Th is began with the col-
lapse of a housing bubble, peaking in the United States in 
2006 fuelled by the easing of credit and sub-prime lending, 
deregulation and the increasing complexity of fi nancial mar-
kets. Th e fi nancial crisis peaked in September and October 
2008 with immediate impacts on fi nancial institutions and 
the banking sector. Th e NASDAQ, the largest trading stock 
exchange in the world (originally, the National Association 
of Securities Dealers Automated Quotations), is based par-
ticularly on ‘technology’ stocks and suff ered large losses. 
Th ere were also broader consequent impacts on economies 
around the world with the possibility that the burden of 
economic impact will fall particularly – directly and indi-
rectly – on poorer people and countries. As noted in the 
discussion of science and engineering policy, many bank 
loans, especially smaller loans by development banks and 
other forms of microfi nance in developing countries, are for 
technology such that a decline in the fi nance available for 
these loans would have a particular impact on development 
in developing countries. Th is Report therefore provides sup-
port for the view that, at a time of economic downturn, it 
is important for all countries to invest in technology and 
 innovation.
Th e underlying cause of the crisis relates to increasingly com-
plex fi nancial ‘ innovations’ and derivatives, and by changing 
attitudes toward risk based on mathematical modeling that 
is increasingly undertaken by young people using tools which 
are less well understood by senior bankers. Young engineers 
in particular were attracted into the fi nancial sector; leading 
to an impact on engineering in terms of the  brain drain. Fol-
lowing the initial  emergency response and support for bank 
bailouts or quantitative easing, attention focused on engineer-
ing as regards longer term solutions to the  economic crisis. In 
the ‘American Recovery and Reinvestment Act’ of 2009, Presi-
dent Barack Obama – in one of his fi rst actions as President 
– emphasized the importance of investing in  infrastructure 
for economic recovery and growth with a total  infrastructure 
investment of US$80.9 billion, with particular importance in 
engineering. President Obama’s action was echoed around 
the world. United States and European governments spent 
US$4.1 trillion on bank bailouts giving these companies forty-
fi ve times more funding than the US$90.7 billion that US and 
European governments spent on aid to all developing countries 
in 20071 (Institute for Policy Studies, 2008) – about the same 
order of magnitude to the US$135–195 billion per year that is 
estimated by Jeff rey Sachs to be required over the next twenty 
years to end extreme poverty, although there is a debate on 
Sachs’ ‘costing’  of poverty (Th e End of Poverty, 20052 ). 
A  FIDIC survey of economic stimulus packages around the 
world, reported in the introduction to chapter six estimates 
an additional demand of US$20 billion for engineering con-
sultancy services
As regards  climate change, the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) has emphasized the importance of 
technology and investment in response to  climate change 
mitigation and adaptation that echoes the emphasis on engi-
1 Institute for Policy Studies, 2008
2 Jeff rey D. Sachs. 2005. Th e End Of Poverty, Economic Possibilities For Our Time. Penguin 
Press, 416p.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   20 14/09/10   15:34:02
I N T R O D U C T I O N
21
neering in the context of investment in  infrastructure in the 
recovery from the fi nancial and  economic crisis. Th e major and 
agreed fi ndings of the IPCC are as follows:
Th e planet has warmed ■
Most warming is due to greenhouse gases ■
Greenhouse gases will continue to increase through the  ■
twenty-fi rst century
Th e IPCC also recognizes that climate models have greatly 
improved, and estimates a rise in the average global tempera-
ture of 1.8 – 4.0°C over the twenty-fi rst century, and warns 
that a temperature rise of anything over 2.0°C is likely to be 
catastrophic for the world. Immediate action is therefore 
needed to prevent catastrophic and irreversible change to the 
world’s climate. 
Engineering is one of the most important activities in the con-
text of  climate change mitigation and adaptation and, as noted 
elsewhere, one of the major areas of need and growth for engi-
neering is in the area of sustainable or green engineering. Many 
countries have already introduced policies and initiatives for 
 climate change mitigation and adaptation prior to the 2009 
United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen, 
and together with the specifi c outcomes of COP15, this will be 
one of the areas of greatest demand and challenge that engi-
neering has ever faced. One of the fi rst challenges is to make 
sure that there will be enough appropriately qualifi ed and 
experienced engineers to meet this demand – this will require 
the development of new courses, training materials and sys-
tems of  accreditation. Th is will also hopefully encourage young 
people into engineering.
 Isambard Kingdom Brunel – a founding father of modern 
engineering.
Ph
ot
o 
by
 R
ob
er
t H
ow
le
tt
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   21 15/09/10   16:38:48
What is Engineering?1 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   23 14/09/10   15:34:03
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
24
What engineering is, what engineers do1.1 
Tony Marjoram and Yixin Zhong
Engineering
While meanings change, the concept of engineering derives 
from the dawn of human history as our ancestors developed 
and designed tools that were essential for their survival. Indeed, 
human beings are defi ned by their tool-making, designing and 
engineering skills, and the socialization and communication 
that facilitated the invention,  innovation and transfer of tech-
nology such as the axe, hammer, lever, wedge, pulley, wheel 
and so on. Although based on trial and error, this activity is 
similar to the modern idea of engineering where trial and error 
is still an important part of  innovation.
Engineering is the fi eld or discipline, practice, profession and 
art that relates to the development, acquisition and applica-
tion of technical, scientifi c and mathematical knowledge about 
the understanding, design, development, invention,  innovation 
and use of materials, machines, structures, systems and proc-
esses for specifi c purposes. Th ere are of course many defi ni-
tions. Th e term ‘engineering’ derives from the word ‘engineer’ 
used in the 1300s for a person who operated a military engine 
or machine – such as a catapult or, later, a cannon. Th e word 
‘engine’ in turn derives from the Latin ingenium for ingenuity 
or cleverness and invention. Th e terms ‘art’ and ‘technical’ are 
important because engineering also arranges elements in a way 
that may, or may not, appeal to human senses or emotions, 
and relates also to the Greek technikos relating to art, craft, skill 
and practical knowledge and language regarding a mechanical 
or scientifi c subject. Prior to the development of the diff erent 
fi elds of engineering, engineering and ‘technical’ were originally 
closely connected,. Th e military connotation declined giving 
way to civil engineering, mechanical, chemical, electrical and 
electronic and later, fi elds that continue to develop with the 
development of knowledge (apart from some curious excep-
tions such as the Army Corps of Engineers in the USA). 
While meanings change, the fact that engineering in the mod-
ern sense also relates to art, even though engineering may not 
commonly be regarded as artistic, can be appreciated in the 
creativity and elegance of many engineered objects and struc-
tures (witness the increasing appearance of such objects and 
structures as art exhibitions in galleries). As noted elsewhere 
in this Report, humans live in engineered economies, socie-
ties and technocultures. Almost every area of human interest, 
activity and endeavour has a branch of engineering associated 
with it.
Engineering also connects to the natural sciences, and to the 
social and human sciences. Science, from the Latin scientia for 
knowledge, relates broadly to a systematic approach to the 
observation of phenomena and the development of hypoth-
esis, experimentation and theory regarding these phenomena, 
and the production of knowledge upon which predictions or 
predictable outcome may be based, i.e. the scientifi c method, 
dating from the early 1600s and largely accredited to Francis 
Bacon (who died of pneumonia after testing the hypothesis 
that it may be possible to preserve a chicken by stuffi  ng it with 
snow). In this broad sense, science includes engineering as a 
highly skilled technique or practice, and also includes much of 
what many scientists also do today. In a narrower, contempo-
rary sense, science is diff erentiated into the basic and applied 
sciences, following the linear model of  innovation – that 
 research in the basic sciences leads through applied  research 
and development in engineering to technological application, 
 innovation and diff usion. As discussed elsewhere, while this 
model endures with scientists and policy-makers on grounds 
of simplicity and funding success, many observers regard the 
‘linear model’ as descriptively inaccurate and normatively 
undesirable partly because many  innovations were neither 
based on nor the result of basic science  research. Th e social 
and human sciences emulate the natural sciences in the use 
of empirical scientifi c methods. Technological change and 
 innovation is one of the major drivers of economic, social and 
human change, so engineering and technology and the social 
sciences are more closely connected.
Engineers
People who are qualified in or practice engineering are 
described as engineers, and may be licensed and formally des-
ignated as professional, chartered or incorporated engineers. 
As noted above, the broad discipline of engineering includes 
a range of specialized disciplines or fi elds of application and 
particular areas of technology. Engineering itself is also dif-
ferentiated into engineering science and diff erent areas of 
professional practice and levels of activity. Th e engineering 
profession, as with other professions, is a vocation or occupa-
tion based upon specialized  education and training, as pro-
viders of professional advice and services. Other features that 
defi ne occupations as professions are the establishment of 
training and university schools and departments, national and 
international organizations,  accreditation and licensing,  ethics 
and codes of professional practice. Surveying is closely profes-
sionally connected to engineering, especially civil engineering, 
and it is interesting to note that George Washington, Th omas 
Jeff erson and Abraham Lincoln were all surveyors before going 
into politics.
Apart from a degree or related qualifi cation in one of the engi-
neering disciplines and associated skill sets, which includes 
design and drawing skills – now usually in computer-aided 
design (CAD) and continued professional development ( CPD) 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   24 14/09/10   15:34:04
W H AT  I S  E N G I N E E R I N G ?
25
and awareness of new techniques and technologies – engi-
neering  education also seeks to develop a logical, practical, 
problem-solving methodology and approach that includes 
soft social as well and technical skills. Th ese include motiva-
tion, the ability to perform, rapid understanding, communica-
tion and leadership under pressure, and social-technical skills 
in training and mentoring.
Engineering is one of the oldest professions, along with divin-
ity, medicine and law. While the linear model has lead to the 
perception of engineers as applied scientists, this is a further 
distortion of reality related to this model, as engineering is dis-
tinct from but related to science, and in fact predates  science 
in the use of the scientifi c method – engineers were the fi rst 
scientists. This debate is, however, rather misleading and 
diverts attention away from the need for a better public and 
policy understanding of the role of engineering and science in 
the knowledge  society and economy. Science and engineering 
are essentially part of the same spectrum of activity and need 
to be recognized as such. Engineers use both scientifi c knowl-
edge and mathematics on the one hand to create technolo-
gies and  infrastructure to address human, social and economic 
issues, and challenges on the other. Engineers connect social 
needs with  innovation and commercial applications. Th e rela-
tionship among science, technology and engineering can be 
roughly described as shown in the fi gure below.
Fields of engineering
Th ere are a diverse and increasing range of areas, fi elds, dis-
ciplines, branches or specialities of engineering. Th ese devel-
oped from civil, mechanical, chemical, electrical and electronic 
engineering, as knowledge developed and diff erentiated as 
subjects subdivided, merged or new subjects arose. Th e emer-
gence of new branches of engineering is usually indicated by 
the establishment of new university departments, new profes-
sional engineering organizations or new sections in existing 
organizations.
To illustrate the scope and diversity of engineering, it is useful 
to conclude this section with a list of engineering branches3 
illustrating various disciplines and sub-disciplines in engineer-
ing; an important presentation of the diversity of engineer-
ing that space dictates can only appear once in the Report. 
Th e list is intended to be illustrative rather than exhaustive or 
defi nitive, as descriptions and defi nitions diff er from country 
to country, often overlapping and changing over time. Further 
suggestions will, no doubt, be forthcoming.
 Agricultural engineering
Engineering theory and applications in agriculture in such  ■
fi elds as farm machinery, power, bioenergy, farm structures 
and natural resource materials processing.
3 Source: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_engineering_branches
 Chemical engineering
Analysis, synthesis and conversion of raw materials into  ■
usable commodities.
Biochemical engineering – biotechnological processes on  ■
an industrial scale. 
 Civil engineering 
Design and construction of physical structures and  ■  infra-
structure. 
Coastal engineering – design and construction of coastline  ■
structures. 
Construction engineering – design, creation and manage- ■
ment of constructed structures. 
Geo-engineering – proposed Earth climate control to  ■
address global warming. 
Geotechnical engineering – behaviour of earth materials  ■
and geology. 
Municipal and public works engineering – for water supply,  ■
sanitation, waste management,  transportation and com-
munication systems, hydrology.
Ocean engineering – design and construction of off shore  ■
structures. 
 Structural engineering – design of structures to support or  ■
resist loads. 
Earthquake engineering – behaviour of structures subject  ■
to seismic loading.
Transportation engineering – effi  cient and safe  ■  transporta-
tion of people and goods.
Traffi  c engineering –  ■  transportation and planning.
Wind engineering – analysis of wind and its eff ects on the  ■
built environment. 
Computer and systems engineering
Research, design and development of computer, computer  ■
systems and devices. 
Electrical engineering and electronic engineering
Research, design and development of electrical systems and  ■
electronic devices.
Power systems engineering – bringing electricity to people  ■
and industry.
Needs
Needs
Science
Technology
Th eories
Engineering Society and Nature
Resources and 
Needs
Products and 
Benefi ts
Tools
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   25 14/09/10   15:34:04
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
26
Signal processing – statistical analysis and production of sig- ■
nals, e.g. for mobile phones.
 Environmental engineering
Engineering for environmental protection and enhance- ■
ment.
Water engineering – planning and development of water  ■
resources and hydrology 
Fire protection engineering
Protecting people and environments from fi re and smoke.  ■
Genetic engineering
Engineering at the biomolecular level for genetic manipula- ■
tion.
Industrial engineering
Analysis, design, development and maintenance of indus- ■
trial systems and processes.
Instrumentation engineering
Design and development of instruments used to measure  ■
and control systems and processes. 
Integrated engineering
Generalist engineering field including civil, mechanical,  ■
electrical and chemical engineering.
Maintenance engineering and asset management
Maintenance of equipment, physical assets and  ■  infrastruc-
ture.
Manufacturing engineering 
Research, design and planning of manufacturing systems  ■
and processes. 
Component engineering – assuring availability of parts in  ■
manufacturing processes 
Materials engineering
Research, design, development and use of materials such as  ■
ceramics and nanoparticles. 
Ceramic engineering – theory and processing of oxide and  ■
non-oxide ceramics. 
Textile engineering – the manufacturing and processing of  ■
fabrics
 Mechanical engineering
Research, design and development of physical or mechani- ■
cal systems such as engines.  
Automotive engineering – design and construction of ter- ■
restrial vehicles.
Aerospace engineering – design of aircraft, spacecraft and  ■
air vehicles.
Biomechanical engineering – design of systems and devices  ■
such as artifi cial limbs 
Mechatronics 
Combination of mechanical, electrical and software engi- ■
neering for automation systems. 
Medical and biomedical engineering
Increasing use of engineering and technology in medicine  ■
and the biological sciences in such areas as monitoring, arti-
fi cial limbs, medical robotics.
Military engineering
Design and development of weapons and defence systems.  ■
Mining engineering
Exploration, extraction and processing of raw materials  ■
from the earth. 
Naval engineering and architecture
Research, design, construction and repair of marine vessels. ■
Nanotechnology and nanoengineering
New branch of engineering on the nanoscale. ■
Nuclear engineering
Research, design and development of nuclear processes and  ■
technology.
Production engineering
Research and design of production systems and processes  ■
related to manufacturing engineering.
Software engineering
Research, design and development of computer software  ■
systems and programming.
Sustainable engineering
Developing branch of engineering focusing on sustainability  ■
and  climate change mitigation.
Test Engineering
Engineering validation and verifi cation of design, produc- ■
tion and use of objects under test.
Transport Engineering
Engineering relating to roads, railways, waterways, ports,  ■
harbours, airports, gas transmission and distribution, pipe-
lines and so on, and associated works.
Tribology
Study of interacting surfaces in relative motion including  ■
friction, lubrication and wear.
 Medical use of engineering.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   26 14/09/10   15:34:04
W H AT  I S  E N G I N E E R I N G ?
27
Engineers, 1.2  technologists and  technicians
Ron Watermayer
Engineering encompasses a vast diversity of fields. It also 
encompasses a diversity of types and levels of engineer – from 
engineers in universities more concerned with  research and 
teaching what is sometimes described as the ‘engineering sci-
ences’ (rather than engineering practice), to practicing, profes-
sional and consulting engineers, to engineering  technologists 
and  technicians. These are fluid concepts. As engineering 
changes, so does the idea and defi nition of what it means to be 
an engineer. Th ere is also a signifi cant overlap; many involved 
in the engineering sciences also practice and consult. Defi ni-
tions of engineers,  technologists and  technicians also diff er 
around the world.
In the United Kingdom, for example, the UK Inter Professional 
Group defi nes a profession as ‘an occupation in which an indi-
vidual uses an intellectual skill based on an established body 
of knowledge and practice to provide a specialised service in a 
defi ned area, exercising independent judgment in accordance 
with a code of  ethics and in the public interest.”  Th e engineer-
ing profession shapes the built environment, which may be 
defi ned as “the collection of man-made or induced physical 
objects located in a particular area or region.’4 It creates the 
physical world that has been intentionally created through sci-
ence and technology for the benefi t of mankind.
Th e UK Institution of Civil Engineers reports that the purpose 
of regulating a profession is ‘to assure the quality of professional 
services in the public interest. Th e regulation of a profession 
involves the setting of  standards of professional qualifi cations 
and practice; the keeping of a register of qualifi ed persons and 
the award of titles; determining the conduct of registrants, the 
investigation of complaints and disciplinary sanctions for pro-
fessional misconduct.’5
Th ere are a number of approaches to the regulation of a pro-
fession around the world. Broadly speaking, these include:
Licensing: to authorize eligible persons to practise in a spe- ■
cifi c area.
Registration: to recognize demonstrated achievement of a  ■
defi ned  standard of competency.
Specialist lists: to indicate peer-recognized competence in  ■
a particular area.  
4 ISO 15392
5 Study Group on Licensing, Registration and Specialist Lists (2005)
All these forms of regulation are linked to codes of conduct. 
Serious breaches of a code of conduct can lead to the with-
drawal of a license, the loss of a title or the removal of the 
transgressor’s name from a specialist list, either on a temporary 
or permanent basis.  
Engineering qualifi cations and professional registration with 
regulatory bodies may in many countries be categorized as 
falling into one of three generic tracks, namely:
Engineer ■
Engineering Technologist ■
Engineering Technician ■
Th e precise names of the titles awarded to registered persons 
may diff er from country to country, e.g. the Engineering Coun-
cil UK registers the three tracks as Chartered Engineer, Incor-
porated Engineer and Technician Engineer, whereas Engineers 
Ireland registers Chartered Engineer, Associate Engineer and 
Engineering Technician. In some countries, only the engineer 
or the engineer and engineering  technologist tracks are regis-
tered. In others, the registration of engineering  technicians has 
only recently been embarked upon. 
Other approaches can also be taken. Researchers at Duke Uni-
versity in the USA6 have put forward a slightly diff erent view 
regarding engineering tracks:
Dynamic Engineers: those capable of abstract thinking, solv- ■
ing high level-problems using scientifi c knowledge, thrive in 
teams, work well across international borders, have strong 
interpersonal skills and are capable of leading  innovation.
Transactional Engineers: possess engineering fundamen- ■
tals but are not seen to have the experience or expertise to 
apply this knowledge to complex problems.
Th e Duke University researchers observed that one of the key 
diff erentiators of the two types of engineers is their  education. 
Most dynamic engineers have as a minimum a four-year engi-
neering degree from nationally accredited or highly regarded 
institutions whereas transactional engineers often obtain a 
sub-baccalaureate degree (associate,  technician or diploma 
awards) rather than a Bachelor’s degree, in less than four years 
but in more than one. Th ey do however point out that edu-
cational background is not a hard and fast rule because in the 
6 Report on Framing the Engineering Outsourcing Debate: Placing the U.S. on a Level 
Playing Field with China and India, 2005. http://www.soc.duke.edu/globalengineering/
papers_outsourcing.php (Accessed: 10 August 2010)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   27 14/09/10   15:34:04
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
28
last fi fty years a number of science and technology leaders 
have emerged with little or no traditional  education.
How many engineers,  technologists and engineers does a 
country require?
Th e engineering profession plays a major role not only in the 
growth and development of a country’s economy but also in 
improving the quality of life for its citizens. Th e engineering 
profession is also playing an ever-increasing role in enabling a 
country to participate in the global economy and in the pro-
tection of the environment. Th e linkage between a country’s 
indigenous engineering capacity and its  economic develop-
ment is understood. It is also understood that more engineering 
professionals will be required to address the  sustainable devel-
opment issues of the day – for example, the development of 
 renewable  energy sources, advancements in technology, solu-
tions for sustaining the environment and improving healthcare. 
What is not understood is how many engineers,  technologists 
and  technicians are required to drive economic growth and 
 sustainable development objectives within a country.
Th ere is no simple answer to this question as it is not simply 
a numbers game; more engineering professionals are needed 
if the number of engineers, engineering  technologists and 
engineering  technicians per capita is below the fi gures of a 
country’s competitors. Furthermore, increasing the number 
of engineering graduates is not necessarily a solution as there 
may be a shortfall in the job market for such graduates or the 
attractiveness of other non-engineering professions requiring 
problem-solving skills might entice graduates away from engi-
neering. Th ese issues are discussed later in this Report.
Th e ‘engineer’ track is typically aimed at those 
who will:
use a combination of general and specialist  ■
engineering knowledge and understanding 
to optimize the application of existing and 
emerging technology;
aply appropriate theoretical and practical  ■
methods to the analysis and solution of engi-
neering problems; 
provide technical, commercial and managerial  ■
leadership;
undertake the management of high levels of  ■
risk associated with engineering processes, sys-
tems, equipment, and  infrastructure; and
perform activities that are essentially intellec- ■
tual in nature, requiring discretion and judge-
ment.
Th e ‘engineering  technologist’ track is typically 
aimed at those who will:
exercise independent technical judgement at  ■
an appropriate level;
assume responsibility, as an individual or as  ■
a member of a team, for the management of 
resources and / or guidance of technical staff ;
design, develop, manufacture, commission,  ■
operate and maintain products, equipment, 
processes and services; 
actively participate in fi nancial, statutory and  ■
commercial considerations and in the creation 
of cost eff ective systems and procedures; and
undertake the management of moderate levels  ■
of risks associated with engineering processes, 
systems, equipment and  infrastructure.
The ‘engineering  technician’ track is typically 
aimed at those who are involved in applying 
proven techniques and procedures to the solu-
tion of practical engineering problems. Th ey:
carry supervisory or technical responsibility; ■
are competent to exercise creative aptitudes  ■
and skills within defi ned fi elds of technology;
contribute to the design, development, manu- ■
facture, commissioning, operation or mainte-
nance of products, equipment, processes or 
services; and
create and apply safe systems of work. ■
Engineering professional tracks
1) Licensing: In this approach, an area of engineering 
work is linked to those persons who have demonstrated 
competence to perform such work. Licensing on a statu-
tory basis prohibits unlicensed persons from performing 
such work. Non-statutory licensing provides the public 
with lists of persons competent to perform work within 
an area of engineering, which may also be undertaken by 
non-licensed persons.  
2) Registration: In this approach, those persons who 
demonstrate their competence against a  standard and 
undertake to abide by a code of conduct, are awarded 
titles and are admitted to a register. Such registration may 
be governed by the laws of a country (statutory register) 
or the regulations or the rules set by the governing body 
of the profession, which oversees the registration proc-
ess and maintains the register (non-statutory register). 
Where governing bodies operate non-statutory registra-
tion, they may only use civil action to prevent non-reg-
istrants from using the title and are not empowered to 
restrict any area of work to registrants. (Statutory regis-
tration linked to the reserving of an area of work for regis-
tered persons has the same eff ect as statutory licensing.)
3) Specialist lists: In this approach, a professional or 
trade body administers a non-statutory voluntary list-
ing of professionals who have met a defi ned  standard of 
competence in a specialist area.
Th ree main approaches to professional 
regulation:
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   28 14/09/10   15:34:04
Engineering and 2 
Human Development
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   29 14/09/10   15:34:06
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
30
The development and application of knowledge in engi-
neering and technology underpins and drives sustainable 
social and  economic development. Engineering and tech-
nology are vital in addressing basic human needs,  poverty 
reduction and  sustainable development, and to bridge the 
‘knowledge divide’. Th is chapter focuses on the vital role of 
engineering and  innovation in human, social and  economic 
development. It includes a very short  history of engineering, 
referring particularly to engineering  education and how the 
 history of engineering has aff ected its future. Th e  history of 
engineering at UNESCO discusses how the engineering sci-
ences programme was once the largest activity in the Natu-
ral Sciences Sector at UNESCO, but declined with the rise of 
the environmental sciences, and is now hopefully poised for 
a resurgence in recognition of the importance of engineering 
as a core and underpinning an area of knowledge application 
and  innovation in such areas as  climate change mitigation and 
adaptation. Th is chapter includes sections on engineering, 
technology and  society, engineers and their social responsibil-
ity in such areas as military technology and pollution on the 
one hand, and the design and construction of environmen-
tally sustainable  infrastructure, living and working spaces on 
the other, as well as the broader corporate  social responsibil-
ity of engineers and engineering. 
History of engineering; engineering at UNESCO2.1 
Tony Marjoram
A very short 2.1.1  history of 
engineering
Th e  history of engineering in the context of the way we live, 
and interact with nature and each other is very much the 
history and pre-history of humanity itself. Human beings are 
partly defi ned as tool designers and users, and it is this  inno-
vation and the design and use of tools that accounts for so 
much of the direction and pace of change of history. Most of 
the broader history of civilization, of economic and social rela-
tions, is also the  history of engineering,  engineering applica-
tions and  innovation. Th e Stone Age, Bronze Age, Iron Age, 
Steam Age and Information Age all relate to engineering and 
 innovation shaping our interaction with the world; ‘the Stone 
Age did not end because we ran out of stones!’ Th e Pyramids, 
Borobudur, El Mirador, the civilizations linked to metal smelt-
ing at Zimbabwe and water engineering at Angkor, the medi-
eval cathedrals and Industrial Revolution are all testament to 
the engineering skills of past generations. Engineering is also 
vital in the surveying and conservation of our cultural heritage; 
the famous work of UNESCO in conserving Borobudur and 
Abu Simbel were essentially engineering projects. 
Th e  history of engineering as a profession, where payment 
is made in cash or kind for services, began with tool- and 
weapon-making over 150,000 years ago – indicating that engi-
neering is one of the oldest professions. Military engineering 
was soon joined by civil engineering in the quest for defence 
and development of early  infrastructure. Th e professionaliza-
tion of engineering is illustrated by Imhotep who built the Step 
Pyramid at Saqqara in 3000 BC and was one of the few com-
moner mortals to be accorded divine status after his death. 
Engineering professionalization continued with the develop-
ment of craft and guild knowledge, and the formalization of 
associated knowledge and  education. Simple patriarchal forms 
of engineering  education existing in ancient societies devel-
oped into vocational technical schools of diff erent types in the 
Middle Ages and particularly during the Renaissance and the 
Scientifi c Revolution of the sixteenth and seventeeth centuries. 
Leonardo da Vinci, for example, had the offi  cial title of Ingeg-
nere Generale and his notebooks reveal an increasing engineer-
ing interest in how things worked. Galileo Galilei developed 
the scientifi c approach and method to the understanding of 
the natural world and analysis of practical problems – a land-
mark in the development of engineering, mathematical repre-
sentation, structural analysis and design that continued into 1785  1845  1900        1950  1990 2020
Iron
Water power
Mechanisation
Textiles
Commerce
Steam power
Railroad
Steel
Cotton
Electricity
Chemicals
Internal 
combustion 
engine
Petrochemicals
Electronics
Aviation
Space
Digital Networks
Biotechnology
Software 
Information 
technology
Sustainability
Radical resource 
productivity
Whole system design
Biomimicry
Green chemistry
Industrial ecology
Renewable  energy
Green 
nanotechnology
1st wave
2nd wave
3rd wave
4th wave
5th wave
6th wave
In
no
va
ti
on
© Th e Natural Edge Project 2004
Figure 1: Waves of Innovation
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   30 14/09/10   15:34:07
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
31
the Industrial Revolution – and the replacement of muscle by 
machines in the production process.
Engineering powered the so-called Industrial Revolution 
that really took off  in the United Kingdom in the eighteenth 
century spreading to  Europe, North America and the world, 
replacing muscle by machine in a synergistic combination 
between knowledge and capital. Th e fi rst Industrial Revolu-
tion took place from 1750–1850 and focused on the textile 
industry. Th e second Industrial Revolution focused on steam 
and the railways from 1850–1900 and the third Industrial Rev-
olution was based on steel, electricity and heavy engineering 
from 1875–1925. Th is was followed by the fourth Industrial 
Revolution based on oil, the automobile and mass production, 
taking place between 1900–1950 and onward, and the fi fth 
phase was based on information and  telecommunications and 
the post-war boom from 1950. Th ese waves of  innovation and 
industrial development have become known as Kondratiev 
waves, K-waves, long waves, supercycles or surges, and relate 
to cycles in the world economy of around fi fty years dura-
tion consisting of alternating periods of high and low sectoral 
growth. Most analysts accept the ‘Schumpeter-Freeman-Perez’ 
paradigm of fi ve waves of  innovation since the fi rst Industrial 
Revolution, although the precise dates, phases, causes and 
eff ects of these major changes are hotly debated, as is the 
nature of the sixth wave based on new knowledge production 
and application in such fi elds as IT, biotechnology and mate-
rials beginning around 1980, and the possible seventh wave 
based on sustainable ‘green’ engineering and technology seen 
to have begun around 2005.
A very short  history of engineering  education
Th e most crucial period in the development of engineering 
were the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries particularly the 
Iron and Steam Ages the second Kondratiev wave of  inno-
vation and successive industrial revolutions. Early interest 
in the development of engineering  education took place in 
Germany in the mining industry, with the creation in 1702 
of a school of mining and metallurgy in Freiberg. One of the 
oldest technical universities is the Czech Technical University 
in Prague founded in 1707. In France, engineering  education 
developed with the creation of the École Nationale des Ponts 
et Chaussées (1747) and École des Mines (1783). Th e École Poly-
technique, the fi rst technical university in  Europe teaching the 
foundations of mathematics and science, was established in 
1794 during the French Revolution – the revolution in engi-
neering  education itself began during a ‘revolution’. Under 
Napoleon’s infl uence, France developed the system of formal 
schooling in engineering after the Revolution, and engineer-
ing  education in France has retained a strong theoretical and 
military character. Th e French model infl uenced the devel-
opment of polytechnic engineering  education institutions 
around the world at the beginning of the nineteenth century, 
especially in Germany in Berlin, Karlsruhe, Munich, Dresden, 
Stuttgart, Hanover and Darmstadt between 1799 and 1831. In 
Russia, similar schools of technology were opened in Moscow 
(1825) and St. Petersburg (1831) based on a system of military 
engineering  education. Th e fi rst technical institutes appeared 
at the same time in the USA including West Point in 1819 
(modelled on the École Polytechnique), the Rensselaer School 
in 1823 and Ohio Mechanics Institute in 1828. In Germany, 
polytechnic schools were accorded the same legal founda-
tions as universities. 
In Britain, however, engineering  education was initially based 
on a system of apprenticeship with a working engineer follow-
ing the early years of the Industrial Revolution when many 
engineers had little formal or theoretical training. Men such as 
Arkwright, Hargreaves, Crompton and Newcomen, followed by 
Telford, George and Robert Stephenson and Maudslay, all had 
little formal engineering  education but developed the tech-
nologies that powered the Industrial Revolution and changed 
the world. In many fi elds, practical activity preceded scientifi c 
understanding; we had steam engines before thermodynam-
ics, and ‘rocket science’ is more about engineering than sci-
ence. Britain tried to retain this lead by prohibiting the export 
of engineering goods and services in the early 1800s, which 
is why countries in continental  Europe developed their own 
engineering  education systems based on French and German 
models with a foundation in science and mathematics rather 
than the British model based on artisanal empiricism and lais-
sez-faire professional development. Th rough the nineteenth 
and into the twentieth centuries however, engineering  educa-
tion in Britain also changed toward a science- and university-
based system and the rise of the ‘engineering sciences’, partly 
in recognition of the increasingly close connection between 
engineering, science and mathematics, and partly due to fears 
that Britain was lagging behind the European model in terms 
of international competition. 
By the end of the nineteenth century, most of the now industri-
alized countries had established their own engineering  educa-
tion systems based on the French and German ‘Humboldtian’ 
model. In the twentieth century, the professionalization of 
engineering continued with the development of professional 
societies, journals, meetings, conferences, and the professional 
 accreditation of exams, qualifi cations and universities, facili-
tating  education, the fl ow of information and continued pro-
fessional development. Th ese processes will continue with the 
development of international agreements relating to  accredita-
tion and the mutual recognition of engineering qualifi cations 
and professional competence, which include the  Washington 
Accord (1989), Sydney Accord (2001), Dublin Accord (2002), 
 APEC Engineer (1999),  Engineers Mobility Forum (2001) and 
the Engineering Technologist Mobility Forum (2003), and the 
1999 Bologna Declaration relating to quality assurance and 
 accreditation of bachelor and master programmes in  Europe.
 Engineering constructs and 
preserves our heritage, as at 
Abu Simbel.
©
 H
oc
ht
ie
f
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   31 14/09/10   15:34:07
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
32
How engineering’s history aff ects its future
Th e Humboldtian model is also, ironically, one of the factors 
that lead to the contemporary decline of interest in engineer-
ing at university level; the fact that the mathematical base is 
regarded as too abstract, out of touch, hard work and boring 
by many young people. Th is is turn has lead to a questioning 
of the Humboldtian model and increasing interest in prob-
lem- and activity-based learning. Th e Humboldtian model also 
underpins the linear model of  innovation. Th e linear model of 
 innovation is the fi rst and major conceptual model of the rela-
tion between science and technology, and  economic devel-
opment. Th is model has become the accepted worldview of 
 innovation and is at the heart of  science and technology policy, 
although the linear model of  innovation overlooks engineer-
ing, to the continued discredit of engineering in the context 
of  science and technology policy. Th e model is based on the 
Humboldtian notion that pure, disinterested, basic scientifi c 
 research, followed by applied  research and development, leads 
to knowledge applications, production and diff usion. While 
the precise origins of the model are unclear, many accredit 
Vannevar Bush’s Science: Th e Endless Frontier published in 1945. 
Th is refl ects particularly on the role of science (rather than 
engineering) in wartime success, underpinned by statistics 
based on and reinforcing the linear model. Th is became the 
model for peacetime  economic development as embodied in 
the Marshall Plan and later the  OECD and its work on Science 
and Technology indicators, despite various criticisms (e.g. that 
the linear model overlooks engineering), modifi cations, alter-
native models and claims that the linear model is dead (Godin, 
2005).1
Engineering therefore has a particular need to overcome the 
Humboldtian notions underlying the ‘fundamentals’ approach 
to  education and linear model of  innovation, and to position 
itself more eff ectively in the development dialogue and bring 
fun into the fundamentals of engineering  education through 
such approaches as  problem-based learning. For the future of 
engineering, an obvious goal is the need to focus specifi cally on 
the important role engineering will play in addressing the UN 
 Millennium Development Goals, especially  poverty reduction 
and  sustainable development, and the vital role of engineering 
in  climate change mitigation and adaptation in the develop-
ment of sustainable, green, eco-engineering and associated 
design, technology, production and distribution systems and 
 infrastructure. Fortunately, the promotion of public under-
standing and interest in engineering is facilitated by present-
ing engineering as a part of the problem-solving solution to 
 sustainable development and  poverty reduction. 
Th e usefulness of promoting the relevance of engineering to 
address contemporary concerns and help link engineering 
with  society in the context of related ethical issues,  sustain-
1 B. Godin. 2005. Measurement and Statistics on Science and Technology: 1920 to the 
Present, London: Routledge.
able development and  poverty reduction is demonstrated by 
the growth of  Engineers Without Borders and similar groups 
around the world, and such activities as the Daimler-UNESCO 
Mondialogo Engineering Award, which attract students 
through its connection to  poverty reduction and  sustainable 
development and appeals to the urge of youth to ‘do some-
thing’ to help those in need. University courses can be made 
more interesting through the transformation of  curricula and 
pedagogy using such information and experience in more 
activity-, project- and  problem-based learning, just-in-time 
approaches and hands-on application, and less formulaic 
approaches that turn students off . In short, relevance works! 
Science and engineering have changed the world, but are pro-
fessionally conservative and slow to change. We need innova-
tive examples of schools, colleges and universities around the 
world that have pioneered activity in such areas as  problem-
based learning. Th e future of the world is in the hands of young 
engineers and we need to give them as much help as we can in 
facing the challenges of the future.
Engineering at UNESCO2.1.2 
Engineering was part of UNESCO from the beginning. It was 
the intention of the founders of UNESCO that the ‘S’ refer 
to science and technology, and that this include the applied 
sciences, technological sciences and engineering. Th e engi-
neering and technological sciences have always played a signif-
icant role in the Natural Sciences Sector at UNESCO. Indeed, 
UNESCO was established during a conference that took place 
in London in November 1945 at the Institution of Civil Engi-
neers – the oldest engineering institution in the world. Th is 
refl ects the stark realization and emphasis of the importance 
of science, engineering and technology in the Second World 
War when many new fi elds and applications were developed 
in such areas as materials, aeronautics, systems analysis and 
project management, as well as the success of the Marshall 
Plan to rebuild capacity and  infrastructure after the war. Th is 
emphasis was mirrored in the support for programme activi-
ties at UNESCO by other UN agencies of the basic, applied and 
engineering sciences and technology (before the development 
of operational activities by UNDP in the mid-1980s).
Background
In the history of the engineering and technological sciences 
at UNESCO, it is interesting to note the similarities and reso-
nances between the programme priorities in engineering 
today and those of the 1960s, 1970s and intervening years. It is 
also interesting to note the importance of engineering in those 
earlier years when engineering was the biggest activity in the 
Science Sector – in terms of personnel and budget – before 
the rise of the environmental sciences. Th ere has also been 
long-term interest in  renewable  energy, beginning with an 
international congress in 1973. Th ere has been close coopera-
tion with the social sciences in the fi eld of science and  society 
 Mondialogo Engineering 
Award project from Japan and 
Nepal on low-cost food.
© Mondialogo
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   32 14/09/10   15:34:08
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
33
with the journal Impact of Science on Society, which was pub-
lished from 1967–1992. Th e reform of engineering  education 
and the need for greater interdisciplinarity and intersectoral 
cooperation,  women and gender issues in engineering,  inno-
vation and the development of endogenous technologies are 
other recurrent themes, and are as important today as they 
were in the 1970s. It is also interesting to note that programme 
activities appear to have been more interdisciplinary twenty 
years ago than they are today. 
Apart from these similarities, there are of course diff erences 
between programme activities over the last forty years and 
also diff erences in defi nition and context over time and in dif-
ferent places, for example the meaning behind ‘engineering’, 
the ‘engineering sciences’ and ‘technology’ (which today is 
often narrowly regarded as synonymous with  Information and 
 Communication Technologies,  ICTs). Th e diffi  culties of defi n-
ing ‘engineering’ and ‘engineering science’, and of engineers, 
 technologists and  technicians, is illustrated by the discussions 
over the  Bologna Accord in 1999 regarding the harmonization 
of graduate and postgraduate  education in  Europe by 2010 (in 
Germany, for example, there are over forty defi nitions of an 
engineer). Th is problem is therefore not unique to UNESCO 
but is faced by  society and governments around the world.
The context of ‘development’ has also changed, although 
development specialists continue generally to overlook the 
role of engineering and technology in development at all levels 
at the macroeconomic level and at the grass roots where small, 
aff ordable technologies can make a tremendous diff erence to 
people’s lives and  poverty reduction. Th is, again, is not unique 
to UNESCO. Most development specialists have a background 
in economics and continue to view the world in terms of the 
three classical factors of production: capital, labour and natu-
ral resources, where knowledge, in the form of engineering, 
science and technology, are not easily accommodated. Th is 
is unfortunate given the obvious importance of engineer-
ing, science and technology in development, particularly in 
the Industrial Revolution for example, as recognized by some 
commentators at the time and in the work of economists such 
as Schumpeter and Freeman on the role of knowledge and 
 innovation in economic change, and the fact that we now live 
in ‘knowledge societies’.
Th e context of UNESCO has also changed from the early days 
when engineering was the main activity area in the Science Sec-
tor (largely supported by UNDP special funding) to the decline 
of such funding for  engineering and the sector in terms of both 
personnel and budget. UNESCO faced a crisis from the mid-
1980s with the decline of UN funding and the withdrawal of 
the United States and UK in 1984, and the consequent budget 
cut of 25 per cent. UNESCO has not really recovered from this 
cut as the budget has remained constant, even with the return 
of the UK in 1997 and the United States in 2003.
Engineering programme 
Th e engineering programme at UNESCO, as the main pro-
gramme in the Science Sector until the 1980s, has been 
active in a diverse range of initiatives and include the imple-
mentation of multi-million dollar projects supported by UN 
special funds, project development and fund raising, network-
ing, cooperation and support of international professional 
organizations and NGOs, conferences and symposia, training, 
workshops and seminars, information and publications, con-
sultancy and advisory activities and programme activity areas 
(including engineering  education and  energy). Th e primary 
focus of the engineering programme, until the late 1980s, was 
on core areas of engineering  education (what would now be 
called human and institutional capacity-building), where the 
emphasis turned increasingly toward  renewable  energy (see 
later). Th e focus on core areas of engineering  education and 
capacity-building is presently returning with the new millen-
nia (albeit with much less human and fi nancial resources). 
Much of this activity was conducted in close cooperation with 
the fi ve main science fi eld offi  ces, which were established to 
facilitate implementation of projects supported by the UNDP 
special funds. With the decline of funds in the 1990s, the fi eld 
network has declined with fewer specialists in engineering in 
the fi eld and at headquarters. 
Th e fi eld of  energy was an increasing emphasis in the engineer-
ing programme that developed in the late 1970s and 1980s. 
Energy activity at UNESCO began eff ectively in the early 1970s 
with the International Congress on the ‘Sun in the Service of 
Mankind’, held in Paris in 1973, organized by UNESCO with 
WMO, WHO and ISES (the International Solar Energy Soci-
ety), when the International Solar Energy Commission was 
also created. In the late 1980s and 1990s interest on  renew-
able  energy continued with the creation of the World Solar 
Programme (WSP), during the 1996–2005, and associated 
World Solar Commission (WSC), which clearly borrowed from 
the earlier activity of ISES. It is useful to note that WSP/WSC 
activity accounted for a total of over US$4 million of UNESCO 
funds, with over US$1 million alone supporting WSP/WSC 
activity in Zimbabwe, including the World Solar Summit held 
in Harare in 1996 that lead to the creation of the World Solar 
Programme and World Solar Commission chaired by President 
Mugabe. Declining funds in the late 1980s and 1990s gave rise 
to increasing creativity. Unfortunately, the historical record 
for the World Solar Programme and World Solar Commission 
is lost as all programme fi les disappeared at the end of 2000. 
Th is is discussed in Sixty Years of Science at UNESCO 1945–2005 
(UNESCO, 2006).2
From the early 1960s until the late 1980s the engineering 
programme – the largest of the three activity areas of in the 
Natural Sciences Sector – peaked with over ten staff  at head-
2 Go to: http://upo.unesco.org/details.aspx?Code_Livre=4503 (Accessed: 29 May 2010)
 Mondialogo Engineering 
Award project from Malaysia 
and India on bio-solar 
technology.
©
 M
on
di
al
og
o
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   33 14/09/10   15:34:08
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
34
quarters, another ten staff  in fi ve main regional fi eld offi  ces 
that were developed over this period, and a budget of up to 
US$30 million per biennium. A diverse range of activities and 
initiatives were implemented, including the establishment and 
support of engineering departments at universities,  research 
centres,  standards institutions and similar bodies in numer-
ous countries. Most of this activity is what we would now call 
human and institutional capacity-building. It is therefore inter-
esting to refl ect on the current emphasis on technical capac-
ity-building and the lessons we may learn from the past. 
Engineering programme activities
Th e engineering programme at UNESCO has focused essen-
tially on two areas of activity: engineering  education and 
capacity-building, and the application of engineering and 
technology to development, including such specifi c issues as 
the  Millennium Development Goals (especially  poverty reduc-
tion and  sustainable development) and, most recently,  climate 
change mitigation and adaptation. Overall activities include 
networking, cooperation and the support of joint activities 
with international professional organizations and NGOs, and 
the organization, presentation and support of conferences and 
symposia, workshops and seminars, as well as the production 
of information and learning/teaching materials, identifi cation 
and commissioning of publications, project development and 
fundraising. 
Other programme activities that have continued since the 
establishment of engineering in UNESCO include expert advi-
sory and consultancy services. In recent times this includes 
participation in the UN Millennium Project Task Force 10 on 
Science, Technology and Innovation, and a contribution to the 
TF10 report Innovation: Applying Knowledge in Development. 
Pilot projects have also been supported, most notably relat-
ing to  energy, with mixed results. Interest in the promotion 
of university-industry cooperation and  innovation developed 
at UNESCO in the early 1990s refl ecting increasing academic 
interest, and the university-industry-science partnership 
(UNISPAR) programme was created by the engineering pro-
gramme in 1993. Th is activity included an innovative Inter-
national Fund for the Technological Development of  Africa 
(IFTDA), which was established with an investment of US$1 
million and supported the development of many small-scale 
 innovations before the IFTDA project was closed as the capital 
was required for other priorities.
Networking, international professional organizations 
and NGOs
Th e engineering programme has been continuously active in 
the development and support of networking, international 
organizations and NGOs in engineering, and helped create 
the World Federation of Engineering Organizations, the main 
‘umbrella’ organization for national and regional engineering 
institutions and associations in 1968. UNESCO also helped 
create such regional organizations as the Federation of Engi-
neering Institutions in SE  Asia and the Pacifi c (FEISEAP, which 
continues as FEIAP), the Association of Engineering Education 
in South East  Asia and the Pacifi c (AEESEAP) and the Afri-
can Network of Scientifi c and Technical Institutions (ANSTI) 
in 1979. Network support activity continues with UNESCO 
supporting networking activities for technology and develop-
ment,  Engineers Without Borders,  Engineers Against Poverty, 
Engineering for a Sustainable World and the International Net-
work for Engineering Studies. 
Conferences and symposia, workshops and seminars
Th e organization and support of various international and 
regional conferences and symposia is an important and long-
term activity of the engineering programme, usually in cooper-
ation with  WFEO. Most recently the programme was involved 
in organizing and supporting the 2008 World Engineers’ Con-
vention (WEC 2008) in Brazil. Th is followed on from WEC 
2004 in Shanghai and the fi rst World Engineers’ Convention, 
WEC 2000, in Hanover. Th e engineering programme was par-
ticularly active in the organization and presentation of training 
and seminars in the 1960s–1980s with UNDP Special Funds. 
Although this activity has inevitably declined since those 
golden years, there has been a recent resurgence that includes 
conferences and workshops on engineering and  innovation, 
 sustainable development,  poverty reduction, engineering 
policy and planning, gender issues in engineering,  standards 
and  accreditation. Activities are being planned on technology 
and  climate change mitigation and adaptation, and an inter-
national engineering congress is to be held in Buenos Aires in 
2010 and the 2011 World Engineers’ Convention (WEC 2011) 
‘Engineers Power the World: Facing the Global Energy Chal-
lenge’ is to be held in Geneva.
Information and publications
Th e production of information and publications, in hard 
cover and electronic formats, is a vital part of capacity-build-
 Adobe building is an early example of civil engineering.
©
 E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   34 14/09/10   15:34:08
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
35
ing, and the engineering programme continues to be very 
active in this domain. Important early activities included the 
development of the UN Information System for Science and 
Technology (UNISIST) programme, based at UNESCO, publi-
cation of the fi rst international directory of new and  renew-
able  energy information sources and  research centres in 1982, 
and the UNESCO Energy Engineering Series with John Wiley 
beginning in the 1990s (some titles are still in print and oth-
ers have been reprinted). More recent publications include 
Small is Working: Technology for Poverty Reduction and Rays 
of Hope: Renewable Energy in the Pacifi c, which also included 
short fi lm productions. UNESCO toolkits of learning and 
teaching materials also published by UNESCO Publishing 
include Solar Photovoltaic Project Development and Solar 
Photovoltaic Systems: Technical Training Manual, Technology 
Business Incubators (this has proved so popular it has almost 
sold out and has been translated and published in Chinese, 
Japanese and Farsi) and Gender Indicators in Science, Engineer-
ing and Technology. Th e establishment of the Sudan Virtual 
Engineering Library project at the University of Khartoum 
has also been most successful; serving as a mirror service for 
the MIT Open Courseware project in Sudan, forming part 
of the open courseware programme of the University of 
Khartoum and a model for the Sudanese Universities Virtual 
Library. Several publications are in press, including forthcom-
ing titles on technology policy and  poverty reduction,  inno-
vation and development.
Project development and fundraising
Engineering programme staff  have long been active in the 
development of new project proposals; in the earlier days 
primarily for UNDP funding. More recent project develop-
ment activity includes the Daimler-UNESCO Mondialogo 
Engineering Award – one of the three pillars of the UNESCO 
partnership with Daimler to promote intercultural dialogue, 
in this case between young engineers and the preparation of 
project proposals to address  poverty reduction,  sustainable 
development and the MDGs. Proposals that did not go for-
ward include a low-orbit satellite project designed to promote 
 education in  Africa using Russian military rockets to launch 
satellites (an idea borrowed from Volunteers in Technical 
Assistance in the USA, which they continued to develop with 
limited success, leading to the near collapse of VITA in 2001 
and transformation into the Volunteers for Prosperity initia-
tive in 2003 under President Bush), and a proposal for a World 
Technological University.  Easter Island is also an 
engineering achievement.
©
 G
FD
L 
- W
ik
im
ed
ia
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   35 14/09/10   15:34:08
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
36
Th e rise and fall of engineering and prospects 
for resurgence
Engineering at UNESCO rose in the early years to be the larg-
est of the three initial and continuing theme areas of UNESCO, 
together with the basic sciences and the environmental and 
ecological sciences. Over the last fi fty years the engineering 
programme has had around one hundred professional and 
support staff , a regular programme budget of over US$50 
million and extra-budgetary funding of over US$200 million 
(mainly UNDP special funds in the mid-1960s to the early 
1990s). Engineering at UNESCO began to decline in real terms 
in the 1990s (in terms of staff  and budget), which refl ected 
the decline of the Science Sector and indeed of UNESCO over 
this period, and was attributed to various external and inter-
nal factors. Th e 1980s marked a general decline in overseas 
aid, the withdrawal of the US and the UK in 1984 that precipi-
tated a funding crisis in UNESCO, the fall of the Berlin Wall in 
1989 that led to the end of the Cold War and changing inter-
national climate, and UNDP special funds began to decline 
from the late 1980s with the establishment and development 
of the Operations Division of UNDP. Th ere were also various 
internal factors at UNESCO. Th e Natural Sciences Sector is 
perhaps the least well understood sector in UNESCO, and 
engineering – for various reasons – is less well understood 
than science. Engineering is distinct from science, though it is 
considered as part of science in UNESCO, and with a declining 
science budget, science issues, priorities and ‘science’ policy 
have tended to predominate (even though engineering policy 
is a signifi cant part of science policy, as discussed in section 
4.5.2). Th is situation refl ects the limited numbers of scientists 
and engineers in the decision-making bodies of UNESCO such 
as the Executive Board and General Conference where  educa-
tion interests tend to predominate. In this way, the status and 
challenges faced by engineering at UNESCO mirrors those 
faced by engineering in governments, organizations and soci-
eties worldwide.
Other internal factors leading to the decline of engineering at 
UNESCO include the choice of programme priorities based 
on personal interaction and lobbying rather than a strategic 
approach based on broader policy issues and a more demo-
cratic determination of needs and priorities. Th is was com-
pounded in the late 1980s and 1990s by the focus on the 
World Solar Programme. While the idea to focus is eminently 
understandable, adequate human and financial resources 
and signifi cant substantive results are required, and should 
not be to the exclusion of other programme interests, oth-
erwise programme activities may become theme areas with 
little real substance, peripheral to core engineering issues, 
with the risk, perhaps not surprising, of limited programme 
achievements. Th is contributed signifi cantly to the decline of 
engineering and the administrative merger of engineering into 
the Basic and Engineering Sciences Division in 2002, with obvi-
ous potential consequences for the future of engineering in 
UNESCO. It is clear that the programmes in UNESCO, with the 
most secure budgets and eff ective lobbying, are those linked 
to international and intergovernmental programmes such as 
the Man and the Biosphere Programme (created in 1971), the 
International Hydrological Programme (1975) and the Inter-
governmental Oceanographic Commission (1960). While this 
advantage for programmes to have such an international back-
ground is acknowledged, there is also a disinclination to create 
new international programmes due to human and fi nancial 
resource constraints.
In this context, it is certainly noteworthy that a proposal for a 
feasibility study for an ‘International Engineering Programme’ 
was made by South  Africa and adopted with signifi cant sup-
port in the 2009 General Conference and Executive Board 
as part of the eff ort to continue and develop engineering 
activities at UNESCO into the new millennium (which itself 
has signifi cant external support). Th is follows and reinforces 
a proposal from the United States for the development of 
‘Cross-Sectoral Activities in Technical Capacity Building’, pre-
sented to and approved unanimously at the Executive Board 
in April 2005, in order to focus on capacity-building in the 
basic sciences and mathematics, engineering and the water 
sciences (with a focus in engineering on activities that included 
‘strengthening of the existing engineering programme, includ-
ing training educators for developing countries, support of 
workshops for educators in  curriculum development, best 
practices, and quality assurance, and development of appro-
priate collaborations with industry.’ Th is was the fi rst proposal 
from the United States since its return to UNESCO in 2003. It 
is to be hoped that these proposals will support a resurgence 
and strengthening of engineering in UNESCO and around the 
world, with the development of international programme 
activities in capacity-building and  engineering applications 
for  poverty reduction and  sustainable development,  climate 
change mitigation and adaptation. UNESCO has a unique 
mandate and mission in the natural sciences, including engi-
neering and technology, to assist Member States, and espe-
cially developing countries. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   36 14/09/10   15:34:09
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
37
Th e Mondialogo Partnership
Th e Mondialogo Engineering Award is part of a 
partnership initiative that was launched by Daim-
lerChrysler (as it then was) and UNESCO in 2003. 
Th e overall aim of the Mondialogo partnership 
is to promote  international cooperation, dia-
logue and understanding among young people 
around the world to promote living together and 
as a basis for developing mutual understanding, 
respect and tolerance. Th e partnership has its ori-
gins in a discussion between DaimlerChrysler and 
the German National Commission for UNESCO 
regarding possible activity to promote intercul-
tural dialogue and understanding. Th is included 
reference to the Associated Schools Project of 
UNESCO, related with other possible activities at 
the tertiary/university level. Following an internal 
request for proposals an ‘Intercultural Dialogue 
through Engineering Applications’ (IDEA) project 
was proposed by the Engineering Programme of 
UNESCO, creating a link between a company 
built on quality engineering and the UN organiza-
tion responsible for science and engineering. Th e 
proposal was agreed and the Mondialogo initia-
tive developed. 
Th e Mondialogo initiative consists of three pil-
lars: the Mondialogo Engineering Award; the 
Mondialogo Schools Contest; and the support-
ing Mondialogo Internet Portal. The Mondi-
alogo Engineering Award promotes cooperation 
between student engineers at universities around 
the world, with a focus on the development of 
engineering project proposals between universi-
ties in developing and developed countries that 
address  poverty reduction, sustainability, the 
other UN  Millennium Development Goals and 
 climate change mitigation and adaptation. Th e 
Mondialogo School Contest is for school students 
between fourteen and eighteen years of age, with a 
focus on developing projects around one of three 
core themes: peace, sports and fair play, elimina-
tion of discrimination; sustainable future; identity 
and respect for cultural diversity. Th e multilingual 
Mondialogo Internet Portal complements and 
supports these project activities with an interna-
tionally accessible information and dialogue plat-
form focusing on intercultural exchange. Since 
2003, there have been three rounds each of the 
Schools Contest and Engineering Award, with the 
fi rst round of the Mondialogo Engineering Award 
in 2004–2005, the second in 2006–2007 and the 
third in 2008–2009. Over this time, the Mondi-
alogo partnership has itself won several awards 
as an exemplar of corporate social responsibility 
and public-private partnership in the promotion 
of  international cooperation and dialogue among 
young people.
Th e Mondialogo Engineering Award
Th e Mondialogo Engineering Award is in essence 
a design exercise for student engineers from 
developing and developed countries who form 
international teams and develop project propos-
als together. Th e projects must address issues of 
poverty,  sustainable development and  climate 
change. One of the driving ideas is that  interna-
tional cooperation on such projects is one of the 
best ways to promote intercultural dialogue and 
understanding.
Each round of the Award has commenced with an 
advertising campaign and mailout of posters and 
information to every university with an engineer-
ing faculty around the world. Interested student 
engineers were encouraged to form local uni-
versity teams and were invited to register them-
selves and any ideas they had for possible project 
proposals on the Mondialogo website. Th ey then 
formed international teams of at least two local 
teams from developing and developed country 
universities, and registered projects on which they 
would work to produce proposals for submission 
to the Award. Project proposals were then devel-
oped collaboratively by the teams over the course 
of around six months. Th e available time period 
was complicated by the fact that universities in 
the southern and northern hemispheres have dif-
ferent academic years, examination schedules and 
periods when students have more or less time. 
Project proposals were then developed and sub-
mitted, short-listed and fi nalised by an independ-
ent Jury. Th e project proposals are assessed on 
criteria of technical excellence, focus on  poverty 
reduction,  sustainable development and the UN 
 Millennium Development Goals, feasibility and 
demonstration of intercultural dialogue between 
teams within each project group. Each round of 
the Award concluded with a Mondialogo Engi-
neering Award Symposium and Ceremony. Th ese 
have taken place in Berlin in 2005, Mumbai in 
2007 and Stuttgart in 2009. Th e Award Sympo-
sium is considered an important component of 
Mondialogo Engineering Award – promoting cooperation for development
 Mondialogo Engineering Award fi nalists.
 Mondialogo Engineering Award medals.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
© UNESCO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   37 14/09/10   15:34:09
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
38
the Award activity enabling representatives of 
the fi nalist teams of young engineers to present 
their project proposals to the other fi nalists, the 
Daimler and UNESCO organizers, Jury members 
and the media. Th e Symposium was followed by a 
Mondialogo Award Ceremony where the Awards 
were presented.
Th e 2009 Award – pursuing dreams into 
reality
Th e 2009 Award Ceremony was hosted by Daimler 
CEO, Dieter Zetsche, and Walter Erdelen, Assistant 
Director-General for Natural Sciences at UNESCO, 
at the Daimler Museum in Stuttgart, and featured 
a keynote presentation by Lewis Hamilton, the 
youngest ever Formula One World Champion 
in 2008. Hamilton’s informal comments were 
moving, encouraging and very inspirational, and 
emphasized the vital role engineers play in F1, 
and how young engineers should pursue their 
 commitment and translate their dreams into real-
ity – as he had done himself – to create solutions 
to some of the most serious problems facing the 
world. One of the young engineers later reported 
that the whole cooperative design process, award 
symposium and ceremony, including Hamilton’s 
comments, just ‘blew my mind’ – underlining 
the importance of activities and events that one 
can sometimes overlook when in the midst of 
things. One of the judges also mentioned that the 
commitment of the students almost brought a tear 
to his eye. Th eir commitment is most reassuring – 
as our future is indeed in their hands! 
Th irty gold, silver and bronze Mondialogo Engi-
neering Awards were presented at the Award Cer-
emony worth a total of €300,000. Th e prize money 
is intended to help facilitate and implement the 
proposed projects, although it is apparent that 
most of the students participate because they 
think it is a good thing to do. Th is is evident in the 
many weblogs of project proposals from the 2009 
and previous awards that are being implemented. 
Th e diverse range of engineering project propos-
als addressing world problems was truly impres-
sive and included proposals focusing on  water 
supply and sanitation, waste management, food 
production and processing housing and shelter, 
 transportation and mobility,  energy,  emergency, 
 disaster response and reconstruction and multi-
sector proposals. 
Organization of the Award
The Mondialogo Engineering Award (MEA) is 
organized and managed by the Engineering Pro-
gramme at UNESCO and Corporate Sponsorship 
department at Daimler, supported by Daimler’s 
 communications consultant, Experience (for-
merly Schmidt und Kaiser).
The Mondialogo Engineering Award Jury, who 
selected the winners from the shortlist, was co-
chaired by Herbert Kohler, Vice-President E-Drive 
and Future Mobility and Chief Environmental 
Offi  ce at Daimler, and Walter Erdelen, Assistant 
Director-General for Natural Sciences at UNESCO, 
and included Peggy Oti-Boateng from the Tech-
nology Consultancy Centre at the University of 
Kumasi in  Ghana, Shirley Malcom from the Ameri-
can Association for the Advancement of Science, 
Ali Uddin Ansari from the Centre for Environment 
Studies and Socio-responsive Engineering at Muf-
fakham Jah College in Hyderabad, Paul Jowitt from 
Heriot-Watt University in Edinburgh, and Barry 
Grear, President of the World Federation of Engi-
neering Organizations (who succeeded previous 
Presidents Kamel Ayadi and Dato Lee Yee Chong).
Between 2004 and 2009 nearly 10,000 engineering 
students from more than half the countries in the 
world took part in the Mondialogo Engineering 
Award. In the 2008–2009 Award, thirty winning 
proposals were selected from ninety-seven project 
proposals from student teams in fi fty-fi ve countries 
with a total of 932 registered project ideas from 
nearly 4,000 student engineers in ninety-four coun-
tries. Th ere were eight gold, twelve silver and ten 
bronze awards, worth €15,000, €10,000 and €5,000 
respectively (a total of €300,000), with one Contin-
uation and one Community Award. In the second 
Award in 2006–2007, thirty award winners were 
selected from ninety-two project proposals from 
student teams in fi fty-four countries with a total of 
809 registered project ideas from over 3,000 student 
engineers in eighty-nine countries. Th ere were ten 
Mondialogo Engineering Awards and twenty Hon-
ourable mentions, each worth €10,000 and €5,000 
respectively, and one Continuation Award. In the 
fi rst Mondialogo Engineering Award in 2004–2005, 
twenty-one winning proposals were selected from 
student teams in twenty-fi ve countries with a total 
of 111 project proposals submitted by 412 teams 
from 1,700 student engineers in seventy-nine coun-
tries. Twenty-one Mondialogo Engineering Awards 
each worth €15,000 were made, with fi ve awarded 
special Jury recognition. 
Th is shows how the Mondialogo Engineering Award 
has gone from strength to strength in terms of total 
numbers of registered teams, interest in the Award 
and in the interest and commitment of young 
engineers to work together in the preparation of 
project proposals that address major issues and 
challenges facing the world, especially  poverty 
reduction,  sustainable development,  climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. It is hoped that the MEA 
will continue to help turn the dreams of young 
engineers into reality, and improve the quality of 
life of some of the world’s poorest people. Th is is 
particularly important following the fi nancial and 
 economic crisis. Unfortunately, this downturn lead 
to a dramatic change in the business environment 
for Daimler, and a cut in corporate sponsorship, 
including the Mondialogo partnership. Th e search is 
on for new sponsors to help support and develop the 
Mondialogo partnership and Engineering Award.
Mondialogo Engineering Award – promoting cooperation for development (continuation)
 Th e Mondialogo Engineer-
ing Award involved young 
engineers to address global 
issues.
© UNESCO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   38 14/09/10   15:34:11
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
39
Th e Great Age of Engineering?
It’s easy to think, from the Western perspective, that the great 
days of engineering were in the past during the era of massive 
mechanization and urbanization that had its heyday in the 
nineteenth century and which took the early Industrial Revolu-
tion from the eighteenth century right through into the twen-
tieth century which, incidently, simultaneously improved the 
health and well-being of the common person with improve-
ments in  water supply and sanitation. Th at era of great engi-
neering enjoyed two advantages: seemingly unlimited sources 
of power, coal, oil and gas, and a world environment of appar-
ently boundless capacity in terms of water supply, materials 
and other resources relative to human need.  
Now we know diff erently. We face two issues of truly global 
proportions –  climate change and  poverty reduction.  Th e 
tasks confronting engineers of the twenty-fi rst century are:
engineering the world to avert an environmental crisis  ■
caused in part by earlier generations in terms of  energy use, 
greenhouse gas emissions and their contribution to  climate 
change, and 
engineering the large proportion of the world’s increasing  ■
population out of poverty, and the associated problems 
encapsulated by the UN  Millennium Development Goals.  
Th is will require a combination of re-engineering existing  infra-
structure together with the provision of fi rst-time  infrastruc-
ture at a global scale.  
And the diff erence between now and the nineteenth century? 
Th is time the scale of the problem is at a greater order of mag-
nitude; environmental constraints are dangerously close to 
being breached; worldwide competition for scarce resources 
could create international tensions; and the freedom to power 
our way into the future by burning fossil fuels is denied.  
Resolving these issues will require tremendous  innovation and 
ingenuity by engineers, working alongside other technical and 
non-technical disciplines. It requires the engineer’s ability to 
synthesize solutions and not simply their ability to analyse 
problems. It needs the engineers’ ability to take a systems view 
at a range of scales, from devices and products through to the 
large-scale delivery of  infrastructure services.  
Th is means that the great age of engineering is NOW.  
Let us briefl y examine the key issues.  
‘Poverty is Real’
Th e immediate prospects for both the urban and rural poor 
in many parts of the world is bleak with little or no access to 
even the most basic of  infrastructure,  education and health-
care, and with little or at best tenuous, legal rights to land or 
property.
 Engineering, 2.2  innovation, social and  economic 
development
Paul Jowitt
  Civil engineering 
construction.
© P. Jowitt
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   39 14/09/10   15:34:12
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
40
Six of the eight UN  Millennium Development Goals3 (MDGs) 
are directly concerned with the human condition; physical 
health, their economic and social well-being and the capacity 
to play a full and useful role in the world. Th e remaining two 
relate to the environmental limits within which we have to 
operate and the partnerships we need to build to deliver the 
 infrastructure that underpins civilization on which we depend; 
 infrastructure that achieves real, pro-poor outcomes in the 
process of its planning, construction and operation. Work-
ing towards the UN MDGs therefore requires engineers to 
become involved.4 Th e critical role of underpinning  infrastruc-
ture for development was stated at the outset by Calestous 
Juma5 (Chair of the UN Science, Technology and Innovation 
Task Force):
‘At least three key factors contributed to the rapid economic 
transformation of emerging economies. First, they invested 
heavily in basic  infrastructure, which served as a founda-
tion for technological learning. Second, they nurtured the 
development of small and medium-sized enterprises, which 
required the development of local operational, repair and 
maintenance expertise. Th ird, their governments supported, 
funded and nurtured higher  education institutions, acad-
emies of engineering and technological sciences, professional 
engineering and technological associations, and industrial 
and trade associations.’
3 Th e  Millennium Development Goals were recognized by the UN General Assembly 
as being part of the road map for implementing the UN’s Millennium Declaration. 
Th ere are eight overall Goals (on Poverty, Education, Gender, Child Mortality, Maternal 
Health, HIV/AIDS, Environment, Global Partnership).  
4 Th is was underlined at a meeting with the British Chancellor of the Exchequer at 11 
Downing Street, London, on 30 November 2005.
5 Calestous Juma (ed.) Going for Growth: Science, Technology and Innovation in  Africa. 
Published by the Smith Institute, 2005. 
Pre-requisites for development
Th e pre-requisites for development, without which attempts 
to improve livelihoods in the developing world will be unlikely 
to succeed, include reasonable governance structures, a func-
tioning civil  society, and freedom from persecution, confl ict 
and corruption.  
Th e impact of global politics, trade and confl icts on devel-
opment is immense. These include trade rules, tariffs and 
western subsidies, local and regional confl ict, oil diplomacy, 
governance, and the roles of transnational companies. But a 
functioning local business sector can also help deliver poverty-
reduction outcomes through direct involvement in the devel-
opment of eff ective and sustainable  infrastructure, which in 
turn is of critical importance for three reasons:
It underpins communities by providing the basic needs and  ■
services of shelter, access to safe water/sanitation,  energy, 
transport,  education and healthcare.  
It provides an internal demand for local skills and employ- ■
ment through its delivery.  
It provides a vital platform for the growth of the local  ■
economy and small and medium sized enterprises through 
improved access to  infrastructure services, local skills, and 
the stimulation of and better access to both internal/local 
and external/national markets.  
But  infrastructure delivery also requires investment.
Th ose mired in poverty do not have and cannot aff ord all the 
resources necessary to resolve their plight. Th ey will need exter-
nal investment from governments, businesses and international 
agencies, and assistance from the worldwide engineering com-
munity. Th ere will be no spectators as the future unfolds, but 
there are implications for civil engineers in particular.  
‘Climate Change is Real’
In June 2005, the National Science Academies of eleven coun-
tries issued a Joint Statement.6 Its opening line was, ‘Climate 
change is real’. It went on to say, ‘Th e task of devising and 
implementing strategies to adapt to the consequences of  cli-
mate change will require worldwide collaborative inputs from 
a wide range of experts, including physical and natural scien-
tists, engineers, social scientists, medical scientists, those in the 
humanities, business leaders and economists.’
Th ey called on the G8 Leaders – due to meet in Gleneagles 
in July 2005 – to acknowledge the threat and identify cost-
effective steps to contribute to substantial and long-term 
6 Joint Science Academies’ Statement, Global Response to Climate Change. June 2005. 
http://royalsociety.org/Joint-science-academies-statement-Global-response-to-clim-
ate-change/  (Accessed: 2 May 2010). 
 Th e Pelamis Wave Energy 
device generates renewable 
electricity.
© P. Jowitt
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   40 14/09/10   15:34:13
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
41
reductions in net global greenhouse gas emissions. Th e same 
message is contained in the Stern Report.7 Yet political progress 
on binding international measures for  climate change mitiga-
tion and adaptation is still slow. At the recent  climate change 
conference in Bali, US agreement on a roadmap for negotia-
tions on a replacement for the Kyoto Protocol came only after 
the barbed comment by the delegate from Papua New Guinea 
to some of the western nations, ‘Either lead, follow or get out 
of the way.’
It is now almost universally accepted that global  climate 
change is a reality, its eff ects are locked in, and the activities 
of the human race – principally through the release of green-
house gases – are a contributory factor. Th e work of building 
acceptance and understanding of  climate change was recog-
nized with the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007. 
Whatever their precise spatial and temporal eff ects, the con-
sequences of  climate change (such as sea level rise, changes in 
rainfall patterns, drought and fl ooding) will mostly impact on 
the most impoverished and therefore vulnerable people of the 
world, while those least susceptible are in fact those responsi-
ble for the bulk of causative emissions.  
With urbanization increasing apace, the greatest risks to 
humanity will be found in lesser-developed countries whose 
urban  infrastructure is often either fragile or non-existent. By 
2025, the world’s population will have increased by about 1.5 
billion to a total of around 6.6 billion and the percentage of 
those living in urban environments will have increased from 40 
per cent to 60 per cent.8 Th e planet has just passed the point at 
which more people live in cities and towns than in rural areas. 
Th e demand for eff ective  infrastructure services is therefore 
immense.  
Energy and  climate change
Th e world is currently powered by a predominantly fossil-
fuelled, carbon-based  energy system based on coal, oil and 
gas. All these resources are non-renewable and out of balance 
within the timescales of the human race, and we are now 
aware of their wider environmental impacts.
Th e patterns of worldwide  energy use are disproportionate, 
and with them the sources of CO2 emissions. But the patterns 
are changing with the emerging economies, such as China and 
India, and their growth as car-ownership, consumer socie-
ties. China is the world’s largest user of coal and the second 
largest consumer of oil and gas,9 though still a relatively small 
7 Stern Report, http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/independent_reviews/stern_review_
economics_climate_change/sternreview_index.cfm (Accessed: 2 May 2010).
8 David Cook and John Kirke, Urban Poverty: addressing the scale of the problem, Munici-
pal Engineer 156 ME4, 2003.  
9 BP Statistical Review of World Energy, June 2005. http://www.bp.com/statisticalreview 
(Accessed: 2 May 2010). 
consumer on a per capita basis. By 2020, China’s  energy use is 
predicted to double.10
Th e achievement of a sustainable  energy economy requires a 
strong  energy- research base that addresses the basic demands 
placed on the  energy system for heat, power and mobility. 
Whether at work or leisure, people are at the centre of the 
 energy system and demand-side solutions need to be innovated 
as well as supply-side and  infrastructure fi xes. While market 
forces may act to resolve some aspects of the  energy equation, 
there are others where the limitation is not technological but 
suff er from a lack of clear leadership and policy development.
Th ere is no magic bullet. Th ere are just three approaches:
Change our behaviour1. 
Change the technology2. 
Change the fuel3. 
Demand-side  innovations are just as important as supply-side 
fi xes. Demand for  energy needs to be reduced by a combina-
tion of changes in personal/corporate behaviours, increased 
 energy effi  ciency in buildings and  transportation systems, and 
in the  energy ratings of plant, equipment and machinery in the 
home, offi  ces and factories.  
One way or another, the urban  infrastructure of developed 
countries needs to be re-engineered to provide sustainable 
and fulfi lling environments for their inhabitants. And the new, 
fi rst-time  infrastructure that is urgently needed in developing 
countries needs to be based on those same principles, learning 
from the mistakes of the developed countries.  
On the supply side we need to shift to carbon-free sources 
of  energy. Wind has become a well-established, carbon-free 
 energy source (at least in its operational phase) but is not 
without its detractors, including those who still doubt its 
economics;11 those against it argue on environmental, aes-
thetic, noise pollution grounds, and not least by its intermit-
tency. Th e availability of wind  energy tends to be in the more 
remote parts of the world, distant from centres of demand, 
and with poor grid and interconnector access. Wave and tidal 
 energy systems are still very much still in development and 
will be required to operate in even more hostile and remote 
environments. Nuclear power brings with it a range of issues 
that need to be addressed, ranging from nuclear safety, public 
acceptability locally, and access to nuclear technology inter-
nationally.  
10 Gregory A. Keoleian; School of Natural Resources and Environment; Co-Director, 
Center for Sustainable Systems; University of Michigan
11 David Simpson, Tilting at Windmills: Th e Economics of Wind Power, April 2004. Th e 
David Hume Institute, Hume Occasional Paper No. 65. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   41 14/09/10   15:34:13
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
42
The construction of large-scale hydropower schemes has 
declined, primarily due to concerns over their social and envi-
ronmental impacts. Th ere are exceptions, the most signifi cant 
example is the Th ree Gorges Dam on the Yangtze River which 
contains a storage reservoir of some 600 km in length, pro-
viding fl ood control, producing 18 GW of hydropower, but 
also displacing almost two million people and resulting in the 
loss of valuable archaeological and cultural sites, biodiversity 
loss and environmental damage.12 Projects such as the Th ree 
Gorges Dam inescapably place the engineer in a diffi  cult situ-
ation. Engineering is not an apolitical activity and may never 
have been so, and the engineer needs all the skills of discern-
ment, judgement and confl ict resolution.
An  energy supply for  Africa is a prize worth seeking, ‘In many 
African countries, lack of  energy security feeds into a cycle 
of poverty. At the beginning of the twenty-fi rst century, it is 
unacceptable for millions of people to live without access to 
electricity!’ (Claude Mandil, IEA).13
Delivering the  Millennium Development Goals
Th e  energy needs of the developing world bring us back to 
the issues of world poverty. Lack of access to basic  infrastruc-
ture is at the root of world poverty and the human tragedies 
12 Th e International Rivers Network, Th ree Gorges Dam, see http://www.irn.org/pro-
grams/threeg/  
13 Claude Mandil, Executive Director, Th e International Energy Agency. http://www.iea.
org/textbase/papers/2003/ african_energy.pdf (Accessed: 29 May 2010). 
associated with it. Two billion people lack access to a basic 
power supply and an equivalent number lack access to safe 
water.  Th e UN target is to halve that number by 2015. Safe 
water for one billion people by 2015 means connecting more 
than one third of a million people per day, every day, for the 
next eight years. Can it be done? And if so, how? What limits 
our response?
Th e limiting factors are not a lack of engineering knowledge 
and technology, or knowing what needs to be done, but fi nd-
ing ways of applying that engineering technology, building 
local capacity to ensure its eff ective delivery, managing and 
fi nancing it, and ensuring that its application is maintained.  
Infrastructure development offers a vital opportunity for 
capacity-building, technological learning, and the develop-
ment of local businesses, ‘Infrastructure uses a wide range of 
technologies and complex institutional arrangements. Gov-
ernments traditionally view  infrastructure projects from a 
static perspective… they seldom consider that building rail-
ways, airports, roads and  telecommunications networks could 
be structured to promote technological, organizational and 
institutional learning.’ 14
Building the  infrastructure to deliver the UN MDGs is not 
about a single project, but about the delivery of many; each 
one is complex in itself, but at the right scale and with the right 
planning, is perfectly feasible. Th e UN MDGs will only be met 
if they are treated as a series of projects, each of which needs a 
project management plan and which the engineering profes-
sion is well placed to help deliver.
Is there a model for this? Are there development models that 
have been successful in dealing with issues akin to those of 
the developing world? Perhaps there are. For example, in many 
deprived inner city areas in the developed world, the issues 
are broadly similar: run down  infrastructure, high unemploy-
ment, an economically disadvantaged local population, high 
crime rates and drug use, and a dysfunctional local economy. 
One solution to such cases was the establishment of special 
purpose development corporations, fi nancially independent 
of the local municipality but ultimately accountable. Th ere will 
be other models as well.
So this is the challenge: 
‘To develop an action-based project plan, to ensure that the 
UN MDGs are met while achieving sustainability worldwide.’
Yes, the Great Age of Engineering is NOW!
14 Professor Tony Ridley and Yee-Cheong Lee, Infrastructure,  innovation and develop-
ment, chp 5, Going for Growth: Science, Technology and Innovation in  Africa, Calestous 
Juma (ed.) Published by the Smith Institute, 2005. 
 Slums are often at the 
margins of engineered  infra-
structure. © P
. Jo
w
itt
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   42 14/09/10   15:34:13
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
43
From the earliest times of human civilization, the activity that 
has come to be called engineering has impacted on  society 
through the technological artefacts – both tangible and intan-
gible – that it creates. Products of engineering surround us and 
aff ect virtually every aspect of our lives, infl uencing culture, 
art and religion in a tightening circle of reciprocal interactions. 
Roads, aqueducts, pumps and canals have made urban life pos-
sible, electricity has illuminated and helped power the world, 
industries and  communications have fostered global affl  uence 
and weapons of increasing power are shaping the interactions 
among nations. Modern music, paintings, and architecture, 
automobiles and modern bridges embody both art and tech-
nique as did the Pyramids and the Parthenon.
Every major engineering  innovation, from metal-making to 
electronics, has brought about changes in  society. Th e devel-
opment and practice of engineering is aff ected, in turn, by 
signifi cant changes in  society’s goals, customs and expecta-
tions. To respond to  society’s demands, the very  education 
of engineers is becoming more interdisciplinary, including 
courses in the humanities, the social sciences and biology. At 
times, however,  society has overlooked the potential of engi-
neering to help address some of its most pressing problems 
and has responded slowly to engineering  innovations, which 
frequently require new organizational patterns, new laws, the 
development of new perceptions, and the evolution of cus-
toms. Societal entities that respond faster and more intelli-
gently to engineering  innovations usually have the advantage. 
Th e American and French revolutions eventually enhanced 
technological development by opening up their societies to 
the opportunities off ered by the Industrial Revolution; the 
Russian Revolution greatly accelerated the pace of industriali-
zation in that country.
Th e fact is that engineering and technology are processes that 
require the synergy of individuals, machines (artefacts) and 
social organizations (Bugliarello, 2000)15. An important facet 
of that synergy is the ever-closer interaction with science. Engi-
neering is basically about the modifi cation of nature through 
the creation of tangible and intangible artefacts and has at 
times preceded a scientifi c understanding of the process. Sci-
ence is about the understanding of nature. Often, to do so, it 
needs to create artefacts. Th us, although diff erent in intent, 
the two endeavours have become indispensable to each other 
– engineered instrumentation, computers, software and satel-
lites to the pursuits of science, and science to advances over 
the entire spectrum of engineering.
15 Bugliarello, George, Th e Biosoma: Th e Synthesis of Biology, Machines and Society, Bul-
letin of Science, Technology & Society, Vol. 20, No. 6, December 2000, pp. 452–464.
Society is today making ever-greater demands on engineer-
ing, from those caused by exploding urbanization and by 
the endemic poverty of a quarter of the world’s population 
in the face of overall global affl  uence, to the mounting con-
cerns about availability of critical resources, the consequences 
of  climate change and increasing natural and man-made  dis-
asters. Th is confronts engineering and  society not only with 
unprecedented technical challenges, but also with a host of 
new ethical problems that demand the development of glo-
bal engineering  ethics. How far should engineering pursue 
the modifi cations of nature? What are engineering’s roles and 
responsibilities in  society? How should engineering address 
problems of equity in terms of the availability of resources 
and services of and between current and future generations? 
Should concerns about global warming take precedence over 
the urgent problem of poverty, or how can they be addressed 
together? What should be the engineering  standards in an 
increasingly globalized enterprise, e.g. the around-the-clock 
design teams operating synergistically in locations across the 
world? Th ese questions cannot be addressed without consid-
ering the need for some fundamental engineering tenets such 
as the upholding of human dignity, the avoidance of danger-
ous or uncontrolled side eff ects, the making of provisions for 
unexpected consequences of technological developments, 
and asking not only about the ‘hows’ but also the ‘whys’ in the 
creation of artefacts.
Th e synergy of engineering with other societal activities is the 
root cause of the material prosperity of many societies and is a 
key to improving the condition of many developing countries. 
Th e rapidly developing interaction of engineering with biologi-
Engineering, technology and 2.3  society
George Bugliarello
 Engineers can be artists – 
Coimbra footbridge.
©
 A
ru
p
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   43 14/09/10   15:34:14
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
44
cal and medical systems is beginning to dramatically increase 
the health of vast sectors of the world population, and the 
synergy of engineering and  education through advances in 
information and  telecommunications technology, to improve 
skills and job opportunities globally. At the same time, how-
ever, developments in mechanization and automation may 
tend to diminish both employment opportunities and person-
to-person, face-to-face interactions by interposing machines. 
Also, as dependency on technology grows – and as technology 
becomes less well understood and operated to its maximum 
capacity –  society is placed at increasing risk by technologi-
cal failures and design faults, whether of logistical supply sys-
tems for water, food,  energy and vaccine, or of other critical 
 infrastructures and systems. Th e risk is aggravated by the ever-
greater interdependencies of our engineered world. Engineer-
ing in its entirety is, in eff ect, a social enterprise that has made 
modern  society possible, with all its potentials and risks, and is 
nurtured in turn by  society (Sladovich, 1991)16. It extends the 
physical and economic capacity of  society by enhancing the 
reach of  society’s components and capabilities of its members, 
and by creating new methods and instruments for agriculture, 
the production of goods, communication, defence, off ence, 
exploration of space and the oceans, and of the preservation 
and utilization of nature’s resources from land to  energy, water 
and materials. Engineering’s evolving and deepening interac-
tion with the other components of  society and its increasing 
ability to intervene in biological processes have become a key 
factor in determining the future of our species.
16 Sladovich, H.E. (ed.). 1991. Engineering as a Social Enterprise, National Academy Press, 
Washington, DC.
Engineers and social responsibility2.4 
Th e big issues2.4.1 
Stuart Parkinson
Engineering has immense capacity to help provide benefi ts 
to  society – as the other contributions in this Report dem-
onstrate – but it also has a similarly large capacity to be used 
to cause harm. It helps to provide basic needs such as water, 
food, shelter and  energy, and does so on the scale necessary for 
industrial  society to function. But engineering has also contrib-
uted to the huge increase in the destructiveness of weaponry 
and warfare seen over the centuries, to increases in inequality 
and to the global damage infl icted on the world’s ecosystems.
As an engineer, it is crucial to understand this dual nature of 
the profession and to be vigilant regarding your own role and 
that of your employers so that you maximize the chances of 
a positive contribution to  society. In essence this is what it 
means to be a socially responsible engineer. 
Engineering and war
In promoting engineering as a career, the professional institu-
tions are quick to point out the critical role that engineering 
plays in helping to provide benefi ts to  society, for example:
‘Today, it is true to say that virtually every aspect of our daily 
lives is enabled or aided in some way by engineers. Engineers 
make things happen, they turn ideas into real products 
and they provide the solutions to life’s everyday practical 
problems.’17
However, they are less quick to highlight the ways in which 
technology has been engineered – in close collaboration with 
the sciences – to contribute to many of  society’s ills. Perhaps 
the starkest example of this is demonstrated by the increase in 
the lethality of weapons over the twentieth century. Research-
ers at the University of Buenos Aires have estimated that 
the ‘lethality index’ – defi ned as the maximum number of 
casualties per hour that a weapon can infl ict – increased by 
17 Young Engineers website. http://www.youngeng.org/index.asp?page=66 (Accessed: 4 
May 2010).
 Tsunami reconstruction 
housing.
©
 A
ru
p
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   44 14/09/10   15:34:14
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
45
a staggering sixty million times over the course of the century, 
with thermonuclear warheads mounted on ballistic missiles 
representing the zenith of destructiveness.18 Indeed, as is well 
known, these weapons have given us the power to destroy 
human civilization and much of the natural world in a very 
short space of time. 
However, the controversies that surround military technology 
are related to a much broader set of issues than just the raw 
power of a given weapon. For example, it is important to realize 
that most people who die in wars are actually killed by smaller, 
simpler technology such as guns and other small arms – and 
war still kills hundreds of thousands of people across the world 
each year.19 While many engineers justify their work on mili-
tary technology by arguing it contributes to national security, 
the situation is far more complex. For example, regulation of 
international arms sales is generally poor, with weapons fi nding 
their way – both legally and illegally – to governments with bad 
human rights records and to war zones. With about 75 per cent 
of war casualties being civilians, this is especially disturbing.20 
One overarching issue related to military technology especially 
relevant to engineers is what economists call the ‘opportunity 
cost’, i.e. the loss of skills and resources from other important 
areas that are currently used by the military. Indicators of this 
opportunity cost are not hard to fi nd. In 2006, global military 
spending was a massive US$1.2 trillion.21 Th is is greater than 
the combined size of the economies of the world’s 110 poorest 
countries,22 and nearly twelve times the global level of offi  cial 
development aid23 – a level of aid which still falls well short of 
that needed to achieve the  Millennium Development Goals.24 
Indeed, resolutions proposed annually at the UN General 
Assembly since 1987 have highlighted the desire of the major-
ity of the world’s governments for cuts in military spending 
to be used to help fund international development. Th is has 
become known as ‘disarmament for development’.25
18 Lemarchand, G. 2007. Defense R&D Policies: Fifty years of history. INES Council and 
Executive Committee meeting, June 2–4 2007. Berlin, Germany. http://www.inesglo-
bal.com/ (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
19 Smith, D. 2003. Th e Atlas of War and Peace. Earthscan, London. pp. 38. 
20 Ibid. 22.  
21 Stalenheim, P., Perdomo, C., Sköns, E. 2007. Military expenditure. Chp. 8 of SIPRI (2007). 
SIPRI Yearbook 2007: Armaments, Disarmament and International Security. Oxford 
University Press/SIPRI. http://yearbook2007.sipri.org (Accessed: 4 May 2010). 
22 Th is was calculated using fi gures from International Monetary Fund (2007). World 
Economic Outlook database. http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2007/02/weo-
data/index.aspx (Accessed: 4 May 2010). 
23 Th is was calculated using fi gures from UN (2007). Th e  Millennium Development Goals 
Report 2007. UN, New York. pp.28. http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/mdg2007.
pdf (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
24 Th e eight  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) include trying to halve extreme 
poverty by 2015. For a discussion on the shortfalls in development aid needed to 
achieve the MDGs (See footnote 23). 
25 Dhanapala, J. 2007. Disarmament and development at the global level. Statement at 
the IPB conference, Books or bombs? Sustainable disarmament for  sustainable develop-
Another comparison of particular relevance to engineers is 
spending on  research and development (R&D). In 2006, the 
governments of the world’s wealthiest countries26 spent US$96 
billion on military R&D compared with only US$56 billion on 
R&D for health and environment protection combined.27 
Engineering and pollution
Engineering and technology is also a key contributor to global 
environmental problems, such as  climate change and loss of 
wildlife. For example, industrial  society now emits the equiva-
lent of about 50 billion tonnes of carbon dioxide each year28 
– with the burning of fossil fuels being the main culprit. Th e 
resulting  climate change is predicted to have huge impacts 
on both humans and wildlife over the coming decades and 
beyond – with many millions of people at risk. Indeed, a recent 
report by the World Health Organization estimated that  cli-
mate change could already be responsible for 150,000 extra 
deaths every year.29
Engineering and technology are also key contributors to the 
global loss of wildlife through their role in activities ranging 
from industrial deforestation to industrial fi shing. Th e rate 
of species extinction across the world is now estimated to be 
more than 100 times the natural level, with the consequence 
that we are now in the midst of a ‘major extinction event’ – 
something that has only happened fi ve times before in the fi ve 
billion year history of planet Earth.30
But of course engineering is playing a key role in helping to 
understand and tackle global environmental problems as well. 
For example, in the case of  climate change,  energy effi  ciency 
and  renewable  energy technology are playing increasingly 
important roles in helping to cut greenhouse gas emissions 
– and so mitigate the threat – while other technologies such 
as fl ood defences are allowing  society to adapt to some of the 
changes which are already happening. Other examples can be 
found elsewhere in this Report, many showing that technology 
and  innovation alone cannot save us; such solutions must be 
engineered to suit  society.
ment. November 2007. http://www.pugwash.org/reports/nw/dhanapala-sean-mac-
bride-prize.htm (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
26 Countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development ( OECD).
27  OECD. 2007. Main Science and Technology Indicators 2007.  OECD, Paris. http://www.
oecd.org/ 
28 Emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) are generally expressed in tonnes of ‘carbon 
dioxide equivalent’ as diff erent GHGs have diff erent warming properties. Figures are 
from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2007). Climate Change 2007: 
Synthesis Report. Fourth Assessment Report. Summary for Policymakers. http://www.
ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar4/syr/ar4_syr_spm.pdf (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
29 World Health Organization. 2003. Climate Change and Human Health – risks and 
responses. http://www.who.int/bookorders/anglais/detart1.jsp?sesslan=1&codlan=1
&codcol=15&codcch=551 (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
30 UNEP. 2007. Global Environmental Outlook 4. Chp. 5. United Nations Environment 
Programme. http://www.unep.org/geo/geo4/media/ (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
 Waste management.
©
 SA
IC
E
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   45 14/09/10   15:34:15
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
46
However, a lack of resources is again impeding the speed at which 
the world faces up to these urgent environmental problems. And 
again, a comparison with military spending is a useful reminder 
of the resources which could be made available. For example, the 
Institute for Policy Studies recently published a report compar-
ing the United States government budget allocated to ‘military 
security’ with that allocated to ‘climate security’. It found that 
the military budget was 88 times the size of that devoted to tack-
ling the climate problem.31 Th e UK organization, Scientists for 
Global Responsibility, carried out a similar comparison, this time 
between the government R&D budgets of the world’s wealthiest 
countries. Th ey found a very similar imbalance between military 
and  renewable  energy R&D spending.32
Is the engineering profession doing enough? 
Given such disturbing facts, it is worth asking whether the engi-
neering profession is doing enough to fulfi l its obligations in 
terms of social responsibility. As entries in this Report show, 
there is a great deal of positive activity across the profession, 
but there remain areas where there is a need for improvement.
Th e most obvious example is arguably the close relationship 
between the engineering profession and the military. Given 
the controversies discussed above, related to military tech-
nologies and the size of military budgets, one might expect 
to hear more criticism from within the profession about how 
its skills are deployed. Yet it is very hard to fi nd cases of, for 
example, professional engineering institutions criticizing the 
government policies that cause such problems. 
For example, during the recent debate in the UK over propos-
als to replace the Trident nuclear weapons system – propos-
als criticized by the then UN Secretary General33 – the main 
comment from the Royal Academy of Engineering (RAE)34 was 
simply that there needed to be suffi  cient investment in skills 
and  infrastructure to ensure timely delivery of the US$40 bil-
lion project. Such a muted response sits uncomfortably with 
the RAE’s recently launched ‘Statement of ethical principles’ 
which encourages engineers to have ‘respect for life… and the 
public good.’35
Indeed, with the active encouragement of UNESCO, profes-
sional engineering and scientifi c institutions have in recent 
31 Pemberton, M. 2008. Th e budgets compared: military vs climate security. Institute for 
Policy Studies. http://www.ips-dc.org/getfi le.php?id=131 (Accessed: 4 May 2010). 
32 Parkinson, S. and Langley, C. 2008. Military R&D 85 times larger than  renewable  energy 
R&D. SGR Newsletter, No. 35, pp.1. http://www.sgr.org.uk/ 
33 Annan, K. 2006. Lecture at Princeton University. 28 November 2006. http://www.
un.org/News/Press/docs/2006/sgsm10767.doc.htm (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
34 RAE. 2006. Response to Th e Future of the Strategic Nuclear Deterrent: the UK manufac-
turing and skills base. http://www.raeng.org.uk/policy/responses/pdf/Nuclear_Deter-
rent_Consultation.pdf (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
35 RAE. 2007. Statement of ethical principles. http://www.raeng.org.uk/policy/ ethics/prin-
ciples.htm (Accessed: 4 May 2010).
years begun to adopt and promote ethical codes for the pro-
fession, which highlight the importance of principles such 
as social justice and environmental sustainability. Yet, when 
there are clear confl icts between these goals and the military 
and commercial interests, which are so intertwined with the 
engineering profession, the principles seem quickly to be com-
promised.
Standing up for social responsibility 
Over the years there have been a number of engineering and 
science organizations which have, in frustration with govern-
ments and professional institutions, tried to promote greater 
social responsibility within the science and technology arenas. 
In 1957, the Pugwash Conferences on Science and World 
Aff airs was formed in response the early nuclear arms race.36 
Th ese conferences – which continue today – bring together 
scientists, engineers and others from across the world to dis-
cuss solutions to global problems. Th ese discussions have been 
important in sowing the seeds of major arms control treaties.
A more radical organization, the International Network for 
Engineers and Scientists for Global Responsibility (INES), was 
set up in 1991 arguing that the professions should play a much 
greater role in supporting peace, social justice and environ-
mental sustainability.37 It has over seventy member organiza-
tions in more than thirty countries.
Influential individuals from the engineering and scientific 
communities have also spoken out urging the professions to 
adopt a more radical position. For example, in 1995 former 
Manhattan Project scientists, Prof. Hans Bethe and Prof. Joseph 
Rotblat called on all engineers and scientists to refuse to work 
on nuclear weapons projects.38 More recently, Jayantha Dha-
napala, a former UN Under-Secretary General and currently 
Chair of the UN University Council, called on engineers and 
scientists (among others) to refuse to work for the world’s top 
twenty-fi ve military corporations, until the ‘disarmament for 
development’ agenda is seriously acted upon.39
Becoming an active member of, or otherwise engaging with, 
one or more of the engineering campaigning groups or non-
governmental organizations would be an important contribu-
tion to the social responsibility agenda for any engineer, and it 
should be recognized as such in career and professional devel-
opment schemes.
36 Pugwash Conference on Science and World Aff airs. http://www.pugwash.org/  
37 International Network for Engineers and Scientists for Global Responsibility (INES). 
http://www.inesglobal.com/ 
38 Rotblat, J. 1995. Remember your humanity. Nobel lecture, Oslo. December 10. In: 
Braun et al (2007). Joseph Rotblat: Visionary for peace. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Ger-
many. pp. 315–322.
39 Dhanapala, J. 2007 (See footnote 25).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   46 14/09/10   15:34:15
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
47
Indeed, a key aspect of being an engineering professional is to 
actively seek opportunities that have a positive impact on glo-
bal problems such as war, pollution, poverty or  climate change. 
Th is is the heart of social responsibility in engineering.
Engineering Social 2.4.2 
Responsibility
David Singleton
As engineers of the built environment, we have a signifi cant 
impact upon the world around us. Th is is both an opportunity 
and a responsibility. Th e way that all of the world’s inhabit-
ants live, and the living  standards that we have come to expect 
form a part of our quality of life, which in turn is infl uenced 
by the  infrastructure around us; much of that  infrastructure is 
shaped by our engineering.
Our challenge as engineers, now and in the future, is to pro-
vide  infrastructure to rural and semi-rural communities in the 
developing world. Also, with increasing urbanization, we face 
additional challenges in terms of how we can economically 
provide  infrastructure in new urban areas; how do we retrofi t 
existing  infrastructure, and how do we accomplish all this in a 
responsible and sustainable manner?
With half of the world’s population now living in urban areas, 
urbanization has been and will continue to be a rapid process 
with virtually all the forecasted population growth in coming 
years taking place in urban areas in less developed countries. 
Forecasts for 2050 show that 70 per cent of the world’s popu-
lation will be urban; some 6.4 billion people will live in urban 
areas (the equivalent of the world’s total population in 2004) 
and most of this population will be concentrated in Asia (54 
per cent) and  Africa (19 per cent). China will have the largest 
urban population at 1 billion in 2050.
Urbanization is generally defi ned as the process of growth as 
a proportion of a country’s resident urban population. Th e 
terms ‘urban areas’ and ‘cities’ are often taken to mean the 
same thing, but urban areas include towns and other smaller 
settlements. For example, half of the world’s urban population 
lives in settlements of fewer than 500,000 people, while meg-
acities – generally defi ned as having rapid growth and a total 
population in excess of 10 million people – house only 9 per 
cent of urban inhabitants.
Arup40 has carried out signifi cant  research into the forces of 
urbanization and we have a clear understanding of the impact 
of urbanization on  society and the positive role that it can 
play in social and  economic development. Concentrating the 
40 A global fi rm of consulting engineers, designers and planners. http://www.arup.com  
world’s population into urban settlements gives  sustainable 
development a better chance through economies of scale on 
various fronts. By contrast however, cities can draw together 
many of the world’s environmental problems. Cities provide 
both an opportunity and a challenge in terms of  infrastructure 
provision.
It is important to understand the challenges associated with 
urbanization and to see these in terms of opportunities for 
change. Long-term planning for urban areas needs to be con-
sidered holistically.  Any town or city has many components 
or urban ‘ingredients’ and there are complex relationships 
between them such as: facilities, in terms of physical  infra-
structure; systems and utilities required by an urban area to 
function; services that urban residents need; and the desirable 
attributes an urban area should possess.
Whether in developing or developed countries, the physical 
 infrastructure associated with urbanization is concerned with 
much more than basic services;  infrastructure can make peo-
ple’s lives better, especially when viewed in terms of the service 
it provides. It is not simply about putting pipes and drains in 
the ground but about ‘public health’ through the provision of 
clean and safe water and sanitation, it is not just about design-
ing and constructing good, safe and reliable transport but 
about providing ‘accessibility’ or even ‘mobility’ to employ-
ment and  education and about determining and meeting the 
need to transport people and freight more effi  ciently. Good 
 infrastructure makes people’s lives better in the here and 
now. Accessible highways better connect towns and cities, effi  -
 Kyzyltoo water supply, 
South Kyrgyzstan –  infrastruc-
ture in rural and semi-rural 
areas.© S
te
ph
en
 Jo
ne
s, 
EW
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   47 14/09/10   15:34:15
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
48
cient railway lines and stations mean we can commute to work 
or escape to places where we choose to spend our leisure time, 
and good design creates residential areas and houses that are 
comfortable, safe places to live. Sustainable development also 
ensures that this will not be at the expense of future genera-
tions or the environment. 
While good engineering provides good  infrastructure, which 
can make people’s lives better, as engineers we also have a 
responsibility to create solutions that are not only eff ective, 
but contribute positively to our environment. Sustainable 
design objectives should run through everything that we do 
as engineers; we should always be thinking about how we can 
make people’s lives better tomorrow, as well as today.
As stated above, the urbanization challenge is not just about 
providing  infrastructure in developing worlds but also about 
retrofi tting existing ones. By adopting an integrated approach 
to managing our existing cities, we can dramatically increase 
their chances for environmental, social and economic success 
in the years to come.  
However, the challenge of retrofi tting cities to be more sus-
tainable is complex. Fortunately, small steps can deliver large 
benefi ts, and change does not need to be radical. Unlocking 
value from present ineffi  ciencies is just one opportunity, for 
example, information technology can be used for real-time 
journey planning, making existing transport networks more 
effi  cient.  
We need to fi nd city-specifi c solutions that provide a higher 
quality of life at lower economic cost and help cities to deal 
with risks such as  climate change and access to clean water 
and food. Despite the size of the challenge, the rising cost of 
resources like  energy and food and the resultant economic 
benefi ts of  sustainable development will drive the reinvention 
of our cities.
Arup is committed to achieving integrated design solutions 
that balance social, economic, physical and temporal param-
eters, creating unique and authentic new urban environments. 
Th e fi rm’s intrinsic agenda addresses effi  cient landuse,  infra-
structure effi  ciency, urban economics and matters of micro-
climate, sociology, ecology, hydrology and  energy usage.  Th ese 
agendas allow us to focus our desire to create sustainable com-
munities, for example in achieving the potential to ‘unlock’ 
new life from ‘brownfi eld’ sites.
The new environments we create should facilitate human 
interactions without being prescriptive, allowing chance and 
spontaneity to occur in interesting and fulfi lling places in which 
to live, work and play. Th oughtfully planned and designed 
 infrastructure can achieve all of this. But we must manage the 
risks to the environments that surround us, including those 
that we create by our designs and their implementation. As 
engineers, we can manage these risks by applying ‘precaution-
ary principles’, planning buildings and  infrastructure to cope 
with the worst likely outcome rather than hoping for the best. 
Taking into account of major forces such as  climate change, 
water shortages and  energy issues means constantly thinking 
about the overall sustainability of our designs. Our aim is to set 
a  standard of sustainable design that benefi ts the environment 
in both the short and the long term. We have a signifi cant 
impact on the world around us and there is an opportunity, 
and indeed a moral obligation, for us to set a  standard of 
design that benefi ts the environment and the people who live 
within. We must constantly think about the overall sustain-
ability of our designs, how we build them, and how they aff ect 
the surrounding environment.
To do this eff ectively, we should ensure our  innovation and 
design solutions meet people’s needs and allow them to live 
the way they choose without creating a negative legacy for 
generations to come.  Th is is what we might call ‘Engineering 
Social Responsibility’. 
One of the challenges for the engineering profession is to 
develop sustainable urban  infrastructure that recognizes, 
rather than resists, the inevitability of migration to urban 
centres and makes provision for these rapidly growing popula-
tions. As engineers we must work eff ectively in collaboration 
with our colleagues and other development-focused profes-
sionals and community leaders to implement sustainable solu-
tions to challenges such as urban poverty. However, we need 
to ensure that these solutions are well integrated into wider 
decision-making, planning and institutional development 
processes to improve living conditions for all.
Sustainability and corporate responsibility are having an 
increasing infl uence on how organizations behave, operate and 
do business. Th ere are many reasons why sustainability should 
be at the top of everyone’s business agenda, not least because 
the continued survival of future generations depends on fi nding 
solutions to the combined issues of  climate change, fi nding an 
alternative to carbon-emitting fossil fuels for  energy and trans-
port needs, and ensuring widespread access to clean water.  
Th e environment in which businesses operate is starting to 
reward sustainability in business, and a clearer defi nition is 
emerging. Sustainability represents a challenge to business, 
but embracing it is fundamental to managing a company’s risk 
profi le, and is essentially good business practice. Th e engineer-
ing industry is no exception. In fact, the engineering industry 
has a greater responsibility towards meeting government leg-
islation, self- or industry- imposed governance, the demands 
of customers to demonstrate we are acting responsibly, and to 
educate clients of the need to change behaviour and be more 
environmentally aware.
 Th e PlayPump – children 
have fun and help with water 
supply.
© David Singleton
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   48 14/09/10   15:34:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
49
Th e sustainability agenda can be pursued in a number of ways. 
At Arup we do so through researching sustainability issues, 
identifying opportunities to operate in a more sustainable 
way, evaluating projects on their sustainability performance, 
creating methodologies to embed sustainability considera-
tions in all our work and promoting sustainability to clients, 
educating all those we deal with on sustainability. We can also 
promote sustainability in the training and  education of design 
professionals in the built environment.
Training and  education is not a unique vision, many others have 
highlighted the need for changes in engineering  education to 
support the sustainability agenda. In 2003, an ICE Presidential 
Commission, ‘Engineering without Frontiers’ asked what was 
expected of an engineer by  society in the twenty-fi rst century. 
Th is had been answered in part in 2000 at the ‘Forum for the 
Future’ where thirty-two young engineers developed a vision of 
the engineer for the twenty-fi rst century (partly sponsored by 
Th e Arup Foundation), including roles in  sustainable develop-
ment.
Our vision is of an engineer who demonstrates through everyday 
practice:
An understanding of what sustainability means. ■
Th e skills to work toward this aim. ■
Values that relate to their wider social, environmental and  ■
economic responsibilities, and encourages and enables others to 
learn and participate.
(Forum for the Future, 2000)
In 2003, a second phase of the work of the Forum saw another 
twelve young engineers from partner companies and organi-
zations assess what progress had been made in particular 
areas identifi ed for progress in the initial phase completed in 
2000. Th e record of progress results was not encouraging, and 
the report noted four key areas where consistent eff ort was 
needed if change is to be driven through eff ectively:
Make choosing a sustainability option cheaper and easier  ■
for clients and contractors.
Build the capacity of teachers and trainers to integrate sus- ■
tainability into courses.
Make specifying sustainability criteria in materials and pro- ■
cesses an eff ective tool for change in procurement chains.
Embed sustainability thinking and practices into the culture  ■
of organizations and across diff erent professional groups.
(Proceedings of the ICE: Briefi ng: Engineers of the 21st Century – partnerships for 
change)
A third phase of the programme began in 2005 to promote 
 sustainable development within the engineering profession. 
Th is is focused on the identifi cation of barriers and infl uencing 
change, and directly addresses the four areas for change iden-
tifi ed in 2003. Overall, the programme emphasized the com-
mitment and enthusiasm young engineers have for promoting 
 sustainable development.
So it seems that the industry is responding, and at least real-
izes this is an important subject for engineers to address and 
lead on. In 2007, Th e Chartered Institution of Building Serv-
ices Engineers (CIBSE) published a sustainability toolkit setting 
out some fundamental principles and providing online tools 
to support engineers in meeting the demands for sustainable 
buildings, and to respond to the sustainability agenda.  
Th e UK Green Build Council (UK-GBC) was also launched in 
February 2007 to provide clear direction on sustainability for 
the sector as a whole, something that had previously been 
lacking.  With members drawn across the industry, including 
NGOs, academic institutions and government agencies, it aims 
to provide a joined-up and collaborative approach to sustain-
ability and building engineering.
Designing in a sustainable way also requires us to investigate 
those trends, which are most likely to have an impact upon the 
world in the future. In order to anticipate future change, Arup 
conducted a series of scientifi c reviews and surveys, which we 
call the ‘Drivers of Change’ that explore the major drivers that 
most aff ect  society’s future. Th e three most important factors 
identifi ed by our clients were  climate change,  energy resources 
and water, with urbanization, demographics and waste not far 
behind. Detailed  research on these six ‘Drivers of Change’ was 
then undertaken and our current focus is to embed them into 
Arup’s design, methodologies and evaluation processes. For 
engineers, tackling these issues must embrace every aspect of 
design and planning. Th is cannot be separated from other key 
considerations and requires a holistic and sustainable approach 
across all the diff erent facets of a new development. Th ere also 
needs to be a strong vision for leadership with clear strategies 
for the emergence of new leaders in engineering.
As an organization, Arup has promoted sustainability for 
decades. Our company’s culture includes a commitment to 
shape a better world through our work. Th e ethical dimension 
of engineering is a subject of lively discussion within the fi rm, 
and there are many issues and questions under continuous 
debate. Should we be refusing work that could be character-
ized as unsustainable? Or should we take on such work and try 
to make them as sustainable as possible, educating our clients 
in the process? Th e answer is not straightforward. If we are to 
contemplate turning away unsustainable work, we must bal-
ance this with the need to educate our clients, and to maintain 
our own business and provide employment for our staff . 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   49 14/09/10   15:34:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
50
Th e author’s aspiration is that eventually, over time, we will 
not talk about sustainable design because it will be simply a 
part of what we always do as ‘business as usual’. It’s the only 
way we can fulfi l our obligation towards social responsibility 
within our fi eld as engineers.
 2.4.3 Corporate Social 
Responsibility
Petter Matthews
 Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) has moved from the 
margins to the mainstream, from a preoccupation with public 
relations and philanthropy, to a concern with a range of stra-
tegic issues that are of critical importance to policy-makers 
and practitioners. It has become inextricably linked with the 
key global challenges of our time including governance,  cli-
mate change, security and international development. And 
most importantly, CSR is now seen as a mechanism through 
which the skills, technology, economic power and global reach 
of the private sector can be applied to the challenges of fi ght-
ing poverty and achieving the  Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs).
Given these developments, it is perhaps surprising that CSR 
 remains so poorly understood and that there are still so few 
examples of it having directly contributed to  poverty reduc-
tion. CSR as a discipline still lacks well elaborated methodolo-
gies to capture its eff ects, and for many companies it is no 
more than a gloss on what is essentially ‘business as usual’. Th e 
private sector has benefi ted from improved markets access in 
recent years, but has not yet fully understood that these ben-
efi ts are accompanied by new social responsibilities. Business 
as usual is a wholly inadequate response given the critical chal-
lenges that we face. Systemic change is necessary. Th is means 
developing new and innovative business models, transforming 
business management systems and building genuine cross-
sectoral partnerships. In eff ect, the challenge is to develop a 
‘second generation’ of approaches to CSR.
Th is paper focuses on the implications of this for the engi-
neering industry. While recognizing the crucial role of small 
and medium enterprises, it is concerned primarily with the 
role of large international companies. It begins by summariz-
ing the objections to CSR that in themselves constitute bar-
riers to progress. It goes on to explain why CSR is especially 
relevant to the engineering industry, and discusses a practical 
method for selecting opportunities. Th e paper concludes by 
considering the implications of failure of CSR for business and 
for  society.
Objections to CSR
Objections to CSR are made by opponents to it from across 
the institutional spectrum. Those opposed to CSR from a 
‘campaigning’ perspective dismiss it as a corporate-driven 
distraction that diverts attention from the need for proper 
enforceable regulation.41 Th ey argue that only the state is man-
dated to protect the public interest, and question the legiti-
macy of corporate infl uence over public policy. It is of course 
true that regulation is often very weak, particularly in devel-
oping countries, and this situation is sometimes exploited by 
irresponsible companies. In fact, it is the absence of regula-
tion that has acted as a driver of CSR in many circumstances, 
as  responsible companies have sought to compensate for the 
governance defi cit.42 However, a problem with the campaign-
ing perspective is that it tends to pitch business interests 
against  society. Of course there are tensions, but there is also 
interdependence. A more fruitful strategy is to use this inter-
dependence to build symbiotic relationships so that business 
and societal interests become mutually reinforcing.
Critics of CSR from the ‘market economy’ perspective argue 
that business fulfi ls its role in  society simply by pursuing its 
own self-interest.43 Th ey reject measures to manage a com-
pany’s social impacts beyond those required by law and mar-
41 See for example the work of the Corporate Responsibility Coalition (Core) at http://
www.corporate-responsibility.org
42 Marsden, C. and Grayson, D. 2007. Th e Business of Business is . . .? Unpicking the Corpo-
rate Responsibility Debate, Th e Doughty Centre for Corporate Responsibility, Cranfi eld 
School of Management.
43 Hopkins, M. 2006.  Corporate Social Responsibility & International Development, 
pp. 17–19, Earthscan, London.
1946: Arup founded by Ove Arup, Danish philosopher  ■
and engineer, proponent of a multi-disciplinary 
approach to design that included societal factors as well 
as design and technical issues. 
1970: In a seminal speech to the firm, Ove Arup  ■
articulated his vision of the firm’s obligation to our 
environment. Th e speech is still relevant today.
1998: Arup adopts as its mission ‘we shape a better  ■
world’. It underlines the signifi cant impact the fi rm has 
on almost all aspects of the built environment.
2001: Arup’s first sustainability forum at Boston’s  ■
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
2005:  ■ Forum for the Future sustainability presentation to 
Arup’s global strategy meeting. 
2007 (September): Sustainability policy is ratified,  ■
recognizing the wider infl uence we have in the work we 
do for our clients, as well as by running our business in 
a sustainable way.
2008 (March): Sustainability Statement published.  ■
Sustainability at Arup
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   50 14/09/10   15:34:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  A N D  H U MA N  D E V E LO PM E N T 
51
ket forces. Th is view is often associated with the economist 
Milton Friedman in his infl uential article, Th e social responsi-
bility of business is to increase its profi ts.44 Th e problem with 
this perspective is that it overlooks the social contract that 
exists between the corporation and the state. Th e primary 
responsibility of business is the production and distribution of 
the goods and services that  society needs. Th e right to make 
a profi t from this social function is granted to corporations 
by the state and demands justifi cation. CSR is an attempt to 
justify this right by responding to  society’s changing expecta-
tions of business.
Th e objections to CSR from campaigning and market economy 
perspectives both have important lessons. Robust regulation 
is necessary to curb unrestrained corporate behaviour and 
ensure compliance with minimum  standards. Th is is particu-
larly important in the developing world where workers and 
poorer communities are especially vulnerable. But unlocking 
the full potential of the private sector also requires incentives 
that encourage companies to go beyond compliance with 
minimum  standards and innovate in delivering high  standards 
of social and environmental performance. Getting this combi-
nation of regulation and incentives is of critical importance in 
developing the second generation of CSR.
CSR and the engineering industry
Th e engineering industry and its clients have been at the fore-
front of the development of CSR in recent years. Th ere are two 
important reasons for this. First, the markets for its goods and 
services are increasingly shifting towards the developing world. 
A number of factors have combined to boost government 
expenditure and increase demand for  infrastructure and ser-
vices. Th ese include several years of record economic growth 
in many low and middle-income countries prior to the current 
 economic crisis, sustained increases in natural resource com-
modity prices over the long term and higher levels of develop-
ment assistance. Th e  OECD estimates that through to 2030, 
 telecommunications, road, rail, water, electricity and other 
 energy related  infrastructure will require investment equal 
to 3.5 per cent of global GDP.45 Th is means we should expect 
approximately US$2.6 trillion dollars to be needed annually 
for constructing new and maintaining and replacing existing 
 infrastructure by 2030. Developing countries will be major 
growth centres for the engineering industry in the next twenty 
to thirty years. 
Second, the core activities of the engineering industry, such 
as building, maintaining and operating  infrastructure, exploit-
ing natural resources and large-scale manufacturing, impact 
directly on the lives of poor people and are often conducted 
44 Friedman, M. Th e Social Responsibility of Business is to Increase its Profi ts, Th e New York 
Times Magazine, September 13, 1970.
45 Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (2008) Infrastructure to 
2030,  OECD, Paris.
in close proximity to them. Companies must manage their 
relationships with the disadvantaged who are either directly 
or indirectly aff ected by their operations, as well as a range of 
other stakeholders who tend to prioritize  poverty reduction 
including governments, NGOs and international agencies. CSR 
off ers companies a way of managing these complex relation-
ships and building a ‘social license to operate’. 
Of course there are a range of additional factors that are also 
driving the need for a second generation of CSR that apply 
across industrial sectors. Th ese include pressure from cam-
paigners, shareholders and ethical investors, the demand for 
new technologies, compliance with global frameworks such 
as the UN Global Compact46 and the growing recognition that 
responsible companies tend to attract and retain the best 
employees.
Identifying opportunities
When fully integrated into corporate strategy, CSR can 
become a source of opportunity and competitive advan-
tage, and a driver of  innovation. Jane Nelson has proposed a 
framework of four strategies for individual fi rms to strengthen 
their contribution to local development and  poverty reduc-
tion  (Figure 1). Th ree of these strategies, compliance with 
regulation, charitable contributions and managing costs, risks 
and negative impacts, represent the conventional corporate 
responses to managing social issues. Th e more innovative 
fourth strategy ‘creating new value’ combines improved social 
outcomes with competitive advantage and is a critical princi-
ple that underpins the second generation of CSR. Porter and 
Kramer refer to outcomes based on this principle as ‘shared 
value’. Th ey argue that the most valuable corporate societal 
contributions, ‘ …occur when a company adds a social dimen-
sion to its value proposition, making social impact integral to 
the overall strategy.’47
46 See http://www.unglobalcompact.org/
47 Harvard Business Review, December 2006, Harvard University, Cambridge MA. pp. 10.
 Evinos Dam, Greece.
© Arup
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   51 14/09/10   15:34:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
52
Opportunities for creating ‘new value’ or ‘shared value’ are 
particularly strong in the engineering and construction sector. 
Its activities are of great societal importance, e.g. the creation 
and maintenance of essential social and economic  infrastruc-
ture. Also, engineering and construction activities tend to have 
a large physical, social and economic ‘footprint’ that creates a 
wide range of opportunities for creating new value. However, 
the opportunities will vary between sectors and geographical 
regions and even between the individual operations of a par-
ticular company. It is important therefore to adopt a system-
atic approach to identifying and selecting opportunities. Th e 
Economic and Social Performance Framework (ESPF) devel-
oped by  Engineers Against Poverty is an example of a practical 
tool designed for this purpose.49
48 Adapted from Nelson, J., Leveraging the Development Impact of Business in the Fight 
Against Global Poverty, Working Paper 22, John F. Kennedy School of Government, 
 Harvard University, Cambridge MA.
49 Go to: http://www.engineersagainstpoverty.org
Th e second generation of CSR has to have a fi rm theoretical 
underpinning, but it also requires practical methods, such 
as the ESPF, to implement improvements and measure their 
eff ects. Th is is where the engineering industry can excel and 
lead the development of the second generation of CSR.
Th e consequences of failure
Th at CSR is such a prominent issue is evidence of a defi ciency in 
the relationship between business and  society. If this relationship 
can be reconstituted on the basis of shared value, the interests of 
the company and of  society can become mutually reinforcing. 
And the activities that we currently refer to as CSR will become 
indistinguishable from the core business of the company.
Business should not be expected to lead the fi ght against pov-
erty, which is the role of governments and multilateral agencies, 
but simply increasing aid and writing off  debt are unlikely to 
deliver cost eff ective and sustainable solutions in the long term. 
Unlocking the development potential of the private sector rep-
resents what is probably the single greatest opportunity to step-
up the fi ght against poverty. A window of opportunity exists for 
business to innovate and lead the necessary changes and if they 
fail, they will probably come to regret the disruptive social, envi-
ronmental and economic consequences that are likely to result 
from a failure to meet the  Millennium Development Goals.
50 Adapted from EAP & ODI. 2007. http://www.odi.org.uk/events/details.
asp?id=168&title=underutilised-value-multinational-engineering-fi rms-supporting-
oil-companies-tackle-poverty (Accessed: 5 May 2010). 
Figure 1: Strategies to strengthen the contribution to development by 
the individual fi rm48
Figure 2: Schematic of an Economic and Social Performance Framework (ESPF) 
for the oil and gas industry50
Th e ESPF encourages companies to seek a detailed understanding of 
the local environment and those using it are encouraged to consult 
with local stakeholders. Th e knowledge that is acquired and the rela-
tionships built tend to discourage thinking about the companies’ 
interaction with  society as a zero sum game. Th e opportunities that 
emerge are measured against their potential to create value that is 
meaningful to local stakeholders and provide competitive value for 
the company. Th e ESPF also encourages companies to think about 
CSR as a driver of  innovation. Poverty, sustainability and  climate 
change have become ‘market shaping’ issues that are unlikely to dis-
appear even during periods of economic downturn.
Shareholder value added
Do positive 
good
Societal 
value
added
Do no harm
Business as usual Build competitive advantage
Create new 
value
Control
• Costs
• Risks
• Negative impact
Charity
Compliance
Economic and Social 
Drivers
(demand-side)
Constrainst
demand-side and 
supply-side
Local Content 
Opportunities
Local Content 
General Strategies
(options)
Local Content Value 
Proposition
 • Competitive 
Diff erentiation
Scope of Work and 
Competencies 
Drivers
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   52 14/09/10   15:34:17
Engineering: 3 
Emerging Issues and Challenges
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   53 14/09/10   15:34:19
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
54
Emerging issues, challenges and opportunities for engineering 
relate to internal and external factors. Internally, the decline 
of interest and  enrolment of young people, especially women 
in engineering is a major concern for future capacity. Exter-
nally, in the development context, emerging issues, challenges 
and opportunities relate to the  Millennium Development 
Goals, especially  poverty reduction and sustainability, and 
increasingly to  climate change mitigation and adaptation. Th is 
chapter has a focus on external issues, challenges and oppor-
tunities, with  enrolment issues covered later in the chapter on 
engineering  education. Th e chapter begins with a section on 
 foresight and forecasts of the future, providing a background 
in  foresight of science and technology and  innovation, and 
drawing on the many  foresight exercises that have been con-
ducted around the world. A section on emerging and future 
areas of engineering emphasizes the increasing importance of 
engineering and sustainability, urbanization and globalization, 
and increasingly important domains of engineering relating to 
materials,  energy, information and systems, and bioengineer-
ing. Th e theme of sustainability is developed in the section on 
the changing climate and increasing need for engineers and 
engineering of the future – beginning in the present – to focus 
on areas relating to  climate change mitigation and adaptation. 
Th e following section examines the issues of information and 
advocacy, public and policy awareness and infl uence, and how 
to get the engineering message across from a professional  com-
munications viewpoint. Th e chapter concludes with a view of 
engineering and technology in the third millennium.
Engineering, 3.1  foresight and forecasts of the future
Ian Miles
Futures studies have been with us for a long time, but the term 
‘ foresight’ has only come into wide use in recent years. A striking 
development in the last decade of the twentieth century was the 
growing prominence of large-scale  foresight exercises conducted 
at national and international levels. Th is trend was amplifi ed in 
the new millennium. Th ese exercises, usually funded by govern-
ments and intended to provide insights for  innovation policy, 
priorities for  research and development funding, and the like,1 
frequently went by the name ‘Technology Foresight’. Th e Japa-
nese experience from the 1970s onwards (using technology  fore-
casting to help build shared understandings of how science and 
technology might better meet social needs and market opportu-
nities) was the initial inspiration for early eff orts in  Europe. Th ese 
large-scale European experiences were widely diff used in turn.
Common to  foresight, as opposed to many other futures studies, is 
the link of long-term analysis (beyond the usual business time hori-
zon) to policy-making (often to specifi c pending decisions about 
 research or  innovation policies) and the emphasis on wide partici-
pation (involving stakeholders who may be sources of knowledge 
not available to the ‘great and good’, whose engagement may pro-
vide the exercise with more legitimacy and whose actions may be 
necessary complements to those taken by government).
Several factors converged to foreground  foresight. First was 
the need to prioritize  research budgets – choices needed to be 
made as to where to invest, as governments were not able to 
1 For documentation of a large number of  foresight activities, see the European Foresight 
Monitoring Network at http://www.efmn.eu – the overview report is particularly help-
ful for statistical analysis. R. Popper et al., 2007. Global Foresight Outlook 2007 at http://
www. foresight-network.eu/fi les/reports/efmn_mapping_2007.pdf  (Accessed: 5 May 
2010).
continue increasing funding across the whole spectrum. Th e 
legitimacy of huge funding decisions being made eff ectively by 
the very scientists and engineers that benefi tted from them was 
also in doubt, not least because some emerging areas seemed 
to be neglected (the Japanese ‘Fifth Generation’ programme in 
the 1980s was a wake-up call,2 triggering a wave of large public 
 research and development programmes in information tech-
nology throughout the industrial world). Foresight, and other 
tools like evaluation studies, was seen as providing ways of mak-
ing more knowledge-based and transparent decisions.
Second, there were growing concerns about the implications of 
science and technology and how to shape development so that 
new technologies could prove more socially and environmentally 
benefi cial. A succession of environmental concerns (pesticides, 
nuclear accidents, ozone depletion and  climate change), food 
panics (in the UK alone there were, in quick succession, scares 
around salmonella and listeria, BSE, foot-and-mouth disease, 
and avian fl u – all of them implicating modern farming and food 
processing techniques, and with huge economic costs even when 
human mortality was low), and social and ethical concerns, mainly 
around biomedical issues in human reproduction and the use of 
tissues and stem cells, with emerging problems over decisions 
about death, applications of new neuroscience and technology, 
enhancement of human capabilities, and the prospect of artifi -
cial intelligence in the not-so-distant future. Nanotechnologies, 
or their treatment in the media, are also contributing to unease 
about how technology decisions are made and where they may 
be taking us. Foresight can contribute to creating visions of future 
2 Feigenbaum, A. and McCorduck, P. 1983. Th e Fifth Generation: Artifi cial Intelligence and 
Japan’s Computer Challenge to the World London, Michael Joseph. Th is book had an 
electrifying impact here.
 Ariane 4 rocket.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   54 14/09/10   15:34:20
E N G I N E E R I N G :  E M E R G I N G  I S S U E S  A N D  C H A L L E N G E S 
55
possibilities, and as well as positive visions  there are warnings 
about dangers and barriers to the realization of opportunities. 
A third set of factors concern  innovation. Innovation has come 
to be recognized as a key element in competitiveness, national 
performance and achieving socio-economic objectives. More 
precisely, many countries have come to feel that there are 
weaknesses in their  innovation systems – the institutions, and 
relationships between institutions, that generate and apply 
knowledge (in science and technology laboratories, applied 
engineering, design, higher and vocational public services, 
commercial enterprises, policymaking, fi nance and so on). 
Foresight was seen to provide tools that could help connect 
and integrate components of  innovation systems, and indeed 
some exercises (e.g. France’s FUTURIS)3 have been explicitly 
aimed at informing decisions about restructuring national 
laboratories and the  innovation system more generally.
Many countries have embarked on large-scale  foresight exer-
cises, and in several cases we are now into the third or even 
later round of such exercises. In some cases, it remains a spe-
cialized activity impelled by one part of government; in oth-
ers  foresight approaches have been embedded much more 
widely. Expertise has been developed in using techniques such 
as road-mapping, scenario analysis, Delphi surveys and trend 
analysis, and there are interesting developments in the appli-
cation of information technology to support these approaches 
and provide new means of decision support.
One lesson learned early on during these exercises was that it 
is important to bring together expertise in social aff airs, busi-
ness management, fi nancial issues and policy, together with 
expertise possessed by scientists and engineers.4 Exercises that 
neglected this found themselves hastily having to plug these 
knowledge gaps. Foresight activities – in the most successful 
exercises – proved a valuable setting to enable experts of many 
kinds to share and fuse their knowledge, to break away from 
their  standard presentations and immediate preoccupations, 
to articulate their understandings about longer-term devel-
opments and to explore how these did or did not align with 
those of experts in adjacent and related areas.
What has proved to be at a premium is the capability to possess 
(and share) highly specialized knowledge, but also to be able to 
relate this understanding to the issues raised in a wide range of 
other fi elds; people with ‘T-shaped skill profi les’ (people with in-
3 See R. Barré Foresight in France, Chp. 5 in L. Georghiou et al. (eds, 2008) Th e Hand-
book of Technology Foresight, Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA:  Edward 
Elgar (Th is Handbook provides much more depth on many of the issues discussed in 
the present text). A good account is also available at: http://forlearn.jrc.ec.europa.eu/
guide/7_cases/futuris_operation.htm (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
4 See the study of ‘industrially-oriented  foresight, J. Molas-Gallart et al. (2001). A Trans-
national Analysis of the Result and Implications of Industrially-oriented Technology Fore-
sight Studies, ESTO Report, EUR No: EUR 20138 EN available at: http://www.p2pays.
org/ref/05/04160.pdf (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
depth knowledge of their own domain as well as competence in 
a much broader spectrum of managerial, interpersonal and other 
skills).  Additionally,  foresight required open-minded people; the 
experts have to be able to participate on the basis of the knowl-
edge they possess, not simply to argue positions that refl ect 
corporate or sectional interests. Th us a combination of cogni-
tive, social, professional and ethical capabilities are required. Th is 
sort of profi le is liable to be in demand in any engineering work 
where relations with customers and users, and perspectives that 
go beyond immediate project management, are required.  
Foresight exercises have addressed a multitude of topics5 but 
an inescapable feature is that, across the board, we are con-
tinuing to move toward a world in which more and more of 
our social and economic activities are instrumented:6 where 
we use new technologies to transform the material world and 
design and simulate these transformations; where technolo-
gies mediate our interactions and help us codify and collate 
our knowledge; where we have increasingly powerful tools to 
intervene in both tangible and intangible elements of complex 
systems, and to help us understand such systems. New forms 
of engineering are emerging (service engineering and bioengi-
neering being two examples), as are new approaches to  educa-
tion and lifelong learning. Th ere is probably no single future for 
engineering; new specialisms will emerge, new skill profi les and 
hybrid combinations will be required and new professions will 
develop that have a greater or lesser engineering component. 
Personal  foresight will be an asset that should enable individu-
als to make informed choices in these shifting landscapes.
Meanwhile,  foresight programmes underline the central role 
played by engineers and engineering in creating the future. 
Hopefully, such activities will continue to be diff used and insti-
tutionalized so that the essential links between engineering 
and social and environmental concerns can be deepened and 
made more eff ective.7 In this way, debate and action around 
long-term opportunities and threats will be informed by 
knowledge of the strengths and limitations of engineering cap-
abilities and of the structure and urgency of social concerns.
5 See the EFMN database.  Even one country’s activities can span a vast range, for exam-
ple recent projects in UK Foresight have concerned themes as various as Flooding, 
Obesity, Drugs and Brain Science, Exploiting the Electromagnetic Spectrum, Detection 
and Identifi cation of Infectious Diseases, and Intelligent Infrastructures. Go to http://
www. foresight.gov.uk for details of these and many more projects.
6 Th is term is borrowed from IBM’s Samuel J. Palmisano in his paper A Smarter Planet: Th e 
Next Leadership Agenda available at http://www.ibm.com/ibm/ideasfromibm/us/smart-
planet/20081106/sjp_speech.shtml  (Accessed: 5 May 2010).  Much of this is also described 
in terms of being ‘informated’ or ‘infomated’, but other technologies are being employed 
alongside information technology, for example, genomics and nanotechnologies.
7 An interesting step here is the introduction of ‘Engineering Foresight’ modules into 
engineering courses, for example a course for third year mechanical engineering 
students at Manchester University intended to equip them for the sort of projects 
they may be working on in the future. Th e course, with a horizon of several decades, 
particularly explores “step change, disruptive technology and scientifi c breakthrough 
rather than incremental product and process development”, and locates mechanical 
engineering in relation to future markets, societies and technologies by training in 
students in various  forecasting techniques. Go to: http://www.manchester.ac.uk/ 
 Th e Vizcaya Bridge in 
northern Spain – designed 
by de Palacio in 1887 and 
UNESCO World Heritage site.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   55 14/09/10   15:34:20
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
56
In the last fi ve decades a set of increasingly urgent global issues 
has emerged that call for an unprecedented move across the 
broad engagement of engineering, ranging from how to make 
the world sustainable in its social, economic and environmen-
tal dimensions, to how to cope with urbanization and globali-
zation. Many of these challenges are underscored by a recent 
study on Grand Engineering Challenges by the National Acad-
emy of Engineering in the USA.8
An incipient broadening of the traditional frontiers of engi-
neering that encompass interactions with sociology, econom-
ics, political science and other social sciences and processes, 
with healthcare and with the agricultural sciences, is beginning 
to enable engineers to play a more eff ective and integrated 
role in addressing these issues. At the same time, the emer-
gence of several fundamental new engineering endeavours, 
closely interwoven with science, from nanotechnology to bio-
engineering has the potential to revolutionize engineering and 
to impact on global issues in not yet fully fathomed ways.
Economic, Social and Environmental Sustainability
In the area of engineering for economic sustainability, the chal-
lenges are to design technologies and systems that can facili-
tate global commerce, foster technological  innovations and 
entrepreneurship, and help generate jobs, while minimizing 
environmental impacts and using resources effi  ciently.
In the social domain, engineering is challenged to design sys-
tems that can facilitate  education and healthcare, enhance 
the quality of life, help eliminate global poverty, and help 
humans preserve their humanity in a world increasingly paced 
by machines. In each of these areas, the engineering contribu-
tion is indispensable, but bound to fail without a close synergy 
with political and economic forces. An emerging challenge to 
engineering is also to develop technological approaches that 
can help prevent or mitigate hostile acts, reduce the impact of 
natural  disasters, and motivate humans to reduce their draw 
on the resources of the planet.
Th e traditional role of engineering in the quest for resources 
– from water to food,  energy and materials – needs to be 
reinforced and expanded by new approaches, as well as in the 
increasingly important role of engineering in resource conser-
vation and waste management.
Th e uneven distribution of water across continents and regions 
and its limited availability make enormous demands on engi-
8 NAE (National Academy of Engineering), February 15, 2008. Go to: http://www.engi-
neeringchallenges.org
neering skills, from devising more eff ective systems for water 
and wastewater treatment and for recycling, to desalination, 
reducing evaporation losses in reservoirs, stanching the large 
amount of leakage from old distribution systems and building 
new recirculation systems.
Food supply, doubled by the green revolution in the last 
quarter of the previous century, is again threatening to 
become insuffi  cient because of the increasing demands of 
rapidly growing populations and economies, the increasing 
use of agricultural land for the development of biofuels, and 
the depletion of fi sh stocks. Th is calls for new engineering 
approaches, including aquiculture and applications of genet-
ics. In many countries, the large percentage of food spoiled 
in storage and transport is a problem that we can no longer 
defer. Neither can the threats to food security that are height-
ened by  climate change, aff ecting 30 per cent of farmers in 
developing countries (Brown and Funk, 2008),9 and wich will 
place new demands on agricultural engineering and global 
logistics.
In  energy, engineering is challenged to continue to improve 
technologies for the collection, in all its manifestations, of the 
inexhaustible but widely dispersed solar  energy, for the extrac-
tion of oil, for tapping thermal  energy from the interior of the 
Earth, and for providing environmentally sustainable power 
and light to large segments of the world’s population. Integra-
tion into power grids of large amounts of intermittent solar 
and wind power is a major challenge, and so is the devising 
of economical storage mechanisms – large and small – that 
would have widespread utility, including also the reduction of 
power plant capacities required to supply power at peak hours. 
Improvement in effi  ciency of  energy utilization to reduce the 
large percentage (about 50 per cent) of global  energy supply 
wasted is a global engineering challenge of the fi rst magni-
tude, and so is the decarbonization of emissions from fossil 
fuel power plants, e.g. through underground gasifi cation and 
deep coal deposits. Th e need to replace liquid hydrocarbons, 
which power much of the world’s  transportation systems, is 
particularly urgent, and the prospect of doing so by biomo-
lecular engineering of plant microbes or by hydrogen fuel cells 
is emerging as a more desirable possibility than making biofu-
els from agricultural biomass.
Th e challenges in the area of material resources are to fi nd 
more sustainable substitutes (as in the structural use of com-
posites, soil, plastic refuse and agricultural byproducts), so as 
9 Brown, M. E. and C. C. Funk. 2008. Food security under  climate change, Science, 
Vol. 319, pp. 580–581, 1 February.
Emerging and future areas of engineering3.2 
George Bugliarello
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   56 14/09/10   15:34:20
E N G I N E E R I N G :  E M E R G I N G  I S S U E S  A N D  C H A L L E N G E S 
57
to reutilize those in scarce supply, such as copper, to recycle 
them and to develop eff ective closed cycles of materials fl ow 
between production and utilization.
In the area of environment, engineering is challenged to help 
reduce the encroachment of the footprints that human habi-
tats and activities leave on it, from the destruction caused by 
expanding human habitats and by confl icts, to the indiscrimi-
nate mining and transformation of resources, the impact of 
dams on wildlife, the emissions to the atmosphere of health-
threatening and global warming gases, as well as the higher 
atmospheric temperatures over cities that also contribute to 
global warming; the ‘heat island’ phenomenon. Increased effi  -
ciencies in the use of all resources, moderation of consump-
tion, recycling of materials, confl ict resolution, containment 
of sprawl, and alternative forms of  energy become ever more 
imperative engineering challenges. So is the ever greater waste 
disposal problem, including the thorny problem of nuclear 
waste, to protect human health and the environment. Th e 
preservation of the integrity of critical habitats of other spe-
cies to enable them to coexist with human activities demands 
careful infrastructural design and site planning. All these chal-
lenges can only be overcome through the synergy of new tech-
nologies and public understanding of the necessity of new 
policies.
Urbanization
Urbanization is a second urgent, emerging global development 
issue with now half the global population living in cities. In the 
developing world, that percentage is projected to continue to 
rise explosively in the foreseeable future, while the developed 
world is already largely urbanized. Th is makes global sustain-
ability increasingly aff ected by the impact of cities, large and 
small. Th e rapidly changing demographic profi les of cities chal-
lenge engineering to address the needs of the massive wave 
of young populations in cities of the developing world, with-
out neglecting their eventual greying as their life expectancy 
increases, already a burgeoning problem in the developed 
world. Th is will require rethinking the design of many inter-
faces between humans and artefacts to facilitate their use. Th e 
urban engineering challenges are to help fi nd ways to provide 
for this tidal wave of urban growth with solutions for adequate 
housing, mobility, water, sanitation, electricity,  telecommuni-
cations, and clean air for all citizens by using local resources 
as much as possible to develop  infrastructure systems that 
can follow the expansion of urban areas, and thus help reduce 
the horrendous blight of urban poverty by creating new job 
opportunities (Bugliarello, 2008).10 Urbanization also requires 
the improvement of quality of life in cities by managing con-
gestion and reducing pollution and noise – in any country.
10 Bugliarello, G. 2008. Urban sustainability and its engineering challenges. Journal of 
Urban Technology, April.
With the continuing expansion of cities over areas at risk from 
earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, inundations, devastating 
storms and tsunamis, and with cities becoming frequent tar-
gets of hostile activities, engineering is ever more challenged 
to fi nd ways to enhance the protection of the populations at 
risk through more robust and resilient  infrastructures, more 
eff ective warning systems, and more realistic evacuation or 
shelter-in-place plans.
Th roughout the range of urban sustainability needs of the 
developing world, good enough solutions will have to be engi-
neered that are more aff ordable than the traditional ones of 
the developed world, and that can rapidly satisfy a majority 
of needs. Th ey range from cheaper and faster construction, to 
simpler maintenance and repair, ‘green’  energy-, material- and 
environment-saving technologies, more fl exible urban mobil-
ity solutions (as in bus rapid transport (BRT) systems) and 
 telecommunications systems that provide broadband inter-
connections without expensive land links.
Globalization
Globalization of the world economy presents engineering with 
a third major set of challenges: to help provide populations, 
regions and individuals with access to global knowledge, mar-
kets and institutions by enhancing  transportation systems, the 
diff usion of information and fast Internet technologies, the 
provision of technical training required to participate in the 
global economy, and through the development of common 
 standards to facilitate the synergies of engineering capacities 
across the globe.
New fundamental engineering endeavours
New and prospective challenges in four fundamental engi-
neering domains: materials,  energy, information and systems, 
as well as bioengineering, off er vast new possibilities for the 
future.
In the domain of materials: it is becoming increasingly possible 
through nanotechnology and bionanotechnology to create, 
ion-by-ion, atom-by-atom, or molecule-by-molecule, materi-
als with a broad range of capabilities, from enhanced struc-
tural strength (Dzenis, 2008)11 to sensing, transferring  energy, 
interacting with light at the scale of light’s wavelength, and 
changing characteristics on command (Vaia and Baur, 2008).12 
Th is will have the eff ect of revolutionizing manufacturing, 
construction and  infrastructures. Composite materials, also 
utilizing a variety of natural materials, make it possible to cre-
ate strong, lightweight structures. Large-scale self-assembly of 
materials and microstructures is a more distant but important 
possibility. Materials and  energy are linked in the emerging 
11 Dzenis, Y. 2008. Structural nanocomputers. Science, Vol. 319, pp. 419–420, 25 January.
12 Vaia, R. and J. Baur. 2008. Adaptive composites. Science, Vol. 319, pp. 420–421, 25 Janu-
ary.
 Th e Eastgate Centre in 
Harare, Zimbabwe, designed 
from a termite mound for 
natural ventilation.
© CCBY - Wikimedia - Mandy Paterson
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   57 14/09/10   15:34:20
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
58
concept of deconstructable structures and in the develop-
ment of recycling, so as to reuse as much as possible the mate-
rials and the  energy embedded within them.
In the  energy domain: developments in fuel cells, biomass and 
waste incinerators, bacterial electricity generators, biofuel 
engines, photovoltaic generators and thermal collectors with 
greater effi  ciencies, in both large and small scale advanced 
wind turbines and in micro-hydro turbines, all have imme-
diate applications to development. High-voltage supercon-
ducting direct current lines off er the prospect – by reducing 
long distance power losses – to capture distant sources of 
 energy and to transmit  energy globally. Also of considerable 
potential impact is the demonstrated possibility of using the 
 energy from walking in order to generate a current suffi  cient 
enough to power low wattage electronic devices. A future 
challenge responding to a universal need is the design of bat-
teries with greater specifi c storage capacity per unit weight. 
Advanced new lighting systems can replace CO2 generating 
fuel burning lamps and fi res as well as ineffi  cient incandes-
cent bulbs. Nuclear fusion is still a hope of distant realization, 
but building a large number of advanced, inherently stable 
fi ssion reactors with a safe proliferation-proof fuel cycle to 
supply base power will become increasingly necessary to 
reduce greenhouse emissions, and in the absence of other 
kinds of  energy supply.
In the information domain: personal portable devices, which 
are revolutionizing individual  communications and access 
to the internet, will become ever more integrated into single 
multi-function, multi-purpose devices combining voice, data, 
and imaging thanks to the future development of billion tran-
sistor microchips and universal open  standards. Th is will have 
great impact on areas not reached by traditional telephone 
systems for reasons of geography, cost or organization. Con-
tinuing advances in semiconductor electronics and computer 
architecture (Ferry, 2008)13 will make ever more powerful (pen-
tafl ops and more) computers possible, with enormous impact 
on engineering analysis and design and the study of biological, 
social and environmental phenomena. Information is key to 
increasing the effi  ciency in the use of  energy and materials. It 
is also key – in synergy with systems engineering – to globally 
improving the performance of healthcare systems, social ser-
vices, manufacturing,  transportation and other infrastructural 
systems, agriculture and geophysics, and mineral prospecting 
and extraction, all major development challenges.
In every major global challenge, from the eradication of the 
endemic blight of poverty, to universal and eff ective health-
care,  economic development, urbanization, security and glo-
bal warming, systems engineering of the highest order is called 
for as it must encompass and harmonize social, political and 
13 Ferry, D. K. 2008. Nanowires in nanoelectronics. Science, Vol. 319, pp. 579–580,
1 February.
economic systems, healthcare and nutrition issues, as well 
as the more traditional engineering systems that deal with 
water and  energy supply, construction,  infrastructures and 
production. To respond to many of these systems engineer-
ing challenges, the incipient developments of agent-based and 
multi-scale modeling off er the possibility of including more 
realistic behavioural components as well as encompassing in 
a model dimensions that range from the nano- to the macro-
scale. A promising systems engineering frontier is also the crea-
tion of more sophisticated robots and robotic systems for use 
in a wide range of applications, from helping the disabled to 
manufacturing and the performance of dangerous tasks.
Bioengineering
Bioengineering, the interaction of engineering with biology 
and medicine, will be of increasing signifi cance in health-
care, industry and agriculture, and in everyday life. A host of 
emerging achievements encompasses for instance biological 
treatments of drinking water (Brown, 2007),14 tissue engineer-
ing for the replacement of diseased biological tissues and the 
creation of new tissues, the engineering of all sorts of sophis-
ticated artifi cial organs (including artifi cial limbs and ocular 
prostheses), advances in instrumentation, sensors, as well as 
more powerful and faster diagnostic approaches and drug 
delivery to the organism, accelerated vaccine production 
(Heuer, 2006),15 and the engineering of proteins, genes and 
organisms. Many of these advances, of potentially great sig-
nifi cance for development, are made possible by progress in 
miniaturization (e.g. the laboratory or the factory on a chip), 
computational soft- and hardware, imaging and visualiza-
tion, and by mechatronics – the combination of mechanical 
devices and electronics.
An emerging but still largely unfathomed aspect of bioengi-
neering is biomimesis, the search for new ideas and ‘proofs of 
concept’ for engineering designs stemming from  research in 
the characteristics of living systems. It can be expected to lead 
to cheaper or more effi  cient and eff ective solutions, as in the 
simple example of ventilation systems inspired by the design 
of termite mounds, or in the great structural strength achieved 
in nature by the synergy of multiple hydrogen bonds.
A new branch of engineering
Out of all these new challenges and possibilities, a new inter-
disciplinary thrust of engineering can be expected to emerge, 
what can perhaps be called engineering for development 
– and would not just be for developing countries. Engineer-
ing for development would respond to the global need for 
engineers who understand the problems of  human devel-
opment and sustainability, and can bring to bear on them 
14 Brown, J. C. 2007. Biological treatment of drinking water, The Bridge, Winter, 
pp. 30–35.
15 Heuer, A. H. (Ed.). 2006. Engineering and vaccine production for an infl uenza pan-
demic. Th e Bridge, Vol. 36, No. 3, Autumn.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   58 14/09/10   15:34:20
E N G I N E E R I N G :  E M E R G I N G  I S S U E S  A N D  C H A L L E N G E S 
59
their engineering knowledge. Th ey are motivated by a sense 
of the future, and are able to interact with other disciplines, 
with communities and with political leaders, to design and 
implement solutions. In this context, an often overlooked but 
essential responsibility of engineering is to help recognize, 
prevent or mitigate possible unwanted consequences of new 
technological developments, such as the onset of tropical dis-
ease arising from the damming of rivers in tropical regions, 
the destruction of thin soils created by mechanized farming 
equipment, or the social instabilities caused by too rapid an 
introduction of automation.
Training a sufficient number of engineering professionals 
focused on development should become a high priority as a 
critical ingredient in the ability of the global community to deal 
with the emerging and urgent issues that confront it today.
what we need is more like a ‘silver shotgun’ approach, an inte-
grated solutions-based engineering portfolio of options, all 
travelling in the same direction. Th e engineering profession 
must now focus the creativity and ingenuity that has delivered 
today’s incredible levels of human and industrial development 
on the task of delivering sustainable engineering and develop-
ment solutions. 
Engineers of the future will focus on leading eff orts to reduce 
pollution, fi rst by reducing material fl ows and then by creating 
critical knowledge and skill sets to redesign technologies, pro-
cesses,  infrastructure and systems to be both effi  cient, produc-
tive and eff ective. 
Th e challenge for engineers of the future is to understand 
the science, engineering and design issues vital to a compre-
hensive understanding of how national economies make the 
transition to a low emissions future. Given the rapid growth 
of greenhouse gas emissions globally there is a real need for a 
greater level of urgency and sophistication around the reali-
ties of delivering cost eff ective strategies, policies and engi-
neering designs to achieve emissions stabilization globally. 
Th e Stern Review explored in detail the concept of stabiliza-
tion trajectories and pointed out that there are two distinct 
phases: 1) global emissions need to stop growing i.e. emissions 
levels would peak and begin to decline; and 2) there would 
need to be a sustained reduction of annual greenhouse gas 
emissions across the entire global economy. Th e Stern Review 
states that ‘Th e longer action is delayed, the harder it will 
become. Delaying the peak in global emissions from 2020 
to 2030 would almost double the rate of [annual] reduction 
needed to stabilize at 550ppm CO2e. A further ten-year delay 
could make stabilization at 550ppm CO2e impractical, unless 
early actions were taken to dramatically slow the growth in 
emissions prior to the peak.’17 
17 Stern, N. 2006. Th e Stern Review: Th e Economics of Climate Change, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, Chp 8: Th e Challenge of Stabilisation, p 10. Available at http://
www.sternreview.org.uk/ (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
16 Th is material is based on a submission by the author and colleagues of Th e Natural 
Edge Project to the Garnaut Climate Change Review initiated by the Australian Federal 
Government. Th e full submission can be downloaded at http://www.naturaledge-
project.net/Documents/TNEPSubmission.pdf (Accessed: 5 May 2010). 
In his closing words to the  Australia 2020 Summit, Prime Minister 
Kevin Rudd said that ‘Climate change is the overarching moral, 
economic, scientifi c, and technological challenge of our age.’ 
Responding to the challenge of  climate change provides both the 
greatest challenge and the greatest opportunity the engineering 
profession has ever faced, and this dual nature may turn out to 
be the most important ‘convenient truth’ ever realized. 
When considering Th e Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change’s statement from 2007 that ‘the world has less than 
eight years to arrest global warming or risk what many scientists 
warn could be catastrophic changes to the planet’, it would be 
easy to despair. However this is balanced by a growing realiza-
tion of the vast opportunities such a focus can deliver, such as 
that ‘Creating the low-carbon economy will lead to the great-
est economic boom in the United States since it mobilized for 
the Second World War’, as stated by the former US President 
Bill Clinton in late 2007. 
In the last two years there has been a signifi cant shift in the 
global conscience on these issues and few now believe that 
not taking action is a viable approach; some even consider it a 
disastrous, costly and amoral one. Th e daunting question that 
many are now asking is ‘are we actually destroying the world 
we are creating?’ Th ese messages are not new, however, in light 
of compelling evidence of both the challenges and opportuni-
ties for over thirty years now there is still hesitancy; there is still 
a lack of action on a broad scale, there are even eff orts to block 
such progress. Much of this results from a lack of understand-
ing, a lack of  education and competency in the proven eco-
nomic policies, scientifi c knowledge, and technological and 
design solutions currently available. 
Rather than seeking a ‘silver bullet’ solution – the one engi-
neering answer to save the world – it is becoming clear that 
A changing climate and engineers of the future3.3 16
Charlie Hargroves
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   59 14/09/10   15:34:20
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
60
Th e key to the economic impact of an ambitious approach to 
emissions reduction is to achieve a balance in the timing of 
the emissions peak and the corresponding requirement for a 
tailing off  of emissions annually. Th e challenge is the range of 
combinations of ‘peaks’ and corresponding ‘tails’ (i.e. trajec-
tories) that may deliver a given stabilization level, especially 
when considering that each trajectory will have a diff erent 
impact on the economy. A late peak will allow short-term 
reduction levels to be relaxed but will then require a greater 
level of annual sustained reduction to meet the overall target. 
An early peak will require a rapid short-term reduction level, 
but these eff orts will be rewarded by a lower level of required 
sustained annual reductions.
Australian Professor Alan Pears from the Royal Melbourne 
Institute of Technology explains, ‘[Greenhouse Gas] Emis-
sion reduction sounds like a daunting prospect, and many 
people imagine that we will have to freeze in the dark, shut 
down industry, and face misery. But remember, we don’t have 
to slash greenhouse gas emissions in a couple of years – we 
are expected to phase in savings over decades. Th is allows 
us to take advantage of the fact that most  energy producing 
or using equipment, from fridges and computers to cars and 
power stations, has to be replaced every 5 to 30 years. So we 
can minimize costs by making sure that, when old equipment 
is replaced, low greenhouse-impact alternatives are installed. 
For example, by 2020, most of  Australia ‘s coal-fi red power 
stations will be more than thirty years old, and they will have 
to be re-built or replaced;  renewable  energy, cogeneration and 
high effi  ciency  energy supply technologies (such as fuel cells) 
could replace them.’18
Th e risk is that if the peak is too soon it may have signifi cant 
impacts on our ability to maintain gradual reductions, and 
if the peak is too late the corresponding annual reductions 
may be too much for the economy to bear. As the Stern 
Review points out, ‘Given that it is likely to be diffi  cult to 
reduce emissions faster than around 3 per cent per year, 
this emphasizes the importance of urgent action now to 
slow the growth of global emissions, and therefore lower 
the peak.’19 
Th e benefi t of using stabilization trajectories as the basis for 
informing a transition in the engineering profession is so we 
can capitalize on the already abundant opportunities for 
short-term reductions to achieve the peak, while also build-
ing the experience and economies of scale to seriously tackle 
the issue of sustained reductions. Th e beauty of the sustained 
reductions model is that it allows an economy to stage the 
activities it undertakes to allow for certain industries to be 
given more time, or ‘head room’ to respond as the industries 
that can make short and medium term gains contribute to 
achieving the average overall reduction, potentially rewarded 
through an emissions trading scheme or other financial 
mechanism. When considering each country’s role in the glo-
bal community the situation becomes more complex: eff orts 
across the economy of a country will need to be aggregated 
to deliver the annual reductions overall; and international 
eff orts need to be aggregated across countries to achieve 
the global stabilization curve. Th e Garnaut Interim Report, a 
2008 economic analysis for  Australia, presented a number of 
country specifi c trajectory curves based on per capita emis-
sions that could be aggregated to achieve the overall global 
stabilization trajectory. 
It is widely agreed that expecting the rapidly developing 
countries of China and India to halt their use of fossil fuel con-
sumption is unreasonable considering that the United States, 
 Australia and other developed countries have capitalized on 
fossil fuels for decades to underpin their development. Th e 
strength of the model proposed by Professor Garnaut, and 
the main reason for our support of it, is that it provides head 
room for both China and India to develop. Moreover, if all 
countries follow their per capita curves this may actually make 
a global transition to stabilization a reality, considering that 
18 Smith, M. and Hargroves, K. 2006. Th e First Cuts Must be the Deepest, CSIRO ECOS, 
Issue 128, Dec–Jan. pp. 8–11. 
19 Stern, N. 2006. Th e Stern Review: Th e Economics of Climate Change, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge. Available at http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/sternreview_sum-
mary.htm (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
Figure 1: BAU emissions and stabilization trajectories for 450–550ppm CO2e
Source: Stern Review
Gl
ob
al 
Em
iss
io
ns
 (G
tC
O
2e
)
50GtCO2e
65GtCO2e
70GtCO2e
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2000 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050 2060 2070 2080 2090 2100
450ppm CO2e
500ppm CO2e (falling to 
450ppm CO2e in 2150)
550ppm CO2e
Business as Usual
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   60 14/09/10   15:34:21
E N G I N E E R I N G :  E M E R G I N G  I S S U E S  A N D  C H A L L E N G E S 
61
already China20 and India21 are making increasingly signifi cant 
commitments to  energy  effi  ciency, such as the Chinese 11th 
fi ve-year plan calling for a 20 per cent fall in  energy consump-
tion per unit of gross domestic product (GDP).
Experts predict the global market for  climate change solutions 
will rapidly reach US$1 trillion dollars and will continue to 
grow. Already many markets for specifi c low carbon products 
and services are among the fastest growing in the world. Th e 
European Union, Silicon Valley in the United States, China and 
Japan especially are competing to ensure that their  research 
and development (R&D) bodies and leading businesses inno-
vate the next generation in lighting technologies,  energy effi  -
cient appliances,  renewable  energy systems, and fuel effi  cient 
cars because these will create multi-billon dollar revenue 
streams for their businesses over the coming decades. Profes-
sor Garnaut summed up the challenge well in February 2008 
when launching the Interim Report. He stated that, in reaching 
targets,  Australia will have to ‘face the reality that this is a hard 
reform, but get it right and the transition to a low-emissions 
economy will be manageable … get it wrong and this is going 
to be a painful adjustment.’22 
20 See China Energy Bulletin at: http://www.energybulletin.net/3566.html (Accessed: 
5 May 2010).
21 See India Bureau of Energy Effi  ciency at: http://www.bee-india.nic.in/ (Accessed: 5 May 
2010). 
22 Maiden, S. 2008. Garnaut eyes massive carbon reductions, Th e Australian. Available 
at:  http://www.theaustralian.news.com.au/story/0,25197,23251141-11949,00.html 
 (Accessed: 5 May 2010). 
As Professor Jeff rey Sachs stated at the 2008 Delhi Sustainable 
Development Summit, ‘what is needed is good arithmetic, and 
good engineering and good economics, all combined… We 
haven’t done the work on that yet. But that is the work that we 
Table 1: Illustrative emissions paths to stabilization
Source: Stern Review
Stabilisation Level 
(CO2e)
Date of peak global 
emissions
Global emissions 
reduction rate (% 
per year)
Percentage reduction in emissions below 
2005 values
2050 2100
450 ppm
2010 7.0 70 75
2020 - - -
500 ppm
(falling to450 ppm 
in 2150)
2010 3.0 50 75
2020 4.0 – 6.0 60 – 70 75
2030 5.0[1] – 5.5[2] 50 – 60 75 – 80
2040 - - -
550 ppm
2015 1.0 25 50
2020 1.5 – 2.5 25 – 30 50 – 55
2030 2.5 – 4.0 25 – 30 50 – 55
2040 3.0 – 4.5[3] 5 - 15 50 – 60
* Garnaut Climate Change Review, 2008. Interim Report to the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments of  Australia. Available at 
http://www.garnautreview.org.au/index.htm  (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
Figure 2: Contraction and convergence for diff erent countries with ‘head 
room’ for the rapidly developing economies: a stylised, illustrative scenario.
Source: Garnaut Interim Report *
Gl
ob
al 
Em
iss
io
ns
 (G
tC
O
2e
)
time
USA/ Australia
Global average
EU/Japan
India
China
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   61 14/09/10   15:34:21
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
62
need to do in the next 2 years in my view – to show a path.’23 
When facing the issues of  climate change, it is easy to become 
hypnotized by the complexity. In order to meet the complex-
ity of the challenges with sophistication and ingenuity of the 
solutions our professions need to work together to inform on 
each others’ eff orts. 
Th e study of economics – if well informed by science – can 
provide valuable guidance as to the potential impact on an 
economy from a range of emissions reduction trajectories. A 
study of science, engineering and design, informed by eco-
nomics, can provide valuable guidance as to the potential for 
our industrial economies to achieve such trajectories in light 
of best practices and balanced by the potential impacts on 
the environment. Th erefore, on its own, a study of economics 
cannot provide all the answers to our leaders who are seriously 
considering the trajectories our emissions must follow without 
being informed by what is physically possible, i.e. by the physi-
cal sciences, engineering and design professions. Likewise, a 
study of science and engineering on its own cannot provide 
all the answers either without being informed by economics 
as to the impacts on the economy from a range of potential 
engineering and design options. 
Whether business, government and the community around 
the world identify and implement the most cost eff ective 
greenhouse gas mitigation options depends signifi cantly upon 
the state of  education and training on  climate change mitiga-
tion solutions. Whether or not decision-makers choose wise 
policy settings and practice wise adaptive governance on the 
 climate change issues in coming decades, or whether busi-
nesses respond well to a carbon price signal depends on their 
knowledge and skills at being able to identify and implement 
cost eff ective mitigation options such as  energy effi  ciency.24 
Th e Stern Review, having analysed the costs of action and inac-
tion, concluded that costs of action to the global economy 
would be roughly one per cent of GDP, and stated that ‘We 
estimate the total cost of business as usual  climate change to 
equate to an average reduction in global per capita consump-
tion of 5 per cent at a minimum now and for ever.’ 25 Th e Stern 
Review describes how the cost would increase were the model 
to take into account additional impacts on environmental 
and human health, and the eff ects of positive feedbacks and 
the disproportionate burden of  climate change on the poor 
and vulnerable globally. It predicts that if fast and dramatic 
23 Sachs, J. 2008. Valedictory Address, delivered to the Delhi Sustainable Development 
Summit, Delhi (7–9 February 2008).
24 Th e Natural Edge Project has undertaken a comprehensive national survey of the state 
of  education on  energy effi  ciency in Australian universities funded by the National 
Framework on Energy Effi  ciency, and covering 27 of the 33 universities. 
25 Stern, N. 2006. Th e Stern Review: Th e Economics of Climate Change, Executive Summary 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, p 10. Available at: http://www.hm-treasury.
gov.uk/media/8AC/F7/Executive_Summary.pdf (Accessed: 29 May 2010).
action is not taken on  climate change, then  climate change 
could cause an economic recession to rival the great economic 
recession of the 1930s, concluding, ‘If a wider range of risks 
and impacts is taken into account, the estimates of damage 
could rise to 20 per cent of GDP or more. Th e investment 
that takes place in the next 10–20 years will have a profound 
eff ect on the climate in the second half of this century and 
the next. (Inaction now) and over the coming decades could 
create risks of major disruption to economic and social activ-
ity on a scale similar to those associated with the great wars 
and the economic depression of the fi rst half of the twentieth 
century. And it will be diffi  cult or impossible to reverse these 
changes.’26 
Developing and meeting greenhouse gas reduction targets is 
urgent because emissions concentrations are now exceeding 
environmental thresholds as regards how much the biosphere 
can accommodate. As Lester Brown writes, the impact of our 
current form of development means that, ‘we are crossing nat-
ural thresholds that we cannot see and violating deadlines that 
we do not recognize. Nature is the time-keeper, but we cannot 
see the clock. Among other environmental trends undermin-
ing our future are shrinking forests, expanding deserts, falling 
water tables, collapsing fi sheries, disappearing species, and 
rising temperatures. Th e temperature increases bring crop-
withering heat waves, more-destructive storms, more-intense 
droughts, more forest fi res, and of course ice melting.’27 Scien-
tists like NASA’s James Hansen argue that if rapid greenhouse 
gas reductions do not occur in the next ten years then these 
ironically termed ‘positive feedbacks’, once unleashed, will 
cause a global catastrophe increasing the risk of sea level rises 
and extreme weather events, and resulting in signifi cant eco-
nomic and business losses globally.28 More than ever there is 
recognition of the need for unprecedented global cooperation 
to undertake action as rapidly as possible to avoid triggering 
such feedback eff ects. Al Gore has called the situation noth-
ing less than a ‘planetary  emergency’, which is surely the most 
signifi cant future challenge for our current ‘young engineers’, 
and which will shape the future of engineering.29
26 Stern, N. 2006. Stern Review. 
27 Brown, L. R. 2008.  Plan B 3.0: Mobilizing to Save Civilization. W.W. Norton & Company, 
398 p.
28 Hansen, J. and Sato, J. et al. 2007. Climate change and trace gases, Phil. Trans. Royal 
Soc, Vol. 365, pp 1925–1954. Available at http://pubs.giss.nasa.gov/abstracts/2007/
Hansen_etal_2.html (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
29 Barringer, F. and Revkin, A.C. 2007. Gore Warns Congress of ‘Planetary Emer-
gency’, The New York Times. Available at http://www.nytimes.com/2007/03/22/
washington/22gore.html (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   62 14/09/10   15:34:21
E N G I N E E R I N G :  E M E R G I N G  I S S U E S  A N D  C H A L L E N G E S 
63
Engineers make a huge contribution across the world but – 
in the UK at least – their role is generally poorly understood. 
Public policy benefi ts from having the engineering dimen-
sions considered early in the policymaking process but – again 
in the UK – engineers are not always engaged. Engineering 
solves global problems and increases the health and wealth 
of nations, so the world needs more engineers to help address 
the enormous challenges we all face.
Th ese propositions drive the Royal Academy of Engineering’s 
mission to ‘put engineering at the heart of  society.’  Th is is 
about helping engineers that need institutional support make 
their fullest contribution for both the benefi t of  society and to 
create recognition of the value of that contribution. Th e issue 
also calls for more work to inspire young people with the fasci-
nation and excitement of engineering, and to encourage more 
of them go on to become the next generation of engineers. 
Perceptions
So what are the key public perception issues that need to be 
tackled? In 2007, the UK Royal Academy of Engineering30 and 
the UK Engineering and Technology Board commissioned a 
survey to fi nd answers to this question.31 Th e survey verifi ed 
much of what the engineering community had suspected over 
many years – that people in the UK have little or no under-
standing of the nature of engineering, its scope, diversity and 
impact on  society. Th is limited awareness and understanding 
of engineering is coupled with a signifi cant lack of confi dence 
in and knowledge of the profession and the work that engi-
neers do. Nearly half of the survey respondents felt they knew 
‘very little’ or ‘not very much’ about engineering, and six out of 
ten people thought that ‘hardly anyone knows what engineers 
do.’ Younger people in particular were found to have a limited 
understanding of engineering. 
Engineers operate across a broad range of activities and sec-
tors and it may be that this very breadth is, in fact, a barrier 
to awareness and understanding of what they do. Indeed, 
the study found that engineering was regarded as diffi  cult to 
defi ne with eight out of ten respondents agreeing that there 
are so many types of engineers that it makes ‘engineering’ a 
diffi  cult role to grasp. Th is is not helped when, for example, the 
media cloaks the specifi c word ‘engineering’ under diff erent 
terms such as ‘design’, ‘science’ or ‘ innovation’. A study of US 
magazine Science Times found that engineers and engineering 
30 Go to: http://www.raeng.org.uk
31 New survey fi nds deep misconceptions of engineering among young people that could 
worsen shortfall in engineers. Available at http://www.raeng.org.uk/news/releases/
shownews.htm?NewsID=416 /pa (Accessed: 5 May 2010). 
were explicitly mentioned in only one in fi ve of the stories that 
were clearly about engineers and engineering.32 UK broadcast 
programming and print articles similarly lack content that is 
actually designated as ‘engineering’ even when the subject is 
actually engineering-focused.  
Communicating with young people is a particular challenge. In 
the UK, we need more young people to choose engineering as a 
career. We must also engage many more young people with the 
societal impacts of engineering so that they can take part in the 
debate on the big issues of the day. Th e essence of engineering can 
be hard for young people to grasp so conveying an engineering 
message has to start in school. Entering a career in engineering 
depends on young people studying the right subjects and having 
access to eff ective guidance,  communications and role models. 
Very few young people in the UK can name a famous engineer 
other than perhaps Brunel, who died in 1859. Th ere is a growing 
 research base that suggests that the key to success in  communica-
tions with young people is having engineering role models who 
look and sound like the young people they are talking to. Role 
model recognition is also a factor. A key concern, therefore, is the 
under-representation in the profession of women and of people 
from ethnic backgrounds and some socio-economic groups.
The world is experiencing a time of rapid technological 
advancement, driven by engineering. Society needs to engage 
and explore important questions with its engineers. As a pro-
fession, engineering needs to work together, nationally and 
internationally, to ensure that  communications challenges 
are addressed and that engineers have every opportunity to 
get their important messages across. After all, engineering is 
for and about people, about making the world a better place. 
Many of the Academy’s own Fellows (elected members) regu-
larly appear in the media and have a high public profi le as a 
result of their work, yet are not necessarily described or recog-
nized as ‘engineers’.  
Th e case study in the following box outlines the three work-
streams that the Academy has developed in response to these 
challenges: public affairs and policy, communicating with 
the public at large, and communicating with young people. 
Increasingly, the Academy is working in these areas with part-
ners in the professional engineering community to create a 
unifi ed voice and more visible presence.  Although the Acad-
emy has a national remit, the achievement of its objectives 
requires a global outlook and an appreciation of the wider 
international context of engineering. 
32 Clark, F. and Illman, D.L. 2006. Portrayals of Engineers in Science Times, Technology and 
Society Magazine, IEEE, Vol. 25, No.1, Spring 2006. pp.12–21.
Th e engineering message – getting it across3.4 
Philip Greenish and Beverley Parkin
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   63 14/09/10   15:34:21
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
64
Introduction
Th e Royal Academy of Engineering is the UK’s national 
academy for the engineering profession. Fellows and staff  
work with a wide range of partner organizations, includ-
ing the government Offi  ce of Science and Innovation, the 
British Council, the UK  research councils, and parliamen-
tary and governmental groups. Th e Academy is a founding 
member of both the International Council of Engineer-
ing and Technological Sciences ( CAETS), the European 
Council of Applied Sciences and Technologies and Engi-
neering (Euro-CASE); all are important vehicles for infl u-
encing international policy. In the UNESCO Commission, 
an Academy-nominated member of the Natural Sciences 
Committee helps to ensure that the engineering dimen-
sion is represented in debate.
You can view the Academy’s website, including links to our 
recent media coverage at http://www.raeng.org.uk and 
read our fl agship publication at http://www.ingenia.com 
Public policy
Society benefi ts when engineers are involved in public life 
and public debate. Almost all government policy has an 
engineering dimension, which is crucial to the successful 
delivery of its objectives.  Policy that has been designed 
from the outset with an understanding of the engineer-
ing dimensions of delivery is more likely to be workable. 
Equally, the engineering approach to problem-solving can 
support the formation of policy that is fi t for purpose and 
sustainable. Eff ective responses to the grand challenges 
such as  climate change,  energy security, world poverty, glo-
bal disease burdens and international terrorism can only 
be developed with engineering input.
Through its Fellows (elected members), the UK Royal 
Academy of Engineering is well networked with govern-
ment and parliament. A programme of public aff airs work 
seeks to build on that network and promote a focused 
set of messages based on policy in  education, engineering 
and international aff airs to target audiences across par-
liamentary institutions, government and its agencies. We 
brief all UK Parliamentary parties and their spokespeople 
on policy interests. Very few UK politicians have an engi-
neering background so the Academy runs a programme 
of meetings to provide information on the key issues. With 
so much legislation deriving from the European Union, this 
work is now extending into EU institutions as well. Finally, 
because the Academy is independent of government, it is 
able to provide impartial, expert advice. Almost all govern-
ment policy has an engineering dimension, which is crucial 
to the successful delivery of its objectives. Policy that has 
been designed from the outset with an understanding of 
the engineering dimensions of delivery is more likely to be 
workable. Equally, the engineering approach to problem-
solving can support the formation of policy that is fi t for 
purpose and sustainable. Eff ective responses to the grand 
challenges such as  climate change,  energy security, world 
poverty, global disease burdens and international terror-
ism can only be developed with engineering input.
Building infl uence
Over the last year, the Academy has been working with 
partners across the UK professional engineering commu-
nity to ensure that government policymakers have access 
to the engineering expertise across the sectors. Th is has 
resulted in government departments enlisting our support 
and the expertise of our leading engineers for a range of 
policy areas as  climate change and  energy, water secu-
rity and national  infrastructure. Furthermore, in order to 
see the engineering perspective underpinning decision-
making across government, the Academy is working to 
improve engineering capacity and understanding within 
the civil service (policy staff ).
The global economic downturn and some high profile 
failures in the fi nancial services industry are providing an 
opportunity to highlight the importance of engineering 
 innovation to support a more resilient future economy 
and address the huge challenges we face.
Another important element of the Academy’s work in 
national policy is in infl uencing the  education of young 
people, particularly in encouraging them to study science, 
technology, engineering and mathematics subjects. Th e 
Academy helped to create a vocationally-focused yet aca-
demically robust qualifi cation for 14–19 year old students 
known as the Diploma and advises government on a range 
of aspects of engineering  education.
Fellows and staff  work with a wide range of partner org-
anizations to promote the Academy’s policy agenda, 
including the Offi  ce of Science and Innovation, the British 
Council, the UK  research councils, the parliamentary com-
mittees for Science and Technology and the Foreign and 
Commonwealth Offi  ce’s Science and Innovation network. 
Th e Academy is a founding member of both the Interna-
tional Council of Academies of Engineering and Techno-
logical Sciences ( CAETS), the European Council of Applied 
Sciences and Technologies and Engineering (Euro-CASE); 
all are important vehicles for influencing international 
policy. Euro-CASE is already proving its value in drawing 
the European Commission’s attention to such issues as the 
engineering dimension of  renewable  energy targets. In the 
UNESCO Commission, an Academy-nominated member 
of the Natural Sciences Committee helps ensure that the 
engineering dimensions is represented in debate.
Media profi le
Th e Academy’s communication with the public aims to 
raise the profi le of the organization and the role, contribu-
tion, achievements and challenges facing engineers. Com-
munications try to engage people of all ages and from all 
walks of life in the debate on engineering and its impact 
on  society, the nation and the world. A key means of  com-
munications with the public are the media. We set our-
selves the goal of getting a serious engineering story into 
the national media every week of the year. Our success in 
this endeavour is due to the Academy’s Fellows who regu-
larly appear in the print and broadcast media on a range 
of topical issues.  
Now that the scientifi c case for  climate change has been 
proven to most people’s satisfaction, the media debate 
in the UK is shifting its focus towards how to adapt and 
mitigate the risks. Th e media has developed an appetite 
for ideas and stories on the new technologies and innova-
tive solutions to mitigate  climate change, providing a fruit-
ful opportunity for engineers to showcase their ideas and 
engage in the debate.
An important part of the strategy is to make the link 
between engineering technologies and the impact they 
have or may have on  society, devising ways to convey 
them that are engaging and thought-provoking, and to 
engage with topical issues. Policy issues such as privacy 
and surveillance, autonomous vehicles and other systems, 
synthetic biology and nanotechnology all have powerful 
implications for  society and the Academy’s work in these 
areas has received considerable media interest worldwide.
We also communicate through our publications. Ingenia, 
our quarterly magazine, is mailed out free of charge to over 
3,000 UK secondary schools and to 11,000 destinations 
around the world. Th e online version has also become a 
signifi cant engineering resource, with hundreds of thou-
sands of visitors logging on each year. A recent publication 
Engineering Change is a book of essays highlighting the role 
of engineering in international development, particularly 
in  Africa.*
Public engagement
If public relations are about persuading and inspiring the 
public with the aim of creating impact and raising profi le, 
public engagement is about helping people debate and 
refl ect on the impact of engineering on the world. Th e 
Academy undertakes public engagement through a variety 
of activities that raise awareness and stimulate nationwide 
or local debate about engineering, including media cover-
age, live events, festivals, exhibitions and drama produc-
tions. Current issues include developments in electronic 
patient databases for healthcare  research, robotics and 
artifi cial intelligence, and synthetic biology.
* Go to: http://www.raeng.org.uk/news/publications/list/reports/
Engineering_Change.pdf (Accessed: 5 May 2010).
CASE STUDY: Th e UK Royal Academy of Engineering 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   64 14/09/10   15:34:21
E N G I N E E R I N G :  E M E R G I N G  I S S U E S  A N D  C H A L L E N G E S 
65
How will engineering and technology develop in the next thou-
sand years? Nearly forty years ago Toffl  er (1971)33 argued that by 
changing our relationship to the resources that surround us, by 
violently expanding the scope of change and most crucially, by 
accelerating its pace, humanity has broken irretrievably with the 
past. We have cut ourselves off  from the old ways of thinking, of 
feeling, of adapting. We have set the stage for a completely new 
 society and we are now racing towards it.
What we could see only dimly in the 1970s, we now both witness 
and understand better as the dramatic development of technol-
ogies such as computing, global  communications, biomedical 
engineering and nanotechnology (to name a few) have shown 
us. As an academic coming towards retirement at the end of the 
twentieth century, I suddenly realized that my career would not 
end when I reached sixty-fi ve, but until about 2040 when the 
undergraduates I have been teaching would themselves reach 
retirement. We have learned that teachers, researchers, govern-
ment and business need to look far ahead in order to keep up.
Recognition of the need for change is a main driving force. Th e 
engineering profession will be infl uenced by wider political, 
social and economic trends over which it currently has little 
infl uence in return. Sustainability has had widespread and far-
reaching infl uence on the profession. Th e growth of alterna-
tive sources of fi nance (such as public, private partnerships, 
etc.) demands a far more proactive and commercially oriented 
approach than we have been used to. 
Political changes also off er an opportunity to reassess and 
re-invent the role of engineering in meeting  society’s needs. 
33 Toffl  er, A. 1971. Future Shock. Pan Books, London.
Building consensus among all interested parties is becoming 
an increasingly important element of this role. To enhance our 
value to  society, we also have to maintain an involvement in 
all stages of the life cycle of our products and services. Sustain-
ability,  ethics and acceptability are becoming closely interlinked 
themes within our work. We must therefore take the lead in set-
ting ethical  standards in our areas of responsibility. 
Creative and successful engineering can be found in the inter-
action of design and project management. While design must 
not to be reduced to technical analysis, project management 
must not be reduced to administrative control. Risk manage-
ment is becoming a central aspect of developing optimum 
solutions, not least because of a growing awareness of fi nan-
cial risks.
Engineering activity
What kind of engineering is going to take us forward in the 
twenty-first century? The Universe of Engineering (RAEng, 
2000)34 takes a comprehensive view of that question, and it is 
necessary to fi rst consider a number of defi nitions of related sub-
jects (Box 1).
Th e title ‘Universe of Engineering’ was used to describe the 
range of activities in which engineering is involved. It is much 
larger than generally supposed. At least half of the companies, 
other than purely fi nancial companies, quoted daily in the 
fi nancial pages of the newspapers depend on engineering to 
be competitive, and so survive and prosper. Th e so-called ‘new 
economy’ was created, and continues to be created through 
34 Royal Academy of Engineering. 2000. Th e Universe of Engineering – a UK perspective, 
London.
Engineering and technology in the third millennium3.5 
Tony Ridley
Science: the body of, and quest for, fundamental knowl-
edge and understanding of all things natural and man-
made; their structure, properties, and how they behave. 
Pure science is concerned with extending knowledge for 
its own sake. Applied science extends this knowledge for a 
specifi c purpose. Science as an activity is not a profession, 
though strong socially responsible codes of conduct and 
practices have developed.
Engineering Science: Th e knowledge required – know-what 
– is the growing body of facts, experience and skills in sci-
ence, engineering and technology disciplines; coupled to 
an understanding of the fi elds of application.
Engineering Design: Th e process applied – know-how – is 
the creative process that applies knowledge and experience 
to seek one or more technical solutions to meet a require-
ment, solve a problem, then exercise informed judgement 
to implement the one that best meets constraints.
Technology: an enabling package or tool formed of knowl-
edge, devices, systems, processes and other technologies 
created for a specific purpose. The word ‘technology’ 
is used colloquially to describe a complete system, a 
 capability or a specifi c device.
Innovation: the successful introduction of something new. 
In the context of the economy it relates to something of 
practical use that has signifi cant technical content and 
achieves commercial success. In the context of  society it 
relates to improvements in the quality of life. Innovation 
may be wholly new, such as the fi rst cellular telephone, 
or a signifi cantly better version of something that already 
 exists.
Th e central role of engineering in  society and the economy 
is neither evident to the public at large nor to the media in 
particular. Th e popular perception is generally confi ned to 
manufacturing and major building works. Th e engineer-
ing profession is considered by many, including unfortu-
nately many young, as a somewhat dull, uncreative activity 
wholly associated with the ‘old economy’.
Subjects related to engineering
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   65 14/09/10   15:34:21
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
66
the process of engineering. Economists have added technology 
to the traditional three prime inputs to all economic activity 
– labour, capital and materials. It is the engineering process 
that creates technology, and which makes technology useful 
to people.
Engineering community
Th ere is a wider engineering community that describes the 
very many people, engineers, scientists, metallurgists, pro-
grammers and many others who practise engineering in one 
form or another, to a greater or lesser degree, in the course 
of their professional activities. It is much larger than generally 
recognized. For example, there are about two million people in 
the UK who call themselves engineers, about three-quarters of 
whom have a professional engineering qualifi cation, and only 
160,000 are formally ‘registered’. Th ere are no common or reli-
able fi gures – or even in some cases measures – to estimate the 
numbers of people in the wider engineering community who 
do not call themselves engineers, but who practise engineering 
in the course of their work. 
In 1995 the UK Institution of Civil Engineers suggested that in the 
fi eld of  infrastructure, engineers were responsible for much of the 
essentials of modern life:
Th e muscles and sinews that hold our  ■  society together (bridges, 
roads, railways, dams, airports, docks, tunnels).
Th e provision and maintenance of its hearts and lungs (clean  ■
water, natural resources in, waste out). 
Transport for safe and eff ective movement. ■
Energy to make it all work (off shore gas and oil, nuclear, hydro,  ■
tidal and wind power).
We know that the whole life cycle of an engineering project 
must be addressed if we are to make wise decisions to proceed 
with planning, fi nance, design, procurement, construction, 
commissioning, operations and maintenance, and decommis-
sioning. In the past there has been a tendency to concentrate 
on the design stage. 
To create successful projects, we need engineers who can 
command the totality of the physical attributes of a project: 
operation, communication and human resources, fi nance and 
funding, organizational and institutional questions, and envi-
ronmental impacts. Th is may be summed up as a pentagon of 
hardware, software, ‘fi nware’, ‘orgware’ and ‘ecoware’. Not only 
is each element of the pentagon important in its own right 
in the creation of an engineering project, it is also the inter-
relationship between them that raises the greatest problems. 
Nearly all engineering problems, in the design, development 
and operation of any system, arise at interfaces. At a larger 
dimension it is at the interfaces between the fi ve elements of 
the pentagon that the greatest diffi  culties arise.
Technology is the subject of technique, but it is also about 
products and processes.  Civil engineering, for example, relies 
on science but specifi cally on technology-based science. In the 
late twentieth century and early twenty-fi rst century, biology 
and chemistry have been increasingly important to the future 
of civil engineering, as are maths and physics. Th is refl ects the 
broader, larger view of the profession that is appropriate for 
the future. Th e family of civil engineers now includes disci-
plines not traditionally thought to be part of the profession.      
Engineering process
Technological change is a complex process that must be man-
aged all the way from concept to the market place. Technological 
knowledge is cumulative and grows in path-dependent ways. 
Ziman (1995)35 has pointed out the distinction between tech-
nology-based science and science-based technology where 
novel technologies have developed from basic, discovery-based 
 research. Th e electrical industry, nuclear engineering and radar 
are examples of the latter. Conversely, technology-based science 
has developed out of practical techniques such as mining and 
metallurgy that have their origins in the mists of antiquity. 
In the nineteenth century, a variety of ancient crafts transformed 
the technology-based science of industrial chemistry, whilst in 
the twentieth century the practical technical knowledge of the 
metallurgist has been incorporated in a new science of mate-
rials. Th e same process is to be observed in almost all fi elds of 
practical human activity as we seek to explore and understand. 
Agriculture, civil engineering, food processing, architecture and 
many other fi elds have developed their respective sciences to 
guide further technical progress. In these cases, engineering is 
not a sub-set of science but has actually created new opportuni-
ties for scientifi c  research.
Morita (1992)36 has said that technology comes from employing 
and manipulating science into concepts, processes and devices. 
Th e true missionaries who can really capture technology and use 
it to chart the future course of industry are what he called ‘ tech-
nologists’, individuals who have a wide understanding of science 
and engineering, as well as a broad vision and true commitment 
to the needs of  society. It is technology that drives industry and 
it is the engineer who guides technology.
Krugman (1994)37 suggests that it often takes a very long time 
before a new technology begins to make a major impact on pro-
ductivity and living  standards. Th e reason for these long lags is 
that technology often does not have its full impact when it is 
35 Ziman, J. 1995. An introduction to science studies – the philosophical and social aspects 
of science and technology, Cambridge University Press.
36 Morita, A. 1992. First UK Innovation Lecture, Royal Society, London.
37 Krugman, P. 1994. Peddling prosperity – economic sense and nonsense in the age of 
diminished expectations, Norton, New York and London.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   66 14/09/10   15:34:21
E N G I N E E R I N G :  E M E R G I N G  I S S U E S  A N D  C H A L L E N G E S 
67
used in isolation. It is only when it becomes broadly applied and 
interacts with other technologies that its true potential can be 
exploited. In these circumstances, engineering  education must 
recognize the importance of synthesis and design as well as more 
conventional analysis. But it must also recognize the importance 
of the iterative approach (feedback) whether in design, in sus-
tainability or in  innovation.
Researchers in technology would be well advised to address 
customer and societal needs and market requirements and not 
just  research for  research or technology’s sake. However, indus-
try would be better served if it sought out good and relevant 
 research more positively, and if it developed more industry/aca-
demic partnerships. Th ereafter industry and academia together 
should treat the task of taking  research into practice as a busi-
ness process to which the disciplines of good project manage-
ment can and should be applied.
Th us, a way ahead for both researchers and industrialists might 
be to ask in each case: What is the societal problem? What is 
the technological challenge? What is the business driver? How 
to defi ne the  research project? What are the fi ndings (actual or 
potential)? What are the potential applications? and, What is 
the mechanism (business process) for advancing  research into 
practice? The process is iterative. The industrialist/business-
man defi nes the problem, the technological challenge sets the 
 research agenda,  but the  research equally defi nes the techno-
logical possibilities.
If we are to advance  research into practice it is not enough 
for governments, industry or  research councils simply to sit in 
judgement on  research proposals. Th ey must actively seek out 
good researchers and, through mutual discussion, develop pro-
grammes that address societal needs. Engineers provide services 
to meet the needs of  society and it is creativity that is our essen-
tial contribution. Th e Latin ingenerare means ‘to create’.
The engineering community in the third millennium needs 
to create a new vision, goal and strategy for itself. Th ough it is 
impossible to predict what the world will be like even in 2020, 
that vision should include a genuine improvement in the qual-
ity of life for all as well as long-term environmental, social and 
economic sustainability. Th e goal of engineering would then 
be to contribute towards achieving that vision, with its strategy 
focusing on the development of whatever structures, skills and 
technologies are needed.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   67 14/09/10   15:34:21
An Overview of Engineering4 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   69 14/09/10   15:34:22
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
70
Th is is one of the main chapters of the Report and presents an 
overview of engineering around the world. Th e chapter begins 
with a review of  statistics and indicators on engineering, with 
reference to the need for and availibility of information on 
engineering, how engineering and engineers are defi ned, OECD 
and UNESCO statistics relating to engineering, engineering 
 education and employment. As noted here and elsewhere in 
the Report, there is a particular need for better indicators on 
engineering at the international level. Th e chapter continues 
with reviews of the major fi elds of civil, mechanical,  electri-
cal and electronic, chemical, environmental, agricultural and 
 medical engineering to give a fl avour of the diverse range of 
fi elds in industry, manufacturing, government,  research and 
development, and consulting in which engineers work. Con-
sulting engineering, for example, is a major industry with an 
annual revenue of around US$490 billion, and helps generate 
half the world’s GDP. 
Th e engineering profession and its organization is then dis-
cussed, with reference to the history and development of 
engineering, national, regional and  international cooperation. 
Reference is also made to leading engineering organizations, 
including the World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
( WFEO), the International Council of Academies of Engineering 
and Technological Sciences ( CAETS), the International Federa-
tion of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC), the European Federation 
of National Engineering Associations (FEANI), the Federation 
of Engineering Institutions of  Asia and the Pacifi c (FEIAP), the 
Association for Engineering Education in Southeast and East 
 Asia and the Pacifi c (AEESEAP), the Asian and Pacifi c Centre 
for Transfer of Technology (APCTT) and the African Network 
of Scientifi c and Technological Institutions (ANSTI). Organi-
zations focused on engineering and technology also make an 
important contribution to international development, and 
include  Practical Action,  Engineers Without Borders,  Engineers 
Against Poverty and  Engineers for a Sustainable World. 
Compared to science, engineering has lacked a refl ective dis-
ciplinary focus on social and policy issues. It is good therefore 
that an international network on  engineering studies has 
recently been developed, which is presented in the following 
section together with a discussion on  engineering,  science and 
technology policy and the transformation of national science 
and engineering systems, with reference to  New Zealand and 
South  Africa. Th is is followed by a section on engineering  eth-
ics and  anti-corruption, which includes contributions on engi-
neers against corruption, and  business integrity management 
systems in  consulting engineering. Th e chapter concludes with 
a section on  women and gender issues in engineering, includ-
ing a case study from  Australia. 
 Engineering indicators – measurement and metrics4.1 
Gunnar Westholm
Section 4.1 summarizes the methods developed and employed 
(and the problems encountered) by the principal international 
agencies for the collection, analysis and distribution of interna-
tionally comparable data on ‘science and technology’ person-
nel in general and, where applicable, on engineers in particular. 
It outlines some historical issues, the challenges faced in using 
these methods, and the role of the principle international 
agencies involved (UNESCO, OECD ,  Eurostat, ILO etc.).
Specifi c attention is given to the OECD  Frascati Manual for 
the measurement of  research and development resources, 
the OECD / Eurostat  Canberra Manual for the measurement 
of stocks and fl ows of human resources devoted to science 
and technology, and to the recent OECD /UNESCO/ Eurostat 
project on the careers of doctorate holders. Th e international 
 education and employment classifications (ISCED, ISCO) 
are reviewed. A number of statistical tables on engineering 
 education and employment (enrolments, graduates, gender) 
are also presented and briefl y discussed. 
Th is section will explore some historical issues of science and 
technology (S&T) indicators, their theoretical defi nitions 
and practical applications, and make reference to human 
S&T resources in general and, where applicable, to engineer-
ing and engineers in particular. Th e role of the principal 
international organizations involved in the development of 
international classifi cations and data collection (UNESCO, 
OECD ,  Eurostat, ILO, etc.) will be discussed. Th e experience 
of a small number of national  science and technology policy 
agencies (notably the United States National Science Foun-
dation) with recognized practice in the fi eld is mentioned to 
show procedures that may perhaps inspire other countries 
or institutions.
Some local or regional data are presented in other sections of 
this Report, so this section attempts to present reasonably 
comparable statistics currently available at the international 
level (the bulk of which comes from the databases of the above 
international agencies, and principally concerning engineering 
 education). Data are more-or-less complete for most industrial-
ized economies (typically full members of the OECD or Euro-
pean Union) but are weaker elsewhere (note that data collection 
eff orts are taking place at the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and 
the data coverage is rapidly improving, albeit from a low base).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   70 14/09/10   15:34:23
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
71
Th e need for science and 4.1.1 
technology data and 
indicators 
Capacity and competence are central to proficient science 
and technology policies where engineering and engineers are 
of crucial signifi cance. Even if the broad family of engineers is 
sometimes fi rst associated with ‘big science’ (high technology, 
aerospace, nuclear, defence etc.), their presence is more strongly 
experienced in everyday life by creating, operating, maintain-
ing and improving public and private  infrastructure (in areas 
such as industry,  energy,  transportation,  communications, agri-
culture, health and utilities) and perhaps also in creating new 
understanding vital for all aspects of  sustainable development 
for the future of  society (such as  renewable  energy technologies, 
 climate change and environmental issues, and so on).
Th e lack of qualifi ed engineers and  technicians is currently 
reported to be one of the principal obstacles to economic 
growth encountered by innovative fi rms in many industrial-
ized and industrializing countries. Th e importance of engi-
neering and engineers and the signifi cance of their role can 
therefore be appreciated, and is highlighted throughout this 
Report. However quantitative and qualitative data are not 
always available, known to policy-makers or kept up to date.
Data on scientists and engineers, however defi ned, have since 
the early days of statistics been widely assembled within the 
customary statistical framework of countries such as, for 
instance, in population, labour force and  education surveys 
or national censuses. Interest in such data for policy reasons 
(such as in  science and technology policy) was recognized 
much later, as was the inadequacy of existing data to meet 
the new demands in many cases. A number of initiatives 
have therefore been taken, at both national and interna-
tional levels, to gather data to meet these new demands. 
Policy-makers wanted to address, among other things, wor-
ries about the increasing age of the science and technology 
workforce, the expected general or specifi c levels of sup-
ply and demand for highly-qualifi ed personnel (and hence 
capacity to adapt and innovate etc.), gender considerations, 
brain-drain and brain gain (to inform immigration policy, 
and so on), and the levels of interest in science and technol-
ogy studies among young people. 
Th e statistical dilemma: 4.1.2 
What is engineering? 
Who is an engineer?
Engineering is a multi-dimensional socio-economic activity 
and there are a multitude of educational and/or functional 
proposals to identify the engineers’ profi le, with diff erent 
approaches to meet national and international needs for 
comparable data and indicators. Th ere are hence signifi cant 
diff erences in the availability of information from one country 
to the next, and particularly between already industrialized 
countries and industrializing countries. Th is, in turn, is due to 
the fact that there about as many types of organization for 
the  education and training of engineers as there are countries 
(and certainly more than for the training of scientists).
Furthermore, there are no clear-cut defi nitions, in particu-
lar defi nitions that might allow international comparisons of 
what is covered by the concept of ‘engineering’, or who in the 
workforce is really an engineer. An engineer may be someone 
who has graduated, at one level or another, from engineer-
ing  education (an  education and training approach), or they 
may be registered or working as an engineer (a membership 
or an occupation approach). Th e same defi nition problem 
also aff ects  technicians. And the analysis of the situation is 
certainly not helped by the fact that the fi eld of engineering, 
technology and engineers, from the earliest days of  statistics 
and indicators, has been merged with the fi eld of science (it 
is common to fi nd data of ‘science and technology’ or ‘scien-
tists and engineers’ as statistical measures).
One of the many defi nitions of engineering and of engineers is that 
suggested by open collaborative online encyclopaedia ‘Wikipedia’, in 
an article which has had many individual contributions and edits:
‘Engineering is the discipline and profession of applying scientifi c 
knowledge and utilizing natural laws and physical resources in order 
to design and implement materials, structures, machines, devices, 
systems and processes that realize a desired objective and meet 
specifi ed criteria...
... One who practices engineering is called an engineer and those 
licensed to do so may have more formal designations such as Profes-
sional Engineer, Chartered Engineer or Incorporated Engineer...
... Th e broad discipline of engineering encompasses a range of more 
specialised sub-disciplines, each with a more specifi c emphasis on 
certain fi elds of application and particular areas of technology...’
Th e OECD4.1.3   Frascati Manual 
on the measurement of 
 research and development 
resources 
Th e basic defi nitions
Th e fi rst proposals for guidelines for systematic measurement 
of national science and technology (S&T) expenditures and 
workforces were those of the OECD in the early 1960s, resulting 
in the  Frascati Manual. Named after meetings held in Frascati, 
Italy, the manual is currently in its sixth edition issued in 2002.
 Good information is 
important to promote women 
in engineering.
©
 E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   71 14/09/10   15:34:24
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
72
Even though the very first guidelines in 1962 discussed 
appraising the total annual resources for S&T in a country, 
they were soon reduced to the measurement of  research and 
development (R&D) expenditures and personnel only. R&D 
represents only a very small part of the total science and tech-
nology activities within a country (discussed in more detail 
with UNESCO, below) and the boundaries between R&D and 
other related activities were hard to defi ne. Th ese boundary 
issues have, ever since, been more thoroughly discussed in all 
successive editions of the  Frascati Manual and concern both 
fi nancial and human resources in R&D.
Th e collection of international R&D data was a totally new 
exercise that called for new concepts, defi nitions and explora-
tory guidelines. Th e  Frascati Manual defi nes R&D as:
‘Research and experimental development (R&D) comprise 
creative work undertaken on a systematic basis in order to 
increase the stock of knowledge, including knowledge of man, 
culture and  society, and the use of this stock of knowledge to 
devise new applications.’
Paragraph 63 of the 2002  Frascati Manual
Th e manual defi nes the basic statistical coverage of R&D per-
sonnel as:  
‘… All persons employed directly on R&D should be counted, 
as well as those providing direct services such as R&D man-
agers, administrators and clerical staff .’
Paragraph 294 of the 2002  Frascati Manual
Th e above defi nition of R&D is very theoretical, and covers 
‘basic  research’ or ‘fundamental  research’, ‘applied  research’ 
and ‘experimental development’. However, this definition 
has never been abandoned, despite numerous debates. Note 
that the OECD collected data only for natural sciences and 
engineering using the  Frascati Manual until, in 1983, the short 
phrase ‘…knowledge of man, culture and  society’ was added 
with a view to embracing R&D in the social sciences and 
humanities (in line with UNESCO practice).
Problems of measuring human resources
A specifi c dilemma emerged regarding the measurement of 
R&D personnel. R&D is not a full-time activity in many cases, 
such as in some enterprises or in tertiary  education institu-
tions (universities), for example, where it may be more a part-
time activity. Th erefore, to include every person engaged in 
R&D in some way in the ‘head-count’ would grossly infl ate the 
human resource input. Since interest focused at the time on 
the overall real R&D resource, it was recommended from the 
start that the head-count data be converted (i.e. reduced) into 
full-time equivalents (FTE) or ‘person-years’, for a long time 
this was the only recommended approach.
Interest in head-counts reappeared only much later, with the 
intensifi cation of indicator work correlating diverse data sets 
expressed in numbers of persons (such as engineers as a share 
of total population, women scientists as a proportion of total 
scientists, etc.). Th erefore, equal signifi cance is now given to 
both full-time equivalents and to head-counts in the latest 
version of the  Frascati Manual (2002). 
From  research and development statistics to science and 
technology indicators
At the time, the R&D statistics service at the OECD acted 
more-or-less like any national central statistical bureau: col-
lecting data (via surveys addressed to the national authorities) 
and processing and publishing the resulting statistics. Analysis 
of the information was not yet a main concern.
Gradually, however, the OECD became the prime customer 
of its own R&D statistics, used for a rising number of policy 
studies. Th is analytical drive helped to identify weaknesses in 
the proposed theoretical guidelines that were then amended 
in subsequent editions of the  Frascati Manual. Th e same work 
was also the opening of the fi rst OECD R&D/S&T indicators 
series, largely inspired by the experience of the National Sci-
ence Foundation (NSF) in the United States. 
Th e principal international  standard classifi cations
All the  Frascati Manual recommendations were, from the out-
set, soundly backed up by references to internationally-adopted 
 standard classifi cations, including the United Nations Systems 
of National Accounts (SNA), the International Standard Clas-
sifi cation of Education (ISCED), the International Standard 
Classifi cation of Occupations (ISCO) and the International 
Standard Classifi cation of All Industrial Activities (ISIC). Th ese 
classifi cations have over time been revised on several occa-
sions (further revisions still underway) and, as a consequence, 
the OECD guidelines also had to follow. Th is notably aff ected 
the R&D human resource series, referenced in terms of  educa-
tion or occupation classifi cations, or both.
Over the years, the  Frascati Manual had to respond to new 
political priorities or the latest S&T policy interests, from 
the fi rst post-war ‘big science’ objectives (aerospace, nuclear, 
defence etc) to more  society-directed goals (social policies, 
environment, health,  energy, information and communication 
technologies, biotechnologies, and so on).
Th e  Frascati Manual recommends an institutional breakdown 
of the national economy into four broad sectors of R&D expen-
ditures and employment (personnel): Business Enterprise; 
Government; Higher Education; and Private Non-Profi t. With 
the exception of the government sector, additional and more 
detailed sub-sectors are suggested. For the Business Enterprise 
sector, this is by detailed industrial branches defi ned in terms of 
ISIC. For Higher Education and Private Non-Profi t sectors, this is 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   72 14/09/10   15:34:24
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
73
by six broad fi elds of science and technology drawing on ISCED, 
namely ‘natural sciences’, ‘medical sciences’, ‘agricultural sciences’, 
plus the ‘social sciences’ and ‘humanities’ and – of specifi c inter-
est to this Report – ‘engineering and technology’ (see Box). 
It goes without saying that no international engineering data 
of the very detailed kind above have ever been published; the 
only (and usually still rather scarce) information available is 
for R&D expenditures and personnel in the higher  education 
and private non-profi t sectors. However, some new fi elds-of-
science aspects are discussed later (referring to a few of the 
statistical tables of human resources, mainly  education statis-
tics, compiled for this Report).
Th e specifi c classifi cations of  research and development 
science and technology personnel
For the analysis of the R&D personnel series (and for other S&T 
personnel series as well), two parallel approaches are recom-
mended in the  Frascati Manual. Th e fi rst is by occupation and 
the second is by level of formal qualifi cation. Th ese are defi ned 
in terms of the 1990 International Standard Classifi cation of 
Occupation (ISCO) by the International Labour Offi  ce (ILO) 
and the 1997 International Standard Classifi cation of Educa-
tion (ISCED) by UNESCO.
In the classification by occupation approach, three broad 
classes of R&D personnel have been defi ned:
Researchers: ‘…professionals engaged in the conception or  ■
creation of new knowledge, products, processes, methods 
and systems and also in the management of the projects 
concerned.’
Technicians and equivalent staff : ‘…persons whose main  ■
tasks require technical knowledge and experience in one 
or more fi elds of engineering, physical and life sciences or 
social sciences and humanities. Th ey participate in R&D 
by performing scientifi c and technical tasks involving the 
application of concepts and operational methods, nor-
mally under the supervision of researchers. Equivalent staff  
perform the corresponding R&D tasks under the supervi-
sion of researchers in the social sciences and humanities.’
Other supporting staff: ‘…includes skilled and unskilled  ■
craftsmen, secretarial and clerical staff  participating in R&D 
projects or directly associated with such projects.’
Th e ‘researchers’ category is frequently also referred to as ‘sci-
entists and engineers’ (RSEs) and is of most specifi c relevance 
to this Report.
In classifi cation by level of formal qualifi cation approach, six 
broad categories are suggested (ISCED 1997) and defi ned in 
terms of the level of study (as a rule linked to the duration of 
study) regardless of the specifi c fi eld of science and technology 
in which the highest degrees have been attained:
ISCED level 6: holders of university degrees at PhD level  ■
(with a highest sub-class second stage of tertiary  education, 
leading to an advanced  research qualifi cation)
ISCED level 5A: holders of basic university degrees below  ■
the PhD level
ISCED level 5B: holders of other tertiary diplomas ■
ISCED level 4: holders of other post-secondary non-tertiary  ■
diplomas
ISCED level 3: holders of diplomas of secondary  ■  education
Other qualifi cations ■
Compared to the previous version of ISCED, dating back to 
1976, the current 1997 ISCED constitutes another break in the 
series of  education statistics, specifi cally in the distribution of 
levels of formal qualifi cation. Th e new sub-class of the highest 
tertiary level, ‘leading to an advanced  research qualifi cation’ 
(to be understood as preparing for PhD degrees), is an impor-
tant novelty in the  education statistics on enrolments for the 
recently (2004) initiated OECD /UNESCO/ Eurostat study of 
labour market characteristics, careers and international mobil-
ity of doctorate holders.
ISCED is fi rst and foremost a catalogue of  education by levels 
of study, but it also provides a record of very detailed fi elds of 
study that frequently serves as a proxy list of fi elds of science 
and technology for purposes of classifi cation other than just 
 education (such as the classifi cation of institutions, scientifi c 
programmes, reports and articles, and so on).
From the international point of view, the  education and training 
of engineers and  technologists, however defi ned, is very country-
specifi c. Th is is particularly true for the duration of the various 
intermediate qualifi cation levels (with or without practical train-
 1. Civil engineering (architecture engineering, building science 
and engineering, construction engineering, municipal and 
structural engineering and other allied subjects).
Electrical engineering, electronics (2.  electrical engineering, elec-
tronics, communication engineering and systems, computer 
engineering (hardware only) and other allied subjects).
Other engineering sciences (such as chemical, aeronautical 3. 
and space, mechanical, metallurgical and materials engineer-
ing, and their specialised subdivisions: forest products; applied 
sciences such as geodesy, industrial chemistry, etc.; the science 
and technology of food production; specialised technologies 
of interdisciplinary fi elds, e.g. systems analysis, metallurgy, min-
ing, textile technology and other allied subjects).
Engineering and Technology
(ISCED 1976 Classifi cation)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   73 14/09/10   15:34:24
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
74
ing or apprenticeships associated with academic study). In some 
countries, the level of some polytechnic institutions has upgraded 
over time to university status (this is also true, for instance, for 
the training of nurses and other medical personnel).
UNESCO 4.1.4  statistics and 
indicators in Science 
& Technology, Research 
& Development
Roughly at the same time as the OECD , UNESCO also initiated 
its fi rst international surveys in science and technology. Th ey 
were intended to cover all S&T activities in a country but in 
practice, like those of the OECD , became mainly focused on 
measurement of R&D only. Th e provisional UNESCO guidelines 
for the surveys had to take into account the very diverse political 
and economic structures of the Organization’s Member States, 
which grouped ‘capitalist countries’ (many already members 
of the OECD ), ‘socialist/communist countries’ and ‘developing 
countries’. UNESCO had to develop a particular institutional 
sector breakdown for the common reporting of S&T and R&D 
resources that – though both were based on the UN SNA classi-
fi cations – was very dissimilar from those of the OECD (indeed, 
only the Higher Education sector breakdowns were identical). 
Th e principal theoretical contribution of UNESCO to the system-
atic measurement of total S&T expenditures and personnel in 
the global economy date back to 1978 and its ambitious Recom-
mendation Concerning the International Standardization for Sta-
tistics on Science and Technology and related practical guidelines.
The Recommendation suggested a complete and detailed 
inventory of the ‘scientifi c and technological activities’ (STA) 
to be measured:
Research and Experimental Development (R&D), similar to  ■
the OECD  Frascati Manual defi nitions.
Science and Technology Education and Training (STET) at  ■
broadly the third level.
Scientifi c and Technological Services (STS). ■
Th e coverage of the STS group was complete for the mid-
1970s but is today outdated and is, accordingly, in serious need 
of revision. It does not, for instance, take into account recent 
fi elds such as space sciences, information and  communica-
tions services,  innovation, biotechnologies or nanotechnolo-
gies) and is, accordingly, in serious need of revision.  
Comparisons of OECD and UNESCO data were not easy, espe-
cially for S&T and R&D expenditures. At the time, OECD was 
measuring in US dollars for its international assessments of 
expenditure – a moderately uncomplicated approach given 
the relative homogeneity of its Member States. Th is was how-
ever not the case for UNESCO which was reduced to publish-
ing its expenditure data in national currencies and that did 
not facilitate international analysis. Th ese currency conversion 
problems have been gradually overcome following the launch 
of Purchasing Power Parities (PPPs), now systematically used 
for most international comparisons of fi nancial data.
Given the technical problems with expenditure, one would 
have expected that personnel data would be easier to handle 
for international comparisons. Even here, there were setbacks 
however due to issues such as confusion between occupa-
tional and educational criteria in the UNESCO guidelines. Also, 
and with the eff ect of making comparisons yet more diffi  cult, 
UNESCO personnel data were often reported by head-count 
(whereas the OECD used full-time equivalents) and measured 
staff  in a broad range of S&T activities (whereas OECD data 
was focused only on staff  in R&D activities).
In other words, the UNESCO fi gures from UNESCO Member 
States (both expenditure and personnel) were much higher 
when compared to the corresponding OECD data for OECD 
Member States. In the days of the Cold War, this manifested 
in an apparent dominance of socialist/communist countries 
in S&T resources (resources that were to a high degree associ-
ated with the military) and raised concern in the West (where 
the critical competence in data analysis had perhaps not yet 
reached its best!).
Statistical work at UNESCO was hampered by drastic budget 
cuts after the withdrawal of a number of the Organization’s 
member countries (among which its principal economic con-
tributor, the USA) in the middle of the 1980s. It was only in 1999, 
with the creation of the new independent UNESCO Institute for 
Statistics (UIS) installed in Montreal, Canada (and replacing the 
former Division of Statistics), that UNESCO’s statistical activi-
ties on  education and literacy, S&T, and culture and communi-
cation recovered. Th is required intensifi ed in-house work and 
cooperation on data collection, diff usion and methodological 
developments with the other international agencies, and more 
of its own or out-sourced analytical eff orts. 
Th e OECD4.1.5  / Eurostat  Canberra 
Manual on the measurement 
of stocks and fl ows of S&T 
personnel
In the late 1980s, serious concern was expressed in a number 
of Western economies (notably the United States) that crucial 
mismatches might soon occur on the labour market between 
the supply and the demand for engineers, scientists and  tech-
nicians. Of particular concern were the imminent massive 
departures of people who had begun their S&T careers during 
 Th e  Frascati Manual 
provides guidelines on the 
measurement of  research and 
development.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   74 14/09/10   15:34:24
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
75
the Second World War or during the fi rst post-war big-science 
period who were about to retire. Other factors reinforced 
these concerns such as demographic trends, the increasingly 
technology-intensive nature of national economies (for exam-
ple the growth in new information and communication tech-
nologies) and some disturbing signs of decreasing interest in 
S&T careers among young people. At the same time, however, 
there were concerns that other changes such as economic 
restructuring and the downsizing of defence industries in 
some countries might in fact lead to a surplus of highly-skilled 
engineers and  technicians.
None of these problems really came about. Th e enrolments 
in S&T studies continued to grow in absolute terms (though 
were decreasing in relative terms) compared to other study 
opportunities. ‘Untapped’ labour resources, such as women 
and minorities, who in the past had acquired S&T competence 
but may never have taken up jobs in the sector (the ‘leaky 
pipe-line’), integrated into the S&T workforce. Th e so-called 
‘brain-gain’ continued in several industrialized countries, 
either by way of immigration of trained specialists or through 
larger numbers of international students who then stayed in 
their host country after graduation.
Many of the concerns were without doubt based more on 
anecdotal evidence than on solid data. No international 
agency was, at the time, able to provide policy-makers with rel-
evant information and statistics. Th is drove the OECD , in close 
cooperation with  Eurostat, to develop in 1989 another set of 
guidelines and indicators to assess the total national stocks 
and fl ows of highly qualifi ed persons. Th e new guidelines were 
similar to its other manuals on measuring S&T activities but 
went well beyond the coverage of the  Frascati Manual for R&D 
only. In the specifi cations for the new indicators, it was clearly 
asserted that no new data surveys should be initiated. Instead, 
work would only draw on the deployment and scrutiny of 
already existing data sets (such as  education and labour force 
statistics), though it was recognized from the start that these 
data had never been intended to serve as a basis for specifi c 
S&T analysis. Th e same approach has been suggested for some 
of the other subsequent OECD manuals on measuring science 
and technology activities (see Box).
After several years of intense work and discussions, a new 
manual was approved at an experts’ meeting in  Australia in 
1994. In recognition of the support of the national authorities, 
it came to be known as the  Canberra Manual. 
For the purposes of the  Canberra Manual, a new term ‘Human 
Resources in Science and Technology’ (HRST) was coined. Once 
again, all guidelines proposed were strictly in line with inter-
national  standards to account for as many aspects as possible 
of supply ( education, in terms of qualifi cations) and demand 
(occupation, in terms of jobs or posts) of highly skilled person-
nel, allowing for possible cross-classifi cations between the two. 
It was not possible to give priority to any of the two criteria; 
both features had to be exploited for the HRST exercise (cross-
classifi cations according to ISCED-1976 and ISCO-1988). 
Th e broad and general defi nition of the HRST reads as fol-
lows:
‘HRST are people who fulfi l one or other of the following con-
ditions: successfully completed  education at the third level in 
an S&T fi eld of study; or not formally qualifi ed as above, but 
employed in an S&T occupation where the above qualifi ca-
tions are normally required.’
Paragraph 49 of the 1995  Canberra Manual
Th is description of course is still rather vague and therefore is 
accompanied by a number of supplementary criteria. ‘Stocks’ 
provide a snapshot of the HRST situation at a specifi c moment 
in time whereas ‘fl ows’ refer to movements in or out of the 
stock over a given time period (generally a year). 
For these variables the  Canberra Manual suggests the follow-
ing defi nitions:
HRST stock: ■  ‘...the number of people at a particular point 
in time who fulfi l the conditions of the defi nition of HRST’ 
(paragraph 107 of the 1995  Canberra Manual). For example, 
the number of PhDs in physics employed in a country and 
sector on a fi xed date.
1990: Proposed Standard Method of Compiling and  ■
Interpreting Technology Balance of Payments Data – 
the TBP Manual ( OECD, 1990)
1993: Proposed Standard Practice for Surveys of  ■
Research and Experimental Development – the  Frascati 
Manual, fi fth edition ( OECD, 1993)
1994: Using Patent Data as Science and Technology  ■
Indicators (revision underway 2008) – the Patent 
Manual ( OECD)
1995: Proposed Standard Method of Compiling and  ■
Interpreting Technology Balance of Payments Data – 
the TBP Manual ( OECD, 1990)
The Measurement of Human Resources devoted  ■
to Science and Technology – the  Canberra Manual 
( OECD/ Eurostat 1995)
2005: Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting  ■
Innovation Data – the  Oslo Manual, third edition 
( OECD/ Eurostat 2005)
2005: Using Patent Data as Science and Technology  ■
Indicators – Patent Manual ( OECD, 1994) (revision 
underway 2008)
Measuring Globalisation –  ■  OECD Handbook on 
Economic Globalisation Indicators ( OECD, 2005)
Th e ‘Frascati Family’ of guidelines for the measurement of science and technology activities
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   75 14/09/10   15:34:24
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
76
HRST fl ows: ■  ‘...the number of people who do not fulfi l any 
of the conditions for inclusion in the HRST at the beginning 
of a time period but gain at least one of them during the 
period (infl ow) as well as the number of people who ful-
fi l one or other of the conditions of the defi nition of HRST 
at the beginning of a time period and cease to fulfi l them 
during the period (outfl ow)’ (paragraph 109 of the 1995 
 Canberra Manual). For example, the number of electronics 
engineers graduating from a country’s universities in a given 
year would be an infl ow.
Internal fl ows: ■  ‘...people who are part of the HRST stock, 
some of whose characteristics change during the time 
period considered without, however, losing the essential 
characteristics for inclusion in HRST’ (paragraph 112 of 
the 1995  Canberra Manual). For example, the number of 
people who change their sector of employment or achieve 
a qualifi cation at a higher ISCED level.
In its very broadest sense, nearly everybody who has a relevant 
academic qualifi cation or is employed in some relevant activity 
may be considered HRST. It is however clear that some qualifi -
cations or some occupations are of more specifi c  science and 
technology policy interest than others. Th e HRST are therefore 
split into two major categories: university level HRST and  tech-
nician level HRST (who, furthermore, may have graduated in a 
number of diff erent fi elds of study, not all of which are of equal 
interest for our analysis of the S&T labour force). 
Th e diff erent diplomas are then broken down into categories, 
the highest being the ‘core coverage’ for the top tertiary-level 
qualifi cations in the natural sciences, engineering and tech-
nology, medical sciences, the agricultural sciences and the 
social sciences. The other categories (‘extended coverage’ 
and ‘complete coverage‘) refer to other fi elds of study, such 
as the humanities, or to lower-level training that may be of 
less  relevance.
Th e  Canberra Manual also reviews, similarly with the  Frascati 
Manual, a number of technical issues, such as: units of clas-
sifi cation (the reporting vs. the statistical unit); head-count 
vs. full-time equivalence; demographics of the HRST labour 
force (age distribution, gender, national origin, ethnicity); 
and combined quantitative and qualitative matters including 
unemployment, training and retraining, salaries, retirement 
ages, public attitudes to science and technology, and so on.
Th ere is also a commented record of potential international 
and national data sources for the inventory of HRST stocks 
and flows, principally the OECD ,  Eurostat and UNESCO 
 education and R&D statistics, the labour force statistics of 
the United Nations International Labour Offi  ce (ILO) and 
national population censuses. All the basic data have been 
provided to these international bodies by national bureaus 
of statistics whose databases are by and large more exhaus-
tive than the consolidated data published (the international 
data issued being for the lowest common denominator). 
Some smaller industrialized countries (such as Scandinavian 
countries) also keep detailed national registers of their HRST 
workforce, as do a number of professional bodies (here, inter-
national and national engineering associations are particularly 
present). Population censuses are undertaken only at inter-
vals of several years (sometimes fi ve to ten years) but their 
coverage usually surpasses that of more frequent (annual or 
even quarterly) household or employment/labour force sur-
veys. Th ese are usually based on sampling only, meaning that 
much of the detailed HRST information  requested vanishes 
(such as the gender dimension of the fi gures).  
As has been already suggested, the  Canberra Manual is 
theoretically rigorous but diffi  cult to use in practice for 
harmonized comparisons, despite several signifi cant meth-
odological and analytical attempts (notably by  Eurostat). 
Th e problems are essentially due to the inadequacy of the 
recommended data sources. ISCED was revised in 1997 with 
a number of breaks in coverage of levels and disciplines (as 
mentioned earlier) but no revision of the  Canberra Manual 
has followed as yet. Th e  Canberra Manual HRST concept 
and defi nitions are, however, now globally recognized and 
serve as key references for most analytical studies of the sci-
ence and technology workforce. 
Th e international study of 4.1.6 
careers of doctorate holders 
Th e most recent – and certainly most promising – international 
HRST project underway is on mapping the careers of doctor-
ate holders (CDH) and their mobility, once again involving the 
OECD , the UNESCO Institute for Statistics and  Eurostat. Th is 
project has called for additional guidelines, which to a large 
extent are drawing more from national practice than from the 
Frascati or the Canberra manuals. 
Th e purpose of the CDH exercise is to collect quantitative and 
qualitative information on a large number of variables for this 
important category of S&T personnel, not only absolute or rel-
ative numbers (in relation to population, labour force or other 
denominators) but also, for instance, information on their:
demographic characteristics (gender, age etc); ■
educational characteristics (level of  ■  education, year of doc-
toral degree, age, fi eld of doctoral degree, graduation age, 
duration of doctoral degree in months, primary sources of 
doctorate funding);
 Engineering is fun!
©
 U
KR
C
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   76 14/09/10   15:34:24
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
77
labour market status and characteristics (inactivity and  ■
unemployment rates, full-time vs. part-time, type of employ-
ment contract), salaries (median annual salaries for persons 
working as researchers, by gender, sector of employment, 
and fi eld of employment);
national origins, mobility (international, national, job-to-job  ■
mobility, mobility intentions);
employment satisfaction; and ■
outputs (articles, books, patents, commercialized products  ■
or processes etc.). 
A fi rst pilot CDH survey embracing just seven volunteering 
countries (Argentina,  Australia, Canada, Germany, Portugal, 
Switzerland and the United States) was initiated in 2005, and 
the fi rst preliminary results were issued in 2007. It was followed 
by a second survey launched later the same year and responses 
were received by mid-2008 by the OECD from no less than 
twenty-fi ve countries, of which several were Eastern European 
states as new members of the European Union.  
Th is wide and rapid survey participation clearly emphasizes 
the very strong international and national policy interest in 
the new CDH approach of assessing human resources for S&T 
and, furthermore, that it is closely linked to public and private 
 innovation concerns, especially in the services sector where 
R&D investments now grow faster than in manufacturing.
A wealth of statistics on doctorate holders and their work-
ing conditions was assembled in the two surveys, though 
they have not yet been systematically published. For further 
analytical purposes, a subset of these data – common to all 
participating countries – was isolated for a target population 
of persons, under the age of seventy, having earned their diplo-
mas during the time period 1990 to 2006. 
Th e country coverage of the 2005 CDH survey was obviously 
neither exhaustive nor representative for the global economy 
and, furthermore, not particularly engineering-oriented (nor 
was the second survey). Th e experience of the fi rst exercise 
however, seems to be confi rmed by the results of the second 
survey and responds to most of the concerns of the S&T com-
munity and policy-makers today.  
Once further enlarged and refi ned, these CDH surveys may 
shed light upon issues related to the stocks and fl ows of highly-
qualifi ed and skilled personnel at the global scale and, hope-
fully, in the medium and longer terms, the results may be of 
signifi cance to specifi c branches of interest as well, such as the 
engineering profession.
To this end, however, additional resources and supplementary 
methodological developments are necessary. Th is is particu-
larly important for the detailed subgroups of the international 
 standard classifi cations (ISCED, ISCO and ISIC) where it is still 
diffi  cult to separate out, from S&T more generally, engineering 
as a fi eld of study, or engineers (and  technicians) as a profes-
sion. Lobbying will undoubtedly be required to induce these 
statistical agencies to meet customers’ needs for more specifi c 
data – but by whom?       
Pending a more comprehensive presentation by OECD /
UIS/ Eurostat of the results of the fi rst two CDH surveys, a few 
items of interest are commented below. Note that these data 
are for overall S&T doctorate holders with only some limited 
linkage to engineering or engineers (and many fi gures are still 
to be considered as broad orders of magnitude). 
One of the principal indicators is the number of doctorate 
holders in the population, reported in absolute terms. As a 
result of massive expansion of higher  education both inside 
and outside the OECD area (for instance in China, India and 
Brazil), the world stocks of highly skilled personnel are rapidly 
growing in a context of economic globalization. Whereas in 
1998 broadly some 140,000 doctoral degrees were awarded in 
the OECD area as a whole, around 200,000 were registered in 
2006, an increase of more than 40 per cent. Th ere are not yet 
any estimates for the worldwide stock of doctorate holders in 
general or engineering doctorates holders in particular but the 
CDH studies suggest that, for instance, by 2006 some 340,000 
(1990–2006) doctoral graduates (all disciplines) were found in 
the United States and nearly 275,000 in Germany.
Th e number of doctorate holders were also analysed per 1,000 
of the national labour force. In 2002 (fi rst CDH survey) the 
following ratios were obtained showing quite large variations 
between countries: Switzerland (27.5), Germany (20.1), United 
States (10.7), Canada (8.2),  Australia (7.8), Portugal (2.6), and 
Argentina (0.5).
All the European countries covered by the survey show that 
the natural sciences are the prime (fi rst or second) major 
fi eld of specialization of their doctorate holders, whereas the 
weighting of the other main S&T fi elds of S&T varies consider-
ably. Within the extended European Union, the natural sci-
ences represent, with only one or two exceptions only, at least 
20 per cent of doctorate holders with some seven countries in 
the 30–40 per cent interval.
According to the same series, in about half the European 
countries, for which data are reported, engineering doctorates 
account for about 20 per cent of total doctorates but once 
again there are large variations between countries in compari-
son with other disciplines. Th e relative importance of engi-
neering is notable in the East European countries (see below) 
 UNESCO toolkit on Gender 
Indicators in SET.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   77 14/09/10   15:34:24
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
78
whereas, for instance Germany, Estonia and Spain (with around 
10 per cent) show other preferences (medical sciences are 30 
per cent in Germany and 20 per cent in Spain). Th e humanities 
show between 10–15 per cent of total doctorate degrees in a 
majority of the countries observed. Th e study estimates the 
share of engineering science doctorates in the United States as 
perhaps some 15 per cent. 
Whereas the numbers of women are increasingly equalling or 
surpassing those of men at the lower levels of tertiary  educa-
tion (enrolments, graduates) – of course still with variations 
between countries and fi elds of study – they are still under-
represented among overall doctorate holders and as science 
and engineering graduates compared to men. Th ey are also 
overall less engaged in typical engineering and  technician pro-
fessions and in  research occupations. Female 1990–2006 doc-
torates accounted for between 30–50 per cent of the total; the 
median of some twenty-two countries ( Europe and the United 
States) being just under 40 per cent in 2006. Th ere are however 
clear signs that since 1998, the numbers of female doctorates 
are now increasing faster than those of men, but they still have 
to catch up in both the science fi elds (with 38 per cent on aver-
age of total doctorates) and notably in engineering where they 
only represented 21 per cent of the total doctorates in 2006. 
Overall unemployment rates for doctorate holders (not 
exceeding 2–3 per cent in 2006) are currently about half those 
of graduates with lower level diplomas and still lower than 
those of the population as a whole, though with variations 
between countries and fi elds of training. Women are more 
likely to be unemployed than men and are also engaged in 
more unstable positions than men. Unemployment rates are 
generally higher in the humanities and social sciences (where 
there is a majority of female doctorates) than in the ‘hard sci-
ences’ (including engineering) where men still constitute the 
majority of the workforce. Th e fi rst CDH survey had shown 
that in the United States (2003), the unemployment rate for 
engineering and technology doctorate holders (and also in 
the natural sciences) was higher than that of any other broad 
discipline, notably the social sciences and the humanities but, 
apparently, this situation is slowly becoming more balanced. 
Th e world median age at graduation of doctorate holders in 
engineering appears to be about 32 years around 2005–2006 
(with some fi fteen countries in the 30–35 years interval), but 
this fi gure reveals considerable diff erences notably between 
Western and Eastern  Europe countries – lowest in Belgium 
and Cyprus (only 28 years) but significantly higher in, for 
instance Bulgaria (44), Lithuania (42), Romania and the Czech 
Republic (40). In about half the countries surveyed, women 
obtained their engineering doctorates faster than their male 
counterparts (Table 1).
Broadly three-quarters of the overall doctorate holders are 
working in the higher  education sector. Th e government sec-
tor is also an important employer of doctorate holders who are 
active in  research and teaching activities or otherwise working 
in management and professional positions. Engineering doc-
torate holders would be expected essentially to work in the 
enterprise sector but in nine out of the thirteen countries for 
which such sector of employment data are available, the uni-
versity sector attracts more engineering doctors than fi rms. In 
the other four countries (Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic 
and the United States) enterprise is employing something like 
at least 10 per cent of the engineering doctors population. 
Table 1: Median age at graduation of engineering 
doctoral graduates 2005–2006
Women Men Total
Argentina .. ..  33
 Australia 31 31 31
Austria 30.9 32.5 32.4
Belgium 29 28 28
Bulgaria 34 45 44
Cyprus .. 28 28
Czech Republic 33.5 40.0 39.5
Denmark 31.7 31 31.2
Estonia 37.0 32.0 34.5
Finland 34 33 33
Japan 33.5 34.0  ..
Latvia 32 32 32
Lithuania 31 29 30
Norway 30.7 31.1 31.0
Poland 32 32 32
Portugal 34 36 36
Romania 38 43 40
Slovakia 30 30 30
Spain 31 32 32
Sweden 32 32 32
Switzerland 30 31 31
United States 30.2 31.0 30.8
Source:  OECD, UNESCO Institute for Statistics,  Eurostat 
Slovak Republic (27%), Poland (26%), Bulgaria (25%), Romania (23%), Czech Republic
(22%), Cyprus (21%), Belgium (20%), Portugal (20%), Lithuania (19%), Latvia (18%),
Denmark (16%), Austria (14%), Estonia (9%), Germany (9%), Spain (9%).
Doctorates in engineering as a percentage of total doctorates in 2006 
(rounded fi gures)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   78 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
79
It is a well known fact that there are signifi cant salary diff er-
ences between men and women also for doctorate holders 
across sectors. In the United States women’s salaries were 
overall 25 per cent lower than those of men in 2003, and in 
Canada 20 per cent lower. Discontent with salaries is a princi-
pal cause of employment dissatisfaction and mobility inclina-
tion. Dissatisfaction with salaries touched some 20 per cent 
of the doctorate holders in the United States, 40 per cent in 
Portugal and 55 per cent in Argentina. Th e percentages were 
even higher among women (2003).
Concerning the outputs of doctorate holders working as 
researchers, the data available are not yet suffi  cient for overall 
conclusions, though the United States’ data suggest that, in 
general, men produce more in terms of, for example, articles 
and publications than women who are ‘more comfortable 
with other means of knowledge diff usion, such as teaching.’ 
Concerning the measurement of doctorate holders of 
foreign origin, a noteworthy section of the fi rst CDH survey 
examines the difference between two basic concepts for 
the understanding of the results: Are the data for foreign-
born people, or are they for people of foreign nationality? 
Th e former category refl ects the culmination of immigrants 
over a longer time period, some of whom may eventually 
have obtained the citizenship of the receiving country, while 
the second – more or less – presents the circumstances at a 
given date.
Depending on the approach chosen, the statistical results 
may diff er. Th e fi rst CDH report indicates that individuals of 
foreign origin are very present among doctorate holders in 
Switzerland in terms both of foreign-born at 41 per cent and 
of foreign nationality at 30 per cent. In Canada and  Australia, 
they are are even higher at 54 per cent and 46 per cent respec-
tively, but those of foreign nationals considerably lower at 18 
per cent and 14 per cent. Th e shares of foreign-born doc-
torate holders are much larger in Canada and in  Australia 
than in the United States. In absolute terms, there are more 
foreign-born doctorate holders in Canada than are born in 
the country. Propensities are high among foreign doctorate 
holders to acquire citizenship in the settlement countries, 
notably in  Australia, Canada and the United States. On the 
other hand, international mobility of United States doctor-
ate holder citizens is low.
Statistics and an analysis of 4.1.7 
engineers in  education and 
employment
Introduction to the statistics
The tables and charts in this section show  education and 
 employment statistics for recent years from UNESCO, OECD 
and  Eurostat. They attempt to place engineers in the glo-
bal context. Th is  education data was initially collected from 
Table 2: Th e principal  OECD methodological manuals
A. Th e ‘Frascati Family’ of Manuals:
R&D Th e Measurement of Scientifi c and Technological Activities Series: - “•  Frascati Manual:  Proposed Standard Practice for 
Surveys of Research and Experimental Development” – 6th Edition ( OECD 2002)
“R&D Statistics and Output Measurement in the Higher Education Sector” – •  Frascati Manual Supplement ( OECD 1989)
Technology Balance 
of Payments
“Manual for the Measurement and Interpretation of Technology Balance of Payments Data –TBP Manual” (•  OECD 1990) *
Innovation “•  Oslo Manual - Guidelines for Collecting and Interpreting Innovation Data” (3rd Edition,  OECD 2005)
Patents “•  OECD Patent Statistics Manual “( OECD 2009)
S&T Personnel “Th e Measurement of Human Resources Devoted to Science and Technology - •  Canberra Manual” ( OECD / Eurostat 1995) *
B. Other Methodological Frameworks for S&T:
High technology “Revision of High-technology Sector and Product Classifi cation” (•  OECD, STI Working Paper 1997/2)
Bibliometrics “Bibliometric Indicators and Analysis of Research Systems: Methods and Examples”, by Yoshiko OKUBO  (•  OECD, STI 
Working Paper 1997/1 ( OECD 1997) **
Globalisation “Measuring Globalisation – •  OECD Handbook on Economic Globalisation Indicators” ( OECD 2005)
Productivity “Measurement of Aggregate and Industry-Level  Productivity Growth  - •  OECD Manual” ( OECD 2001)
Biotechnology “A Framework for Biotechnology Statistics” (•  OECD 2005)
* Dealing mainly with the classifi cation and interpretation of existing information (not originally collected for the purpose of S&T analysis and policy)
** Working paper, without recognised manual status 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   79 14/09/10   15:34:25
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
80
respective Member States using a common questionnaire, 
though each agency manages its own database and analysis.
With regard to engineers in particular, the ISCED 1997 classi-
fi cation introduces a new set of ten broad fi elds of  education, 
one of which is the ‘engineering, manufacturing and con-
struction’ category with three new sub-categories (diff erent 
from the ISCED 1976 classifi cation described in section 4.1.3). 
Th ey are, as much as possible, used for the data presented in 
the tables and charts.
Tables 1 to 6 show data for the world. Tables 7 to 12 show data 
for countries in the OECD and the European area, as there are 
no corresponding worldwide data available. (Go to section 
4.1.8 to view the Tables). 
Engineering and engineering trades: engineering drawing, mechan-
ics, metal work, electricity, electronics,  telecommunications,  energy 
and chemical engineering, vehicle maintenance and surveying.
Manufacturing and processing: food and drink processing, textiles, 
clothes, footwear, leather, materials such as wood, paper, plastic and 
glass.
Architecture and building: architecture and town planning, struc-
tural architecture, landscape architecture, community planning, 
cartography, building construction and civil engineering.
Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction
(ISCED 1997 Classifi cation)
Notes on the statistics
Th ese macro-statistics should be interpreted with care given 
that the quality of the data is not always fully satisfactory.
UNESCO data on  education is only available for the broad ‘engi-
neering, manufacturing and construction’ category as a whole, 
whereas in the case of OECD and  Eurostat they issue separate 
data for its three sub-categories. Th erefore, with the worldwide 
UNESCO data as the lowest common denominator, the tables 
and charts show the data for the whole category as a priority. 
Some separate data from OECD and  Eurostat are available in 
the three sub-categories for the new levels introduced for the 
highest classes of the revised ISCED, notably 6, 5A and 5B (see 
section 4.1.3 for more detail). Th e UNESCO data for ISCED cat-
egories 5 and 6 have been amalgamated and this again is used as 
the lowest common denominator for comparison.
Discrepancies in data availability can also be seen in the tables, 
particularly those between industrialized countries (typically 
OECD and associated states) where the bulk of the world’s engi-
neers are still found, and the emerging economies. Unfortunately, 
statistical information for the industrializing countries, which are 
the major regional economies, is also not yet available.
Trends are often more important for policy analysis than exam-
ining absolute fi gures at a given moment in time. Time series 
are most complete for the industrialized countries, though the 
situation is steadily improving for a number of the industrial-
izing UNESCO Member States. 
Data for tertiary  education statistics are collected for students 
entering  education (enrolments), students in the pipeline, and 
students leaving  education with an appropriate qualifi cation 
(graduates). Enrolment numbers may refl ect present interest 
in specifi c studies, whereas, several years previously, graduate 
numbers perhaps refl ected more on policy or employment 
concerns. Gender data are by and large available for both 
enrolments and graduates.
As a rule, analysing trends is more informative for policy analy-
sis than examining absolute fi gures at a given moment in time. 
Time series are still most complete for ‘developed’ countries 
though the situation is steadily improving also for a number of 
industrializing UNESCO Member States. 
Given that the quality criteria of the data are not always fully 
satisfactory, these ‘macro’ series should be interpreted with 
care. Furthermore, statistical information is still unfortunately 
unavailable for some of the principal regional economies in 
the world (Russian Federation, China, Indonesia, Singapore, 
Th ailand, Egypt, Nigeria and others) though there is hope that 
the statistical series concerned will already be completed in 
the rather short term. 
As far as ‘engineers’ are concerned, the ‘new’ ISCED (1997) 
introduces a novel set of ten broad groups of fi elds of  edu-
cation, one of which is ‘Engineering, manufacturing and con-
struction’ (different from the ISCED-76 version described 
earlier) with three new subcategories (and programmes):  
Engineering and engineering trades: Engineering drawing,  ■
mechanics, metal work, electricity, electronics,  telecommu-
nications,  energy and chemical engineering, vehicle mainte-
nance, surveying. 
Manufacturing and processing: Food and drink processing,  ■
textiles, clothes, footwear, leather, materials (wood, paper, 
plastic, glass, etc.)
Architecture and building: Architecture and town planning,  ■
structural architecture, landscape architecture, community 
planning, cartography, building construction, civil engineer-
ing.  
Whereas the OECD and  Eurostat issue separate data for each of 
the above three sub-categories (where the fi rst one, Engineer-
ing and engineering trades, is of particular interest), UNESCO 
only provides their full subtotal, which – as the smallest com-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   80 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
81
mon denominator – is presented as priority in the worldwide 
enrolments and graduates series below. Earlier (see the section 
4.1.6 on the careers of doctorate holders) we also discussed the 
breakdown of new levels of the highest classes of the revised 
ISCED (notably 6 and 5A and 5B) for which some separate data 
are available from OECD and  Eurostat. However, once again, 
we shall have to draw on the UNESCO series where the above 
ISCED categories 5 and 6 have been amalgamated.
Introductory analysis of the statistics on  education
What do these statistics tell us concerning the current and 
near-future supply of engineers? Are the recurring concerns of 
mismatches between demand and supply justifi ed?
To begin with,  engineering studies enrolments have increased in 
every country in absolute terms over the last decade, with only 
very few exceptions. Th e rates of increase, of course, are varied.
However,  engineering studies enrolments indicate a decline in 
most countries in relative terms over the same period – despite 
their absolute growth – when compared to total enrolments 
in tertiary  education in a country and enrolments in other 
disciplines. Th e increases in absolute  enrolment numbers are 
therefore explained, to some extent, by the general overall 
increases in the numbers entering tertiary  education, rather 
than a move towards  engineering studies by young people.
It is also clear that female  engineering studies enrolments are 
increasing more quickly than those of male enrolments, and 
accordingly also their share in the total student and gradu-
ate numbers. Th e proportions are however still low in most 
countries, and in some very low. It is not really possible to pin-
point any common trends (increases, stagnation or decreases) 
between and within the regions of the world (essentially 
UNESCO groupings). Whereas numbers are reasonably stable 
over time in the largest countries, more relative year-to-year 
variations may be observed in smaller countries and, notably, 
in those of the developing regions for which data is not regu-
larly available.
The overall tendency within the countries covered by the 
OECD / Eurostat data is slow but steady growth in the numbers 
of  engineering studies enrolments. Th e principal exceptions 
to this are Japan, the Netherlands, Norway and Korea where 
notable decreases of some 5 to 10 per cent have been recorded 
since the late 1990s. Such declines are taken very seriously by 
national authorities at a time of stagnating demographics and 
the retirement of engineers who graduated immediately after 
the ‘baby boom’. In Japan for instance, various measures are 
taken with a view to reinforcing immigration of qualifi ed scien-
tists and engineers from, or outsourcing R&D to, other coun-
tries in the region. Initiatives are also reinforced in a number 
of countries to stimulate the return home of highly qualifi ed 
expatriates. 
It is worthwhile noting, just as an example, that total  engineer-
ing studies enrolments in Korea are about one-third higher 
than those of Japan (according to the UNESCO series). 
In  Europe and the broader OECD area, which shows a median 
increase of 10 per cent, enrolments appear to be growing faster 
in several of the new European Member States, many of which 
were in earlier times integrated in the Eastern Bloc or part of 
the former Federation of Yugoslavia. Similar growth is seen in a 
number of the former Soviet republics in Central Asia.
Considerable and regular progress is noticed in the Mediter-
ranean region, including Turkey (an OECD member) and the 
countries of North  Africa and, with the perceptible exception 
of Saudi Arabia, in the Arab countries in general.
In the South and West Asian region, enrolments in  engineer-
ing studies have risen fi ve-fold in Bangladesh since the start 
of the century and by around half in India, Iran and Pakistan. 
In the fi rst three of these countries, the numbers of female 
students are also increasing at high rates but are decreasing 
in Pakistan.
In the sub-Saharan region of  Africa, there are still many 
countries not yet reporting to UNESCO despite the UIS’s 
steadily intensified capacity-building efforts. South  Africa 
appears to be the leading country in the region for  engineering 
studies enrolments in absolute terms with a 60 per cent increase 
between 2000 and 2006. All reporting African countries (with 
only one or two exceptions) saw average growth well above 
that of  Europe for instance; the growth is however starting 
from a lower base. Here again, much of the progress is due to 
increased female participation. For example, Ethiopia appears 
to have the second highest growth rates in this vast region, 
and it nearly tripled its numbers over the fi ve years to 2005 
(though followed by a dramatic drop in 2006). Th e increases 
included the quadrupling of female engineering students.
UNESCO Member States in East Asia, the Pacifi c and the Car-
ibbean include a large number of smaller states for which no 
data are reported.
No common picture may be drawn for Latin America where 
enrolments in  engineering studies are increasing in Columbia, 
Mexico and Brazil but are decreasing in Argentina and Chile. 
Th e situation again varies in the smaller countries in the con-
tinent, perhaps with a slight tendency though towards slow 
growth or levelling-off .
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   81 14/09/10   15:34:25
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
82
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
 Europe ( OECD/ Eurostat)
Austria ... 40,448 ... ... 31,158 30,004 29,674 29,890
Belgium ... 41,903 40,886 41,513 39,729 44,270 40,451 41,670
Bulgaria 49,639 52,426 52,777 51,941 50,948 50,463 50,504 51,083
Croatia 18,941 ... 19,916 20,920 20,722 ... 21,891 22,283
Cyprus 886 670 550 522 637 843 1,009 1,262
Czech Republic 51,105 40,800 41,536 58,958 58,661 65,655 66,248 ...
Denmark 17,481 18,982 19,720 19,406 21,771 22,501 24,005 23,077
Estonia 7,517 7,420 7,320 7,107 7,357 7,859 8,269 8,412
Finland 64,738 69,230 72,303 73,363 77,596 80,167 80,827 80,153
France ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 252,882
Germany 338,901 325,667 323,953 332,161 341,652 360,034 ... 360,394
Greece ... ... ... 72,813 ... 90,404 106,528 93,626
Hungary 51,295 54,389 51,256 46,064 55,476 54,406 53,965 54,569
Iceland 483 556 606 693 870 980 1,022 1,149
Ireland 17,967 18,241 19,343 19,971 20,310 20,790 19,233 19,420
Israel 41,015 39,138 52,987 60,116 57,929 58,661 56,812 55,537
Italy 306,157 297,928 299,778 303,435 312,170 319,739 320,343 316,135
Latvia 13,215 9,300 10,128 11,320 11,764 12,280 12,352 13,159
Lithuania 24,122 27,275 29,419 30,059 33,099 35,578 36,376 35,775
Luxembourg ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 405
Malta 431 411 459 525 674 698 737 ...
Netherlands 51,008 52,218 53,641 54,219 53,084 44,576 44,475 47,292
Norway 15,733 12,953 12,386 12,598 13,395 13,874 14,726 ...
Poland 203,095 213,125 234,638 258,483 269,726 272,641 248,542 269,810
Portugal ... 67,007 ... 81,648 84,526 85,414 83,079 80,597
Romania 91,450 98,964 108,672 117,244 138,909 145,106 150,203 152,176
Russian Federation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Slovakia 26,152 28,210 29,637 29,069 28,279 28,621 31,521 32,439
Slovenia 14,980 15,450 16,026 16,530 17,456 17,508 17,753 17,962
Spain 281,760 295,266 303,122 314,066 322,932 324,936 319,340 318,881
Sweden 64,634 66,287 68,206 69,410 71,736 71,949 70,089 68,846
Switzerland 24,638 23,305 23,293 24,255 25,384 26,622 26,376 27,418
Turkey ... ... 211,449 220,243 259,069 281,986 292,623 312,420
United Kingdom 182,761 178,410 217,529 225,784 177,164 180,656 185,283 191,182
Other  OECD (outside  Europe)
 Australia 98,305 97,686 99,662 108,113 110,171 108,488 108,319 108,319
 New Zealand 10,568 11,586 11,607 10,793 13,975 14,839 15,124 15,788
Canada 122,974 ... ... 128,337 ... ... ... ...
Mexico 310,974 332,646 358,543 391,952 415,429 476,228 437,442 454,399
Table 1: Students Enrolled in Tertiary-Level “Engineering”* Education, 1999-2006, Total (persons) - World
Engineering indicators – Tables 4.1.8 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   82 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
83
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
United States ... ... ... ... ... ... 1154,971 1166,545
Japan 718,782 706,998 701,698 694,580 685,063 677,544 668,526 655,851
Rep. of Korea 1019,703 1096,304 1046,279 1079,584 1036,741 993,934 1022,845 971,722
Western  Europe n.e.c
Andorra ... ... ... - - - - -
Gibralter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Holy See - - - ... ... ... ... ...
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 111 149 135 ...
Monaco . . . . . . ... ...
San Marino . 141 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central and Eastern  Europe n.e.c.
Albania ... 2,599 2,708 ... 3,738 4,243 ... ...
Belarus ... ... ... ... ... ... 132,527 138,417
Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montenegro ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Moldova ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Serbia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Macedonia 6,558 7,793 7,709 9,152 9,035 8,376 8,936 ...
Ukraine 494,995 ... 456,901 487,137 513,638 545,764 581,761 606,853
 Arab States
Algeria ... ... ... ... ... 71,445 78,175 80,826
Bahrain ... ... ... ... 2,080 ... 1,589 1,581
Djibouti ... ... 13 ... ... 28 ... 114
Egypt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iraq ... 28,857 ... ... ... 78,227 ... ...
Jordan ... ... ... ... 22,636 22,636 25,087 27,601
Kuwait ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lebanon ... 13,851 15,166 16,492 16,608 15,552 19,276 20,067
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ... 59,645 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritania ... ... ... ... - ... - ...
Morocco 5,350 7,170 16,517 ... 13,570 13,221 16,790 21,392
Oman ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,488 ...
Palestinian Aut. Terr. 4,781 4,201 4,168 5,967 8,074 8,688 ... 11,149
Qatar ... ... 289 276 312 432 ... ...
Saudi Arabia ... 32,865 ... ... 44,233 15,721 19,780 ...
Sudan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Syrian Arab Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tunisia ... ... ... ... 23,697 ... ... 34,802
United Arab Emirates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Yemen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   83 14/09/10   15:34:25
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
84
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Central Asia
Armenia ... ... 4,725 ... 4,632 4,921 5,841 6,169
Azerbaijan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Georgia 21,505 23,282 27,734 31,251 36,344 35,657 31,812 10,678
Kazakhstan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kyrgyzstan ... ... 21,363 34,582 19,949 14,202 21,061 22,633
Mongolia 11,124 12,993 14,649 16,059 18,316 18,545 20,117 22,478
Tajikistan ... 3,912 5,967 6,397 5,449 6,863 15,488 19,189
Turkmenistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uzbekistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 43,065
East  Asia and the Pacifi c n.e.c.
Brunei Darussalam 108 153 228 ... 202 170 218 334
Cambodia ... ... 722 803 ... 1,066 ... 2,740
China ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cook Islands ... ... ... . ... ... ... ...
Dem. P. Rep. of Korea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Fiji ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Hong Kong (China) ... ... ... ... 25,302 24,990 24,466 24,379
Indonesia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kiribati ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lao P. Dem. Rep. ... 1,393 1,656 ... 1,922 3,560 2,337 4,382
Macao, China ... ... ... 316 413 ... 505 501
Malaysia ... ... ... 150,285 ... 156,286 128,376 ...
Marshall Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Micronesia (Fed. St. of) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Myanmar ... ... 29,957 ... ... ... ... ...
Nauru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Niue ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Palau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Papua New Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Philippines ... ... ... ... 299,831 376,224 ... ...
Samoa ... 57 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Singapore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Solomon Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Th ailand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Timor-Leste ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tokelau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tonga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tuvalu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Vanuatu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Viet Nam 141,930 132,569 ... 154,846 164,141 ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   84 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
85
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
South and West Asia
Afghanistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bangladesh ... 8,845 11,903 12,935 14,049 27,349 45,482 ...
Bhutan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ,597
India ... ... 418,193 526,476 ... ... 696,609 ...
Iran, Islamic Rep. of ... ... ... ... ... 451,768 578,053 727,116
Maldives ... ... . . . ... ... ...
Nepal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Pakistan ... ... ... ... ... ... 31,240 46,090
Sri Lanka ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Latin America and the Caribbean
Anguilla ... ... ... . . ... . .
Antigua and Barbuda ... . ... . ... ... ... ...
Argentina ... ... ... ... 177,475 ... 168,914 ...
Aruba ... 423 391 383 438 399 ... 408
Bahamas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Barbados ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Belize ... ... ... ... ... 1 ... ...
Bermuda ... ... ... ... ... ... 89 ...
Bolivia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Brazil ... ... ... 279,716 301,158 319,175 344,714 ...
British Virgin Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cayman Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
Chile ... ... ... 163,834 169,310 99,755 120,942 122,447
Colombia ... ... 283,661 ... ... 319,910 364,589 424,362
Costa Rica ... ... 9,979 11,080 ... 16,157 ... ...
Cuba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14,393
Dominica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dominican Republic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Ecuador ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
El Salvador ... ... ... 13,870 15,477 ... 14,898 14,905
Grenada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guatemala ... ... ... 19,092 ... ... ... 20,824
Guyana ... ... ... ... ... 447 446 477
Haiti ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Honduras ... ... ... ... 21,533 ... ... ...
Jamaica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montserrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
Netherlands Antilles ... 864 783 ... ... ... ... ...
Nicaragua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Panama ... ... ... 21,241 18,585 15,251 14,616 14,664
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   85 14/09/10   15:34:25
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
86
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Paraguay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Peru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,286
St. Kitts and Nevis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St.Lucia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Suriname ... ... ... 526 ... ... ... ...
Trinidad and Tobago ... 1,300 1,399 ... ... 3,788 ... ...
Turks and Caicos Islands ... ... ... ... . . ... ...
Uruguay ... ... ... ... ... ... 12,321 ...
Venezuela ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sub-Saharan  Africa
Angola 674 ... ... 1079 ... ... ... ...
Benin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Botswana ... ... 352 353 ... 534 603 ...
Burkina Faso ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,721
Burundi ... ... ... 500 ... ... ... ...
Cameroon ... ... ... ... ... 2,170 ... 5,906
Cape Verde ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central African Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chad ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Comoros ... ... ... ... . ... ... ...
Congo ... ... . 116 ... ... ... ...
Côte d’Ivoire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. Rep. of  Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Equatorial Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Eritrea 174 372 451 - ... 1,286 ... ...
Ethiopia 5,918 5,892 11,421 9,383 13,625 17,347 16,972 12,967
Gabon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gambia ... ... ... ... ... . ... ...
 Ghana ... 8,050 8,972 9,438 ... 8,115 ... ...
Guinea ... ... ... ... ... 2,060 ... 1,672
Guinea-Bissau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kenya ... 16,435 17,652 ... ... ... ... ...
Lesotho - ... ... ... - ... 52 -
Liberia ... 2,013 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Madagascar ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,295 2,976
Malawi 1,041 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritius 1,909 1,833 1,978 1,847 2,169 2,482 2,971 2,585
Mozambique ... ... ... ... ... 2,424 2,788 ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   86 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
87
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Namibia 305 ... 475 ... 539 ... ... ...
Niger ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nigeria ... ... ... ... ... ... 187 ...
Rwanda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sao Tome and Principe . . . . . . . ...
Senegal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Seychelles . . . . . . . .
Sierra Leone ... 49 80 ... ... ... ... ...
Somalia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
South  Africa ... 43,354 ... ... 54,038 62,013 69,028 70,339
Swaziland 361 327 268 ... ... 305 225 174
Togo ... 256 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uganda 4,356 2,095 3,366 ... ... 6,332 ... ...
United Rep. of Tanzania 3,406 ... ... ... ... ... 4,589 ...
Zambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Zimbabwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source: UNESCO
* Sub-total for “Engineering”  (no separate breakdown available for the subclasses of ISCED - 97 Group “Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction”)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   87 14/09/10   15:34:25
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
88
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
 Europe ( OECD/ Eurostat)
Austria ... 7,526 ... ... 6,169 6,170 6,149 6,366
Belgium ... 7,712 7,561 8,519 8,006 10,106 8,498 10,075
Bulgaria 19,908 20,201 19,482 17,972 17,256 16,263 16,170 16,259
Croatia 5,163 ... 4,957 5,385 5,165 ... 5,400 5,651
Cyprus 201 74 43 39 49 85 130 177
Czech Republic 9,976 10,551 10,709 12,359 12,154 13,348 14,061 ...
Denmark 5,103 5,308 5,175 5,989 7,130 7,555 7,951 7,596
Estonia 2,005 1,987 2,055 2,061 2,044 2,111 2,270 2,292
Finland 11,252 12,306 13,163 13,797 14,457 14,841 15,082 15,077
France ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 59,215
Germany 60,653 60,054 60,847 62,636 64,661 68,152 ... 65,693
Greece ... ... ... 19,629 ... 25,431 29,547 22,066
Hungary 10,625 ... 10,295 9,884 11,195 10,142 10,285 10,179
Iceland 103 126 156 182 244 305 320 368
Ireland 3,105 3,247 3,613 3,577 3,645 3,468 3,142 3,177
Israel 10,902 9,584 14,230 17,467 13,103 15,904 15,216 15,109
Italy 78,998 78,381 79,478 80,140 83,367 86,809 88,784 89,599
Latvia 3,192 2,480 2,520 2,582 2,531 2,570 2,648 2,735
Lithuania 7,855 8,540 9,013 8,796 9,292 9,896 9,446 9,000
Luxembourg ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Malta 97 95 107 145 186 188 209 ...
Netherlands 6,267 6,306 6,408 6,448 6,230 6,009 5,991 7,107
Norway 3,975 3,231 2,974 2,973 3,230 3,305 3,550 ...
Poland 41,910 44,274 50,907 57,491 59,657 61,478 63,715 73,133
Portugal ... 19,745 ... 22,118 22,658 22,785 21,599 20,720
Romania 22,141 25,100 28,876 32,608 40,704 43,752 44,003 45,247
Russian Federation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Slovakia 7,287 7,378 8,022 8,315 8,081 8,207 8,821 9,247
Slovenia 3,667 3,869 3,960 4,056 4,056 4,143 4,287 4,335
Spain 71,211 75,065 77,229 83,606 88,124 89,946 88,796 89,280
Sweden 17,536 18,789 19,967 20,270 20,628 20,260 19,611 19,116
Switzerland 2,631 2,722 2,954 3,176 3,435 3,708 3,746 3,984
Turkey ... ... 45,960 47,708 48,258 53,182 53,253 58,147
United Kingdom 31,548 31,550 36,088 35,980 32,921 34,105 35,448 37,881
Other  OECD (outside  Europe)
 Australia 17,481 17,946 18,562 21,475 22,170 22,480 22,643 22,782
 New Zealand 3,000 3,422 3,083 3,452 3,953 3,390 3,518 3,977
Canada 25,014 ... ... 26,843 ... ... ... ...
Mexico 67,007 73,806 79,806 91,200 99,133 128,011 107,270 111,726
Table 2: Female Students Enrolled in Tertiary-Level “Engineering”* Education, 1999-2006, Total (persons) - World
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   88 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
89
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
United States ... ... ... ... ... ... 186,682 189,427
Japan 77,278 77,674 79,201 80,825 81,260 80,682 79,468 76,922
Rep. of Korea 185,728 195,251 175,300 188,797 189,299 160,346 165,982 156,216
Western  Europe n.e.c
Andorra ... ... ... - - - - -
Gibralter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Holy See - - - ... ... ... ... ...
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 32 43 42 ...
Monaco . . . . . . ... ...
San Marino . 36 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central and Eastern  Europe n.e.c.
Albania ... 601 650 ... 955 1,115 ... ...
Belarus ... ... ... ... ... ... 38,319 40,440
Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montenegro ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Moldova ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Serbia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Macedonia 1,833 2,196 2,194 2,580 2,619 2,646 2,835 ...
Ukraine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Arab States
Algeria ... ... ... ... ... 22,080 24,288 25,334
Bahrain ... ... ... ... 509 ... 359 333
Djibouti ... ... ... ... ... 7 ... 24
Egypt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iraq ... 6,416 ... ... ... 14,707 ... ...
Jordan ... ... ... ... 6,858 6,858 6,149 7,326
Kuwait ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lebanon ... 3,155 3,030 3,364 3,561 3,496 3,769 4,137
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritania ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Morocco 1,267 1,628 5,686 ... 3,024 3,091 4,018 5,804
Oman ... ... ... ... ... ... 904 ...
Palestinian Aut.. Terr. 1,212 1,002 1,060 1,804 2,866 2,727 ... 3,090
Qatar ... ... ... ... 50 68 ... ...
Saudi Arabia ... 204 ... ... 345 2,841 3,022 ...
Sudan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Syrian Arab Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tunisia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
United Arab Emirates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Yemen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   89 14/09/10   15:34:25
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
90
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Central Asia
Armenia ... ... 1,256 ... 1,252 1,330 1,528 1,825
Azerbaijan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Georgia 5,400 5,168 7,308 8,803 11,384 11,236 10,512 2,948
Kazakhstan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kyrgyzstan ... ... 6,143 14,954 6,091 3,240 6,161 6,649
Mongolia 5,311 6,095 6,960 7,914 8,775 8,058 8,253 8,674
Tajikistan ... ... 679 ... ... ... ... ...
Turkmenistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uzbekistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,175
East  Asia and the Pacifi c n.e.c.
Brunei Darussalam 33 54 93 ... 76 65 84 122
Cambodia ... ... 40 33 ... 45 ... 172
China ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cook Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. P. Rep. of Korea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Fiji ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Hong Kong (China) ... ... ... ... 4,819 5,012 5,100 5,149
Indonesia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kiribati ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lao P. Dem. Rep. ... 169 190 ... 184 397 347 481
Macao, China ... ... ... ... ... ... 63 70
Malaysia ... ... ... 46,037 ... 57,921 50,240 ...
Marshall Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Micronesia (Fed. St. of) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Myanmar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nauru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Niue ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Palau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Papua New Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Philippines ... ... ... ... 90,816 ... ... ...
Samoa ... 2 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Singapore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Solomon Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Th ailand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Timor-Leste ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tokelau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tonga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tuvalu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Vanuatu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Viet Nam 14,936 15,619 ... 22,355 23,576 ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   90 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
91
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
South and West Asia
Afghanistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bangladesh ... 1,185 1,188 1,366 1,531 3,521 6,779 ...
Bhutan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 117
India ... ... 93,279 130,832 ... ... 165,402 ...
Iran, Islamic Rep. of ... ... ... ... ... 78,101 119,744 189,291
Maldives ... ... . . . ... ... ...
Nepal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Pakistan ... ... ... ... ... ... 13,341 6,882
Sri Lanka ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Latin America and the Caribbean
Anguilla ... ... ... . . ... . .
Antigua and Barbuda ... . ... . ... ... ... ...
Argentina ... ... ... ... ... ... 51,796 ...
Aruba ... 51 42 43 60 50 ... 47
Bahamas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Barbados ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Belize ... ... ... ... ... - ... ...
Bermuda ... ... ... ... ... ... 2 ...
Bolivia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Brazil ... ... ... 75,512 79,351 84,177 90,064 ...
British Virgin Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cayman Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
Chile ... ... ... 40,565 37,050 21,171 25,915 29,137
Colombia ... ... 94,787 ... ... 102,624 115,575 155,073
Costa Rica ... ... 2,959 2,716 ... 4,626 ... ...
Cuba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 3,570
Dominica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dominican Republic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Ecuador ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
El Salvador ... ... ... 3,485 4,030 ... 3,765 3,722
Grenada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guatemala ... ... ... 3,580 ... ... ... 5,244
Guyana ... ... ... ... ... 58 52 74
Haiti ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Honduras ... ... ... ... 7,266 ... ... ...
Jamaica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montserrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
Netherlands Antilles ... 112 115 ... ... ... ... ...
Nicaragua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Panama ... ... ... 6,221 5,540 4,274 4,537 4,473
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   91 14/09/10   15:34:25
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
92
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Paraguay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Peru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,027
St. Kitts and Nevis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Lucia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... .
St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Suriname ... ... ... 174 ... ... ... ...
Trinidad and Tobago ... 317 379 ... ... 803 ... ...
Turks and Caicos Islands ... ... ... ... . . ... ...
Uruguay ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,440 ...
Venezuela ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sub-Saharan  Africa
Angola 138 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Benin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Botswana ... ... 78 58 ... 62 74 ...
Burkina Faso ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 733
Burundi ... ... ... 43 ... ... ... ...
Cameroon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cape Verde ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central African Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chad ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Comoros ... ... ... ... . ... ... ...
Congo ... ... . 12 ... ... ... ...
Côte d’Ivoire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. Rep. of  Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Equatorial Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Eritrea 7 17 22 - ... 123 ... ...
Ethiopia 516 454 991 765 1,077 1,932 2,433 2,134
Gabon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gambia ... ... ... ... ... . ... ...
 Ghana ... 881 962 781 ... 632 ... ...
Guinea ... ... ... ... ... 141 ... 201
Guinea-Bissau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kenya ... 2,168 2,229 ... ... ... ... ...
Lesotho - . ... ... - ... 19 ...
Liberia ... 499 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Madagascar ... ... ... ... ... ... 424 537
Malawi 174 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritius 433 338 398 390 487 662 841 708
Mozambique ... ... ... ... ... 245 278 ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   92 14/09/10   15:34:25
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
93
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Namibia 35 ... 78 ... 97 ... ... ...
Niger ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nigeria ... ... ... ... ... ... 21 ...
Rwanda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sao Tome and Principe . . . . . . . ...
Senegal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Seychelles . . . . . . . .
Sierra Leone ... 14 20 ... ... ... ... ...
Somalia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
South  Africa ... 7,190 ... ... 13,125 15,756 16,847 18,231
Swaziland 25 19 41 ... ... 48 24 15
Togo ... 16 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uganda 741 561 596 ... ... 1,196 ... ...
United Rep. of Tanzania 294 ... ... ... ... ... 468 ...
Zambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Zimbabwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source: UNESCO
* Sub-total for “Engineering”  (no separate breakdown available for the subclasses of ISCED - 97 Group “Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction”)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   93 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
94
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
 Europe ( OECD/ Eurostat)
Austria ... 12,9 ... ... 13,6 12,6 12,1 11,8
Belgium ... 11,8 11,4 11,3 10,6 11,5 10,4 10,6
Bulgaria 18,4 20,1 21,4 22,7 22,1 22,1 21,2 21,0
Croatia 19,8 ... 19,1 18,6 17,0 ... 16,3 16,3
Cyprus 8,2 6,4 4,6 3,7 3,5 4,0 5,0 6,1
Czech Republic 22,1 16,1 16,0 20,7 20,4 20,6 19,7 ...
Denmark 9,2 10,0 10,3 9,9 10,8 10,4 10,3 10,1
Estonia 15,4 13,8 12,7 11,7 11,6 12,0 12,2 12,3
Finland 24,6 25,6 25,9 25,8 26,6 26,7 26,4 25,9
France ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,5
Germany 16,2 15,8 15,5 15,4 15,2 15,4 ... 15,7
Greece ... ... ... 13,8 ... 15,1 16,5 14,3
Hungary 18,4 17,7 15,5 13,0 14,2 12,9 12,4 12,4
Iceland 5,7 5,8 6,0 6,0 6,5 6,7 6,7 7,3
Ireland 11,9 11,4 11,6 11,3 11,2 11,0 10,3 10,4
Israel 16,6 15,3 19,6 20,1 19,2 19,5 18,3 17,9
Italy 17,0 16,8 16,5 16,4 16,3 16,1 15,9 15,6
Latvia 16,1 10,2 9,9 10,2 9,9 9,6 9,5 10,0
Lithuania 22,5 22,4 21,6 20,2 19,7 19,5 18,6 18,0
Luxembourg ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,0
Malta 7,5 6,5 6,2 7,2 7,5 8,9 7,8 ...
Netherlands 10,9 10,7 10,6 10,5 10,1 8,2 7,9 8,2
Norway 8,4 6,8 6,5 6,4 6,3 6,5 6,9 ...
Poland 14,5 13,5 13,2 13,6 13,6 13,3 11,7 12,6
Portugal ... 17,9 ... 20,7 21,1 21,6 21,8 21,9
Romania 22,4 21,9 20,4 20,1 21,6 21,2 20,3 18,2
Russian Federation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Slovakia 21,3 20,8 20,6 19,1 17,9 17,4 17,4 16,4
Slovenia 18,9 18,4 17,5 16,7 17,2 16,8 15,8 15,6
Spain 15,8 16,1 16,5 17,1 17,5 17,7 17,6 17,8
Sweden 19,3 19,1 19,1 18,1 17,3 16,7 16,4 16,3
Switzerland 15,8 14,9 14,3 14,3 13,6 13,6 13,2 13,4
Turkey ... ... 13,2 13,1 13,5 14,3 13,9 13,3
United Kingdom 8,8 8,8 10,5 10,1 7,7 8,0 8,1 8,2
Other  OECD (outside  Europe)
 Australia 11,6 11,6 11,5 10,7 11,0 10,8 10,6 10,4
 New Zealand 6,3 6,7 6,5 5,8 7,1 6,1 6,3 6,6
Canada 10,1 ... ... 10,2 ... ... ... ...
Mexico 16,9 16,9 17,5 18,3 18,6 20,5 18,3 18,6
Table 3: Students Enrolled in Tertiary-Level “Engineering”* Education, 1999-2006, as a % of All  Students - World
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   94 14/09/10   15:34:26
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
95
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
United States ... ... ... ... ... ... 6,7 6,7
Japan 18,2 17,8 17,7 17,5 17,2 16,8 16,6 16,1
Rep. of Korea 38,7 38,6 34,8 34,5 32,3 30,8 31,7 30,3
Western  Europe n.e.c
Andorra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gibralter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Holy See ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 25,2 28,0 25,6 ...
Monaco ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
San Marino ... 15,0 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central and Eastern  Europe n.e.c.
Albania ... 6,5 6,6 ... 8,6 8,0 ... ...
Belarus ... ... ... ... ... ... 25,1 25,4
Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montenegro ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Moldova ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Serbia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Macedonia 18,7 21,1 19,2 20,5 19,8 18,0 18,1 ...
Ukraine 28,5 ... 23,4 22,8 22,4 22,1 22,3 22,1
 Arab States
Algeria ... ... ... ... ... 10,0 9,9 9,9
Bahrain ... ... ... ... 10,9 ... 8,4 8,6
Djibouti ... ... 2,6 ... ... 2,5 ... 5,9
Egypt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iraq ... 10,0 ... ... ... 19,0 ... ...
Jordan ... ... ... ... 12,2 10,6 11,5 12,5
Kuwait ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lebanon ... 11,9 11,3 11,5 11,5 10,1 11,6 11,6
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ... 20,6 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritania ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Morocco 2,0 2,6 5,3 ... 4,0 3,8 4,6 5,6
Oman ... ... ... ... ... ... 9,3 ...
Palestinian Aut. Terr. 7,2 5,9 5,2 6,7 7,7 7,1 ... 6,6
Qatar ... ... 3,7 3,5 4,0 4,7 ... ...
Saudi Arabia ... 8,1 ... ... 8,4 2,7 3,3 ...
Sudan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Syrian Arab Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tunisia ... ... ... ... 9,0 ... ... 10,7
United Arab Emirates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Yemen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   95 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
96
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Central Asia
Armenia ... ... 6,9 ... 6,3 6,2 6,7 6,2
Azerbaijan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Georgia 16,5 17,0 19,7 21,0 23,4 23,0 18,3 7,4
Kazakhstan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kyrgyzstan ... ... 11,2 16,5 9,9 6,9 9,6 9,7
Mongolia 17,0 17,6 17,2 17,8 18,7 17,1 16,2 16,3
Tajikistan ... 4,9 7,6 7,5 5,6 6,3 13,0 14,4
Turkmenistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uzbekistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,3
East  Asia and the Pacifi c n.e.c.
Brunei Darussalam 2,9 3,8 5,1 ... 4,4 3,5 4,3 6,6
Cambodia ... ... 2,8 2,5 ... 2,3 ... 3,6
China ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cook Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. P. Rep. of Korea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Fiji ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Hong Kong (China) ... ... ... ... 17,3 16,9 16,1 15,7
Indonesia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kiribati ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lao P. Dem. Rep. ... 9,8 9,9 ... 6,8 10,5 4,9 7,7
Macao, China ... ... ... 1,5 1,6 ... 2,2 2,2
Malaysia ... ... ... 23,8 ... 21,4 18,4 ...
Marshall Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Micronesia (Fed. St. of) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Myanmar ... ... 5,4 ... ... ... ... ...
Nauru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Niue ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Palau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Papua New Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Philippines ... ... ... ... 12,4 15,5 ... ...
Samoa ... 4,8 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Singapore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Solomon Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Th ailand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Timor-Leste ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tokelau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tonga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tuvalu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Vanuatu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Viet Nam 17,5 18,1 ... 19,7 19,8 ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   96 14/09/10   15:34:26
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
97
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
South and West Asia
Afghanistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bangladesh ... 1,2 1,4 1,5 1,6 3,3 5,0 ...
Bhutan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 14,4
India ... ... 4,3 5,0 ... ... 5,9 ...
Iran, Islamic Rep. of ... ... ... ... ... 23,1 27,2 30,3
Maldives ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nepal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Pakistan ... ... ... ... ... ... 4,0 5,6
Sri Lanka ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Latin America and the Caribbean
Anguilla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Antigua and Barbuda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Argentina ... ... ... ... 8,4 ... 8,1 ...
Aruba ... 26,8 24,0 24,1 26,2 23,4 ... 19,5
Bahamas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Barbados ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Belize ... ... ... ... ... 0,1 ... ...
Bermuda ... ... ... ... ... ... 13,9 ...
Bolivia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Brazil ... ... ... 7,8 7,5 7,5 7,5 ...
British Virgin Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cayman Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chile ... ... ... 31,4 29,9 17,2 18,2 18,5
Colombia ... ... 29,0 ... ... 28,8 29,8 32,3
Costa Rica ... ... 12,6 14,3 ... 14,9 ... ...
Cuba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,1
Dominica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dominican Republic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Ecuador ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
El Salvador ... ... ... 12,2 13,3 ... 12,2 11,9
Grenada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guatemala ... ... ... 17,1 ... ... ... 18,6
Guyana ... ... ... ... ... 6,4 6,1 6,5
Haiti ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Honduras ... ... ... ... 18,0 ... ... ...
Jamaica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montserrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Netherlands Antilles ... 33,7 32,2 ... ... ... ... ...
Nicaragua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Panama ... ... ... 18,1 14,3 11,9 11,6 11,2
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   97 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
98
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Paraguay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Peru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 0,6
St. Kitts and Nevis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Lucia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Suriname ... ... ... 10,1 ... ... ... ...
Trinidad and Tobago ... 16,8 16,2 ... ... 22,6 ... ...
Turks and Caicos Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uruguay ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,1 ...
Venezuela ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sub-Saharan  Africa
Angola 8,6 ... ... 8,6 ... ... ... ...
Benin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Botswana ... ... 4,7 4,2 ... 5,2 5,5 ...
Burkina Faso ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,6
Burundi ... ... ... 4,7 ... ... ... ...
Cameroon ... ... ... ... ... 2,6 ... 4,9
Cape Verde ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central African Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chad ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Comoros ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Congo ... ... ... 1,0 ... ... ... ...
Côte d’Ivoire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. Rep. of  Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Equatorial Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Eritrea 4,4 9,0 8,2 ... ... 27,9 ... ...
Ethiopia 11,3 8,7 13,1 9,2 9,2 10,1 8,9 7,2
Gabon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Ghana ... 14,7 14,0 13,8 ... 11,6 ... ...
Guinea ... ... ... ... ... 12,0 ... 3,9
Guinea-Bissau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kenya ... 18,5 18,7 ... ... ... ... ...
Lesotho ... ... ... ... ... ... 0,7 ...
Liberia ... 3,9 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Madagascar ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,1 6,0
Malawi 32,7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritius 25,3 22,2 15,9 14,7 12,9 14,0 17,6 15,4
Mozambique ... ... ... ... ... 10,9 9,9 ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   98 14/09/10   15:34:26
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
99
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Namibia 3,2 ... 3,6 ... 4,6 ... ... ...
Niger ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nigeria ... ... ... ... ... ... 0,0 ...
Rwanda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sao Tome and Principe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Senegal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Seychelles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sierra Leone ... 0,7 0,9 ... ... ... ... ...
Somalia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
South  Africa ... 6,7 ... ... 7,5 8,3 9,4 9,5
Swaziland 7,4 6,9 5,6 ... ... 4,6 3,8 3,1
Togo ... 1,7 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uganda 10,7 3,8 5,4 ... ... 7,2 ... ...
United Rep. of Tanzania 18,1 ... ... ... ... ... 9,0 ...
Zambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Zimbabwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source: UNESCO
* Sub-total for “Engineering”  (no separate breakdown available for the subclasses of ISCED - 97 Group “Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction”
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   99 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
100
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
 Europe ( OECD/ Eurostat)
Austria ... 18,6 ... ... 19,8 20,6 20,7 21,3
Belgium ... 18,4 18,5 20,5 20,2 22,8 21,0 24,2
Bulgaria 40,1 38,5 36,9 34,6 33,9 32,2 32,0 31,8
Croatia 27,3 ... 24,9 25,7 24,9 ... 24,7 25,4
Cyprus 22,7 11,0 7,8 7,5 7,7 10,1 12,9 14,0
Czech Republic 19,5 25,9 25,8 21,0 20,7 20,3 21,2 ...
Denmark 29,2 28,0 26,2 30,9 32,7 33,6 33,1 32,9
Estonia 26,7 26,8 28,1 29,0 27,8 26,9 27,5 27,2
Finland 17,4 17,8 18,2 18,8 18,6 18,5 18,7 18,8
France ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 23,4
Germany 17,9 18,4 18,8 18,9 18,9 18,9 ... 18,2
Greece ... ... ... 27,0 ... 28,1 27,7 23,6
Hungary 20,7 ... 20,1 21,5 20,2 18,6 19,1 18,7
Iceland 21,3 22,7 25,7 26,3 28,0 31,1 31,3 32,0
Ireland 17,3 17,8 18,7 17,9 17,9 16,7 16,3 16,4
Israel 26,6 24,5 26,9 29,1 22,6 27,1 26,8 27,2
Italy 25,8 26,3 26,5 26,4 26,7 27,1 27,7 28,3
Latvia 24,2 26,7 24,9 22,8 21,5 20,9 21,4 20,8
Lithuania 32,6 31,3 30,6 29,3 28,1 27,8 26,0 25,2
Luxembourg ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Malta 22,5 23,1 23,3 27,6 27,6 26,9 28,4 ...
Netherlands 12,3 12,1 11,9 11,9 11,7 13,5 13,5 15,0
Norway 25,3 24,9 24,0 23,6 24,1 23,8 24,1 ...
Poland 20,6 20,8 21,7 22,2 22,1 22,5 25,6 27,1
Portugal ... 29,5 ... 27,1 26,8 26,7 26,0 25,7
Romania 24,2 25,4 26,6 27,8 29,3 30,2 29,3 29,7
Russian Federation ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Slovakia 27,9 26,2 27,1 28,6 28,6 28,7 28,0 28,5
Slovenia 24,5 25,0 24,7 24,5 23,2 23,7 24,1 24,1
Spain 25,3 25,4 25,5 26,6 27,3 27,7 27,8 28,0
Sweden 27,1 28,3 29,3 29,2 28,8 28,2 28,0 27,8
Switzerland 10,7 11,7 12,7 13,1 13,5 13,9 14,2 14,5
Turkey ... ... 21,7 21,7 18,6 18,9 18,2 18,6
United Kingdom 17,3 17,7 16,6 15,9 18,6 18,9 19,1 19,8
Other  OECD (outside  Europe)
 Australia 17,8 18,4 18,6 19,9 20,1 20,7 20,9 21,0
 New Zealand 28,4 29,5 26,6 32,0 28,3 22,8 23,3 25,2
Canada 20,3 ... ... 20,9 ... ... ... ...
Mexico 21,5 22,2 22,3 23,3 23,9 26,9 24,5 24,6
Table 4:  Female Students as a % of All Enrolled Students in  Tertiary-Level “Engineering”* Education, 1999-2006 - World
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   100 14/09/10   15:34:26
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
101
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
United States ... ... ... ... ... ... 16,2 16,2
Japan 10,8 11,0 11,3 11,6 11,9 11,9 11,9 11,7
Rep. of Korea 18,2 17,8 16,8 17,5 18,3 16,1 16,2 16,1
Western  Europe n.e.c
Andorra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gibralter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Holy See ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 28,8 28,9 31,1 ...
Monaco ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
San Marino ... 25,5 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central and Eastern  Europe n.e.c.
Albania ... 23,1 24,0 ... 25,5 26,3 ... ...
Belarus ... ... ... ... ... ... 28,9 29,2
Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montenegro ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep.  of Moldova ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Serbia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Macedonia 28,0 28,2 28,5 28,2 29,0 31,6 31,7 ...
Ukraine ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Arab States
Algeria ... ... ... ... ... 30,9 31,1 31,3
Bahrain ... ... ... ... 24,5 ... 22,6 21,1
Djibouti ... ... ... ... ... 25,0 ... 21,1
Egypt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iraq ... 22,2 ... ... ... 18,8 ... ...
Jordan ... ... ... ... 30,3 30,3 24,5 26,5
Kuwait ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lebanon ... 22,8 20,0 20,4 21,4 22,5 19,6 20,6
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritania ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Morocco 23,7 22,7 34,4 ... 22,3 23,4 23,9 27,1
Oman ... ... ... ... ... ... 20,1 ...
Palestinian Aut. Terr. 25,4 23,9 25,4 30,2 35,5 31,4 ... 27,7
Qatar ... ... ... ... 16,0 15,7 ... ...
Saudi Arabia ... 0,6 ... ... 0,8 18,1 15,3 ...
Sudan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Syrian Arab Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tunisia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
United Arab Emirates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Yemen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   101 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
102
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Central Asia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Armenia ... ... 26,6 ... 27,0 27,0 26,2 29,6
Azerbaijan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Georgia 25,1 22,2 26,4 28,2 31,3 31,5 33,0 27,6
Kazakhstan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kyrgyzstan ... ... 28,8 43,2 30,5 22,8 29,3 29,4
Mongolia 47,7 46,9 47,5 49,3 47,9 43,5 41,0 38,6
Tajikistan ... ... 11,4 ... ... ... ... ...
Turkmenistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uzbekistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 12,0
East  Asia and the Pacifi c n.e.c.
Brunei Darussalam 30,6 35,3 40,8 ... 37,6 38,2 38,5 36,5
Cambodia ... ... 5,5 4,1 ... 4,2 ... 6,3
China ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cook Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. P. Rep. of Korea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Fiji ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Hong Kong (China) ... ... ... ... 19,0 20,1 20,8 21,1
Indonesia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kiribati ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lao P. Dem. Rep. ... 12,1 11,5 ... 9,6 11,2 14,8 11,0
Macao, China ... ... ... ... ... ... 12,5 14,0
Malaysia ... ... ... 30,6 ... 37,1 39,1 ...
Marshall Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Micronesia (Fed. St. of) ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Myanmar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nauru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Niue ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Palau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Papua New Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Philippines ... ... ... ... 30,3 ... ... ...
Samoa ... 3,5 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Singapore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Solomon Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Th ailand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Timor-Leste ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tokelau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tonga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tuvalu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Vanuatu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Viet Nam 10,5 11,8 ... 14,4 14,4 ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   102 14/09/10   15:34:26
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
103
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
South and West Asia
Afghanistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bangladesh ... 13,4 10,0 10,6 10,9 12,9 14,9 ...
Bhutan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19,6
India ... ... 22,3 24,9 ... ... 23,7 ...
Iran, Islamic Rep. of ... ... ... ... ... 17,3 20,7 26,0
Maldives ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nepal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Pakistan ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,7 14,9
Sri Lanka ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Latin America and the Caribbean
Anguilla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Antigua and Barbuda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Argentina ... ... ... ... ... ... 30,7 ...
Aruba ... 12,1 10,7 11,2 13,7 12,5 ... 11,5
Bahamas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Barbados ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Belize ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bermuda ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,2 ...
Bolivia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Brazil ... ... ... 27,0 26,3 26,4 26,1 ...
British Virgin Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cayman Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chile ... ... ... 24,8 21,9 21,2 21,4 23,8
Colombia ... ... 33,4 ... ... 32,1 31,7 36,5
Costa Rica ... ... 29,7 24,5 ... 28,6 ... ...
Cuba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 24,8
Dominica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dominican Republic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Ecuador ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
El Salvador ... ... ... 25,1 26,0 ... 25,3 25,0
Grenada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guatemala ... ... ... 18,8 ... ... ... 25,2
Guyana ... ... ... ... ... 13,0 11,7 15,5
Haiti ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Honduras ... ... ... ... 33,7 ... ... ...
Jamaica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montserrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Netherlands Antilles ... 13,0 14,7 ... ... ... ... ...
Nicaragua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Panama ... ... ... 29,3 29,8 28,0 31,0 30,5
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   103 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
104
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Paraguay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Peru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 19,4
St. Kitts and Nevis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Lucia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Suriname ... ... ... 33,1 ... ... ... ...
Trinidad and Tobago ... 24,4 27,1 ... ... 21,2 ... ...
Turks and Caicos Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uruguay ... ... ... ... ... ... 36,0 ...
Venezuela ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sub-Saharan  Africa
Angola 20,5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Benin ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Botswana ... ... 22,2 16,4 ... 11,6 12,3 ...
Burkina Faso ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 42,6
Burundi ... ... ... 8,6 ... ... ... ...
Cameroon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cape Verde ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central African Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chad ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Comoros ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Congo ... ... ... 10,3 ... ... ... ...
Côte d’Ivoire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. Rep. of  Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Equatorial Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Eritrea 4,0 4,6 4,9 ... ... 9,6 ... ...
Ethiopia 8,7 7,7 8,7 8,2 7,9 11,1 14,3 16,5
Gabon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Ghana ... 10,9 10,7 8,3 ... 7,8 ... ...
Guinea ... ... ... ... ... 6,8 ... 12,0
Guinea-Bissau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kenya ... 13,2 12,6 ... ... ... ... ...
Lesotho ... ... ... ... ... ... 36,5 ...
Liberia ... 24,8 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Madagascar ... ... ... ... ... ... 18,5 18,0
Malawi 16,7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritius 22,7 18,4 20,1 21,1 22,5 26,7 28,3 27,4
Mozambique ... ... ... ... ... 10,1 10,0 ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   104 14/09/10   15:34:26
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
105
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Namibia 11,5 ... 16,4 ... 18,0 ... ... ...
Niger ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nigeria ... ... ... ... ... ... 11,2 ...
Rwanda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sao Tome and Principe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Senegal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Seychelles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sierra Leone ... 28,6 25,0 ... ... ... ... ...
Somalia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
South  Africa ... 16,6 ... ... 24,3 25,4 24,4 25,9
Swaziland 6,9 5,8 15,3 ... ... 15,7 10,7 8,6
Togo ... 6,3 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uganda 17,0 26,8 17,7 ... ... 18,9 ... ...
United Rep. of Tanzania 8,6 ... ... ... ... ... 10,2 ...
Zambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Zimbabwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source: UNESCO
* Sub-total for “Engineering”  (no separate breakdown available for the subclasses of ISCED - 97 Group “Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction”
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   105 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
106
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
 Europe ( OECD/ Eurostat)
Austria ... 5,642 5,583 ... 6,246 6,281 6,704 ... ...
Belgium ... 7,906 7,535 7,689 ... 4,976 ... 7,587 ...
Bulgaria 6,503 6,319 7,128 10,654 7,432 7,418 7,429 ... ...
Croatia 2,657 2,719 2,517 2,272 2,229 ... 2,319 2,388 ...
Cyprus 185 ... ... 160 188 119 ... ... ...
Czech Republic 5,988 5,159 5,017 5,196 7,244 8,018 8,728 10,377 ...
Denmark 3,773 3,579 5,293 5,126 4,800 5,692 5,221 5,176 ...
Estonia 905 926 923 781 914 854 1,133 1,148 ...
Finland 8,674 7,376 8,195 8,240 8,005 8,189 ... ... ...
France 82,407 75,387 ... 87,943 95,481 97,509 94,737 ... ...
Germany 56,199 52,174 50,157 49,567 51,718 53,725 55,998 ... ...
Greece ... ... ... ... ... 4,864 7,374 9,137 ...
Hungary 6,720 5,820 4,363 5,821 5,772 5,301 5,124 4,669 ...
Iceland 82 110 113 98 139 145 168 219 ...
Ireland 5,173 5,415 5,331 4,754 6,281 7,061 7,157 ... ...
Israel ... 14,605 3,849 4,540 ... ... ... ... ...
Italy 29,689 31,013 32,144 37,846 45,300 49,744 56,428 ... ...
Latvia 1,255 1,438 1,441 1,460 1,484 1,845 ... 1,794 ...
Lithuania 4,742 5,340 5,673 5,571 5,983 6,489 6,890 6,892 ...
Luxembourg ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Malta 38 122 103 82 98 112 101 ... ...
Netherlands 8,661 8,254 8,385 8,958 9,590 8,693 8,940 9,691 ...
Norway 2,512 2,351 2,486 2,150 2,540 2,559 2,449 ... ...
Poland ... ... 29,831 33,105 36,110 34,144 37,304 42,564 ...
Portugal ... 7,148 ... 8,239 8,926 10,008 10,585 ... ...
Romania 11,787 12,866 14,032 15,392 24,912 26,015 27,501 27,653 ...
Russian Federation ... ... ... ... ... 335,655 360,535 417,343 ...
Slovakia 2,889 3,317 4,450 4,680 4,870 5,220 6,085 6,018 ...
Slovenia 2,037 ... 1,995 2,295 2,120 2,219 2,259 2,168 ...
Spain 37,855 38,584 45,112 48,185 50,663 50,368 ... 47,181 ...
Sweden 7,788 8,824 9,373 9,970 10,319 11,945 ... ... ...
Switzerland 8,146 7,871 7,300 7,353 6,811 7,214 8,639 ... ...
Turkey ... ... 41,506 43,873 46,331 49,910 51,145 53,311 ...
United Kingdom 56,069 49,198 57,969 56,315 52,729 48,284 50,704 52,798 ...
Other  OECD (outside  Europe)
 Australia 11,957 12,520 18,083 18,860 19,578 ... 21,314 22,499 ...
 New Zealand 2,191 2,143 2,174 2,311 2,173 2,724 2,870 3,061 ...
Canada 24,614 ... ... 25,722 ... ... ... ... ...
Mexico 37,716 44,606 46,424 50,812 59,303 ... 59,117 ... ...
Table 5:  Students Graduating in Tertiary-Level “Engineering”* Education, 1999-2007, Total (persons) - World
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   106 14/09/10   15:34:26
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
107
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
United States 176,430 179,276 179,965 179,002 184,740 189,402 189,938 189,532 ...
Japan 212,706 209,938 204,502 203,151 199,405 195,241 195,670 ... ...
Rep. of Korea 167,655 174,299 168,296 180,233 173,614 172,703 165,812 179,143 169,831
Western  Europe n.e.c
Andorra ... ... ... - - - - - ...
Gibralter . . . . . ... ... ... ...
Holy See - ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 14 4 ... 46 ...
Monaco . . . . . . ... ... ...
San Marino ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central and Eastern  Europe n.e.c.
Albania ... 243 178 ... 218 ... ... ... ...
Belarus ... ... ... ... ... 22,725 23,906 24,871 ...
Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montenegro ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Moldova ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Serbia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Macedonia 732 882 602 649 730 793 802 ... ...
Ukraine 119,886 ... 111,563 112,693 112,390 121,394 99,293 107,112 ...
 Arab States
Algeria ... ... ... ... ... 10,842 ... 12,156 ...
Bahrain ... ... ... ... 255 ... 326 296 ...
Djibouti . ... ... ... ... ... . ... ...
Egypt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iraq ... 5,646 ... ... ... 22,565 ... ... ...
Jordan ... ... ... ... ... 3,797 3,755 ... ...
Kuwait ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lebanon ... 1,797 2,335 2,276 ... 2,487 3,294 3,497 ...
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritania ... ... ... ... ... ... - - ...
Morocco ... 721 ... ... 1,243 1,099 2,829 3,550 ...
Oman ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 260 ...
Palestinian Aut. Terr. ... 575 810 ... 1,178 1,181 ... 1,592 ...
Qatar ... ... 68 62 76 ... ... ... ...
Saudi Arabia ... ... ... ... ... 1,145 2,110 ... ...
Sudan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Syrian Arab Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tunisia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
United Arab Emirates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Yemen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   107 14/09/10   15:34:26
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
108
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Central Asia
Armenia ... ... 1,174 846 ... 827 ... 723 ...
Azerbaijan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Georgia 4,060 3,402 3,164 3,473 4,272 4,307 ... 4,514 ...
Kazakhstan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kyrgyzstan 1,660 ... 2,167 1,835 2,868 2,038 2,224 2,299 ...
Mongolia 1,587 1,815 2,203 2,401 2,541 2,354 2,653 2,946 ...
Tajikistan ... 1,079 1,466 1,201 722 842 915 1,296 ...
Turkmenistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uzbekistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 9054 ...
East  Asia and the Pacifi c n.e.c.
Brunei Darussalam 13 67 80 ... 72 91 96 89 ...
Cambodia ... 65 78 74 ... 178 ... 518 ...
China ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cook Islands . . . . . . ... ... ...
Dem. P. Rep. of Korea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Fiji ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Hong Kong (China) ... ... ... ... 8,955 8,299 8,267 8,023 ...
Indonesia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kiribati ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lao P. Dem. Rep. ... 335 330 ... 408 237 737 852 ...
Macao, China ... ... 53 49 63 ... 73 90 ...
Malaysia ... ... ... ... ... 47,620 ... ... ...
Marshall Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Micronesia (Fed. St. of) 3 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Myanmar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nauru . . . . . . ... ... ...
Niue . . . . . . ... ... ...
Palau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Papua New Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Philippines ... ... ... ... 39,518 56,628 ... ... ...
Samoa 103 23 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Singapore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Solomon Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Th ailand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Timor-Leste ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tokelau . . . . . . ... ... ...
Tonga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tuvalu . . . . . . ... ... ...
Vanuatu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Viet Nam ... ... ... ... ... ... 38,786 ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   108 14/09/10   15:34:27
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
109
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
South and West Asia
Afghanistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bangladesh ... 845 ... 826 870 ... ... ... ...
Bhutan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iran, Islamic Rep. of ... ... ... ... ... 67,978 86,373 94,218 ...
Maldives . . . . . ... ... ... ...
Nepal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Pakistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sri Lanka ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Latin America and the Caribbean
Anguilla ... . . . . ... ... . ...
Antigua and Barbuda . . . . ... ... ... ... ...
Argentina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Aruba 67 61 74 62 49 33 ... 34 ...
Bahamas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Barbados ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Belize ... ... ... ... ... - ... ... ...
Bermuda ... ... 10 ... ... ... ... ... 26
Bolivia ... 2,233 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Brazil ... ... 25,310 28,024 30,456 33,148 36,918 ... ...
British Virgin Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cayman Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . ...
Chile ... ... ... ... 16,297 17,365 ... 12,495 ...
Colombia ... ... ... 14,744 ... ... 30,824 29,231 ...
Costa Rica ... 692 2079 1579 ... ... ... 974 ...
Cuba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,755 ...
Dominica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dominican Republic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Ecuador ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
El Salvador ... ... ... 1,412 2,017 ... 1,782 1,630 ...
Grenada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guatemala ... ... ... 435 ... ... ... 833 ...
Guyana ... ... ... ... ... 101 ... 108 ...
Haiti ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Honduras ... ... ... ... 808 ... ... ... ...
Jamaica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montserrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... . ...
Netherlands Antilles ... 114 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nicaragua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Panama ... ... ... 2,523 3,100 1,478 1,957 2,178 ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   109 14/09/10   15:34:27
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
110
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Paraguay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Peru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Kitts and Nevis ... ... . . ... ... ... ... ...
S.t Lucia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Vincent & the 
Grenadines
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Suriname ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Trinidad and Tobago 274 279 296 269 ... 611 ... ... ...
Turks and Caicos Islands ... ... ... ... . . ... ... ...
Uruguay ... ... ... ... ... ... 680 556 ...
Venezuela ... 11,871 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sub-Saharan  Africa
Angola 16 ... ... 15 ... ... ... ... ...
Benin 140 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Botswana 54 ... 38 ... ... ... ... ... ...
Burkina Faso ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Burundi ... ... 34 ... ... 148 ... ... ...
Cameroon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1619 ...
Cape Verde ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central African Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chad ... . ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Comoros . . ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Côte d’Ivoire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. Rep. of  Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Equatorial Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Eritrea ... ... 159 65 185 82 ... ... ...
Ethiopia 661 704 ... 1,259 2,197 2,511 2,396 2,235 2,813
Gabon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gambia ... 373 ... ... ... . ... ... ...
 Ghana ... 2,124 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guinea-Bissau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kenya ... 4,975 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lesotho - . . - - ... ... ... ...
Liberia ... 638 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Madagascar ... ... 306 102 ... ... 632 441 ...
Malawi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritius ... ... 387 329 294 734 743 729 ...
Mozambique ... ... ... ... ... 105 162 ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   110 14/09/10   15:34:27
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
111
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Namibia ... ... 10 ... 38 ... ... ... ...
Niger ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nigeria ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rwanda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sao Tome and Principe . . . . . . . ... ...
Senegal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Seychelles . . . . . . . . ...
Sierra Leone ... 40 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Somalia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
South  Africa ... 5,360 ... 7,079 7,364 8,358 9,003 10,387 ...
Swaziland ... 3 - 8 ... 5 36 6 ...
Togo ... 164 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uganda 519 1,077 ... ... ... 1,354 ... ... ...
United Rep. of Tanzania 957 ... ... ... ... 727 ... ... ...
Zambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Zimbabwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source: UNESCO
* Sub-total for “Engineering”  (no separate breakdown available for the subclasses of ISCED - 97 Group “Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction”
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   111 14/09/10   15:34:27
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
112
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
 Europe ( OECD/ Eurostat)
Austria ... 22,6 20,6 ... 21,4 20,4 20,4 ... ...
Belgium ... 11,6 10,7 10,5 ... 11,1 ... 9,3 ...
Bulgaria 14,5 13,5 15,0 21,1 15,7 16,1 16,1 ... ...
Croatia 18,8 19,0 17,4 15,4 14,0 ... 11,9 11,5 ...
Cyprus 7,1 ... ... 5,6 6,0 3,4 ... ... ...
Czech Republic 17,2 13,4 11,5 11,9 15,4 14,8 15,9 15,0 ...
Denmark 12,2 10,8 13,6 13,0 11,3 9,0 10,5 10,9 ...
Estonia 14,1 13,1 12,1 10,1 9,3 8,3 9,6 9,9 ...
Finland 22,8 20,4 22,2 21,3 20,7 21,2 ... ... ...
France 16,6 15,1 ... 16,5 16,3 14,7 14,7 ... ...
Germany 17,8 17,3 16,9 16,9 17,0 16,8 16,3 ... ...
Greece ... ... ... ... ... 10,1 12,3 ... ...
Hungary 14,0 9,7 7,5 9,3 8,5 7,8 6,9 6,5 ...
Iceland 5,0 6,2 5,5 4,5 5,5 5,1 5,8 6,4 ...
Ireland 12,1 12,9 11,6 10,6 11,7 12,6 12,0 ... ...
Israel ... 23,4 5,7 6,3 ... ... ... ... ...
Italy 15,6 15,3 14,7 15,2 15,6 15,3 14,9 ... ...
Latvia 10,0 9,4 7,1 7,7 7,1 7,7 ... 6,8 ...
Lithuania 21,7 21,2 20,7 18,7 17,4 17,0 16,6 15,9 ...
Luxembourg ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Malta 2,8 6,2 5,1 4,4 4,8 5,2 3,7 ... ...
Netherlands 11,2 10,4 10,3 10,4 10,7 9,0 8,4 8,3 ...
Norway 8,8 7,9 7,7 7,3 8,4 8,0 7,7 ... ...
Poland ... ... 6,9 7,2 7,6 7,0 7,4 8,4 ...
Portugal ... 12,2 ... 12,9 13,0 14,6 15,1 ... ...
Romania 18,5 18,9 18,4 16,5 18,1 17,6 17,6 15,8 ...
Russian Federation ... ... ... ... ... 19,7 19,9 22,3 ...
Slovakia 13,6 14,6 16,9 16,6 15,3 14,8 16,7 15,0 ...
Slovenia 19,3 ... 16,6 16,1 15,2 14,9 14,3 12,6 ...
Spain 14,2 14,8 16,2 16,5 16,9 16,9 ... 16,5 ...
Sweden 20,0 20,8 21,9 21,9 20,9 20,1 ... ... ...
Switzerland 15,1 14,1 13,0 12,7 11,8 12,0 13,6 ... ...
Turkey ... ... 17,2 15,3 14,9 19,3 18,8 14,3 ...
United Kingdom 11,8 9,8 10,5 10,0 8,8 8,1 8,0 8,2 ...
Other  OECD (outside  Europe)
 Australia 7,9 7,4 8,3 7,9 7,8 ... 7,9 7,9 ...
 New Zealand 5,8 5,0 4,9 5,2 4,6 5,2 5,3 5,2 ...
Canada 10,9 ... ... 10,4 ... ... ... ... ...
Mexico 13,7 14,9 14,9 15,0 17,5 ... 15,5 ... ...
Table 6: Students Graduating in Tertiary-Level “Engineering”* Education as a % of All  Graduates, 1999 - World
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   112 14/09/10   15:34:27
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
113
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
United States 8,5 8,3 8,3 8,0 7,8 7,7 7,4 7,2 ...
Japan 19,1 19,4 19,2 19,4 19,2 18,6 18,5 ... ...
Rep. of Korea 36,4 35,4 32,4 32,0 30,0 28,4 27,5 29,5 28,1
Western  Europe n.e.c
Andorra ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gibralter ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Holy See ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 23,0 5,5 ... 34,8 ...
Monaco ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
San Marino ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central and Eastern  Europe n.e.c.
Albania ... 5,1 3,9 ... 4,2 ... ... ... ...
Belarus ... ... ... ... ... 22,6 23,4 23,6 ...
Bosnia and Herzegovina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montenegro ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Moldova ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Serbia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rep. of Macedonia 23,4 22,8 16,3 17,2 16,1 15,3 14,1 ... ...
Ukraine 31,9 ... 26,3 24,2 21,9 20,9 21,1 20,5 ...
 Arab States
Algeria ... ... ... ... ... 11,8 ... 11,3 ...
Bahrain ... ... ... ... 10,0 ... 10,2 10,3 ...
Djibouti ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Egypt ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iraq ... 10,3 ... ... ... 25,7 ... ... ...
Jordan ... ... ... ... ... 10,0 8,9 ... ...
Kuwait ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lebanon ... 12,5 14,2 13,1 ... 10,5 12,8 11,5 ...
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritania ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Morocco ... 2,6 ... ... 5,0 4,1 5,9 6,5 ...
Oman ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 2,6 ...
Palestinian Aut. Terr. ... 5,7 7,0 ... 9,2 9,4 ... 7,3 ...
Qatar ... ... 5,2 5,1 5,5 ... ... ... ...
Saudi Arabia ... ... ... ... ... 1,4 2,6 ... ...
Sudan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Syrian Arab Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tunisia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
United Arab Emirates ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Yemen ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   113 14/09/10   15:34:27
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
114
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Central Asia
Armenia ... ... 10,6 7,2 ... 6,9 ... 5,3 ...
Azerbaijan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Georgia 18,2 15,9 15,5 15,6 17,7 17,9 ... 15,7 ...
Kazakhstan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kyrgyzstan 12,8 ... 11,8 8,0 10,8 6,5 6,7 7,1 ...
Mongolia 16,1 17,6 14,8 13,6 13,9 11,2 11,8 12,5 ...
Tajikistan ... 8,1 10,6 9,8 6,1 6,2 6,3 8,8 ...
Turkmenistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uzbekistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 15,4 ...
East  Asia and the Pacifi c n.e.c.
Brunei Darussalam 1,9 5,9 7,4 ... 4,6 6,6 5,7 5,2 ...
Cambodia ... 2,5 2,7 2,4 ... 2,0 ... 6,2 ...
China ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cook Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. P. Rep. of Korea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Fiji ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Hong Kong (China) ... ... ... ... 22,2 19,5 19,9 19,5 ...
Indonesia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kiribati ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lao P. Dem. Rep. ... 17,1 11,3 ... 7,9 5,5 14,1 11,6 ...
Macao, China ... ... 1,1 1,0 0,8 ... 1,2 1,5 ...
Malaysia ... ... ... ... ... 23,5 ... ... ...
Marshall Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Micronesia (Fed. St. of) 2,2 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Myanmar ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nauru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Niue ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Palau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Papua New Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Philippines ... ... ... ... 10,3 14,1 ... ... ...
Samoa 18,9 5,7 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Singapore ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Solomon Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Th ailand ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Timor-Leste ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tokelau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tonga ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Tuvalu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Vanuatu ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Viet Nam ... ... ... ... ... ... 21,3 ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   114 14/09/10   15:34:27
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
115
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
South and West Asia
Afghanistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bangladesh ... 0,6 ... 0,4 0,5 ... ... ... ...
Bhutan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
India ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Iran, Islamic Rep. of ... ... ... ... ... 24,0 23,6 26,4 ...
Maldives ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nepal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Pakistan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sri Lanka ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Latin America and the Caribbean
Anguilla ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Antigua and Barbuda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Argentina ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Aruba 34,5 22,3 25,7 24,1 13,9 15,0 ... 12,6 ...
Bahamas ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Barbados ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Belize ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Bermuda ... ... 10,1 ... ... ... ... ... 15,6
Bolivia ... 10,8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Brazil ... ... 6,0 5,6 5,4 5,0 4,9 ... ...
British Virgin Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Cayman Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chile ... ... ... ... 25,3 16,3 ... 17,1 ...
Colombia ... ... ... 22,4 ... ... 23,4 25,3 ...
Costa Rica ... 7,2 8,9 6,0 ... ... ... 9,0 ...
Cuba ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 1,7 ...
Dominica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dominican Republic ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Ecuador ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
El Salvador ... ... ... 13,9 16,1 ... 12,8 11,9 ...
Grenada ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guatemala ... ... ... 10,6 ... ... ... 13,7 ...
Guyana ... ... ... ... ... 9,0 ... 7,6 ...
Haiti ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Honduras ... ... ... ... 10,8 ... ... ... ...
Jamaica ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Montserrat ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Netherlands Antilles ... 20,0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nicaragua ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Panama ... ... ... 15,1 16,4 7,9 11,2 11,1 ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   115 14/09/10   15:34:27
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
116
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Paraguay ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Peru ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Kitts and Nevis ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Lucia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
St. Vincent & the Grenadines ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Suriname ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Trinidad and Tobago 15,3 14,3 12,9 11,3 ... 19,2 ... ... ...
Turks and Caicos Islands ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uruguay ... ... ... ... ... ... 8,6 6,6 ...
Venezuela ... 19,5 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sub-Saharan  Africa
Angola 5,7 ... ... 8,7 ... ... ... ... ...
Benin 14,0 ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Botswana 4,0 ... #VALEUR! ... ... ... ... ... ...
Burkina Faso ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Burundi ... ... 4,5 ... ... 8,5 ... ... ...
Cameroon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 5,8 ...
Cape Verde ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Central African Rep. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Chad ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Comoros ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Côte d’Ivoire ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Dem. Rep. of  Congo ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Equatorial Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Eritrea ... ... 17,6 6,0 16,5 6,5 ... ... ...
Ethiopia 7,7 6,1 ... 6,9 7,7 6,1 8,1 8,3 8,7
Gabon ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Gambia ... 36,9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
 Ghana ... 18,4 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guinea ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Guinea-Bissau ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Kenya ... 17,9 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Lesotho ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Liberia ... 9,1 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Madagascar ... ... 4,5 1,6 ... ... 6,0 4,4 ...
Malawi ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mali ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Mauritius ... ... 17,7 15,1 10,3 17,7 11,7 11,9 ...
Mozambique ... ... ... ... ... 3,6 4,5 ... ...
Namibia ... ... 0,3 ... 1,9 ... ... ... ...
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   116 14/09/10   15:34:27
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
117
1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Niger ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Nigeria ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Rwanda ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sao Tome and Principe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Senegal ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Seychelles ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Sierra Leone ... 0,6 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Somalia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
South  Africa ... 5,2 ... 7,0 6,7 7,2 7,5 8,3 ...
Swaziland ... 0,3 ... 0,7 ... 0,5 3,5 0,3 ...
Togo ... 2,8 ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Uganda 5,0 7,4 ... ... ... 6,4 ... ... ...
United Rep. of Tanzania 24,3 ... ... ... ... 18,0 ... ... ...
Zambia ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Zimbabwe ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source: UNESCO
* Sub-total for “Engineering”  (no separate breakdown available for the subclasses of ISCED - 97 Group “Engineering, Manufacturing and Construction”
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   117 14/09/10   15:34:27
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
118
1998 2005
Total Engineering 
& Eng. 
Trades
Manufacturing 
& Processing
Architecture 
& Building
Total Engineering 
& Eng. 
Trades
Manufacturing
& Processing
Architecture 
& Building
Albania ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Austria ... ... ... ... 100,0 55,0 10,4 34,6
Belgium ... ... ... ... 100,0 62,1 1,1 36,8
Bulgaria 100,0 88,6 8,8 2,6 100,0 79,7 8,9 11,4
Croatia ... ... ... ... 100,0 58,3 17,2 24,6
Cyprus ... ... ... ... 100,0 74,6 0,0 25,4
Czech Republic 100,0 60,4 15,4 24,2 100,0 63,8 11,1 25,2
Denmark 100,0 42,0 9,9 48,2 100,0 59,8 6,3 33,9
Estonia 100,0 52,6 24,4 23,0 100,0 49,1 17,3 33,6
Finland 98,7 76,1 8,1 14,5 98,6 81,6 5,3 11,7
France ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Germany 100,0 57,9 3,4 38,8 100,0 67,9 5,1 26,9
Greece ... ... ... ... 100,0 31,7 47,3 21,0
Hungary 100,0 75,0 8,3 16,7 100,0 69,1 10,4 20,4
Iceland 96,6 57,3 15,1 24,1 100,0 61,4 3,3 35,2
Ireland 100,0 54,4 15,9 29,6 100,0 48,0 7,6 44,3
Italy 100,0 69,9 2,6 27,5 100,0 59,3 4,4 36,2
Latvia 100,0 93,4 4,0 2,6 100,0 55,7 11,4 32,9
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 100,0 0,0 0,0 100,0
Lithuania 100,0 59,2 18,5 22,3 100,0 65,3 10,9 23,8
Luxembourg (Grand-Duché) 100,0 55,8 0,0 44,2 ... ... ... ...
Macedonia ... ... ... ... 100,0 58,6 23,1 18,3
Malta ... ... ... ... 100,0 54,0 0,0 46,0
Netherlands 100,0 61,2 5,5 33,3 100,0 55,4 4,7 39,9
Norway 100,0 76,0 4,6 19,3 98,4 66,6 4,9 27,0
Poland 98,2 68,8 12,0 17,4 97,4 63,6 11,2 22,5
Portugal 100,0 60,4 7,5 32,1 100,0 59,5 5,4 35,1
Romania 100,0 57,8 39,5 2,6 100,0 72,8 21,8 5,3
Slovakia 100,0 63,2 13,7 23,1 100,0 66,3 9,6 24,2
Slovenia 100,0 63,8 14,5 21,8 100,0 51,8 23,3 24,9
Spain 100,0 65,8 4,2 30,0 100,0 66,3 5,0 28,7
Sweden 100,0 100,0 0,0 0,0 100,0 81,0 2,9 16,1
Switzerland ... ... ... ... 100,0 66,3 3,3 30,4
Turkey ... ... ... ... 100,0 63,6 20,5 16,0
United Kingdom ... ... ... 26,0 100,0 56,2 9,2 34,6
United States ... ... ... ... 100,0 70,3 20,4 9,3
Japan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source:  Eurostat
Table 7: Percentage Distribution of Tertiary-Level Enrolled Students, by Engineering Subfi eld, 1998  and 2005 -
 Europe/ OECD - Selected Countries
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   118 14/09/10   15:34:27
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
119
1998 2005
Total Engineering 
& Eng. 
Trades
Manufacturing 
& Processing
Architecture 
& Building
Total Engineering 
& Eng. 
Trades
Manufacturing
& Processing
Architecture 
& Building
Albania ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Austria 62,6 34,7 15,3 12,5 100,0 62,5 12,6 24,9
Belgium ... ... ... ... 100,0 67,0 2,8 30,3
Bulgaria 100,0 84,4 7,0 8,6 100,0 82,3 9,7 8,0
Croatia ... ... ... ... 100,0 59,2 15,7 25,0
Cyprus ... ... ... ... 100,0 75,8 3,0 21,2
Czech Republic 100,0 60,8 14,4 24,8 100,0 66,0 11,7 22,4
Denmark 100,0 61,4 6,2 32,3 100,0 54,3 10,6 35,2
Estonia 100,0 58,5 17,4 24,1 100,0 56,1 21,4 22,4
Finland 100,0 72,2 8,8 19,0 98,4 82,1 5,4 10,9
France ... ... 1,3 0,2 89,6 67,7 8,4 13,5
Germany 100,0 62,4 6,4 31,3 100,0 64,5 6,3 29,2
Greece ... ... ... ... 100,0 58,9 8,5 32,6
Hungary 100,0 65,1 13,1 21,8 100,0 61,1 18,1 20,9
Iceland 97,5 45,7 17,3 34,6 100,0 61,9 3,0 35,1
Ireland 100,0 47,3 13,3 39,4 100,0 56,1 7,1 36,9
Italy 100,0 66,1 2,5 31,4 100,0 66,7 4,5 28,8
Latvia 100,0 89,3 7,5 3,2 100,0 60,9 10,9 28,2
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 100,0 0,0 0,0 100,0
Lithuania 100,0 57,1 22,4 20,5 100,0 59,3 14,9 25,8
Luxembourg (Grand-Duché) 100,0 61,1 ... 38,9 ... ... ... ...
Macedonia 100,0 63,2 19,8 17,0 100,0 58,6 25,3 16,1
Malta 100,0 100,0 0,0 0,0 100,0 90,1 0,0 9,9
Netherlands 100,0 66,8 5,9 27,3 93,8 51,6 4,4 37,9
Norway 100,0 78,4 4,5 17,1 100,0 61,5 3,2 35,3
Poland 97,1 68,5 13,9 14,8 97,5 64,1 12,0 21,4
Portugal 100,0 61,8 5,4 32,8 100,0 56,4 10,4 33,4
Romania 100,0 54,8 42,6 2,6 100,0 73,7 18,5 7,8
Slovakia 100,0 57,1 17,0 25,9 100,0 65,8 8,8 25,4
Slovenia 100,0 78,4 9,3 12,3 100,0 56,9 21,1 22,0
Spain 100,0 67,9 4,7 27,4 100,0 71,1 6,3 22,5
Sweden 100,0 100,0 0,0 0,0 100,0 81,6 3,8 14,6
Switzerland ... ... ... ... 100,0 56,8 25,7 17,5
Turkey ... ... ... ... 100,0 63,3 21,5 15,2
United Kingdom ... ... ... ... 100,0 54,9 8,9 36,2
United States 100,0 86,0 7,0 6,9 100,0 66,6 14,9 18,5
Japan ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Source:  Eurostat
Table 8: Percentage Distribution of Tertiary-Level Graduates,  by Engineering Subfi eld, 1998 and 2005 -  Europe/ OECD -
Selected Countries
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   119 14/09/10   15:34:27
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
120
1998 2005
Total Engineering 
& Eng. 
Trades
Manufacturing 
& Processing
Architecture 
& Building
Total Engineering 
& Eng. 
Trades
Manufacturing
& Processing
Architecture 
& Building
Albania ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Austria 16,7 ... ... ... 20,7 12,4 32,0 30,5
Belgium ... ... ... ... 21,0 13,0 46,3 33,8
Bulgaria 39,6 38,2 51,5 44,2 32,0 28,8 49,9 40,9
Croatia ... ... ... ... 24,7 13,6 53,5 30,8
Cyprus ... ... ... ... 12,9 6,1 ... 32,8
Czech Republic 20,1 13,4 39,5 24,3 21,2 11,7 58,5 29,1
Denmark 35,4 33,0 64,9 31,5 33,1 26,2 85,2 35,5
Estonia 27,1 12,5 62,9 22,3 27,5 17,8 50,7 29,6
Finland 16,6 11,6 46,4 25,1 18,7 15,9 42,7 25,1
France ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
Germany 16,6 6,4 25,9 30,9 18,4 10,1 37,3 35,8
Greece ... ... ... ... 27,7 26,5 18,2 51,1
Hungary 20,9 14,7 51,7 33,5 19,1 9,3 51,9 35,3
Iceland 20,6 10,0 65,2 18,1 31,3 22,9 73,5 41,9
Ireland 15,7 15,8 17,0 14,8 16,3 12,3 33,1 17,8
Italy 25,3 15,3 55,6 47,9 27,7 17,1 48,7 42,6
Latvia 24,9 23,8 25,2 61,8 21,4 14,2 51,1 23,5
Liechtenstein ... ... ... ... 31,1 ... ... 31,1
Lithuania 33,0 20,1 70,0 36,2 26,0 16,4 71,8 31,3
Luxembourg (Grand-Duché) 5,3 0,8 ... 11,0 ... ... ... ...
Macedonia ... ... ... ... 31,7 19,5 53,2 43,9
Malta ... ... ... ... 28,4 19,3 ... 38,9
Netherlands 12,4 5,4 52,9 18,8 13,5 5,5 73,1 17,6
Norway 24,6 22,2 47,3 28,8 24,1 18,5 46,7 33,9
Poland 20,9 15,2 45,1 25,5 25,6 17,8 47,5 36,5
Portugal 28,8 22,2 55,3 35,2 26,0 17,7 58,2 35,2
Romania 23,1 24,6 19,8 41,7 29,3 28,7 26,1 49,8
Slovakia 28,1 23,4 43,9 31,5 28,0 23,3 49,0 32,6
Slovenia 23,9 12,1 60,8 33,8 24,1 6,6 51,7 34,9
Spain 25,1 20,3 34,2 34,3 27,8 22,2 49,2 37,1
Sweden 24,9 24,9 ... ... 28,0 24,6 44,4 41,9
Switzerland ... ... ... ... 14,2 8,3 35,8 24,7
Turkey ... ... ... ... 18,2 6,9 44,1 30,2
United Kingdom 15,9 ... ... 24,5 19,1 12,4 29,0 27,5
United States ... ... ... ... 16,2 15,5 7,0 41,4
Japan 10,4 ... ... ... 11,9 ... ... ...
Source:  Eurostat
Table 9: Women as %  of Total Enrolled Tertiary-Level  Students, by Engineering Subfi eld, 1998 and 2005 -
 Europe/ OECD - Selected Countries
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   120 14/09/10   15:34:27
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
121
Table 10: Total Persons, 2003-2006, with Tertiary-Level Engineering Qualifi cations in the Labour Force (aged 15-74) - thousands - 
 Europe/ OECD - Selected Countries
Total Male Female
2003 2004 2005 * 2006* 2003 2004 2005* 2006* 2003 2004 2005* 2006*
European Union (27 countries) 8,118 11,056 10,963 12,778 6,970 9,419 9,250 10,837 1,148 1,637 1,713 1,941
European Economic Area (EEA)** 8,173 11,109 11,021 12,783 7,020 9,468 9,302 10,841 1,153 1,641 1,719 1,942
Austria ... 270 254 253 ... 243 228 226 ... 27 26 28
Belgium ... 270 269 282 ... 227 233 240 ... 43 36 42
Bulgaria 243 260 254 252 162 169 160 162 81 91 94 90
Cyprus 18 17 17 19 15 14 15 15 4 3 3 4
Czech Republic 209 ... ... 228 173 ... ... 190 36 ... ... 38
Denmark 187 179 192 200 141 143 151 159 46 36 41 42
Estonia 77 72 82 79 47 45 52 51 30 27 30 28
Finland 232 242 241 242 205 211 208 215 26 31 33 27
France 1,200 1,292 1,443 1,548 1,035 1,093 1,205 1,332 165 199 238 216
Germany 3,170 3,227 3,658 3,489 2,812 2,833 3,232 3,086 358 394 426 403
Greece 184 199 202 227 146 157 157 177 37 42 45 50
Hungary 200 213 220 221 162 172 176 176 38 41 43 45
Iceland 5 5 6 4 4 4 5 4 ... ... ... ...
Ireland ... 83 88 ... ... 76 80 ... ... 7 8 ...
Italy 531 535 574 662 414 428 462 502 117 108 113 160
Latvia 63 66 68 38 39 41 45 26 24 24 23 12
Lithuania ... 150 150 144 ... 105 108 101 ... 45 42 43
Luxembourg 6 10 11 10 5 9 10 9 1 1 2 1
Malta ... 2 3 3 ... 2 3 2 ... ... ... ...
Netherlands 310 334 312 288 284 307 284 267 25 27 29 21
Norway 50 48 53 ... 45 45 47 ... ... ... 6 ...
Poland ... 42 570 609 ... 36 474 484 ... 6 96 125
Portugal ... 108 128 134 ... 87 95 100 ... 22 33 34
Romania ... 363 378 403 ... 247 256 276 ... 116 122 127
Slovakia 89 104 117 120 71 76 89 97 17 29 28 23
Slovenia 39 44 50 52 31 36 41 43 8 9 9 9
Spain 1,360 1,399 ... 1,586 1,226 1,256 ... 1,416 134 143 ... 170
Sweden ... 212 235 251 ... 166 182 196 ... 46 53 55
Switzerland 112 185 230 288 100 168 210 262 12 17 20 25
Turkey ... ... ... 649 ... ... ... 497 ... ... ... 152
United Kingdom ... 1,360 1,447 1,437 ... 1,242 1,305 1,290 ... 118 141 147
Source:  Eurostat
* For most countries there is a break in series between 2005 and 2006
** EU-27 plus Iceland, Lithuania and Norway
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   121 14/09/10   15:34:27
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
122
Table 11: Women as % of Total Qualifi ed Engineers in the Labour Force, 2003-2006 (aged 15 to 74) -  Europe/ OECD -
Selected Countries 
2003 2004 2005* 2006*
European Union (27 countries) 14,1 14,8 15,6 15,2
European Economic Area (EEA)** 14,1 14,8 15,6 15,2
Austria .. 10,0 10,2 11,1
Belgium .. 15,9 13,4 14,9
Bulgaria 33,3 35,0 37,0 35,7
Cyprus 22,2 17,6 17,6 21,1
Czech Republic 17,2 .. .. 16,7
Denmark 24,6 20,1 21,4 21,0
Estonia 39,0 37,5 36,6 35,4
Finland 11,2 12,8 13,7 11,2
France 13,8 15,4 16,5 14,0
Germany 11,3 12,2 11,6 11,6
Greece 20,1 21,1 22,3 22,0
Hungary 19,0 19,2 19,5 20,4
Iceland .. .. .. ..
Ireland .. 8,4 9,1 ..
Italy 22,0 20,2 19,7 24,2
Latvia 38,1 36,4 33,8 31,6
Lithuania .. 30,0 28,0 29,9
Luxembourg 16,7 10,0 18,2 10,0
Malta .. .. .. ..
Netherlands 8,1 8,1 9,3 7,3
Norway .. .. 11,3 ..
Poland .. 14,3 16,8 20,5
Portugal .. 20,4 25,8 25,4
Romania .. 32,0 32,3 31,5
Slovakia 19,1 27,9 23,9 19,2
Slovenia 20,5 20,5 18,0 17,3
Spain 9,9 10,2 .. 10,7
Sweden .. 21,7 22,6 21,9
Switzerland 10,7 9,2 8,7 8,7
Turkey .. .. .. 23,4
United Kingdom .. 8,7 9,7 10,2
Source:  Eurostat
* For most countries there is a break in series between 2005 and 2006
** EU-27 plus Iceland, Lithuania and Norway
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   122 14/09/10   15:34:28
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
123
Table 12: Total, Male and Female Engineering Qualifi cations as % of All Qualifi cations in the Labour Force, 2003-2006 
(aged 15-74) -  Europe/ OECD - Selected Countries
Total Male Female
2003 2004 2005 * 2006* 2003 2004 2005* 2006* 2003 2004 2005* 2006*
European Union (27 countries) 20,3 19,1 19,1 18,8 33,4 31,9 31,8 31,7 6,0 5,8 6,1 5,7
European Economic Area (EEA)** 20,0 18,9 18,9 18,8 32,9 31,6 31,5 31,7 5,9 5,7 6,0 5,7
Austria .. 28,6 28,1 28,1 .. 42,8 42,9 42,7 .. 7,2 7,0 7,6
Belgium .. 14,0 13,6 13,8 .. 24,0 24,4 24,2 .. 4,3 3,5 4,0
Bulgaria 23,8 25,2 24,5 23,7 39,6 40,6 38,5 38,4 13,2 14,7 15,2 14,0
Cyprus 14,6 13,6 13,5 13,3 23,8 22,2 24,2 22,4 6,7 4,8 4,6 5,3
Czech Republic 26,8 .. .. 25,2 39,1 .. .. 38,3 10,7 .. .. 9,3
Denmark 18,0 16,9 17,8 17,6 28,3 28,0 29,2 29,4 8,5 6,6 7,3 7,1
Estonia 30,4 27,0 28,8 27,7 51,1 46,9 50,5 47,7 18,6 15,8 16,5 15,7
Finland 23,0 23,1 22,6 22,2 45,6 45,1 44,2 45,1 4,7 5,4 5,5 4,4
France 14,2 14,8 15,3 15,6 25,8 26,4 27,2 28,3 3,7 4,3 4,8 4,1
Germany 30,3 29,7 29,6 28,7 44,0 43,2 43,3 42,5 8,8 9,2 8,7 8,3
Greece 15,6 14,9 15,2 16,0 23,4 22,2 22,5 24,1 6,6 6,7 7,1 7,3
Hungary 20,9 20,3 20,5 19,7 35,4 35,0 35,6 34,4 7,6 7,4 7,4 7,4
Iceland 11,6 12,2 13,0 11,4 19,0 20,0 23,8 25,0 .. .. .. ..
Ireland .. 12,0 12,1 .. .. 23,1 23,6 .. .. 1,9 2,1 ..
Italy 14,1 13,4 13,6 14,2 21,9 22,1 22,6 22,8 6,3 5,3 5,2 6,5
Latvia 23,7 23,5 21,7 13,5 36,8 37,6 36,6 26,3 15,0 13,9 12,1 6,6
Lithuania .. 29,5 27,5 26,0 .. 48,8 46,0 45,5 .. 15,3 13,5 13,0
Luxembourg 15,4 15,4 14,9 14,9 21,7 23,7 24,4 24,3 6,3 3,7 6,1 3,2
Malta .. 7,1 10,0 9,1 .. 13,3 17,6 12,5 .. .. .. ..
Netherlands 11,4 11,4 10,6 9,6 18,9 19,1 17,7 16,6 2,1 2,1 2,2 1,5
Norway 5,8 5,5 5,9 .. 10,9 10,7 11,0 .. .. .. 1,3 ..
Poland .. 13,2 16,1 15,6 .. 31,6 31,1 29,2 .. 2,9 4,8 5,5
Portugal .. 13,3 15,7 15,3 .. 26,8 29,3 28,2 .. 4,5 6,7 6,6
Romania .. 26,4 26,3 26,3 .. 34,6 34,4 35,3 .. 17,6 17,7 17,0
Slovakia 24,1 25,1 25,7 24,5 38,8 37,4 38,2 38,2 9,1 13,8 12,6 9,8
Slovenia 17,9 18,4 19,4 18,9 32,0 33,3 35,7 35,0 6,6 6,9 6,3 5,9
Spain 20,2 19,5 .. 18,7 36,0 35,1 .. 33,5 4,0 4,0 .. 4,0
Sweden .. 14,1 14,7 15,1 .. 25,8 26,5 27,1 .. 5,3 5,8 5,8
Switzerland 24,6 25,5 23,9 24,6 34,0 35,4 33,4 34,3 7,5 6,8 6,0 6,1
Turkey .. .. .. 16,8 .. .. .. 21,0 .. .. .. 10,1
United Kingdom .. 15,0 15,0 14,3 .. 26,6 26,5 25,5 .. 2,7 3,0 3,0
Source:  Eurostat
* For most countries there is a break in series between 2005 and 2006
** EU-27 plus Iceland, Lithuania and Norway
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   123 14/09/10   15:34:28
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
124
 4.2.1 Civil engineering
Jose Medem Sanjuan 
Introduction
Civil engineers bring unique services to  society – services 
that involve creative skills and personal decisions that carry 
substantial responsibility. Th eir skills and decisions touch 
the lives of people around the world in their role as profes-
sionals managing the built environment. Indeed, human life 
for the most part depends on these services, which have to 
be reliable, safe and of high quality to ensure a high  stand-
ard of living. If the services of the civil engineer are fl awed 
then disruption and other grave consequences may result 
including sickness, injury and death to, potentially, a large 
number of people. Consequently, civil engineering is often 
better known for its rare failures than for its constant suc-
cesses.
Th e challenge of  sustainable development requires ethi-
cal and technical commitment from the civil engineer-
ing community around the world. Professional  ethics are 
important in order to reduce corruption in the industry 
and to adopt a zero-tolerance approach to bribery, fraud, 
deception and corruption in any form; with annual global 
expenditure in the construction industry in 2004 at around 
US$3.9 trillion, Transparency International estimates that 
10 per cent is lost through corrupt practices. Many, many 
more roads, water systems and jobs could be created with 
that money.
Civil engineers make up a signifi cant proportion, about 
50 per cent, of all engineers, and many are members of 
national, regional and international engineering organiza-
tions. Solidarity between those in developed and devel-
oping countries requires the full commitment of the civil 
engineering profession in order to help developing coun-
tries raise the  standard of civil engineering services in their 
own contexts.
Th e profession faces signifi cant and rapid changes. Chal-
lenges to public safety, health and welfare are becoming 
more demanding. It is therefore critical to promote high 
technical  standards of civil engineering through, for exam-
ple, the assurance of mobility of our professionals to enable 
the sharing of knowledge and access to technology. Out 
of these beliefs and concerns, and in order to address the 
global problems specifi c to civil engineers and civil engi-
neering, the World Council of Civil Engineers (WCCE)1 was 
created in July 2006.2 
Some concerns of civil engineering
WCCE members from diff erent parts of the world briefl y dis-
cuss below some key questions of concern such as mobility, 
the decline in civil engineering students, corruption in civil 
engineering and the importance of potable water and sanita-
tion in developing countries.
Mobility 
Professional recognition of civil engineering qualifi cations is 
generally straightforward at a national level, however across 
a border it can become a serious problem and, indeed, civil 
engineering is not a regulated profession in some countries. 
Hence mobility continues to be a very diffi  cult issue, despite 
international  accreditation agreements and accords.
Th ere are many diff erences within the profession worldwide 
brought on by geography, climate, resources, people, history, 
culture, traditions, idiosyncrasy and language. Th ese can vary 
substantially even within nations. Also, and more practically, 
modernization of technology and techniques have been con-
ducted in diff erent ways according to economic and indus-
trial development. Th ere are diff erences too in the content 
and duration of civil  engineering studies, some demanded by 
local context but also because courses are, necessarily, con-
tinuously changing.
Decline in numbers of civil engineering students
In many countries, the number of students that choose a civil 
engineering career is in decline. Success patterns in  society 
have changed and many prospective students believe that an 
engineering career is a more diffi  cult route to success than 
others. Th is perception may be due to obsolete study plans, 
perceived high work commitment, perceived low salaries, a 
lack of  research careers, or a view that civil engineers are  tech-
nicians that do not get to the ‘top’ compared to, say, busi-
ness or management graduates. But it is also because civil 
engineering has not recently been explained well to  society, 
1 Th e work of the World Council Civil Engineers  (WCCE) focuses on civil engineers and 
their representation and concerns. A unique feature of WCCE is that individual civil 
engineers can become members, not just national and regional organizations and busi-
nesses. It will facilitate a global platform where all the members are equal, regardless of 
their nationality. WCCE’s work will refl ect core values such as collaboration, honesty, 
integrity, ethical practice, high  standards, and total opposition to corruption. For more 
information: http://www.wcce.net/
2 WCCE has celebrated two General Assemblies, the fi rst in July 2006 in Mexico, which 
was also the offi  cial founding event followed by a regional Congress on Urban Devel-
opment, and the second in May 2007 in Zimbabwe followed by a regional Congress on 
Education and Capacity Building.
Fields of engineering4.2 
©
 W
ik
im
ed
ia
 co
m
m
on
s
 Blackfriars Bridge, London, 
under construction.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   124 15/09/10   10:16:02
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
125
compared to science or other branches of engineering and 
technology such as ICT.
Other reasons for such perceptions are:
Th e study of civil engineering is hard with a high mathemati- ■
cal component compared to other study programmes such 
as the social sciences, and the entrance salary is low com-
pared to other professions; and the new Bachelor degrees in 
civil engineering may make this even worse.
  ■ Civil engineering companies and other professions within 
the built environment do not encourage continuous profes-
sional development; they employ engineers when there is 
work and drop them when the contract terminates. 
In the hierarchy of building companies, civil engineers are  ■
often regarded as expendable, less important than other 
professionals when in fact they are the resources upon 
which such companies are based.
Time and working pressure is extremely high during the  ■
‘hot’ phases of construction and supervision at building 
sites, which are usually away from the company offi  ce and 
demands additional time for travelling or working away 
from home.
Fight against corruption in civil engineering
Th e  infrastructure construction sector faces the greatest chal-
lenges of corruption in both developed and developing coun-
tries. Corruption has a human cost; it damages economies, 
projects and careers. Unfortunately, many societies have to 
tolerate a certain level of corruption as routine. Corruption 
can occur in both the public and private sectors, in the pro-
curement phase as well as during the design and construction 
phase of a project, and among both employers and employ-
ees. Furthermore, companies that refuse to pay bribes may be 
denied contract awards, certifi cates, payments and permits.
Corruption is a complex problem and there is no single or sim-
ple method to prevent it, but laws against corrupt practices are 
not enough. As part of the solution it is vital that civil engineer-
ing societies and institutions adopt and publish transparent and 
enforceable guidelines for ethical professional conduct. Univer-
sities should teach compulsory courses in ethical professional 
conduct and raise the awareness of future civil engineers in how 
to recognize and fi ght corruption. On construction projects, 
corruption should be addressed as part of safety and quality 
control using a comprehensive and systematic approach. In this 
respect it is important to highlight the activity of Transparency 
International and their Anti-Corruption Training Manual for 
 infrastructure, construction and engineering sections (discussed 
elsewhere), which is a very important tool that provides an easy 
read overview of what constitutes corruption.
Th e importance of clean drinking water and sanitation
Many people believe that improved medicines are the basis of a 
more healthy  society. Fewer realize that civil engineering works 
are the fi rst line of defence in public health. Potable water and 
improved sanitation are the most eff ective means of improving 
health whether for a person, a community or an entire  society.
Many waterborne diseases are preventable by treating drinking 
water to potable  standards, and delivery of water to the home 
frees up time for family,  education and livelihoods. Implement-
ing a wide range of sanitation schemes will to help control liquid 
and solid wastes. Proper treatment and disposal of human and 
animal waste will reduce the opportunities for infection, take 
the strain off  medical facilities and improve the aesthetics of 
a place through adequate control of odours and insects. Such 
solutions bring communities together to establish organizations 
and governance for their shared resource, and hence they reduce 
confl ict. Furthemore, initial implementation at the school and 
village level reaches larger populations. Th e development and 
implementation of such actions is primarily the responsibility 
of the civil engineer. 
Th e provision of potable water may be on an individual or com-
munity-based system. Th us, the civil engineer can support the 
development of the entire  society while improving the health 
of its people.
 4.2.2 Mechanical engineering
Tony Marjoram, in consultation with 
various national and international 
institutions and organizations in 
mechanical engineering
 Mechanical engineering is one of the oldest and most diverse 
branches of engineering covering the design, production and use 
of tools, machines and engines, and can therefore be considered 
a central feature of the transition from ape to tool-designing and 
tool-using human.  Mechanical engineering includes the use of 
mechanics, materials, heat, fl uids and  energy, and combines the 
applications and understanding of associated underlying prin-
ciples and science in static and dynamic mechanics, structures, 
kinematics, materials science, thermodynamics, heat transfer, 
fl uid mechanics,  energy systems and conversion. Mechanical 
engineers not only apply but also generate underlying science 
in such areas as fi nite element analysis (a numerical method for 
solving partial diff erential equations in the analysis of complex 
systems such as mechanical simulations and weather modeling), 
computational fl uid dynamics, and computer-aided design and 
manufacturing (CAD-CAM).  Mechanical engineering under-
pins industrial development in such areas as manufacturing and 
production,  energy  generation and conversion,  transportation, 
automation and robotics.
 Concorde.
©
 W
ik
im
ed
ia
 - 
Ar
pi
ng
st
on
e
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   125 14/09/10   15:34:28
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
126
From the development of early tools and machines, many of 
which had military applications as ‘engines’ of war and were 
therefore used to destroy the creations of civil engineering, 
mechanical engineering developed around the world, the 
results of which were quite often unknown elsewhere until 
much later. Mechanical devices, including clocks, vehicles, 
drive system cranks, gears, camshafts and chains were devel-
oped by the ancient Greeks, Egyptians, Chinese and Arabs. 
Leonardo da Vinci was the fi rst famous mechanical engineer, 
although he is most commonly regarded today as an artist. 
Other famous mechanical engineers and their contributions 
to social and  economic development include Archimedes 
(screw pump), Charles Babbage (‘Diff erence Engine’ – the 
fi rst mechanical computer), Karl Benz and Gottlieb Daim-
ler, Henry Bessemer (steel), Louis Blériot, Isambard Kingdom 
Brunel, Nicolas Léonard Sadi Carnot (thermodynamics – 
Carnot cycle), Rudolf Diesel, Henry Ford, Yuan-Cheng Fung 
(biomechanics), Henry Laurence Gantt (Gannt chart), Hero 
of Alexandria (the windwheel and first steam turbine), 
Joseph Marie Jacquard (Jacquard loom – a forerunner of 
the computer), Henry Maudslay (machine tools), Th omas 
Newcomen (fi rst steam engine), Nicolaus Otto (four-stroke 
engine), Charles Parsons (steam turbine), William Rankine 
(thermodynamics), Osbourne Reynolds (fl uid dynamics – 
Reynolds Number), Igor Sikorsky (helicopter), Ernst Werner 
von Siemens and Sir William Siemens, Nikola Tesla (physicist, 
electrical and mechanical engineer – AC power systems), 
George Stephenson, Robert Stephenson, Richard Trevithick 
(steam power), James Watt (steam engine), Frank Whittle (jet 
engine), Joseph Whitworth (threads and precision machin-
ing), Felix Wankel (rotary engine), Zhang Heng (spherical 
astrolabe and seismometer).
 Mechanical engineering underpinned and was in turn driven 
forward by the successive waves of  innovation and Industrial 
Revolution. Th e fi rst wave of Industrial Revolution focused on 
the textile industry from 1750–1850; the second wave focused 
on steam and the railways from 1850–1900; the third wave was 
based on steel, machine tools, electricity and heavy engineer-
ing from 1875–1925; and the fourth wave based on oil, the 
automobile and mass production from 1900 onwards, all of 
which were based on mechanical engineering. Th e fi fth wave, 
based on information and  telecommunications from 1950, 
is related to electrical and mechanical engineering, as is the 
sixth wave, beginning around 1980, based on new knowledge 
production and application in such fi elds as IT, biotechnol-
ogy and materials. Th e seventh wave, beginning around 2005, 
based on sustainable ‘green’ engineering and technology to 
promote  sustainable development,  climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, will once again be focused particularly on a 
core of mechanical engineering.
 Mechanical engineering institutions,  education and 
 accreditation
The first professional institution of mechanical engineers 
(IMechE) was founded in the UK in 1847, thirty years after the 
creation of the Institution of Civil Engineers, partly as a breakaway 
from the ICE by George Stephenson (the ‘Father of Railways’ and 
creator of the ‘Rocket’) and others on the mechanical side of 
engineering, which was at the time part of the ICE. Institutions 
of mechanical engineering then arose in continental  Europe, the 
United States and elsewhere. Th is wave of institutional develop-
ment occurred around the same time as the establishment of 
departments of engineering focusing on mechanical engineering 
in major universities around the world. Th e approach to engi-
neering  education coursework and pedagogy was based on the 
‘Humboldtian’ model building on a ‘fundamentals’ approach 
to  education with a foundation in mathematics and the engi-
neering ‘science’, as discussed elsewhere. Largely unchanged in 
150 years, it is one of the factors responsible for the decline of 
contemporary interest of young people in engineering  educa-
tion. Th ese days, of course, there is more mathematics, building 
upon fi nite element analysis and related tools, and more core 
subjects than the statics and dynamics, strengths of materials, 
thermodynamics, fl uids, control theory, machine tools, mate-
rials science, computing, engineering drawing and design sub-
jects that comprised the typical mechanical engineering degree 
course a generation ago. Nowadays students will also encounter 
computational fl uid dynamics, CAD and computer modeling, 
mechatronics, robotics, biomechanics and nanotechnology.
Even before they graduate, young mechanical engineers also 
encounter a changing world in terms of  accreditation and pos-
sible mobility. Th e move to a competence-based approach and 
systems of recognition and  accreditation of engineering and 
associated  curricula has been driven by various international 
groups, particularly the  Washington Accord, signed in 1989 as an 
international agreement among national bodies responsible for 
accrediting engineering degree programs (and the recognition 
of substantial equivalence in the  accreditation of qualifi cations 
in professional engineering). Th e six international agreements 
governing mutual recognition of engineering qualifi cations and 
professional competence also include the associated Sydney 
Accord for Engineering Technologists or Incorporated Engineers 
and the Dublin Accord for the international recognition of 
Engineering Technician qualifi cations. Th e  Washington Accord 
group includes  Australia, Canada, Chinese Taipei, Hong Kong 
China, Ireland, Japan, Korea, Malaysia,  New Zealand, Singapore, 
South  Africa, United Kingdom and the United States; provi-
sional members include Germany, India, Russia and Sri Lanka.
Applications and development
When they graduate from the increasing diverse branches 
of mechanical engineering, young engineers are faced with 
a diversity of possible careers in established and emerging 
fields of engineering and  engineering applications. Many 
©
 R
ob
in
 C
am
pb
el
l, E
W
B-
U
K
 Water fi lter, West Bengal.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   126 14/09/10   15:34:28
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
127
young engineers are concerned about the role of engineering 
in addressing the issues and challenges of development, and 
see opportunities for involvement with such groups as  Engi-
neers Without Borders and  Engineers Against Poverty, based 
at IMechE in the UK. Many other mechanical engineers are 
also concerned about the  social responsibility of engineers and 
engineering organizations, and the need to engage more eff ec-
tively with development issues in such fi elds as:
  ■ water supply and sanitation;
cleaner production and recycling; ■
  ■ energy effi  ciency and conservation,  renewable  energy and 
clean coal technology;
  ■ emergencies and  disaster preparedness and response includ-
ing urban security;
post  ■  disaster and confl ict restoration, rehabilitation and 
reconstruction; and
engaging engineers in decision-making, policy-making and  ■
planning.
Mechanical and related national and international engineering 
organizations have a responsibility to assist engineers engaged 
in such activities through enhanced  international cooperation, 
staff  and student exchange.
Electrical and Electronic 4.2.3 
engineering
Tony Marjoram, in consultation with 
Andrew Lamb and various national 
and international institutions and 
organizations in electrical and electronics 
engineering
Electrical and electronics engineering is the fi eld of engineer-
ing that focuses on the study and application of electricity, 
electromagnetism and, since the Second World War, the devel-
opment and application of electronics and electronics engi-
neering in the later 1950s, from what was previously referred 
to as ‘radio engineering’. Due to the rapid pace of change since 
1945, electrical and electronics engineering include an increas-
ingly diverse of topics, from the more traditional  electrical 
engineering subjects of power generation and distribution, 
electric circuits, transformers, motors, electromagnetic and 
associated devices, to the development of electronic engineer-
ing from telephone, radio, television and  telecommunications, 
through the dramatic development of electronic technologies 
such as radar, sonar and weapons systems in the Second World 
War, to more recent electronic materials, devices and circuits, 
integrated circuits and computer systems, microwave systems, 
mobile telephony, computer networking, increasingly sophis-
ticated information and communication technologies, optical 
fi bres and optoelectronic devices, photonics and nanotech-
nologies. 
Broadly speaking,  electrical engineering deals with larger 
scale systems of electricity, power transmission and  energy, 
while electronics engineering deals with smaller systems of 
electricity, electronics and information transmission. Such 
systems operate on an increasing micro-scale such that the 
term ‘microelectronics’ is now common. Indeed, ‘Moore’s law’, 
named after Gordon Moore, co-founder of Intel, describes the 
trend in computing hardware as the surface density of tran-
sistors in an integrated circuit that doubles almost every two 
years.
Th e study of electricity eff ectively began in the seventeenth 
century with the study of static electricity by William Gilbert 
– credited as the father of  electrical engineering – who coined 
the term ‘electricity’ from the Greek elektron for amber (used 
in his experiments), and who distinguished between electric-
ity and magnetism. Lightning was another natural electrical 
phenomena that attracted interest, and Benjamin Franklin, 
a polymath with a particular interest in electricity, proposed 
fl ying a kite in a storm in 1750 to illustrate that lightning is 
electricity. While it is not known if he conducted the experi-
ment, the course of history may well have been diff erent had 
he been holding the string as he went on to be the United 
States ambassador to France and was instrumental in drafting 
the Treaty of Paris in 1783 to mark the end of the American 
War of Independence.
In 1775 Alessandro Volta developed a machine to produce 
statice electricity, and the voltaic pile in 1800, a precursor 
to the electric battery, to store it. Interest increased into the 
nineteenth century, with Ohm’s work on current and poten-
tial diff erence, Michael Faraday’s discovery of electromagnetic 
induction in 1831 and James Clerk Maxwell theoretical link 
between electricity and magnetism in 1873. Based on this 
work, and the invention of the light bulb, Th omas Edison built 
the fi rst (direct current) electricity supply system in Manhat-
tan in 1882. At the same time, Nikola Tesla was developing 
the theory of alternating current power generation and dis-
tribution that was promoted by Westinghouse, which lead 
to a ‘War of Currents’ with the Edison Illuminating Company. 
AC gradually displaced DC on grounds of range, effi  ciency 
and safety, with Edison regretting not adopting AC. Tesla 
developed induction motors and polyphase systems, Edison 
developed telegraphy and the Edison Illuminating Company 
became General Electric. Th e development of radio at the end 
of the century lead to the cathode ray tube, diode, amplifying 
triode and magnetron as enabling technologies for the oscillo- © S
AI
CE
 Computer chip.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   127 14/09/10   15:34:28
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
128
scope, television, microwave and computing, furthered by the 
transistor in 1947, integrated circuits in 1958 and the micro-
processor in 1968.
Electrical and electronics engineering institutions, 
 education and applications
In the early years the study of electricity, with few applications, 
was essentially part of physics. With increasing interest in the 
commercialization of electrical power supply and the electric 
telegraph,  electrical engineering began to develop in the late 
nineteenth century and professional bodies began to appear 
while university departments of  electrical engineering began 
to off er degree courses in the later 1800s. Building on earlier 
 curricula, electrical and electronics engineering degrees cover 
a range of subjects and may including power, control systems, 
nonlinear systems, microelectronics, computer engineer-
ing, systems analysis, information theory, signal processing, 
mechatronics, robotics,  telecommunications, data  communi-
cations, communication systems and nanotechnology. 
Professional bodies for electrical and electronics engineers 
include, in particular, the Institute of Electrical and Electron-
ics Engineers (IEEE) based in the United States and the Insti-
tution of Engineering and Technology (IET) based in the UK. 
Th e IEEE has the largest worldwide membership, number of 
publications, conferences and related events. While such mega 
engineering organizations may be good at  communications 
and facilitating continuous professional development, which is 
especially useful in a rapidly changing fi eld, they may also how-
ever undermine professional development and applications at 
the local level, especially in developing countries. 
Power engineers are responsible for the design and mainte-
nance of power grids and power systems connecting to the 
grid. On-grid power systems may also feed power into the grid, 
as with the increasing interest in microgeneration. Th ere is also 
increasing interest in power system control, including satellite 
control systems, to reduce the risk of blackouts and surges. 
Control systems engineering monitors and models control and 
other systems as well as designs system controllers using signal 
processors and programmable logic controllers (PLCs). Con-
trol  engineering applications include industrial automation, 
aircraft and automobile control systems and battery charge 
regulating technology for solar photovoltaic systems.
Th e design and testing of electronic circuits is a signifi cant 
part of electronic engineering and involves the properties of 
individual components: resistors, capacitors, inductors, diodes 
and transistors, for particular purposes. Microelectronics and 
integrated circuits allow this at the micro- and nano-electric 
scale, enabling modern microelectronic devices. Microelec-
tronics is at the microscopic scale and requires knowledge of 
chemistry, materials science and quantum mechanics. Signal 
processing relates increasingly to digital systems and is rapidly 
expanding to include applications in most areas of  electrical 
engineering and electronics – in  communications, control, 
power systems and biomedical engineering. Integrated circuits 
are now found in almost all electronic systems and devices, 
including radio, audio and TV systems, mobile communica-
tion, recording and playback devices, automobile control sys-
tems, weapons systems and all types of information processing 
systems. Signal processing is also related to instrumentation 
and control engineering.
One of the greatest areas of potential for  electrical engineering 
and electronics is in combination with other areas of engineer-
ing, especially mechanical engineering, in mechatronics where 
electromechanical systems have increasingly diverse applica-
tions in such areas as robotics and automation, heating and 
cooling systems, aircraft, automobile and similar control sys-
tems. Such systems are working on an increasingly miniature 
scale, such as the microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) 
that control vehicle airbags, photocopiers and printers. In bio-
medical engineering, for example, mechatronics is enabling the 
development of better and more mobile medical technology, 
and MEMS, the development of implantable medical devices 
such as cochlear implants, pacemakers and artifi cial hearts. 
Electrical engineering and electronics is of obvious importance 
in the development context but is challenged by the increas-
ing level of support knowledge and technology that may be 
required, as is the case with modern automobile diagnostic 
devices, for example.
 4.2.4 Chemical engineering
Jean-Claude Charpentier
Th e state of modern chemical engineering
 Chemical engineering involves the application of scientifi c and 
technological knowledge to create physical, chemical and bio-
logical transformations of raw materials and  energy into tar-
geted products. Th is involves the synthesis and optimization 
of the design, materials, manufacturing and control of indus-
trial processes. It involves physical-biological-chemical separa-
tions (using processes such as distillation, drying, absorption, 
agitation, precipitation, fi ltration, crystallization, emulsifi ca-
tion, and so on), and chemical, catalytic, biochemical, electro-
chemical, photochemical and agrochemical reactions.
Customers require increasingly specialized materials, active 
compounds and ‘special eff ects chemicals’ that are much more 
complex than traditional high-volume bulk chemicals. Indeed, 
many chemical products now rely on their specialized micro-
structures as well as their chemical composition to achieve 
their purpose; think ice-cream, paint, shoe polish, and so on.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   128 14/09/10   15:34:28
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
129
 Chemical engineering already plays an essential role in 
attempts to feed the population of the planet, to tap new 
sources of  energy, to clothe and house humankind, to improve 
health and eliminate sickness, to provide substitutes for rare 
raw materials, to design sophisticated materials for ever-evolv-
ing information and communication devices, and to monitor 
and to protect our environment, among other things. 
Chemical engineers involved in the production of structured 
materials face many challenges in fundamentals, product 
design, process integration and in process control. Organizing 
scales and complexity is necessary to understand and describe 
the events at the nano- and micro-scales, and to better con-
vert molecules into useful products at the process scale. Th is 
leads chemical engineers to translate molecular processes into 
phenomenological macroscopic laws that create and control 
the required end-use properties and functionality of products. 
Essentially, to transform molecules into money.
Th e work of today’s chemical engineers involves strong multi-
disciplinary collaboration with physicists, chemists, biologists, 
mathematicians, instrumentation specialists and business 
people. Biology is now included as a foundation science in 
the  education of chemical engineers (along with physics and 
chemistry) in order to address genetics, biochemistry and 
molecular cell biology. Developing new concepts within the 
framework of what could be called ‘physical-biological-chemi-
cal engineering’ justifi es the qualifi cation of ‘process engineer-
ing’ as an extension of chemical engineering.
Chemical and process engineers are one of the few groups of 
engineers who work in the natural sciences, technology and 
economics. Chemical engineers need to be good problem 
solvers, creative, pragmatic, innovative and have the skills for 
technical rigour, systems thinking and multidisciplinary tasks. 
Th e business of chemical engineers is to imagine and invent 
reactions that will convert the chemical substances we fi nd 
around us into substances or products that meet a need, and 
to address the problems and challenges posed by chemical 
and process industries.
Figure 1: Biochemistry and biochemical engineering
Gene
Function
Micro-organism 
enzyme
Population cellular  
plant
Biocatalyst 
Environment
Active aggregat
Bio 
Reactors
Separators
Units plants
Interaction 
biosphere
Pico-scale Nano-scale Micro-scale Meso-scale Macro and Mega-scale
Organising levels of complexity with an integrated approach of phenomena and simultaneous and coupled 
processes from the GENE with known structure and functiun up to the PRODUCT (ecoproduct) with the 
desired END-USED PROPERTY
Figure 2: Biochemistry and biochemical engineering
enterprise
site
plants
process 
units
particles, 
thin fi lms
molecule 
cluster
molecules
single and multi-
phase systems
Chemical and Process Engineering is now concerned with the understanding 
and development of systematic procedures for the design and operation of 
chemical process systems, ranging:
FROM nano and microsystems scales where chemicals have to be synthesize 
and charachterize at the molecular-level
TO industrial-scale continuous and batch processes
month
week
day
h
min
s
ms
ns
ps
TIME SCALE
1 pm 1 nm 1 μm 1 mm 1 m 1 km LENGHT SCALE
small
intermediate
large
CHEMICAL SCALE
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   129 14/09/10   15:34:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
130
Th e chemical and process industries – the heart of 
the challenges
Today, the chemical and related industries – including oil and 
gas, oil shale, petrochemicals, pharmaceuticals and health, 
agriculture and food, environment, pulp and paper, textile and 
leather, iron and steel, bitumen, building materials, glass, sur-
factants, cosmetics and perfume, and electronics, and so on 
– are evolving rapidly. Th is is due to unprecedented demands 
and constraints, stemming not least from public concern over 
environmental and safety issues. Only 25 per cent by weight of 
extracted resources is used for the production of goods and 
services; the other 75 per cent is lost to pollution, waste and 
environment disturbances.
Chemical knowledge is also growing rapidly and the rate of 
discovery increases every day. More than fourteen million dif-
ferent molecular compounds could be synthesized in 2005. 
About 100,000 can regularly be found on the market, but only 
a small fraction of them can be found in nature. Most of them 
are deliberately conceived, designed, synthesized and manu-
factured to meet a human need, to test an idea or to satisfy our 
quest for knowledge. Th e development of combined chemical 
synthesis with nanotechnology is a current example.
Th ere are two major demands associated with the challenge 
to assure development, competitiveness, sustainability and 
employment in chemical industries. Th e fi rst is how to com-
pete in the global economy where the key factors are globali-
zation, partnership and  innovation (which mainly involves the 
acceleration of  innovation as a process of discovery and devel-
opment). For example, in the fast-moving consumer goods 
business, time to market has decreased from about ten years 
in 1970 to an estimated 2–3 years in the year 2000. Now, even 
one year is often considered long. Th e second major demand 
is to respond to market demands. Th is actually presents a 
double challenge. In industrializing countries, labour costs are 
low and there are fewer regulations. In industrialized coun-
tries, there is rapid growth in consumer demand for specifi c 
end-use properties and signifi cant concern for the environ-
ment and safety.
Th e chemical engineering profession is already responding to 
these demands and the necessity for more sustainable prod-
ucts and processes. It will increasingly  research innovative 
processes for production to transition, from the now tradi-
tional high-bulk chemistry, into new industries of specialized 
and active material chemistry.
For example, in the production of commodity and interme-
diate products (ammonia, calcium carbonate, sulphuric acid, 
ethylene, methanol, ethanol and so on representing 40 per 
cent of the market), patents usually do not apply to the prod-
uct but rather to the process, and the process can no longer be 
determined by economic considerations alone. Th e need is to 
produce large quantities at the lowest possible price, but the 
economic constraints will no longer be defi ned as ‘sale price, 
minus capital, plus operating, plus raw material, plus  energy 
cost’. Increased selectivity and the savings linked to the proc-
ess itself must be considered, which needs further  research. 
Furthermore, it has to be added that the trend towards global-
scale facilities may soon require a change of technology, with 
the current technology no longer capable of being built ‘just a 
bit bigger’. Th is may involve an integrated multi-scale chemical 
process design. It may mean that large-scale production units 
are created by the integration and interconnection of diverse, 
smaller-scale elements.
For high-margin products that involve customer-designed or 
perceived formulations, chemical engineers need to design 
new plants that are no longer optimized to produce one prod-
uct at high quality and low cost. Th e need is for multi-purpose 
systems and generic equipment that can be easily switched 
over to other recipes; systems like fl exible production, small 
batches, modular set-ups, and so on.
Chemical and process engineering in the future
Briefl y, the years to come seem to be characterized by four 
main parallel and simultaneous changes:
Total multi-scale control: process to increase selectivity 1. 
and productivity.
Process intensifi cation: including the design of novel 2. 
equipment, new operating modes and new methods of 
production (Figure 3).
Figure 3: A plant of the future
©
 C
ha
rp
en
tie
r
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   130 14/09/10   15:34:29
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
131
Manufacturing end-use properties: product design and 3. 
engineering. 
Application of multi-scale and multi-disciplinary compu-4. 
tational modeling: for example from the molecular-scale, 
to the overall complex production scale, to the entire pro-
duction site, and involving process control and safety.
With these changes in mind, modern chemical engineering can 
be seen as a tool for driving sustainable social and  economic 
development in the contexts of ‘ society and market demands 
versus technology off ers’ and the concept of transforming 
molecules into money.
Clearly, the chemical industries are confronted with a great 
number of challenges, all within a framework of globalization, 
competition and sustainability. To satisfy these consumer 
needs and market trends, chemical and process engineers 
must develop innovative technologies and take a multi-disci-
plinary, multi-scale and integrated approach. Moreover, they 
can use this approach to respond to increasing environmental, 
societal and economic requirements, and to smooth the tran-
sition towards sustainability whatever their particular industry 
may be. 
 Chemical engineering today drives  economic development 
and is fundamental to wealth creation in the framework of 
globalization and sustainability. Engineers must constantly 
adapt to new trends, and the  education of the next genera-
tion of students must arm them with the tools needed for the 
world as it will be, and not only as it is today, as well as prepare 
them for the technology-driven world of the future.
 4.2.5 Environmental engineering
Cheryl Desha and Charlie Hargroves
Since the start of the Industrial Revolution engineers have 
made signifi cant advances in delivering a range of crucial solu-
tions and services to the world’s growing communities. How-
ever, until the latter part of the twentieth century, engineers 
gave little consideration to broader environmental impacts, 
in part due to a lack of scientifi c understanding of the world’s 
natural systems and their limited resilience. As scientifi c knowl-
edge increased, the fi eld of environmental science emerged 
and expertise developed around better understanding of the 
impacts of development on the environment. Eff orts were 
made to incorporate key components of this new knowledge 
across the engineering disciplines. However, the most visible 
action was in developing a new discipline to focus on the inter-
face of engineering and environmental issues, in the form of 
‘environmental engineering’. 
As knowledge about the extent and complexity of the environ-
mental challenge has grown, it has become clear that expertise 
developed as part of the environmental engineering discipline 
over the last two decades will be increasingly important. How-
ever, the challenge is far too great, and the time to respond too 
short to expect environmental engineers to take care of all the 
environmental issues for the entire profession; environmental 
engineering is not a substitute for sustainable engineering. Rather, 
critical knowledge and skills in environmental science, previously 
only taught in environmental engineering, must be quickly and 
eff ectively integrated across all engineering disciplines. Mean-
while, the environmental engineering discipline itself must con-
tinue to evolve as an advanced and specialist fi eld, for example 
in such areas as modeling, monitoring, impact assessment, pollu-
tion control, evaluation and collaborative design.
Over the past several decades, environmental engineering has 
emerged as a distinct engineering discipline around the world. Tak-
ing just a few examples from the United States:
Th e Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET)  ■
now accredits more than fi fty environmental engineering pro-
grammes. 
  ■ Environmental engineering has become a recognized specializa-
tion on professional engineering licensing exams.a
As of May 2005, the US Bureau of Labor Statistics ■
(BLS)b  counted over 50,000 environmental engineers.
A wider estimate shows that this may be as high as 100,000.c  
As a profession, environmental engineering is now larger than  ■
biomedical, materials and chemical engineering (which in 2002 
had 8,000, 33,000 and 25,000 members, respectively) and trends 
show that it is growing more quickly.
Th e predicted 30 per cent growth in the number of environmen- ■
tal engineers to 65,000 by 2012 will account for 5 per cent of all 
engineering jobs created over the decade ending in 2012. For 
comparison, 11 per cent will be in civil engineering, 14 per cent 
in mechanical engineering, 1 per cent in biomedical engineering, 
2 per cent in chemical engineering, and 4 per cent in aerospace 
engineering.d
a Final Report of the Joint Task Force for the Establishment of a Professional Soci-
ety for Environmental Engineers of the American Academy of Environmental 
Engineers (AAEE) and the Association of Environmental Engineering and Sci-
ence Professors (AEESP), September 2006.
b United States Bureau of Labor Statistics website: http://www.bls.gov/oco/
ocos027.htm
c Th is higher estimate is based on the fact is that 34.5 per cent of the members of 
the American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) now classify themselves as envi-
ronmental engineers and, depending on who counts them, there are 228,000 
to 330,000 civil engineers in the U.S. (based on 2002 U.S. government estimate 
and 2000 U.S. National Science Foundation estimate, respectively).
d S. Jones et al. 2005. An Initial Eff ort to Count Environmental Engineers in the 
USA. Environmental Engineering Science, Vol. 22, No. 6, pp. 772–787.
Th e emergence of environmental engineering
as a distinct discipline in the USA
James R. Mihelcic
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   131 14/09/10   15:34:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
132
‘Our discipline has at times struggled to understand its place 
– environmental engineering must move on from simply 
being a practice area that cleans up the output of other engi-
neering disciplines. It must embrace a deeper understanding 
of the systems of the earth and the interaction of those sys-
tems with the manufactured or built form. Only then can it 
build a respected body of knowledge and become a practice 
area truly independent of other engineering disciplines.’3 
Adjunct Professor David Hood, the Institution of Engineers  Australia’s College of 
Environmental Engineers, 2009 Chairman.
With this in mind, as the  education sector mobilizes to prepare 
all engineering graduates for sustainable engineering, environ-
mental engineering can play a key role in the transition and 
thereafter. As one of the newer disciplines, it will be increas-
ingly called upon to assist all other engineering disciplines to 
understand how to deliver sustainable engineering solutions.
 4.2.6 Agricultural engineering
Irenilza de Alencar Nääs and 
Takaaki Maekawa
Agriculture has a very long history. Evidence of agricultural 
engineering can be found in ancient civilizations with tools 
and technologies such as ploughs, grain storage and irrigation. 
Modern agricultural engineering, as we know it today, began 
to grow after the 1930s. At the time, it played only a marginal 
role in  Europe though with variations from country to country. 
Various machines had been developed and improved for agri-
cultural use in the course of the proceeding century – feeding 
the growth of urban populations. However, despite the impor-
tance of agricultural engineering for this primary sector, devel-
opment of the profession was still slow and limited in scope. 
Th e design of agricultural machines and buildings was based 
on skills and accumulated experience rather than coordinated 
scientifi c  research. Th e same applies to post-harvesting tech-
nologies and greenhouses as well as ergonomics, safety and 
labour organization. Environmental protection and sustain-
able landuse did not become subjects of scientifi c  research 
until much later.
To address these issues and to foster  international coopera-
tion of researchers and combine cooperation with a concern 
for improved working conditions in farming and rural activi-
ties, the International Commission of Agricultural Engineering 
(CIGR) was founded in 1930.4  Th e technical problems in the 
3 Hood, D. Personal communication with the authors, 16 February 2009.
4 CIGR was founded in 1930 at Liège in Belgium at the fi rst International Congress of 
Agricultural Engineering. It is a worldwide network involving regional and multina-
tional associations, societies, corporations and individuals working in science and 
technology and contributing to the diff erent fi elds of agricultural engineering. It sup-
ports numerous free activities carried out by management and individual specialist 
realm of agricultural engineering were few and relatively sim-
ple, and  research was focus on agricultural tools. Over time, 
farm machinery, adapted mechanics, machine testing and 
groups, agricultural societies and union bodies in each country. CIGR is allied with 
international bodies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the Inter-
national Organization for Standardization (ISO) and the United Nations Industrial 
Development Organization (UNIDO).
 For more information, go to: http:// www.cigr.org.
CIGR technical sections
Section 1. Land and water engineering: engineering applied to the 
science of soil and water management.
Section 2. Farm buildings, equipment, structures and environment: 
optimization and design of animals, crops and horticultural build-
ings and related equipment, climate control and environmental 
protection, farm planning and waste management.
Section 3. Equipment engineering for plants: farm machinery and 
mechanization, forestry mechanization, sensing and artifi cial intel-
ligence, modeling and information systems and the application of 
advanced physics.
Section 4. Rural electricity and other  energy sources: application of 
electricity and electro technology to agriculture, the rationalization 
of  energy consumption, use of  renewable  energy sources and related 
technologies, and automation and control systems.
Section 5. Management, ergonomics and systems engineering: farm 
management, working methods and systems, labour and work plan-
ning, optimization, human health, ergonomics and safety of work-
ers, rural sociology and systems engineering.
Section 6. Post-harvest technology and process engineering: physi-
cal properties of raw (food and non-food) materials, quality of fi nal 
products, processing technologies, and processing management 
and engineering.
Section 7. Information systems: the mission of this section is to 
advance the use of information and communication systems in 
agriculture.
CIGR Working Groups
Earth Observation for Land and Water Engineering Working 1. 
Group.
Animal Housing in Hot Climates Working Group.2. 
Rural Development and the Preservation of Cultural Heritages 3. 
Working Group.
Cattle Housing Working Group.4. 
Water Management & Information Systems Working Group .5. 
Agricultural Engineering University Curricula Harmonization 6. 
Working Group. 
Image Analyses for Advanced Grading and Monitoring in Agri-7. 
cultural Processes.
Rural Landscape Protection and Valorization.8. 
Th e International Commission of Agricultural 
Engineering (Commission Internationale du Génie 
Rural - CIGR)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   132 14/09/10   15:34:29
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
133
standardization became major subjects while scientifi c labour 
organization strongly accentuated attitude, living and health 
conditions in all human work.
After the catastrophe of the Second World War, agriculture 
was one area in which an immense rebuilding eff ort was nec-
essary. Demography was seriously aff ected, distorted econo-
mies had to be re-orientated and societies had to sprout again. 
Farm materials and equipment had to be rebuilt, renewed or 
even created. It was necessary to provide for the populations 
needs as fast as possible and agricultural engineering enabled 
agriculture – the bedrock of the recovering economies. From 
the end of the 1950s, once the problems of the post-war period 
had concluded, the profession experienced considerable and 
unexpected growth.
Th e main concerns of today’s agricultural engineers are best 
understood by looking at the technical sections and current 
working groups of the CIGR. In terms of  education, the scope 
of agricultural engineering means that it is now, in many cases, 
taught under the headings of the other branches of engineer-
ing – notably environmental engineering.
Looking into the future, the human race is confronted by 
many problems as a result of its own activity, such as the dis-
turbance of ecosystems, population growth, the depletion of 
resources and environmental decay. Our challenge is to use 
our knowledge and  innovation to overcome these problems in 
the context of a changing climate and environment in order to 
meet some of the fundamental needs of life: enough food to 
eat and enough water to drink for everyone.
Overview of CIGR
The International Commission of Agricultural Engineering 
(CIGR) brings together specialists to contribute to the progress 
of the human race and the effi  cient use of resources through 
the formation of systems for sustainability, land management, 
farming, food production and similar.
Medical Engineering4.2.7 
J . P. Woodcock
Th e purpose of medical technology is to provide accurate 
diagnoses and treatment and, in the case of rehabilitation, to 
help individuals achieve ordinary day-to-day tasks so that they 
can play a full role in  society.
Medical technology in developing countries
According to a report from the World Health Organization 
(WHO), around 95 per cent of medical technology in develop-
ing countries is imported and 50 per cent of the equipment is 
not in use. Th e main reasons for this are lack of maintenance 
due to the lack of suitable training on the use of the equip-
ment and the fact that much of the equipment is too sophis-
ticated for the real needs of the population1. Bearing in mind 
these drawbacks to the delivery of healthcare to developing 
countries, the potential role of information and communica-
tion technologies holds promise for the provision of adequate 
support and training. However, underlying all of this is the fact 
that, whereas the United States spends US$5,274 per capita on 
healthcare, most developing countries are only able to spend 
less than US$100.5
Major problems for developing countries lie in the high initial 
and running costs, the remoteness of the manufacturers, the 
fact that much of the latest equipment is controlled by micro-
processors and that the equipment is not designed to operate 
under a wide range of climatic conditions.6
Much of the technology made available involves disposable 
items such as special gels for electrodes and ultrasound gel 
to achieve proper contact with the skin during ultrasound 
examinations. Th ese are initially sterile, but quickly become 
5 Nkuma-Udah K.I., and Mazi E.A. 2007. Developing Biomedical Engineering in  Africa: A 
Case for Nigeria, IFMBE Proceedings, 14 June 2007, International Federation for Medical 
and Biological Engineering. 
6 Rabbani, K.S. 1995. Local Development of Bio-Medical Technology – a Must for the 
Th ird World. Proceedings of RC IEEE-EMBS & 14th BMESI, 1.31–1.32. 
 Participants of CIGR World 
Congress 2006 in front of the 
University of Bonn building.
© CIGR
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   133 14/09/10   15:34:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
134
contaminated unless correctly stored. Th ese items are usually 
imported at a high cost to the importer. More sophisticated 
modern equipment is often not needed and a basic item is 
of greater use, but the sophisticated system may have to be 
bought at a high price because of the lack of choice. Repair 
facilities and spare parts are often unavailable, and the equip-
ment has to be returned to the manufacturer, or specialized 
 technicians have to be brought in at great cost.
A problem particularly relevant to developing countries is the 
donation of equipment, which is surplus to requirements or 
outdated. Many countries depend on the donation of medical 
equipment but often there is no funding for the  transporta-
tion of equipment, installation, maintenance and training.7
Personnel and training
In developing countries there is a shortage of properly trained 
 medical engineering professionals, with very few engineers – 
most being  technicians – and very few training institutes.8 If 
equipment is to perform optimally, and have a long service 
life, then the engineering staff  are as important as the medi-
cal staff  in the delivery of healthcare. Th ese skilled staff  must 
have appropriate training so that they can carry out the work 
eff ectively. Th ey must also be conversant with the appropriate 
 standards and regulatory bodies.
It is important to build up the knowledge and expertise avail-
able in developing nations. This will require training pro-
grammes and courses at undergraduate and postgraduate 
levels, but to achieve this, support is needed from interna-
tional bodies such as the International Federation for Medical 
and Biological Engineering (IFMBE), the International Union 
for Physical and Engineering Sciences in Medicine (IUPESM), 
the World Health Organization and UNESCO.
It is also important to arrange ‘training’ facilities between uni-
versities from both the developing world and richer countries, 
as well as benefi tting from distance learning Master degrees 
(such as the MSc in Clinical Engineering off ered at Cardiff  Uni-
versity, UK). Th is high-level cooperation will involve organiza-
tions within the developing countries: for example, the Nigerian 
Institute for Biomedical Engineering (NIBE) was set up in 1999 
and has held six national biomedical engineering conferences 
and four national professional development courses in Nigeria. 
NIBE’s professional journal, the Nigerian Journal of Biomedical 
Engineering, was fi rst published in 2001.
Th e African Union of Biomedical Engineering and Sciences 
(AUBES) was set up in 2003. Th e aim of AUBES is to foster 
cooperation between biomedical engineering professionals 
7 Digital Healthcare: the impact of information and communication technologies on health 
and healthcare. Th e Royal Society, Document 37/06, 2006.
8 Ibid. 105. 
across  Africa.9 A similar success story is reported from Bang-
ladesh.
Th e future
Information and communication technologies ( ICTs) have 
the potential to transform the delivery of healthcare and to 
address future health challenges.10 Th e Royal Society report 
Digital Healthcare identifi es three broad areas where  ICTs will 
make a signifi cant contribution to medical practice: Home 
Care Technologies, Primary Care Technologies and Secondary 
and Tertiary Care Technologies.
Home Care Technologies could be used by healthcare profes-
sionals or the patients themselves for ‘treating known medical 
conditions, self care, detecting and identifying new condi-
tions and/or monitoring/maintaining health.’11 Primary Care 
Technologies would be used by general practitioners, public 
health specialists, community nurses, health centre staff  and 
community hospitals. Areas such as prevention and control 
of common health problems, hygiene, and  education, and 
the diagnoses of common diseases/injuries and provision of 
essential medicine would benefit. Secondary and Tertiary 
Care technologies would be used in hospitals for diagnosis 
and treatment of medical conditions that need specialized 
 facilities.
Sensor technologies could be used to monitor individuals 
more effectively within the home and workplace environ-
ments. Sensors are being developed based on low-cost com-
puter technology bought over the counter or the Internet.12 
Instrumentation such as thermometers, measuring scales, 
heart rate and blood pressure monitors, blood sugar and body 
fat monitors could send information to personal computers or 
even mobile phones. Th is information could then be assessed 
by the individual concerned as well as their healthcare sup-
port team resulting in immediate support for the patient con-
cerned.
At present most developing countries do not have the neces-
sary  infrastructure to contribute as equal partners in the area 
of knowledge production and dissemination. Th e numbers 
of computer terminals, networks,  communications channels 
with bandwidth and so on are limited. However, an investment 
in this  infrastructure would markedly improve all aspects of 
instrumentation and training problems13 and open up the 
emerging opportunities in the above three areas.
9 Ibid. 105.
10 Ibid. 107. 
11 Ibid. 107.
12 Ibid. 107.
13 Srinivasan, S., Mital, D.P., and Haque, S. 2008. Biomedical informatics  education for 
 capacity building in developing countries. Int. J. Medical Engineering and Informatics, 
Vol.1, No.1, pp.39 –49. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   134 14/09/10   15:34:29
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
135
Biomedical informatics provides the potential to lessen pov-
erty and the disease burden in developing countries. Again, 
 infrastructure is the key, for example India has initiated an 
ambitious national development programme. Th e Asia-Pacifi c 
region is also investing in biomedical informatics, and progress 
in  Africa can be seen in South  Africa, Kenya, Nigeria and 
 Ghana.14
Consideration might also be given to local fabrication of 
instrumentation15 such as ECG monitors, digital thermom-
eters, weighing scales and blood-glucose monitors. Potential 
benefi ts of such investment would be in the lower cost of 
fabrication and the local availability of expertise and spares. 
14 Ibid. 113.
15 Ibid. 106. 
Th is will also improve response times and a decrease in the 
downtime of vital equipment. Th e equipment would also be 
developed to operate under local climate conditions, and may 
result in the elimination of expensive air conditioning and 
dehumidifi ers. Th e building of local expertise would result in 
increasing confi dence, and will have positive feedback in the 
training of engineers and  technicians. 
Th e future of  medical engineering and technology in devel-
oping countries can be positive if these types of investment 
can be made. Th e power of modern communication systems, 
their decreasing costs and new learning methods can deliver 
a better  standard of healthcare in the medium term. When 
this is combined with local fabrication, medical engineers will 
become more self-reliant and will better support the delivery 
of basic healthcare, at a more acceptable cost, in places where 
it is desperately needed.
An introduction to the 4.3.1 
organization of the profession
Tony Marjoram
As discussed elsewhere, human beings are defi ned for their 
tool-making, designing and engineering skills as well as the 
socialization and communication that also developed with 
this inventive, innovative activity – as can be closely connected 
to the development and transfer of technology still seen today. 
Th e  history of engineering as a profession, where payment is 
made for services, began with tool- and weapon-making over 
150,000 years ago, making engineering one of the oldest pro-
fessions. An ‘engineer’ was fi rst used to describe a person who 
operated a military engine or machine; ‘engine’ derives from 
the Latin ingenium for ingenuity or cleverness and invention. 
Th e professionalization of engineering continued with the 
development of crafts and guilds, and the formalization of 
associated knowledge and  education. Simple patriarchal forms 
of engineering  education in ancient societies developed into 
vocational technical schools of diff erent types in the Middle 
Ages, the Renaissance and the Scientifi c Revolution of the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, when Leonardo was the 
Ingegnere Generale. Th e most crucial period in the develop-
ment of engineering was the eighteenth and nineteenth cen-
turies, particularly the Iron Age and Steam Age of the second 
phase of Industrial Revolutions. In Britain, where the industrial 
revolution began, many engineers had little formal or theo-
retical training. With practical activity preceding scientifi c 
understanding, engineering  education was initially based on 
a system of apprenticeship with a working engineer, artisanal 
empiricism and laissez-faire professional development. Britain 
tried to retain this lead by prohibiting the export of engineer-
ing goods and services in the early 1800s, and countries in con-
tinental  Europe developed their own engineering  education 
systems based on French and German models, with a founda-
tion in science and mathematics rather than the British model. 
France developed the system of formal schooling in engineer-
ing after the Revolution under Napoleon’s infl uence, and engi-
neering  education in France has retained a strong theoretical 
character. Th e French model infl uenced the development of 
polytechnic engineering  education institutions around the 
world at the beginning of the nineteenth century, especially in 
Germany where early interest in the development of engineer-
ing  education took place in the mining industry. 
By the end of the nineteenth century, most of the now industri-
alized countries had established their own engineering  educa-
tion systems based on the French and German ‘Humboldtian’ 
model. In the twentieth century, the professionalization of 
engineering continued with the development of professional 
societies, journals, meetings, conferences, and the professional 
 accreditation of exams, qualifi cations and universities, which 
facilitated  education, the fl ow of information and continued 
professional development. Th rough the nineteenth and into 
the twentieth century, partly due to fears that Britain was lag-
ging behind the European model in terms of international com-
petition, engineering  education in Britain also changed toward 
a science and university based system  and the rise of the ‘engi-
Th e engineering profession and its organization4.3 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   135 14/09/10   15:34:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
136
 Engineering School 
in Peshawar, Pakistan,
in the 1960s.
neering sciences’ – partly in recognition of the increasingly close 
connection between engineering, science and mathematics. 
Th e engineering profession, as other professions, is a vocation 
or occupation based upon specialized  education and training, 
as providers of professional advice and services. Other features 
that defi ne occupations as professions are the establishment of 
training and university schools and departments, national and 
international organizations,  accreditation and licensing,  ethics 
and codes of professional practice. While engineering is one of 
the oldest professions, along with divinity, medicine and law, a 
perception has arisen of engineers as applied scientists, refl ect-
ing the ‘linear model’ that pure science leads to applied engi-
neering. As indicated elsewhere, this is a misleading distortion 
of reality, diverting attention away from the need for a better 
public and policy understanding of the role of engineering and 
science in knowledge societies and economy.
People who are qualified in or practice engineering are 
described as engineers, and may be licensed and formally des-
ignated as professional, chartered or incorporated engineers. 
As noted above, the broad discipline of engineering includes 
a range of specialized disciplines or fi elds of application and 
particular areas of technology. Engineering itself is also dif-
ferentiated into engineering science and diff erent areas of 
professional practice and levels of activity. Th e process of pro-
fessionalization continued with the development of interna-
tional agreements relating to  accreditation and the mutual 
recognition of engineering qualifi cations and professional 
competence, which include the  Washington Accord (1989), 
the Sydney Accord (2001), the Dublin Accord (2002), the 
 APEC Engineer (1999), the  Engineers Mobility Forum (2001) 
and the Engineering Technologist Mobility Forum (2003), 
and the 1999 Bologna Declaration relating to quality assur-
ance and  accreditation of bachelor and master programmes 
in  Europe.
Apart from a degree or related qualifi cation in one of the engi-
neering disciplines and associated skillsets, which includes 
design and drawing skills – now usually in computer-aided 
design (CAD) and continued professional development 
( CPD) – and awareness of new techniques and technolo-
gies, engineering  education also seeks to develop a logical, 
practical, problem-solving methodology and approach that 
includes soft social as well and technical skills. Th ese include 
motivation, the ability to perform for rapid understand-
ing, communication and leadership under pressure, and 
social-technical skills in training and mentoring. Engineering 
encompasses a diverse and increasing range of areas, fi elds, 
disciplines, branches or specialities. Th ese have developed 
from civil, mechanical, chemical, electrical and electronic 
engineering, as knowledge developed and diff erentiated, as 
subjects subdivided and merged or new subjects arose. Th e 
emergence of new branches of engineering are usually indi-
cated by the establishment of new university departments, 
sections in existing or new professional engineering organi-
zations. 
Th e engineering profession now consists of the diversity of 
types and levels of engineer, working in an expanding range 
of increasingly overlapping fi elds in various modes of employ-
ment, who may or may not be members of diff erent profes-
sional organizations, who read a variety of professional journals 
and magazines, attend and participate in a mixture of continu-
ous professional development ( CPD) training courses, work-
shops and conferences. Publications and conferences are now 
big business for engineering organizations with many earning 
their largest income from such sources. 
Professional engineers work in industry, government, consult-
ing and academia. Professional engineering institutions and 
organizations operate at the national, regional and interna-
tional level, similar to professional scientifi c organizations. 
Larger countries and economies usually have separate organi-
zations dedicated to the specifi c fi elds of engineering, linked 
by overall ’umbrella’ organizations such as the American Asso-
ciation of Engineering Societies (AAES) or the Engineering 
Council in the UK (ECUK). Th ere may be advantages and dis-
advantages of having specifi c or collective national organiza-
tions (as in  Australia and Canada, for example) from the point 
of view of advocacy, interdisciplinarity, coordination and so 
on, as umbrella organizations are inevitably far smaller than 
their members. National organizations are mainly linked at 
the international level by the World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations ( WFEO).  WFEO has over 100 national and inter-
national member organizations representing fi fteen million 
engineers around the world. Larger countries often have acad-
emies of engineering, and the International Council of Acad-
emies of Engineering and Technological Sciences ( CAETS) now 
has twenty-six members. 
Th ere are around 5,000 universities with accredited faculties, 
schools or divisions of engineering around the world (accord-
ing to the International Association of Universities), and hun-
dreds of journals and magazines on engineering. International 
 accreditation bodies are mentioned above, and these link with 
national bodies in most large countries. Th ere are also hun-
©
 C
h.
 H
ill
s/
U
N
ES
CO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   136 14/09/10   15:34:29
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
137
dreds of national and international conferences on engineer-
ing around the world every year, and every four years there 
is the World Engineers’ Convention (most recently WEC2008 
in Brasília, and WEC2011 in Geneva). Because of the diverse 
nature of engineering, various international organizations have 
interests in the subject, although UNESCO is the only interna-
tional organization with a specifi c mandate for science and 
engineering.  WFEO was itself established at UNESCO in Paris 
in 1968 in response to calls for such an international organi-
zation to represent the engineering community around the 
world.  WFEO,  CAETS and the International Federation of Con-
sulting Engineers ( FIDIC) are presented in this Report, as are 
the European Federation of National Engineering Associations 
(FEANI), the Federation of Engineering Institutions of  Asia and 
the Pacifi c (FEIAP, formerly FEISEAP), the Association for Engi-
neering Education in Southeast and East  Asia and the Pacifi c 
(AEESEAP), the Asian and Pacifi c Centre for Transfer of Tech-
nology (APCTT), the African Network of Scientifi c and Tech-
nological Institutions (ANSTI), the African Engineers Forum 
(AEF) and the International Federation of Engineering Societies 
(IFEES). International development organizations with a focus 
on engineering are also presented and these include  Practical 
Action (formerly the Intermediate Technology Development 
Group),  Engineers Without Borders (with increasing numbers 
of groups in an increasing number of countries),  Engineers 
Against Poverty (UK) and  Engineers for a Sustainable World 
(USA).
International cooperation4.3.2 
Tony Ridley
Th e twentieth century was a time of increasing interdepend-
ence. Engineers work in their own country to assist their devel-
opment, but engineers have been travelling to other countries 
for many years, particularly during the colonial era. Today, 
engineers work in a more collaborative, cooperative way.
One of the major developments in engineering at the global 
level during the last twenty years has involved concern for 
the environment. Following the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de 
Janeiro, the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Devel-
opment (CSD) was established by the United Nations General 
Assembly in December 1992. Since the outset its meetings 
have involved participation by members of civil  society. Sur-
prisingly, engineers were not included among those initially 
invited; notwithstanding the crucial role they play in the 
delivery of development, while protecting the environment in 
every country in the world.
Following representations made by  WFEO, engineers were at 
last invited, together with scientists through the International 
Council of Scientifi c Unions (ICSU), to attend CSD-9 in 2001. 
Th ey have been involved ever since with increasing infl uence, 
together with other representatives of civil  society: women, 
children and youth, indigenous peoples, NGOs, local authori-
ties, workers and trade unions, business, industry and farmers. 
Th is was followed by participation in the World Summit for 
Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg in 2002 
and then the United Nations Millennium Project.
Th e  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), adopted by the 
United Nations in 2000, are the world’s targets for reducing 
extreme poverty in its many dimensions: income poverty, 
hunger, disease, lack of  infrastructure and shelter, while pro-
moting gender equality,  education, health and environmental 
sustainability. Th e UN Millennium Project was commissioned 
by the then Secretary-General, Kofi  Annan, to develop a prac-
tical plan of action to meet the targets. 
Th e core of the work of the Millennium Project was carried out 
by ten thematic task forces. Task Force 10 included a number 
of engineers. Its report Innovation: Applying Knowledge in 
Development argued that meeting the MDGs would require 
a substantial reorientation of development policies so as to 
focus on economic growth, particularly the use of scientifi c 
and technological knowledge and related institutional adjust-
ments. It outlined key areas for policy action focusing on plat-
form or generic technologies, defi ning  infrastructure services 
as a foundation for technology, improving higher  education in 
science and placing universities at the centre of local develop-
ment, spurring entrepreneurial activities, improving the policy 
environment, and focusing on areas of underfunded  research 
for development. A key point – after all the excellent work 
done in policy planning – was the recognition that engineers 
were needed to turn the policies into reality and hence should 
be involved in the planning.
Out of Task Force 10 developed ‘Infrastructure, Innovation 
and Development’ (Ridley et al., 2006),16 which argued that 
the absence of adequate  infrastructure services is one of the 
main problems hindering eff orts to develop  Africa. Technol-
ogy and  innovation are the engines of economic growth. 
With the globalization of trade and investment, technologi-
cal capabilities are a source of competitive advantage. While 
 infrastructure development and technological development 
are two of the most important areas of development policy, 
practitioners and policy-makers alike tend to consider them 
as separate issues. Th e focus of  infrastructure development 
in recent years has shifted from the mere construction of 
physical facilities to the appropriate provision of services. 
Environmental and social factors have become part of  infra-
structure development and planning, yet most  infrastructure 
projects are not explicitly linked to technological develop-
ment  eff orts.
16 Ridley, T. M, Y-C. Lee and C. Juma, Infrastructure,  innovation and development, Int J. 
Technology and Globalization, Vol.2, No.3/4, pp.268–278. © 
M
ar
jo
ra
m
 President Lula at the 2008 
World Engineers’ Convention.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   137 14/09/10   15:34:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
138
Th e World Federation of 4.3.3 
Engineering Organizations 
( WFEO)
Barry Grear
Engineering is a profession that is truly international. An idea 
for a structure, project or product may be conceived by an 
engineer in one country, it may be designed in one or more 
countries, constructed or produced with components from 
many countries, operated and maintained where used and 
disposed of with international support. In this era, the concept 
of an engineer belonging to a country is challenged and may 
even be considered obsolete. It is however important for all 
engineering associations, governments and fi rms to have con-
fi dence in the abilities,  standards and experience of engineers 
working across international boundaries. Th e World Federa-
tion of Engineering Organizations ( WFEO) therefore has sev-
eral important roles as the international body representing the 
engineering profession worldwide. Th e national professional 
institutions that constitute  WFEO have ten million engineers 
worldwide in their registered memberships.  WFEO therefore 
aims to be the internationally recognized and chosen leader 
of the engineering profession, and it cooperates with other 
national and international professional engineering organiza-
tions such as  FIDIC and  CAETS.  WFEO’s mission is to:
represent the engineering profession internationally, provid- ■
ing the collective wisdom and leadership of the profession 
to assist national agencies choose appropriate policy options 
that address the most critical issues facing the world;
enhance the practice of engineering; ■
make information on engineering available to all countries  ■
of the world and to facilitate communication of best prac-
tice between its members;
foster socio-economic security,  ■  sustainable development 
and poverty alleviation among all countries of the world, 
through the proper application of technology; and
serve  ■  society and to be recognized by national and interna-
tional organizations and the public as a respected and valu-
able source of advice and guidance on the policies, interests 
and concerns that relate engineering and technology to the 
human and natural environment.
 WFEO has eight Standing Committees that are each convened 
with international membership:
Th e Committee on Engineering and the Environment ■  
Responsible for issues relating to engineering, the environ-
ment and  sustainable development,  climate change mitiga-
tion and adaptation and associated  infrastructure, advising 
various bodies including the United Nations Commission 
on Sustainable Development.
Th e Committee on Information and  ■  Communication
Responsible for engineering and information and com-
munication technologies, including advice regarding the 
introduction and application of  ICTs for development, and 
reduction of the information divide.
Th e Committee on Education and Training ■
Responsible for matters relating to engineering  education 
and training, and providing advice and assistance in setting 
international  standards, including the mobility of graduate 
and experienced engineers.
Th e Committee on Technology ■
Works on a wide range of projects relating to  appropriate 
technologies, including the provision of advice regarding 
the development of building code and urban  infrastructure 
in developing countries.
Th e Committee on Capacity Building ■
Responsible for issues relating to capacity-building in engi-
neering, including the provision of advice and assistance 
to communities in sub-Saharan  Africa, Latin America and 
the Caribbean, and the development of a model to ensure 
the transfer of technology when development projects are 
undertaken.
Th e Committee on Energy ■
Working in all areas related to engineering and  energy, 
including the development of reports on the feasibility 
conditions of diff erent  energy technologies, with publica-
tions on wind  energy and nuclear power  energy, and current 
preparation of reports on solar  energy and bio  energy.
Th e Committee on Anti-Corruption ■
Focal point for the provision of advice to  WFEO members 
and linkage with related organizations such as UNESCO, 
the World Bank and Transparency International to develop 
activities to minimize corruption that reduce the eff ective-
ness of development assistance.
Th e Committee on Women in Engineering  ■
Responsible for activities relating to  women and gender 
issues in engineering, including the development of a pro-
gram to empower women in engineering and technology 
by networking and developing leadership skills, utilizing the 
experience of long established women’s groups and provid-
ing assistance in strengthening new initiatives.
Economic effi  ciency requires a country to rapidly deploy new 
technologies from elsewhere, and to attract capital to purchase 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   138 14/09/10   15:34:29
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
139
those technologies. Many developing countries do not have 
suffi  cient capital of their own and therefore need to attract 
foreign direct investment (FDI). Th is in turn requires adher-
ence to intellectual property laws, but also low levels of cor-
ruption and fair taxation and/or tariff s. Political instability and 
access to fi nance are important factors but electricity supply 
and adequate roads are also rated as signifi cant obstacles by 
the World Development Bank. Worldwide, engineering quali-
fi cations have become highly regarded by employers because 
of their emphasis on risk management, ethical practice and 
sustainable outcomes. In this way, graduates from engineering 
courses have become a new source of managers and leaders 
for many organizations and professions.  Whenever capital is 
made available it is vital that the nation has the technical capa-
bility to make good technology decisions.  
Th e  WFEO has been able to vigorously represent the engineer-
ing profession in global policy settings, especially with regard 
to issues of  sustainable development and human welfare. 
Th is means interacting visibly and eff ectively with the United 
Nations and its specialized agencies such as UNESCO and the 
World Bank, as well as the international and regional develop-
ment banks and fi nancing agencies. With the whole-hearted 
endorsement and support of  WFEO members, there has been 
significant achievement. For example, the UN  Millennium 
Development Goals Task Force on Science, Technology and 
Innovation was co-chaired by  WFEO. 
Sadly there are still too many people who have never turned 
on a light switch, never walked on a built roadway, let alone 
ridden on one. Th is leads on to a fi nal point regarding the poor 
condition of  infrastructure worldwide. An ever-increasing glo-
bal population that continues to shift to urban areas requires 
widespread adoption of sustainability. Demands for  energy, 
drinking water, clean air, safe waste disposal, and  transporta-
tion will drive environmental protection and  infrastructure 
development. Society will face increased threats from natural 
events, accidents, and perhaps other causes such as terrorism. 
Th e public is becoming increasingly aware that development 
need not come at the price of a compromised and depleted 
environment for them and their children, and has begun to 
see sustainability, not as an unattainable ideal, but as a practi-
cal goal. To answer that call, engineers associated with  WFEO 
increasingly transform themselves from designers and builders 
to lifecycle project ‘sustainers’. 
On the demographic front, the world is well on its way to a 
population exceeding ten billion people in 2050. Today, people 
occupy more space on the planet than they did thirty years 
ago, and they are straining the earth’s environment, particu-
larly the requirements for  energy, fresh water, clean air, and 
safe waste disposal. Over the past thirty years, gradual global 
warming has profoundly impacted on more than half of the 
world’s population living within fi fty miles of coastal areas. 
Th ese areas have become much harsher places to live because 
of sea level rise, increased storm activity, and greater suscep-
tibility to fl ooding. Growing population, shrinking resources 
and  climate change have put us on the path to sustainability, 
and have put sustainability at the forefront of issues requiring 
global attention.  WFEO and its members continue to strive 
to understand the aspirational role that they will play in that 
radically transformed world.
International Council of 4.3.4 
Academies of Engineering 
and Technological Sciences 
( CAETS)
William Salmon
Th e International Council of Academies of Engineering and 
Technological Sciences ( CAETS) consists of national acad-
emies of engineering and technological sciences from diff erent 
countries.  CAETS was established in 1978 with fi ve founding 
academies and held its fi rst Convocation that year in Wash-
ington DC at the invitation of the US National Academy of 
Engineering (NAE). Each  CAETS member academy consists of 
peer-elected members representing the highest  standard of 
excellence and achievement in their profession for that nation. 
With a well-established program of service on important 
national and international issues with signifi cant engineering 
and technological content, many of these national academies 
are called upon by their governments to provide authorita-
tive, objective advice on technological issues of national 
importance. Working together in  CAETS, the academies form 
a worldwide engineering resource that can address with the 
highest skills and capabilities major global issues that require 
the considered judgement of the world’s most outstand-
ing engineering talent.  CAETS was created with a vision that 
national and international decision-making on economic, 
social and environmental issues is properly informed by rel-
evant scientifi c, technological and engineering considerations 
so that all people can fully benefi t from the capabilities of sci-
ence, technology and engineering.
Objectives
Consistent with its Articles of Incorporation and in support of 
its mission,  CAETS:
provides an independent non-political and non-govern- ■
mental international organization of engineering and 
technological sciences academies prepared to advise gov-
ernments and international organizations on technical and 
policy issues related to its areas of expertise;
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   139 14/09/10   15:34:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
140
contributes to the strengthening of engineering and tech- ■
nological activities in order to promote sustainable eco-
nomic growth and social welfare throughout the world;
fosters a balanced understanding of the applications of  ■
engineering and technology by the public;
provides an international forum for discussion and com- ■
munication of engineering and technological issues of com-
mon concern;
fosters cooperative international engineering and techno- ■
logical eff orts through meaningful contacts for the develop-
ment of programs of bilateral and multilateral interest;
encourages improvement of engineering  ■  education and 
practice internationally;
fosters establishment of additional engineering academies  ■
in countries where none exist; and
undertakes other projects, programs and activities.  ■
Mission
Th e  CAETS mission is to foster eff ective engineering and tech-
nological progress for the benefi t of societies of all countries. 
Specifi cally,  CAETS provides the mechanism through which 
the engineering and applied science academies of the world 
work together on internationally important issues. Member 
academies each have a well-established programme of service 
on important national and international issues with signifi cant 
engineering and technological content, and many are called 
upon by their governments to provide authoritative, objective 
advice on technological issues of national importance.  CAETS 
enables each academy to draw on the total global experience 
and expertise of all member academies when addressing issues 
at their own national level. It also ensures that the best tech-
nological and engineering expertise is made available and used 
to best advantage by key international and inter-governmental 
institutions and organizations.
Governance
Th e administrative and policy body of  CAETS, on which 
each academy has one representative, is the Council which 
elects the Offi  cers (President, President-elect, Past President 
and Secretary/Treasurer) and the Board of Directors, which 
consists of the Offi  cers (the Executive Committee) and four 
other members each serving, except for the Secretary/Treas-
urer, for one year terms. Th e major  CAETS events are its 
annual Council meetings, its biennial Convocations and its 
host-academy sponsored symposia in alternate non-Convo-
cation years. Past Convocations have focused on ‘Engineer-
ing, Innovation and Society’, ‘Technology and Health’, ‘World 
Forests and Technology’, ‘Entertaining Bytes’, ‘Oceans and 
the World’s Future’, ‘Hydrogen Economy: Clean Energy for 
this Century’ and ‘Environment and Sustainable Growth’. 
Strategy 
 CAETS priorities include engagement with the United Nations 
specialized agencies and related international organizations, 
fostering and strengthening national academies of engineer-
ing and technological sciences, convocations, symposia and 
reports, support for member academy initiatives, and address-
ing issues of common concern of the member academies.
With respect to its fi rst priority listed above,  CAETS partici-
pates in an ongoing advisory/consultative role with the rel-
evant scientific/technological organizations of the United 
Nations (UN) System, and it has established working relations 
with  WFEO, IAC, ICSU and other relevant non-governmental 
bodies in respect of  CAETS linkages with the UN.
Th e  CAETS website (http://www.caets.org) includes informa-
tion on all aspects of  CAETS activities, and mailing addresses 
of and links to the websites of its member academies.  CAETS 
is incorporated in the District of Columbia, USA, June 30 2000 
and is an IRS 510(c)(3) tax-exempt, charitable organization.
International Federation of 4.3.5 
Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC)
Peter Boswell
Th e International Federation of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC) 
represents the  consulting engineering industry at the inter-
national level. A macroeconomic analysis confi rms the indus-
try’s signifi cance and importance. Th e  consulting engineering 
industry, which comprises independent private consulting 
fi rms supplying services on a fee-for-service basis, is a major 
industry worldwide. It has an annual revenue of some US$490 
billion, and is heavily involved with the construction, man-
agement and industrial sectors that generate one-half of the 
world’s GDP. Any industry sector, especially one that makes 
major contributions to conceiving, designing, delivering and 
maintaining the world’s  infrastructure, aims to be able to 
quantify the scope and importance of its activities. However, 
unlike the manufacturing sector, the services sector, of which 
the  consulting engineering industry forms a part, does not 
lend itself to a straightforward analysis. Data is lacking and the 
classifi cation of activities often prevents a rigorous analysis. 
Most recent discussions of the industry’s activities have 
taken place within the context of the World Trade Organiza-
tion’s trade in service negotiations and the harmonization of 
national statistics. Th ese two approaches have converged on 
a reasonably robust classifi cation of the  consulting engineer-
ing industry’s activities that span both architectural and civil 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   140 14/09/10   15:34:29
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
141
engineering services in the broadest sense, as well as industrial 
consultancy. Given this perspective, and faced with the need 
to quantify in detail industry activity at the national level to 
sum up the global demand for  consulting engineering services, 
 FIDIC has developed a top-down macroeconomic approach 
based on investments to estimate the global demand. Th is is 
of suffi  cient importance to discuss in more detail.
 FIDIC’s role in quantifying the consultancy industry 
Th e WTO GATS classifi cation: Bottom-up industry data
Consulting engineers are generally recognized as supplying tech-
nology based intellectual services for two broad market sectors: 
the built environment (comprising buildings,  infrastructure 
and the environment), and industry (involving manufactur-
ing, equipment and process plant). Since industry also involves 
the built environment it is convenient to distinguish  consult-
ing engineering in terms of architectural and engineering (A&E) 
services and product engineering (or industrial consultancy).
Th ese services may be supplied a) internally by organizations 
responsible for a project or for supplying plant and equipment 
to a project, or b) externally by both specialized and multidis-
ciplinary fi rms coming from  consulting engineering and other 
industries. Th e General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) 
is a treaty of the World Trade Organization (WTO) that has 
been the focus of most recent discussion on quantifying the 
industry’s importance. Th e GATS Services Sectoral Classifi ca-
tion List MTN.GNS/W/120 spreads engineering services over 
only two categories: 
Professional Services, namely Architectural, Engineering,  ■
Integrated Engineering and Urban and Landscaping Ser-
vices (collectively called ‘A&E Services’) provided by quali-
fi ed architects and engineers. 
Construction and Related Engineering Services, which refer  ■
to physical construction and related engineering works and 
are classifi ed as Construction Services. 
Numerous commentators have pointed out that: 
Construction Services involve Professional Services, and a) 
vice versa. 
Some A&E Services are not included, such as services pro-b) 
vided by surveyors, topographical engineers, construction 
economists and quantity surveyors. 
Engineering services are required in other services sec-c) 
tors – including under the W/120 Environmental Serv-
ices category and Professional Services classifi ed under 
the Computer and Related Services category as well as 
under Other Business Services (mining, manufacturing, 
fi sheries, agriculture, testing,  energy distribution, security 
equipment maintenance, building services; management 
consulting) – all of which are very much the domain of 
consulting engineers. 
Industrial consultancy services for engineered machinery d) 
(Standard Industrial Classifi cation SIC 353-9; SIC 361-6) 
are a major category in some countries’ national statistics 
but have no W/120 equivalent here. 
Given the evident confusion, the question therefore is whether 
existing statistical databases can give a reasonably accurate 
picture of  consulting engineering that does justice to the 
industry’s importance. 
National sector statistics: A&E Professional Services 
Regarding W/120 A&E Professional Services, it has been noted 
that International Standard Industrial Classifi cation of all Eco-
nomic Activities (ISIC) categories for Professional and Other 
Business Services (ISIC 882 Architectural, engineering and 
other technical activities), upon which many national statis-
tics are based, correspond to the W/120 A&E Services (CPC 
Codes 8671-4). In turn, the W/120 A&E Professional Services 
(CPC Codes 8671-4) correspond to the International Labour 
Organization’s International Standard Classifi cation of Occu-
pation ISCO-88: 214. Th us, there is a possibility that national 
statistics based on engineering disciplines are in some cases 
suffi  ciently disaggregated to be able to measure W/120 A&E 
Professional Services. 
National sector statistics: Construction and related 
engineering services
Regarding W/120 Construction and Related Engineering 
 Services (CPC 512-7), it is also noted that they correspond 
to ISIC Construction and Engineering-Related Services (ISIC 
501-5), which form the basis for many national statistics. 
UNCTAD has separated Construction and Related Engi-
neering Services into ‘Construction and Related Engineer-
ing Services for A&E Design’ and ‘Construction and Related 
Engineering Service for Physical Construction’. Th e latter is 
accurately refl ected in: 
ISIC Revision 3 Construction (ISIC 451-5) covering all  ■
aspects of physical construction of a building (site prepara-
tion; building of complete constructions or parts thereof; 
civil engineering; building installation; building comple-
tion; renting of construction or demolition equipment with 
operator).
Extended Balance of Payments Services (EBOPS) 249 cover- ■
ing site preparation and general construction for buildings 
and other structures, construction work for civil engi-
neering, as well as installation and assembly work. It also 
includes repairs, renting services of construction or demoli-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   141 14/09/10   15:34:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
142
tion equipment with operator, and exterior cleaning work 
of buildings. 
Foreign Affi  liates Trade in Services (FATS) statistics recorded  ■
in the OECD Globalisation Indicators database. 
EBOPS249 helps overcome the traditional approach to sepa-
rate ‘construction’ (mainly  infrastructure development) from 
‘building’ involving residential and non-residential structures, 
where  infrastructure, as a public good, is provided by the 
public sector, and the building industry is dominated by the 
private sector. Th e increasing tendency for governments to 
outsource construction and to partner with the private sector 
has rendered the traditional approach misleading. 
National sector statistics: Industrial consultancy 
Industrial consultancy services for engineered machinery are 
covered in many national statistical databases under catego-
ries equivalent to the American Industry Classifi cation System 
NAICS and can in principle be readily identifi ed. For instance, 
concordance tables exist between NAICS Canada, ISIC Revison 
3.1 and the Statistical Classifi cation of Economic Activities in 
the European Community (NACE). Revision 1.1. NAICS codes 
are commonly used to standardize the defi nitions of services 
industries between diff erent countries. 
National sector statistics: Conclusion 
Th e conclusion is that by considering: 
A&E services;  ■
W/120 A&E Professional Services;  ■
W/120 Construction and Related Engineering Services for  ■
A&E Design; 
W/120 Construction and Related Engineering Services for  ■
Physical Construction; 
W/120 Environmental Services and W/120 engineering Pro- ■
fessional Services used in other W/120 sectors, and some 
relatively small sectors not covered by W/120;
industrial consultancy; and ■
engineering for engineered machinery (CPC 353-9; CPC  ■
361-6),
it should be possible to generate national data for the  con-
sulting engineering industry. Indeed, France has undertaken a 
rigorous analysis that simplifi es the industry’s activities to: 
A&E services.  ■
Construction ( ■  infrastructure, buildings, industrial). 
Management (territorial; organization). ■
Industrial consultancy. ■
Production and development of goods (physical, immate- ■
rial). 
Table 1 shows how this may be facilitated by specifying the 
type of services for the various activities. 
Here, the ‘X’ indicates the services that are common and easily 
identifi ed. In 2007 in France, A&E Services accounted for 72 
per cent of industry turnover (of which 21 per cent was for 
turnkey projects) and 28 per cent for Industrial Consultancy. 
In Sweden, the percentages were 65 per cent and 37 per cent. 
For South  Africa in 2005, Industrial Consultancy amounted to 
some 20 per cent of Construction. Th e most important activ-
Types of services
Pre-decision 
consulting
Design
Project 
Management
Control
Technical 
Assistance
Turnkey 
Projects
A&E
Construction X X X X X X
Management; 
Solution 
integration; 
Special studies
X X
Industrial
Production; 
Process 
development; 
Product 
development
X X
Table 1: Types of activities for consultancy services
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   142 14/09/10   15:34:29
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
143
ity in all countries remains activities in Construction, a sector 
that has a major social and economic role. In general, organiza-
tions representing the  consulting engineering industry rarely 
cover industrial consultancy, so data leading to adequate 
understanding of the industry’s role is often lacking. Develop-
ing a global view of the industry based on national statistics 
has not been attempted. 
Quantifying the consultancy industry: Top-down 
macroeconomic data 
A&E and industrial GFCF 
Given the difficulty in estimating the  consulting engineer-
ing industry revenue and market size using industry statistics 
it is useful to turn to output data for diff erent countries. Both 
GDP (Gross Domestic Product) and Gross Fixed Capital Forma-
tion (GFCF) have become standardized in the 1993 System of 
National Accounts (SNA). Th e system consists of several consol-
idated accounts for an economy as a whole, of which the Capital 
Account shows how gross savings have been spent on GFCF and 
changes in inventories, resulting in net lending/net borrowing. 
Capital formation takes place in a country’s production units. 
It consists of change in inventories minus disposals, and addi-
tions to fi xed assets, called Fixed Capital Formation produced 
as outputs from production processes that are themselves 
used repeatedly or continuously in other processes of pro-
duction for more than one year. A country’s GDP expenditure 
should by defi nition only include newly produced fi xed assets. 
GFCF is one of the principal components of GDP, typically 
accounting for around 20 per cent. 
Th e extent of loss of GFCF’s productive potential is known as 
the Consumption of Fixed Capital (CFC), which is to be com-
pensated by the acquisition of an equal amount of fi xed capi-
tal. GFCF is Fixed Capital Formation (FCF) computed without 
deducting CFC. It is GFCF less inventories. Statistically, GFCF 
measures the value of additions to fi xed assets purchased by 
business, government and households, minus disposals of fi xed 
assets sold off  or scrapped. So it is a measure of the net new 
investment in the domestic economy in fi xed capital assets. 
While GFCF is called ‘gross’, because it does not include the 
depreciation of assets, this terminology is confusing because 
the aim is to measure the value of the net additions to the 
fi xed capital stock. 
Estimates of capital formation are prepared by three meth-
ods: fl ow of funds (the sum of saving and net capital infl ow 
from abroad); commodity fl ow (by type of assets and change 
in stock by industry of use); and expenditure (by adding GFCF 
by industry of use). 
Under SNA, GFCF is categorized as Tangible Produced Fixed 
Asset comprising construction (dwellings, other buildings and 
structures, non-residential buildings, other structures); plant, 
machinery and equipment; and other assets (land improve-
ments, fences, ditches, drains, and so on). As an illustration, 
GFCF in plant, machinery and equipment by producers con-
sists of the value of their acquisitions of new and existing 
machinery and equipment minus the value of their disposals 
of their existing machinery and equipment. It covers transport 
equipment and other machinery and equipment, including 
offi  ce equipment, furniture, and so on. 
Consulting engineers now routinely provide services classi-
fi ed under business services (such as were permitted) so these 
should be included. Th ere has also been much debate recently 
about separating out information technology and computing, 
and introducing  research and development. Inevitably, there 
is considerable overlap so fi rst-order estimates based on the 
traditional GFCF categories are adequate for market analysis. 
Table 2 illustrates that the traditional GFCF categories can be 
matched to the WTO categories.
WTO GFCF
Types of Services
Pre-decision 
consulting
Design
Project 
Management
Control
Technical 
Assistance
Turnkey 
Projects
A&E
Construction Construction X X X X X X
Management; 
Solution 
integration; Special 
studies
Other Assets X X
Industrial
Production;
Process 
development; 
Product 
development
Plant, 
Machinery and 
Equipment
X X
Table 2: Matching traditional GFCF categories to WTO categories
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   143 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
144
Th e Other Assets GFCF represents at most a few per cent of 
total GFCF. Like Construction, it generally involves activities 
that require technology-based intellectual services, so for the 
purposes of estimating the potential demand for these serv-
ices, it can be combined with Construction GFCF leaving only 
two categories: A&E and Industrial. 
World GFCF in 2007 was US$9,271 billion for a GDP of 
US$54,747 billion. National statistics also give accurate esti-
mates of A&E and Industrial GFCF (e.g. European Union 2007: 
54 per cent and 46 per cent, respectively). GFCF is considered 
to be a better indicator than CFC for monitoring trends as 
changes in inventories are subject to large fl uctuations. Th us, 
GFCF fl uctuations often refl ect future business activity and the 
pattern of economic growth. 
Th e  consulting engineering industry 
Given the extent and depth of GFCF data, and the fact that the 
data mirror the categories that would be used in a bottom-up 
approach to measuring the demand for  consulting engineer-
ing services, it is clearly attractive to use GFC for industry sec-
tor statistics. Th e only reported examples of this approach are 
for the UK construction industry and for the European Union 
transport sectors. 
For construction and plant, GFCF includes new build structures 
and new plant, but depreciation and repair and maintenance 
are not taken into account. Th e durability of buildings and some 
plant means that repair and maintenance, which is almost half 
of construction output and a signifi cant part of manufacturing 
output, is largely ignored. Th is is consistent with omitting depre-
ciation from GFCF as the repair and maintenance accounts for 
capital consumption (GFCF is a measure of net new investments 
in fi xed capital in the domestic economy). 
Allowances for repair and maintenance can be estimated by 
noting that the construction industry typically reports that 
7 per cent of its turnover is spent doing repair and mainte-
nance. Th e fi gure for plant and equipment will be less owing 
to the much shorter lifetime, say 3 per cent. As a fi rst-order 
approximation, A&E and Industrial GFCF should be multiplied 
by factors of 1.07 and 1.03, respectively. Making these allow-
ances, worldwide A&E GCF is 52 per cent of total GFCF of 
US$9,693 billion and Industrial is 48 per cent. 
As mentioned above, it is assumed that all construction GFCF 
requires technology-based intellectual services of the types 
supplied by a consulting service. However, only a percentage 
of Industrial GFCF will require these services. In principle, it is 
possible to sum up the value of technology-based intellectual 
services supplied in each of the product categories that make 
up Industrial GFCF. Some categories will require a consider-
able amount of, say, engineering design service (e.g. engines, 
non-electrical machinery, electric generators, motors, electri-
cal machinery, and  communications equipment) in all phases 
of their production, installation and maintenance. Others will 
require much less. Overall, preliminary estimates indicate that 
54 per cent of worldwide Industry GFCF requires technology-
based intellectual services, so the total of investments in fi xed 
assets that require these services is US$7,553 billion in 2007. 
The final stage of the analysis is probably the most diffi-
cult. What is needed is an estimate of the percentage of the 
US$7,553 billion in investments that is spent on technology-
based intellectual services. Only a few attempts have been 
made to estimate the demand for technology-based intellec-
tual services for the A&E and Industrial sectors. For instance, 
the value added by a sector (that measures the activity in the 
sector and provides the level of demand for services in the sec-
tor), the breakdown between asset types (from GFCF data) 
and the skills profi les of staff  working in the sector, gives the 
skills required and thus an estimate of the number of jobs. 
Such an exercise has been carried out for the South African 
construction sector. Similarly, a European Union study used a 
so-called marginal labour-to-capital ratio method to quantify 
the number of jobs created by an injection of a given GFCF 
into the A&E and Industrial sectors. Given the numbers of jobs 
and the salary levels for the various skill levels, one can esti-
mate fee revenues for technology-based intellectual services. 
The usual approach, however, is to use national statistical 
data for product categories in order to estimate the volume 
of technology-based intellectual services. Samples taken from 
a selection of countries indicate that the average for the A&E 
and Industrial sectors combined is 8.3 per cent or US$627 bil-
lion. Th is represents the potential worldwide demand for tech-
nology-based intellectual services. As mentioned above, some 
of the demand (estimated to be 42 per cent worldwide) will be 
supplied internally by organizations responsible for a project 
or for supplying plant and equipment to a project. Th e remain-
der (78 per cent) will be supplied externally by both special-
ized and multidisciplinary fi rms whose principle activity (more 
than one-half of fi rm revenue) is to meet this demand. It is 
these fi rms that make up the  consulting engineering industry 
with a worldwide turnover of US$490 billion. 
European Federation of 4.3.6 
National Engineering 
Associations (FEANI)
Willi Fuchs and Philippe Wauters
It was the conviction that the engineering community in 
 Europe could and should contribute to peaceful develop-
ment in a continent so deeply devastated by the Second 
World War, that lead in 1951 to the creation of the ‘Inter-
national Federation of National Engineers Associations’ by 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   144 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
145
engineering organizations from seven European countries. 
In 1956 it was renamed ‘European Federation of National 
Engineering Associations’ (FEANI) so as to focus on the Euro-
pean character of the Federation. Th e means to realize the 
contribution of the engineer was discussed at a congress on 
‘Th e Role of the Engineer in Modern Society’ and a goal was 
set to strengthen the presence of engineers in every national 
and international movement of economic and social impor-
tance.
Now, more than fi fty years later, what has happened within 
FEANI? First of all, there has been a remarkable growth in 
the number of National Engineering Associations that have 
joined FEANI and consequently in the number of Euro-
pean countries represented within it. Indeed, from FEANI’s 
initial seven member countries, thirty European countries 
are now represented by their national engineering aassocia-
tions. Th ese include many European countries, all Member 
States of the European Union (except two Baltic states) as 
well as other European countries such as Norway, Iceland, 
Switzerland, Serbia and Russia (as a Provisional Member, on 
the way to full membership). Th is makes FEANI by far the 
largest European multi-discipline engineering organization, 
representing engineers who have successfully completed 
either short or long cycle academic  education. FEANI will 
most probably grow further since engineering associations 
from other European countries have, or are on their way to, 
applying for membership.
To cope with this growth, FEANI has developed a modern 
organization and has defi ned rules, agreed upon by its mem-
bers, and described in its Statutes and Bylaws, which conform 
to the Belgian legislation on AISBL (non-profi t organizations). 
Th e headquarters of FEANI, the Secretariat General, is located 
in Brussels. Th e Statutes stipulate that countries seeking to 
become members of FEANI fi rst have to nominate one FEANI 
National Member body to offi  cially represent their various 
national associations. Th ere can only be one FEANI National 
Member per country. FEANI today is thus composed of its 
Secretariat, thirty national members and, through them, a 
network of more than 350 national engineering organizations 
representing about 3.5 million engineers. Th e FEANI organi-
zation is governed by a General Assembly (GA), the decision 
making body, at which all National Members are present. An 
elected Executive Board is responsible for implementing the 
decisions taken by the General Assembly, and the Secretariat 
General is in charge of the day-to-day business. In addition, 
the Executive Board may from time-to-time establish Com-
mittees and ad hoc Working Groups to deal with issues of 
common interest.
Is the initial objective of FEANI, namely to contribute to 
peace in  Europe, still valid? Fortunately,  Europe is enjoying 
one of the longest periods of peace in its history so its found-
ing objective, which remains valid, can be seen today as the 
basis for developing the benefi ts of more concrete and tech-
nical issues to support individual engineers. Among these 
issues is the need to ensure excellence in  education for Euro-
pean engineers and to support the recognition of their pro-
fessional qualifi cations. Th ese, in turn, support the mobility 
of European engineers both within  Europe and the rest of the 
world. Th ree examples of FEANI projects are:
EUR-ACE
Together with other stakeholders such as universities, 
 accreditation agencies, professional engineering bodies and 
trade unions, FEANI has recently started the Accreditation of 
European Engineering Programmes (EUR-ACE) project. Th e 
project is fi nanced by the EU Commission and has developed 
an  accreditation system based on output criteria covering 
the fi rst and the second cycle of engineering  education as 
defi ned in the Bologna Declaration. Th e EUR-ACE Standards 
and Procedures are now being implemented by six  accredita-
tion agencies that have been authorized to deliver the EUR-
ACE label. Th e EUR-ACE system is ‘complementary’ to the 
FEANI system, and programmes with a EUR-ACE label are 
now being included in the FEANI INDEX.
EUR-ING
FEANI has defi ned a quality professional title ‘European Engi-
neer’ ( EUR ING) for professional engineers based on a sound 
 education (programmes listed in the INDEX or equivalent) 
and assessed professional experience. Th is FEANI proprietary 
professional title is a de facto quality  standard recognized in 
 Europe and worldwide, and particularly in those countries 
that do not regulate the profession. 
European Professional Card Feasibility Study
Th e recognition of professional qualifi cations is a major con-
cern for the EU institutions involved in developing solutions 
to implement the full content of the EU Treaty, as far as the 
three liberties are concerned. In particular, the liberty on the 
right to pursue a profession in an EU Member State, other 
than the one in which the professional qualifi cations have 
been obtained. With this aim, the European Union Directive 
on Recognition of Professional Qualifi cations (2005/36/EC) 
states that Member States should encourage professional 
organizations to introduce a so-called ‘professional card’ to 
facilitate the recognition of the qualifi cation and the mobil-
ity of professionals. Th e card could contain information on 
the professional’s qualifications (university or institution 
attended, qualifi cations obtained, professional experience), 
employment experience, legal establishment, professional 
penalties received relating to his profession and the details 
of the relevant competent authority. At the request of the 
European Commission, FEANI has undertaken a feasibility 
study into the concept. A professional card should provide 
for its owner recognition of his/her professional qualifi ca-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   145 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
146
tions, both in  Europe and worldwide, as an independent 
body would validate all the data. 
In addition to these major activities, FEANI also produces 
position papers on subjects of important interest to  society; 
it has developed a framework for a European Code of Con-
duct for Engineers, adopted in 2006 by all National Members; 
is involved in  CPD (Continuous Professional Development) 
activities; issues regularly the FEANI News and maintains a 
website (www.feani.org), which is the basis of its communi-
cation system and regularly updated. 
Federation of Engineering 4.3.7 
Institutions of Asia and 
the Pacifi c (FEIAP)
Tan Seng Chuan
Th e Federation of Engineering Institutions of Southeast  Asia 
and the Pacifi c (FEISEAP) was founded on 6 July 1978. Its 
establishment followed an exploratory meeting convened 
and organized by the Engineering Institute of Th ailand under 
the King’s patronage with the support of UNESCO. It was cre-
ated as an umbrella organization for engineering institutions, 
and had the following objectives:
to foster cooperation and exchange of information  ■
between its members;
to encourage the application of technical progress to eco- ■
nomic and social advancement in the region;
to collaborate with international, regional and national  ■
governmental and non-governmental organizations; and
to encourage engineers in the region to contribute to the  ■
engineering community.
It is an international member of the World Federation of 
Engineering Organizations ( WFEO).
Th e Change to FEAIP
At its 14th General Assembly held in Cebu, Philippines, on 
26 November 2007, the question of the continuation of FEI-
SEAP was discussed. It was unanimously agreed to review 
FEISEAP’s constitution to defi ne its objectives more clearly 
and to broaden the scope of its membership to include more 
member economies. Th e revised constitution was discussed 
and adopted at the 15th General Assembly. Th e constitution 
incorporated a change of name to the ‘Federation of Engi-
neering Institutions of  Asia and the Pacifi c’ (FEIAP).
Along with the change of name and constitution, three 
new working groups were formed to collaboratively achieve 
FEIAP’s aims and objectives. Th ey are, namely, the Environ-
mental Working Group, the Engineering Education Working 
Group and the Professional Ethics Working Group.  
Th e Environmental Working Group aims to promote envi-
ronmental activities within regional economies, increase col-
laboration among member economies, and provide support 
to the Engineering Education Work Group on environmental 
engineering related activities. Th e Working Group published a 
publication themed ‘Environmental Sustainability’ in 2008. Th e 
Engineering Education Working Group is working towards the 
collaboration and promotion of engineering  education among 
member economies within the region, and the formulation 
of benchmarks and best practice guidelines to assist member 
economies on the international engineering  accreditation 
programmes. Th e Professional Ethics Working Group will be 
providing a set of ethical guidelines for engineers in their deci-
sion-making processes, especially during the design stage, with 
a long-term view towards  sustainable development.
Besides the formation of the three working groups, FEIAP 
also re-launched its website and replaced its logo to refl ect a 
more dynamic and vibrant organization. Th e website will be 
the key platform to leverage the latest technology, facilitating 
greater interaction and sharing of information among mem-
ber economies within the region.  Another initiative is the 
‘FEIAP Engineer of the Year’ Award, which aims to recognize 
and encourage engineers on their contributions and achieve-
ments in the fi eld of engineering among member economies. 
Th e award will also serve as a source of motivation for the 
recipients and one which all engineers aspire to achieve.
Th e Challenge
Th irty years is indeed a milestone and a great achievement for 
FEIAP. It is expected that the coming years will continue to be 
challenging for the Federation due to the manifold challenges 
of the eff ects of globalization, off shore out sourcing,  climate 
change, and the increasing demand for  innovation and exper-
tise to remain competitive and sustainable in the market place 
are becoming more pronounced. One of the greatest chal-
lenges today is the diversifi cation of culture in the Asia and 
Pacifi c region. Th us the building and strengthening of FEIAP’s 
networks is a crucial item in the agenda of the Federation. To 
rise to this challenge, FEIAP aims to promote the exchange of 
experience and information related to science and technol-
ogy for the advancement of the engineering profession, espe-
cially with regard to the national and regional economic and 
social developments in the years ahead. Th e FEAIP website 
is a key platform to leverage the latest technology, and thus 
facilitate greater interaction and information-sharing among 
member economies within the region. Another new initiative 
is the ‘FEIAP Engineer of the Year’ award, which recognizes 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   146 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
147
and encourages engineers in their contributions and achieve-
ments among member economies.   
Another critical challenge is ensuring the high quality of engi-
neering  education in the region. It is recognized that national 
engineering institutions have an important role in determin-
ing and accrediting the quality of their national engineering 
 education systems. Th us it is important for the Federation to 
leverage its resources within the region to share experience 
and assist the developing economies in adapting  accredita-
tion processes internationally. Th is also implies the bench-
marking of the engineering  education system against an 
international  accreditation system, for instance, under the 
 Washington Accord. 
Climate change is another challenge for the engineers region-
ally and globally. Th ere is increasingly clear evidence that 
global warming and several natural  disasters is the result 
of  climate change.  Engineers, well known for their inge-
nuity towards solving problems systematically, will be able 
to address the issue of  climate change – one of the major 
environmental challenges of our time. To this end, FEIAP 
will be taking the initiative to identify opportunities for col-
laboration in terms of  research and development for critical 
issues aff ecting mankind among the member economies. 
As a regional organization, FEIAP plays an important role 
in creating opportunities for engineers across geographical 
boundaries to meet and share their experiences. FEIAP will 
also be the conduit in the facilitation of dialogue with rel-
evant governmental and non-governmental organizations in 
order to provide possible solutions to the challenges we face 
now and in the future. 
Conclusion
With the recent changes in FEIAP’s name, logo and consti-
tution, FEIAP is seeking to be a more inclusive organization 
focused on its objectives to foster greater collaboration and 
sharing of information among member economies and par-
ticipation in international initiatives. FEIAP is set to stay rel-
evant in the new economy and to be a driving force for the 
engineering profession in  Asia and the Pacifi c regions.  
Association for Engineering 4.3.8 
Education in Southeast and 
East  Asia and the Pacifi c 
(AEESEAP)
R. M. (Bob) Hodgson
Th e foundation of AEESEAP was the outcome of a UNESCO 
regional seminar on ‘New Approaches to Engineering Educa-
tion in Asia’ held in Kuala Lumpur in 1973. During the seminar 
it was recommended that a permanent organization for engi-
neering  education for the South-East Asian region be formed. 
Subsequent action by UNESCO and the World Federation of 
Engineering Organizations ( WFEO) led to the formation of 
AEESEA, the Association for Engineering Education in South-
East Asia. In 1989 this organization changed its name to the 
Association for Engineering Education in Southeast and East 
 Asia and the Pacifi c with the acronym AEESEAP, to better rep-
resent the region occupied by the member countries. 
Th e aims and goals of AEESEAP
Th ese are to assist in the development and enhancement of 
technology and engineering capabilities within South-East 
Asia, East  Asia and the Pacifi c by improving the quality of 
the  education of engineers and  technologists. Th e associa-
tion seeks to facilitate networking and cooperation between 
institutions engaged in engineering  education, industry and 
other relevant organizations in the region, and to promote the 
development of systems and  standards for engineering and 
technology  education. Th ese goals are seen as important con-
tributions to  economic development and the advancement of 
the welfare of the people of the region.
Th e aims of AEESEAP are as follows:
to promote an awareness of the role of engineering in the  ■
creation of wealth and the enhancement of national health 
and well-being;
to promote the development and delivery of high quality  ■
 curricula for engineering and technology;
to facilitate and stimulate regional cooperation in the  ■  edu-
cation and training of engineers and  technologists;
to facilitate participation in international assistance pro- ■
grammes for engineering  education as donors and recipi-
ents as appropriate;
to be proactive in the identifi cation of problems in engineer- ■
ing  education and training, and in fi nding solutions to them 
through the exchange of information and personnel;
to provide services and advice on the quality improvement  ■
of engineering  education programmes;
to provide advice on the establishment of new facilities and  ■
institutions for the delivery of  education and training in 
engineering and technology;
to promote continuing  ■  education and professional devel-
opment of engineers,  technologists and educators;
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   147 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
148
to promote cooperation between industry and educators  ■
on a national and international basis;
to assist existing national societies of engineers and engi- ■
neering  technicians and groups of educators of engineers 
and engineering  technicians in their eff orts to improve engi-
neering  education; and
to assist in the establishment of societies or groups of engi- ■
neering  technicians for this purpose where they do not 
already exist.
Th e membership of AEESEAP
AEESEAP has a comprehensive range of membership classes. 
Th ese are as follows: Voting Members, Ordinary Members, 
Individual Members, Supporting Members, Correspondent 
Members, Honorary Members and Subscribing Library Mem-
bers. Voting members are key to the operation of the Associa-
tion as the representatives of the voting members also form 
the AEESEAP Executive Committee and thus act as the board 
of the Association. Th e voting members are drawn from fi fteen 
countries in the region. Sadly, some of the voting members 
have not been in active membership for some time and are 
in arrears with their subscriptions. A continuing problem in 
this context is that the individuals who are the nominated rep-
resentatives of the voting members often change and it has 
proved diffi  cult to contact the responsible persons, noting 
that the voting members are institutions or agencies and not 
individuals. A determined eff ort is now underway to overcome 
this problem and to restore the membership base such that an 
emphasis will be placed on rebuilding the base of committed 
voting members as national representatives.
Recent activities
Th e AEESEAP secretariat and presidency is rotated between 
fi fteen member countries at three-year intervals and is cur-
rently located in  New Zealand, the last handover having taken 
place early this year in February 2007. Prior locations were 
the Philippines followed by Indonesia and then Malaysia. Th e 
most recent handover took place in Kuala Lumpur in Febru-
ary in association with an AEESEAP Regional Symposium on 
Engineering Education with the theme ‘New Strategies in Engi-
neering Education’. Over fi fty papers were presented at the 
symposium with two thirds on matters of  curriculum design 
and delivery and one third on technological themes. In addi-
tion to the  curriculum and technical papers, the traditional 
country reports on the state of engineering  education in the 
countries of the voting members were presented. 
Consideration of the patterns that have been emerging for 
some time and the events briefl y detailed above led to the con-
clusion that the presence of the AEESEAP secretariat typically 
leads to activities appropriate to a national or local regional 
association where one does not exist or is inactive. Here it 
must be made very clear that in presenting this analysis, no 
criticism is implied or intended of the recent AEESEAP offi  ce 
bearers from Malaysia or before them, Indonesia. What has 
become clear is that although the aims and goals of AEESEAP 
remain relevant to the region, the activities that gain support 
in pursuit of these goals have changed.  
Th irty-fi ve years of dynamic change in the region
As the economies of the nations in the region served by AEE-
SEAP change from underdeveloped to developing and then to 
developed or mature, a corresponding change occurs in engi-
neering  education and  accreditation systems – though this is 
observed to be somewhat ad hoc. Since AEESEAP was estab-
lished, international engineering  accreditation systems have also 
been developed. Such systems are most fully developed and 
applied at the level of professional degrees, usually four year, 
accredited through for example the  Washington Accord. Th is 
accord was established in 1983 with AEESEAP nations  Australia 
and  New Zealand as two of the original signatories. Currently, of 
AEESEAP members,  Australia,  New Zealand, Japan, Korea and 
Singapore are full signatories of the  Washington Accord, with 
Malaysia a provisional member and several nations in the region 
currently working towards provisional membership as a step 
towards full membership. Th e  Washington Accord is essentially 
a system for accrediting national  accreditation systems and 
subsequently for mutual recognition of  accreditation decisions 
made by the national bodies at the institution, usually univer-
sity and degree major level. In recent years, similar systems have 
been developed for engineering  technician degrees through the 
Sydney Accord, and for  technician diplomas through the Dub-
lin Accord. Once nations have achieved membership of these 
accords, many of the aims of AEESEAP are seen to have been 
achieved, at least on a national basis.
Future directions for AEESEAP
For AEESEAP to survive and to play a useful role in the region, 
consideration must be given to the factors discussed above 
which are: the rapid industrialization and surge to prosperity of 
several AEESEAP nations, the development of national societies 
devoted to engineering  education, the increasing involvement of 
the AEESEAP Members and Potential Members in international 
 accreditation agreements and, not discussed but of importance 
here, the increasing internationalization in scope and view of 
trans-global learned societies including IEEE and IET (formally 
IEE). Consideration of these factors leads to the suggestion that 
the future role of AEESEAP may be to act as a regional forum 
for national engineering societies and as a source of advice and 
expertise to nations as they seek to develop engineering  educa-
tion and the related  accreditation systems. 
Conclusions
In the thirty-fi ve years of its existence, AEESEAP has played a 
useful role in the region served through both the development 
of international personal networks and the provision of con-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   148 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
149
ferences. Th ese conferences have been valuable as a forum for 
the sharing of best and evolving practice. At the present time 
the future of AEESEAP is under discussion because a number 
of the Voting Members have ceased to be active in the asso-
ciation and the AEESEAP conferences have developed a local 
rather than international emphasis. Th e key factors leading to 
these changes have been identifi ed and two key and related 
roles for AEESEAP have been proposed and are under discus-
sion. Th e future role of AEESEAP may be to act as a regional 
forum for national engineering societies and as a source of 
advice and expertise to nations as they seek to develop their 
engineering  education and the related  accreditation systems.
Asian and Pacifi c Centre 4.3.9 
for Transfer of Technology 
(APCTT)
Krishnamurthy Ramanathan
Interest in setting up an Asia-Pacific mechanism to foster 
technology transfer was expressed as early as 1965 at the fi rst 
Asian Congress on Industrialization in Manila. Subsequently, 
through resolutions passed at the Commission Sessions of the 
United Nations Economic and Social Commission for  Asia and 
the Pacifi c (UNESCAP), the Regional Centre for Technology 
Transfer (RCTT) was established in Bangalore in India on 16 
July 1977 with the Government of India off ering host facilities 
for the Centre. In 1985, the Centre was renamed the Asian and 
Pacifi c Centre for Transfer of Technology (APCTT). APCTT was 
relocated from Bangalore to New Delhi, with the support of 
the Government of India on 1 July 1993. APCTT has the status 
of a subsidiary body of UNESCAP and its membership is iden-
tical to the membership of UNESCAP.
APCTT is widely regarded as the fi rst technology and engineer-
ing body for technology capacity-building in the Asia-Pacifi c 
region. Its objectives are to assist the members and associate 
members of UNESCAP by: strengthening their capabilities to 
develop and manage national  innovation systems; develop, 
transfer, adapt and apply technology; improve the terms of 
transfer of technology; and identify and promote the devel-
opment and transfer of technologies relevant to the region. 
During its initial phase (1977–1984) of operation, APCTT 
functioned as a Technology Information Centre.  From 1985 to 
1989, the Centre broadened the scope of its technology trans-
fer activities to other areas such as technology utilization and 
technology management. 
In an eff ort to create awareness among policy-makers in the 
developing countries on the importance of technology in 
national development, APCTT published books and mono-
graphs on the management of technology transfer, technology 
development, industrial  research, and similar. For example, in 
1985, with fi nancial assistance from UNDP, APCTT prepared 
a series of country studies and a regional report on technol-
ogy policies and planning in selected countries. Th e common 
issues thus identifi ed were then summarized in another pub-
lication, Technology Policy and Planning – Regional Report, 
which provided cross-country analysis and the policy-related 
implications thereof for the diff erent countries of the region. 
On the basis of the lessons and experiences gained from the 
activities outlined above, APCTT prepared a Reference Manual 
on Technology Policies that provided the general framework 
and setting for technology policy formulation. Another exam-
ple, the Technology Atlas Project of 1986–1989, funded by the 
Government of Japan, was to help technology planners avoid 
the pitfalls of a fragmented and uncoordinated approach to 
technology-based development.
APCTT’s technology utilization programme was aimed at 
linking potential users to the suppliers of relevant technolo-
gies through technology expositions, missions, workshops 
and individual syndication. Th e emphasis was on the promo-
tion, transfer and utilization of selected, commercially viable 
technologies in identifi ed priority sectors such as agro-based 
industries, low-cost construction,  renewable  energy,  energy 
conservation, biotechnology and microelectronics. These 
technology transfer activities were refined during 1989 to 
focus increasingly on technology capacity-building at institu-
tional and enterprise levels. In the 1990s, APCTT’s programme 
was directed at small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs) 
and the promotion of environmentally sound technologies. 
Emphasis was placed on more eff ective and effi  cient access 
to information on technology transfer and its dissemination 
through linkages and networking. With the support from the 
Government of Germany through GTZ (1993–2002), the Cen-
tre focused increasingly on technological upgradation of SMEs 
and the promotion of R&D and enterprises cooperation. In 
this context, as an example, the Technology Bureau for Small 
Enterprises (TBSE) evolved as a joint venture between APCTT 
with the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI) 
to assist SMEs in fi nance and technology syndication. 
APCTT started deploying web-based tools to strengthen 
its technology transfer services in cooperation with other 
partner institutions in the region such as the twin websites 
http://www.technology4sme.net and http://www.business-
asia.net in cooperation with other partner institutions in 
the region as a comprehensive, online and free technology 
market business service for SMEs. Th e http://www.technolo-
gy4sme.net website, with its database of technology off ers 
and requests, facilitates eff ective communication and inter-
action among buyers and sellers of technology. Both websites 
contain a wide range of information for use by entrepreneurs, 
investors,  technologists, business development experts and 
policy-makers. Over fourteen countries in the region are at 
various stages of duplicating this type of technology trans-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   149 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
150
fer platform, specifi c to their own contexts. APCTT has also 
designed the APTITUDE Search Engine to help seekers of 
technology simultaneously search several technology data-
bases that are in the public domain.
To ensure that a holistic approach is taken in the planning 
and management of technology transfer, APCTT is currently 
promoting a ‘National Innovation Systems’ approach in coun-
tries of the Asia-Pacifi c region. Th e aim is to infl uence policy-
makers so that they appreciate the relevance and importance 
of the NIS approach, and to develop policy frameworks that 
ensure the eff ective development and transfer of  innovations 
in industry,  research and development institutions, and in 
universities. APCTT is also implementing a project on Grass-
roots Innovation to help member countries scout, document 
and eventually commercialize such  innovations with a view 
towards promoting inclusive development and social entre-
preneurship.
Th e African Network of 4.3.10 
Scientifi c and Technological 
Institutions (ANSTI)
Jacques Moulot
In  Africa, engineers and scientists have traditionally organ-
ized themselves in networks based around disciplines. Such 
networks are often professional associations with political or 
administrative purposes aimed at addressing gaps aff ecting the 
profession and careers of engineers and scientists. Networks 
aimed at human resource capacity-building are less common. 
According to Massaquoi and Savage17 there are mainly two 
types of such capacity-building networks at regional level in 
 Africa: regional centres of excellence for training and  research 
and regional institutional networks.
Th e African Network of Scientifi c and Technological Institu-
tions (ANSTI) is an example of the latter. Established in 1980 by 
UNESCO, ANSTI is arguably one of the oldest alliances dealing 
with science in  Africa. It draws its political mandate from the 
fi rst Conference of Ministers Responsible for the Application 
of Science and Technology to Development in  Africa organ-
ized in 1974 and its operational mandate from its members 
and partners. 
Th e membership of ANSTI currently comprises 174 univer-
sity departments and  research centres, following a 77 per 
cent increase since 1999. Th e members are located in 35 sub-
17 Massaquoi, J.G.M. and Savage, Mike (2002) Regional Cooperation for  capacity build-
ing in science and technology. Popularisation of science and technology  education: 
Some Case Studies for  Africa. By Mike Savage and Prem Naido (Eds). Commonwealth 
 Secretariat
Saharan African countries. An estimated one-third of the 
members provide engineering degrees in various disciplines 
of engineering. Th e network functions with a light and cost 
eff ective structure composed of a secretariat in charge of the 
daily operation and implementation of the activities of the 
network, and a Governing Council that meets once a year 
to approve the budget and provide policy guidelines for the 
network.
ANSTI provides capacity-building services and opportuni-
ties to scientists and engineers at its member institutions. 
These include awards and fellowships for postgraduate 
training, grants for travel to and for the organization of con-
ferences, and funds for visiting professorships. As in any net-
work, information exchange is emphasized. ANSTI pools the 
resources of its members and seeks partnerships and support 
from donors to attain its specifi c objectives (highlighted in 
the Box). Up to 2008, among other activities, it had provided 
diff erent types of grants to more than 300 staff  of member 
institutions; facilitated more than 50 staff  exchange visits; 
granted over eighty-fi ve postgraduate fellowships for train-
ing of which 35 per cent in the fi elds of engineering, and pro-
vided more than ninety grants to scientists and engineers to 
attend conferences.
Th e objectives of ANSTI, as detailed in its 2007–2011 strategic plan 
are:
To strengthen the staff of science and engineering training  ■
institutions.
To facilitate the use of African scientists in the diaspora to  ■
strengthen teaching and  research in science and engineering in 
universities.
To promote the use of Information and  ■  Communication 
Technology (ICT) in the delivery of science and engineering 
 education.
To facilitate the sharing of scientifi c information and strengthen  ■
the coordinating mechanism of the network.
To strengthen  ■  research activities in relevant areas of Science & 
Technology.
To provide a forum for the discussion of strategic issues in  ■
science and engineering  education (including issues of quality 
and relevance).
Excerpt from ANSTI Strategic Plan 2007–2011
Th e main objectives of ANSTI
One of the important activities of any capacity-building pro-
gramme is the identifi cation and discussion of strategic issues 
involved in the relevant fi elds of  education. ANSTI, through 
the meetings of deans and other expert groups, has in the past 
identifi ed several issues that aff ect science and technology 
 education in  Africa. Th e network has established a biennial 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   150 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
151
forum, the Conference of Vice-Chancellors, Deans of Sci-
ence, Engineering and Technology (COVIDSET), which brings 
together university leaders responsible for science and tech-
nology to deliberate on strategic issues in higher  education 
relevant to their disciplines. Considering the small amount of 
funds used to establish the network and the limited resources 
at the disposal of the small network secretariat, it can be seen 
that institutional networks eff ectively contribute to human 
resource development on a large scale.18
18 J. Massaquoi. 2008. University as Centres of Research and Knowledge Creation: An 
Endangered Species? H. Vessuri and U. Teichler (eds.), pp.59–70, Rotterdam, Sense 
publishers.
invitation to AEF participants by  WFEO, to attend their 2003 
Congress in Tunis as well as to participate in an African Engi-
neers Day event. 
Th e  Africa Engineers Forum network of engineering organi-
zations subscribes to shared values in support of viable and 
appropriate engineering capacity in  Africa. Th irteen national 
engineering professional bodies are currently signatories. 
AEF strives to ensure an appropriate level of effi  cient human 
resource capacity in the built environment professions, but 
particularly in engineering, to enable  Africa to ultimately 
achieve  sustainable development for all the people of  Africa. 
It contributes resources and expertise in partnership with key 
stakeholders to accomplish the transfer and assimilation of the 
value of the best practice principles of  sustainable develop-
ment to identifi ed communities at all levels.
Th e  Africa Engineers Forum consists of national volunteer 
associations of engineering professionals that provide techni-
cal leadership in support and enhancement of the principles 
of: 
wealth creation;  ■
sustainable engineering as a prerequisite for development; ■
quality of life; and  ■
holistic  ■  education and training for capacity-building. 
Th e vision of the AEF is to strive to ensure an appropriate level 
of effi  cient human resource capacity in the built environment 
professions, but particularly in engineering, to enable  Africa to 
ultimately achieve  sustainable development for all the people 
of  Africa. 
Th e 4.3.11  Africa Engineers 
Forum and AEF Protocol of 
Understanding
Dawie Botha
Th e  Africa Engineers Forum (AEF) was established in 2000 to 
build upon the earlier initiative to facilitate more inclusive 
and broader cooperation of African engineers in order to pro-
mote and foster  sustainable development within an African 
context. At the World Summit for Sustainable Development 
in Johannesburg South  Africa in 2001, the World Federation 
of Engineering Organizations ( WFEO) co-hosted an event at 
which several African engineering initiatives and philosophies, 
including the AEF protocol, were presented. Th is resulted in an 
Th e AEF is committed to pursue the goals set out in the 
Protocol of Understanding and Cooperation in order to 
achieve its objectives, which are aimed at achieving the fol-
lowing outcomes: 
Excellence in engineering technology in  ■  Africa. 
Informed and intelligent decision-making about built  ■
environment  infrastructure by all government structures 
and private sector entities by utilizing human capacity-
building orientation programmes and projects.
A suffi  cient pool of competent professionals by and  ■
through: 
– off ering and pursuing awareness and orientation pro-
grammes, projects and activities regarding the role of 
Engineering and Technology; 
– promotion of interest in mathematics and science at 
higher grades in primary and secondary schools;
– off ering career guidance programmes and activities;
– promoting consistent investment mechanisms for 
 infrastructure and promoting fair and reasonable remu-
neration for all engineering practitioners;
– facilitating mentorship; and
– off ering continued professional development oppor-
tunities.
Sustainable professional frameworks and organizational  ■
structures in  Africa by: 
– creating permanent facilities and administrative mech-
anisms to support the built environment profession’s 
activities and programmes. 
An awareness relating to AEF activities in order to  ■
prepare the countries, its people and its decision-
makers for the challenges of the future by: 
– utilizing the opportunities offered to enhance the 
image and raise public awareness about the role and 
value of engineering and industry in particular, and engi-
neering and the built environment in general. 
Support the development of entrepreneurship in the  ■
engineering environment.
Goals of AEF
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   151 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
152
International Federation 4.3.12 
of Engineering Education 
Societies (IFEES)
Hans J .  Hoyer with Lueny Morell,  Claudio 
Borri, Sarah Rajala , Seeram Ramakrishna, 
Xavier Fouger, Bruno Laporte, José Carlos 
Quadrado, Maria Larrondo Petrie and 
Duncan Fraser
Introduction
Engineering and technology play a key role in globalization as 
both developed and developing countries design and imple-
ment effective and efficient strategies that advance their 
economies and  social development. Science and engineering 
 education needs to be continuously evolving in order to assist 
all countries to reduce poverty, boost socio- economic devel-
opment and make the right decisions for sustainable and envi-
ronmentally compatible development.
A global approach is needed to eff ectively innovate in engi-
neering  education. The world needs to establish effective 
engineering  education processes of high quality to assure a 
global supply of well-prepared engineering graduates; engi-
neers who can act locally but think globally. It is imperative 
that technical know-how be supplemented with professional 
skills to develop a generation of ‘adaptive engineering lead-
ers’ capable of addressing the multiple challenges of an ever-
changing world – these are the engineering professionals that 
a globalized world needs.
Th e role of engineering  education in growing knowledge-
based economies
Knowledge and  innovation have always played a key role in 
development. Fifty years ago, competitiveness and growth 
Th e  Africa Engineers Protocol of Understanding and Coop-
eration was developed by the AEF to cover the essential 
components of what is seen as ‘sustainable engineering’, 
which is a prerequisite for sustainability. Th e AEF protocol 
contains the following items:
Develop and uphold the AEF concepts about  ■
 sustainable development.
Communicate at a technical level amongst all  ■
engineering professionals, resident within and outside 
 Africa.
Develop and implement alliance and integration  ■
models for AEF interaction and networking with other 
continental and international engineering and other 
built environment organizations.
Promote and accept internationally accepted norms in  ■
terms of conduct, integrity,  ethics, engineering  standards 
and care for our people and our environment.
Develop and maintain acceptable and appropriate  ■
frameworks to accredit and recognize educational 
qualifi cations and professional  standards to facilitate 
reciprocity and equity.
Encourage and facilitate ongoing learning and  ■
profess ional  development for  engineering 
professionals.
Set up and maintain an African electronic database for  ■
technical information linked to the websites of the AEF 
signatories and other partners of strategic importance 
and relevance.
Exchange information and sharing of experiences  ■
regarding engineering practice.
Disseminate relevant published technical papers,  ■
articles and editorials.
Exchange and provide access to technical journals and  ■
magazines for reference purposes.
Arrange professional and technical networking  ■
opportunities and events within the infl uence sphere 
of participating organizations in cooperation with the 
other participants in AEF, and make use of the potential 
contribution and assistance of the African diaspora 
engineers.
Set up, maintain and manage an events database  ■
concerning annual programmes of events, including 
those relating to continuous professional development, 
for the purpose of forward planning and coordination.
Communicate, accept and implement best practice  ■
in terms of desirable and appropriate local and 
internationally recognized engineering  standards, 
processes, procedures, methods or systems in relation 
to the delivery processes and the life cycle of products 
and assets.
Facilitate the harmonization of  ■  standards, documenta-
tion, methods and procedures as appropriate.
Promote the use of procurement as an instrument for  ■
development and capacity-building.
Promote and facilitate entry to and equality for all  ■
demographic and gender groups in the engineering 
profession.
Provide a platform for infl uential African engineering  ■
professionals who can infl uence best policy practices 
at all levels of decision-making in government and the 
private sector.
Facilitate and promote networking amongst African  ■
tertiary educational institutions involved in engineering 
related  education.
Facilitate and promote appropriate  ■  education and 
training for engineering professionals dealing with the 
challenges of rural development.
 Facilitate and offer public awareness programmes  ■
in order to enhance the visibility and recognition of 
the role of the engineering profession in African civil 
 society. 
Promote and support pertinent  ■  science and technology 
policy including the extension of  research and 
development initiatives by governments in  Africa.
Develop and off er capacity-building programmes in  ■
order to develop a pool of knowledgeable decision-
makers, clients and users of engineering  infrastructure 
and services.
Invite and facilitate government and private sector  ■
participation in engineering practice and related 
matters.
Develop, promote, facilitate and lobby for the  ■
acceptance of best practice policies relating to foreign 
investment and donor involvement and infl uence in 
 Africa. 
Promote appropriate  ■  curricula at schools to prepare and 
enable learners to enter into the fi eld of engineering.
Develop and provide outreach and career guidance  ■
programmes for all school learners.
Th e  Africa Engineers Protocol
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   152 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
153
were driven by access to natural resources and labour. With 
globalization and the technological revolution of the last 
decades, knowledge has clearly become a key driver of com-
petitiveness. A knowledge economy now is one that utilizes 
knowledge as the key engine of competitive growth. It is an 
economy where knowledge is acquired, created, disseminated 
and used eff ectively to enhance  economic development. Tran-
sitioning from a traditional economy to a knowledge economy 
requires long-term investments in  education,  innovation and 
ICT, in addition to an appropriate economic and institutional 
regime that allows for effi  cient mobilization and allocation of 
resources. Innovation in technology, as well as products and 
business processes, boosts productivity. Today, the prosper-
ity of nations depends on how eff ectively organizations use 
their human resources to raise productivity and nurture 
 innovation.
While  education has always been a key component of  inno-
vation and technological advance, the complexity and speed 
of the interplay between  education, knowledge, technology 
and skills require far-reaching adjustments of  education sys-
tems. Knowledge-enabled economies are able to constantly 
modernize their  education systems in line with changes in 
economic policies. Th ese changes have been both systemic 
and deep, aff ecting the nature of teaching and learning. Most 
OECD countries have increased their public expenditures on 
 education over the last few decades. Developing countries 
also have made signifi cant investments in  education. However, 
talent and skills have become the world’s most sought-after 
commodity. As economies increasingly shift towards knowl-
edge-intensive directions, the demand for skills and compe-
tencies increases signifi cantly.
Performance in the marketplace is driven by the quality, 
skills and fl exibility of labour and management. In addition 
to traditional ‘hard’ skills and ICT competencies, knowledge 
economies require a new set of ‘soft’ skills such as a spirit 
of enquiry, adaptability, problem-solving,  communications 
skills, self-learning knowledge discovery, cultural sensitivity, 
social empathy, and motivation for work. Countries need to 
develop teaching and learning environments that nurture 
these skills.
International Federation of Engineering Education 
Societies
Launched in 2006, the International Federation of Engineer-
ing Education Societies (IFEES) aims to create a worldwide 
network of engineering educators and engineering  educa-
tion stakeholders. Th rough the collaboration of its member 
organizations, IFEES’s mission is to establish eff ective and high-
quality engineering  education processes to assure a global 
supply of well-prepared engineering graduates. IFEES strives 
to strengthen its member organizations and their capacity to 
support faculty and students, attract corporate participation 
and enhance the ability of engineering faculty, students and 
practitioners to understand and work in the varied cultures 
of the world.
To do this, IFEES focuses on four strategic areas: engineering 
 education  infrastructure;  research, development and entrepre-
neurship; student recruitment; and success and lifelong learn-
ing. It will promote and support activities and initiatives that: 
promote engineering  education; promote access to engineer-
ing  education; enhance quality; gear engineering  education to 
the needs of  society; share teaching methods and  curriculum 
plans; increase transparency and recognition of titles; foster 
and favour mobility of students and professionals; promote 
 ethics and gender issues; increase awareness of  sustainable 
development; improve humanistic skills and cultural aware-
ness; and foster imagination and innovative thinking in new 
generations of engineers.
Stakeholders are increasingly expecting engineering colleges to act 
as leaders in  innovation and to provide solutions to  society’s chal-
lenges. Th e Global Engineering Deans Council (GEDC) is a new ini-
tiative of IFEES that brings together deans and heads of engineering 
 education institutions to ensure their schools deliver locally-rele-
vant and globally-relevant courses, and to make engineering more 
attractive to top candidates and future generations of students.
Global Engineering Deans Council
A new worldwide student initiative is starting to take shape under 
the title Student Platform for Engineering Education Development 
(SPEED). SPEED aspires to connect diff erent stakeholders of  educa-
tion, provide input and create a change in the fi eld of engineering 
 education. SPEED off ers a platform for student leaders, to facilitate 
their engagement into cooperation and  research on engineering 
 education matters and connect them with representatives from 
businesses, academia, civil  society and politics. 
Student Platform for Engineering Education 
Development
In addressing engineering  education on a global scale, students 
should be involved and their input considered. Board of European 
Students of Technology (BEST) has been providing input into engi-
neering  education policies at the European level and beyond since 
1995. With the mission to provide services to students, BEST focuses 
in providing complementary  education, educational involvement 
and career support to European students. BEST is active in thirty 
countries with 2,000 members and reaching 900,000 students.
Board of European Students of Technology
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   153 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
154
 4.4.1 Practical Action - and the 
changing face of technology 
in international development
Andrew Scott
Introduction
Over the years, the ways of working of the Intermediate Tech-
nology Development Group (ITDG) – now  Practical Action 
– have evolved, as one would expect, through experience, new 
thinking and through dialogue with others. Our approach to 
technology, development and change, which is at the core of 
our work, has itself evolved. Th is is achieved by tracing the evo-
lution of our approach to technology and relating this to wider 
trends in thinking about international development, discussed 
below. It is important to explain why, still in the twenty-fi rst 
century, organizations like  Practical Action, involved with 
 appropriate technology, continue to play such a vital role in 
development.
Th e evolution of our approach to technology and  poverty 
reduction can roughly be divided into four phases. These 
phases do not correspond exactly to the four decades of the 
organization’s existence but by coincidence they are not far 
off  it; they do not have a clear start or end, and they overlap 
to some extent. Th ey are simply a way to trace changes in our 
approach to technology through shifts in thinking, each phase 
marking a period where one set of ideas was predominant. It is 
a subjective view, perhaps, but serves the purpose.  
Th e fi rst phase concerns the period when the main approach 
relates to the transfer of technology to developing countries. 
Th is evolved during the 1970s when the main questions were 
related to scale and technology choice, with technology devel-
opment to make small-scale options available. Th en came 
a focus on the development of technologies specifi cally for 
poor people within developing countries – what became 
known as ‘ appropriate technologies’. In the late 1980s, when 
participation became the watchword for all  poverty reduc-
tion initiatives, Participatory Technology Development (PTD) 
dominated thinking in the  appropriate technology world. 
More recently, the approach has been to focus on the devel-
opment of what can be described as people’s technological 
capabilities, which refl ects a focus on people and their situ-
ations. Th is evolution of thinking will be explained in more 
detail using some examples.
From technology transfer to technology development
ITDG began life as an organization providing information and 
advice about technology to others.  Part of the work at the 
start was promoting the concept of Intermediate or Appropri-
ate Technology, spreading the message, and part was helping 
people to put it into practice. One of the fi rst activities con-
ducted under ITDG’s name was the production and publishing 
of Tools for Progress, a catalogue of technologies for farmers 
and small-enterprises in developing countries. And quite early 
on, a Technical Enquiry Service was established that is still 
going strong.
ITDG relied on a number of panels of voluntary experts to pro-
vide this advice. Th ese panel members – at one stage there 
were over 300 involved – were almost all technical people, 
with science and engineering backgrounds, and most were 
in the UK. They sought out technological knowledge and 
information from companies and researchers in the country, 
mainly with the intention of transferring this to developing 
countries.
With the experience of a number of fi eld projects and increased 
contact with practitioners on the ground, and with the realiza-
tion too that at times there was no  appropriate technology 
available to transfer, the emphasis moved to the question of 
technology choice and technology development. Th is resulted 
in a concentration on scale. Small was beautiful, and what was 
needed was small-scale technology for small-scale farmers and 
small-scale enterprises. ITDG at this time (in the 1970s and 
1980s) devoted a lot of its eff ort to the development in India 
of small-scale plants for the manufacture of cement, sugar 
and cotton yarn, with varying success. Th e work in the case 
of cement set about reviving a production technique that in 
 Europe had been abandoned in the nineteenth century in 
favour of a larger-scale processing technology. In the case of 
small-scale sugar, the development work involved bringing 
together traditional processing with more recent scientifi c 
knowledge; while in the case of cotton it entailed scaling down 
the size of the machinery and plant.
Cement
Small-scale cement production was one of three manufactur-
ing technologies that ITDG began working on in the 1970s 
with an Indian partner, ATDA (Appropriate Technology Devel-
opment Association). Th e technology was based on the batch 
processing of limestone using a vertical shaft kiln to produce 
cement. Th e ATDA units had a capacity of around fi fty tonnes 
per day, compared with the 2,000 to 3,000 tonnes per day 
that might be found in conventional, large-scale rotary kilns. 
Th e small-scale vertical shaft kiln was developed partly as a 
 Engineering International Development 4.4 
Organizations
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   154 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
155
response to a national cement shortage.  Th ough the yields 
were lower and they produced cement of more variable qual-
ity, they had the advantage of reduced transport costs, being 
closer to both raw materials and markets.
Th e fi rst commercial small-scale cement plant developed by 
ATDA went into production in 1981.  Within four years, there 
were nineteen units in operation in India, the world’s second 
largest cement producer, and there are now 300 mini-cement 
plants with a total installed capacity of around 11 million 
tonnes a year. Th e largest cement producer, China, has 50,000 
mini-cement plants.
Sugar
Turning briefl y to sugar processing by the late 1970s, when 
ITDG fi rst started work on sugar technology, there were several 
thousand small-scale Open Pan Sulphitation (OPS) plants in 
India.  Th ese OPS units had a capacity of between 100 tonnes 
and 200 tonnes of cane per day, compared with large-scale 
mills based on vacuum pan processing with capacities higher 
than 1,000 tonnes a day, and can reach 20,000 tonnes. Th e OPS 
processing technique had developed in India in the 1950s and 
together with ATDA, ITDG sought to improve the technical 
effi  ciencies and to transfer the technology to other countries.
Th ere are four mains steps in the manufacture of sugar: crush-
ing, clarifying, boiling and recovery (crystallization and separa-
tion). Over a period of ten years, ITDG and ATDA developed 
and introduced two main technical improvements: screw 
expellers to increase the yield at crushing, and shell furnaces, 
which improved boiling rates and allowed the use of wet 
bagasse (crushed cane) for fuel. Th e technology was success-
fully transferred to Kenya and Tanzania, though the number of 
OPS plants was fewer than had been hoped.
One reason for the limited spread of OPS plants was the regu-
lated nature of the sugar market, both nationally and inter-
nationally. In India price controls sometimes meant that the 
by-products were worth more than the sugar, while elsewhere 
there were investment incentives available only for large-scale 
processors. Sugar continues to generate a lot of debate in dis-
cussions of trade regulations.
Cotton
Small-scale cement and small-scale sugar achieved some suc-
cess; the technology worked – technically speaking – and was 
fi nancially viable. With cotton, the third processing technol-
ogy that ITDG devoted a lot of time and eff ort on, the story is 
less rosy. In 1986 a review of the textile programme concluded 
‘It is unfortunate that... little lasting achievement can be cred-
ited to the programme.’ Why was this? What went wrong?
Th e cotton story began in India in 1975, when an initial study 
– as studies often do – recommended further  research and 
the testing of small-scale yarn production. Th e context is quite 
important to understand why this was pursued. At this time, 
the textile industry in India accounted for 15 per cent of indus-
trial employment and, in the decentralized informal sector, 
was second only to agriculture as a source of employment. It 
also has to be remembered that because of Gandhi’s espousal 
of cotton spinning as an integral element of traditional Indian 
way of life, manual technologies for cotton processing held 
great symbolic meaning to many people. Th e idea therefore of 
showing that manual cotton spinning to supply yarn to hand-
loom weavers could work, held great appeal.
In 1978, a pilot project was initiated by ATDA to demonstrate 
the technical feasibility of cottage spinning and to test its eco-
nomic viability. Christian Aid supported the project and ITDG 
provided a technical consultant from the Shirley Institute, the 
UK’s principal textile technology  research centre. Technologi-
cal development focused on improving the performance of 
the charkhas (the spinning machines) and on cotton pre-
processing, i.e. the preparation of raw cotton for use by the 
spinners.
Over time it was established that a hand-driven charkha would 
not be practicable with more than six spindles. A 12-spindle 
pedal-driven charkha was developed, followed by a 24-spin-
dle motor driven charkha. Th e latter could produce two-and-
a-half times the yarn of the 12-spindle charkha without the 
 Th e Monitor Merrimac 
Memorial Bridge Tunnel, USA.© S
AI
CE
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   155 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
156
hard labour, but this was getting away from the Ghandian 
model. Financially it was eventually shown that the 12-spin-
dle pedal charkha could only be viable within the subsidized 
khadi sector, but the 24-spindle motorized charkha could be 
viable, though would fi nd it hard to compete with mill yarn on 
grounds of quality.
As far as the cotton pre-processing technology was concerned, 
the review in 1986 concluded, ‘Unfortunately the machine pro-
duction achieved little other than the production of scaled-
down versions of a card and drawframe to high  standards of 
engineering along with a poorly manufactured blowroom.’ It 
did not work. Th e review concluded, ‘the Textile Programme 
appears to have fallen into a “widget trap” – “widgets” were 
sought as solutions for problems before the search for a tech-
nological “fi x” was adequately justifi ed.’ 
Overall comments
Although small, these three small-scale manufacturing tech-
nologies each still required a substantial investment, which 
was beyond the scope of an individual living on around two 
dollars a day. Th ey might be small-scale in relation to conven-
tional plant, but not relative to the assets of micro-enterprises 
or smallholder farmers. Th ough cooperative ownership was 
an option – and many OPS sugar plants in India started as 
cooperatives – for the impoverished, such factories could only 
mean either wage employment or a market for their agricul-
tural produce.
Attention shifted therefore as ITDG paid greater attention to 
socio-economic factors, redressing previous neglect of the 
social, institutional and economic context; attention shifted 
to technology development for micro- and small enterprises. 
Here there were some successes, for instance the tray drier and 
fi bre cement roofi ng tiles. Th e latter are now in widespread 
use in much of the developing world. Moreoever, tray driers 
were successfully developed in Peru by a small enterprise, and 
transferred to other countries.
Participatory Technology Development
Th e next phase in ITDG’s approach to technology and  poverty 
reduction saw a focus on Participatory Technology Develop-
ment (PTD). PTD is now a well-established practice in the fi eld 
of agriculture and can trace its origins back to trials in farmers’ 
fi elds by agricultural  research stations with a shift, though not 
everywhere, towards more and more of the experimentation 
into the hands of the farmers themselves. But the concept of 
PTD applies also to other sectors; and arguably the beta test-
ing of software by IT companies is a form of PTD.
Th is change during the 1980s – particularly the late 1980s 
– towards technology users being directly involved in tech-
nology development rather than recipients of products, was 
assisted by two trends in thinking. First, there was greater 
understanding of the process of  innovation that takes place 
by small-scale farmers and within small enterprises; how they 
learn and apply new knowledge. It was recognized that tech-
nical change is generally evolutionary and incremental. Radi-
cal invention is the exception rather than the rule. Technical 
change, by and large, consists of very small, minor adjustments 
to the way people do things based on ‘what people are doing’, 
on the knowledge and experience that they have, and the skills 
they possess to carry them out.
Th e second change in thinking was a great move towards par-
ticipatory approaches in the practice of international develop-
ment. Participatory techniques (such as PRA, RRA or PLA) that 
recognize the value of existing knowledge and skills became 
acceptable methods for all kinds of planning and fi eld work, 
and quite quickly became almost a discipline in themselves. 
Th e idea of involving people in the development or adaptation 
of the technologies they use fi tted into this very well. A good 
example of PTD, featured in ITDG appeal literature for some 
time with some success, was the donkey ploughs in Sudan.
Ploughs in Sudan
In the confl ict in Darfur, large numbers of people have moved 
to refugee camps – the so-called ‘internally displaced people’ 
(IDPs). Th is has always been a harsh environment to live in, 
but ITDG has been working in North Darfur for almost two 
decades – for half of our forty years – where we have been 
supporting the development of technologies used by small-
scale farmers. From the beginning, our approach has been to 
work with the farmers, enabling them to acquire new knowl-
edge about alternative agricultural techniques, such as soil and 
water conservation or pest management, and to try and get 
them to test these new ideas for themselves.
ITDG began working with small-scale farmers in Kebkabiya, 
North Darfur, in 1987 in collaboration with Oxfam. An initial 
review of local tools and farmers’ needs prompted work on a 
prototype donkey-drawn plough. While the introduction of 
animal-drawn ploughs in the region goes back to the 1960s, 
the models available were too expensive for the great majority 
of farmers.
Actual plough designs were borrowed from existing designs, 
from two designs in particular:  a wooden ard (scratch plough 
– a type of simple plough) and a steel mouldboard plough, 
which was a scaled-down version of a  standard ox-plough, 
made suitable for donkeys. In Kebkabiya, the approach focused 
on getting ploughs to farmers and letting them do the real 
experimentation, rather than on the fi ner details of technical 
specifi cation. Th is approach, or rather the plough design that 
emerged from it, has generated some criticism from profes-
sional agricultural engineers; but the farmers who carried out 
the trials seemed satisfi ed. Th e approach meant that farmers 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   156 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
157
were able to assess the overall value of the ‘product’, including 
the qualitative matters such as convenience and drudgery.
Th e manufacturers of the plough were the local blacksmiths. 
A total of 120 blacksmiths were trained in making ploughs, 
and they were able to fi ne tune basic designs in line with their 
own skills and resources and take into account of feedback 
from farmers about the plough’s performance and their pref-
erences.  
Th e donkey-drawn plough resulted in considerable savings in 
time and labour for the 80 per cent of farmers in the district 
who had access to it. Average yields increased to 682 kg/ha as 
a result of increased water absorption and the area under culti-
vation increased. Over 2,800 ploughs have been produced and 
sold, and more farmers each year adopt the plough.
Technological capabilities
Th e work of ITDG (and other AT organizations) is now less 
about identifying or developing specifi c technological options 
(hardware) for specifi c locations at a particular time, and is 
more about enabling resource-poor women and men to iden-
tify and develop technologies to address their needs as these 
needs change over time. Th e technology choice focus of the 
early AT movement – the 1970s and early 1980s – was a static 
approach that took little account of the ever-changing world 
that people live in. But there has been a move by AT organiza-
tions in recent years towards describing their work in terms of 
the technological capabilities of people, i.e. people’s ability to 
use, develop and adapt technologies in, and in response to, a 
changing environment rather than in terms of the character-
istics of technologies, as before. Th e need is to develop local 
systems that will support or strengthen technological capabili-
ties. One way to do this is through community-based exten-
sion workers.
Kamayoqs
 Practical Action has several experiences of community-based 
extension. One of these, in Peru, has recently been recognized 
as an example of good practice by the UN Food and Agricul-
ture Organization. At the centre of this initiative is the training 
of farmer-to-farmer extension agents known as Kamayoq. In 
the sixteenth century Kamayoq was the term used to describe 
special advisers on agriculture and climate in the Inca Empire. 
Th ey were trained to anticipate weather patterns and were 
responsible for advising on key agricultural practices such as 
optimal sowing dates.
Th e approach was piloted in the early 1990s in the Vilcanota 
valley where the farming communities are over 3,500 metres 
above sea level. Farm households here have one or two head 
of cattle, some sheep and a number of guinea pigs. Th e most 
common crops are maize, potatoes and beans.
In 1996,  Practical Action established a Kamayoq School in the 
town of Sicuani, supported by the local authority, and to date 
over 140 Kamayoq have been trained of whom 20 per cent 
are women.
Trainees come from and are selected by the communities. ■
Training is provided in Quechua, the local language. ■
Th e course lasts eight months and involves attendance for  ■
one day per week. 
Th e course focuses on local farmers’ veterinary and agricul- ■
tural needs.
After their training, the Kamayoq are able to address the veteri-
nary and agricultural needs of local smallholder farmers. Farm-
ers pay the Kamayoq for their services in cash or in kind. Th ey 
are able and willing to do so because the advice and technical 
assistance they receive can lead to an increase in family income 
of 10–40 per cent through increased production and sales of 
animals and crops. Th e most sought-after service is the diag-
nosis and treatment of animal diseases. In each of the thirty-
three communities where the Kamayoq are active, mortality 
rates among cattle have fallen dramatically. A recent evalua-
tion found that 89 per cent of farmers reported that mastitis 
is eff ectively controlled; milk yields increased from 6.26 to 8.68 
litres and sales increased by 39 per cent. In one community, 
Huiscachani income from crop production increased 73 per 
cent after receiving technical advice in 2005.
An example of Participatory Technology Development facili-
tated by Kamayoqs has been the discovery of a natural medi-
cine to treat the parasitic disease on Fasciola hepatica. Over 
a three-year period, the Kamayoq and local villagers experi-
mented with a range of natural medicines until they discov-
ered a particularly eff ective treatment that is also cheaper 
than conventional medicines. Other examples of Participatory 
Technology Development include the treatment of a fungal 
disease of maize and the control of mildew on onions.
Where are we today?
So where do we stand today? Well, 1.1 billion people do not 
have access to clean water, 2.4 billion have no sanitation, 2 bil-
lion people have no access to modern  energy services, 1.5 bil-
lion have inadequate shelter and 800 million are underfed. 
Th ough for millions the  standard of living has improved, mil-
lions more remain in absolute poverty. We know technology 
change can help to change their lives, but access to even low-
cost, simple technologies is prevented by their poverty.
At the same time, technology is being looked to as the solution 
to the world’s problems. Th e  Africa Commission concluded in 
2005 that strengthening the scientifi c and technological capac-
 Th e One Laptop per Child 
OLPC $100 computer – small 
is beautiful?
©
 C
CB
YS
A 
- W
ik
ip
ed
ia
 - 
Xa
m
ã 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   157 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
158
ity of  Africa was an imperative, and favoured the development 
of centres of excellence. Th e Commission recommended that 
donor countries provide US$500 million a year for ten years 
to African universities. Also in 2005, the Sachs Millennium 
Project Report for the UN made similar recommendations. 
Furthermore, the US and others are now looking to technol-
ogy to overcome the challenge of  climate change.
But people are still falling into widget traps. Th e same mis-
takes are being made now as were being made twenty, thirty 
and forty years ago. Th e lessons that ITDG –  Practical Action 
– has learnt, the lessons that others have learned, the com-
bined experience of decades’ work in promoting technology 
for  poverty reduction, are often being ignored in the excite-
ment about the potential of modern, science-based technolo-
gies. For example, the US$100 laptop promoted by the US 
not-for-profi t One Laptop per Child (OLPC), an off shoot from 
MIT’s Media Labs, has drawn such criticism. It should be noted 
however that one modern ICT in particular has made a huge 
diff erence to the lives of people throughout the developing 
world: the mobile phone. Access for many has been made pos-
sible not just because of the physical  infrastructure of the net-
works – the widgets – but also the fi nancing and tariff  systems. 
Mobile phones are quite clearly an Appropriate Technology 
for impoverished communities.
In short, though we might think the concept of  appropriate 
technology is now widely established as part of the received 
wisdom of international development, this is clearly not 
refl ected in practice.   Practical Action will have to continue to 
persuade people of the basic principles of how technology can 
be used to reduce poverty.
In his last lecture, Schumacher suggested that when technolo-
gies are being assessed for their appropriateness for  poverty 
reduction, one of the questions should be: Is it an  appropriate 
technology from a democratic point of view? An intermediate 
technology approach, he said, ‘is also the democratic way that 
gives the little people some independence and what the young 
call “doing one’s own thing”.’  An essential dimension to AT, 
and indeed an often-mentioned aspect of  Practical Action’s 
approach, is the democratic idea of increasing control over 
one’s own life. Th is is another way of expressing Amartya Sen’s 
idea of development being the freedom to make decisions 
about one’s own life and livelihood.
Technology Democracy
People are increasingly alienated from the decision-making 
that aff ects them in all walks of life, including the use and 
development of technology. Enabling more democratic tech-
nology choice is partly about widening the range of options, 
including making more productive technologies available, 
and partly about providing an environment (institutional, 
fi nancial, social, political) that supports access to technology 
options and the freedom to choose by resource-poor people. 
While much of the eff ort of the development community is 
in fact geared to providing a supportive environment, it is 
often assumed that, once this is in place,  appropriate tech-
nology decisions will be taken. However, the needs and cir-
cumstances of diff erent social groups need to be explicitly 
addressed and their technology needs must also be explicitly 
addressed.
Seen holistically, in the complexity of a dynamic social, eco-
nomic, cultural, and political context, the eff ective manage-
ment of technology change is a question of capabilities. Th e 
poor must be enabled or empowered to access improved 
technologies, and to make their own technical choices through 
the development of their capability. Th is will enable them to 
respond to changing needs and opportunities as they arise, 
and lead to  sustainable development.
Much of  Practical Action’s work is now concerned with 
strengthening people’s technological capabilities so that they 
can make their own decisions about the technologies that they 
use. Our projects demonstrating the eff ectiveness of commu-
nity extension workers, supporting Participatory Technology 
Development by farmers, and developing skills in micro-enter-
prises, are all about strengthening people’s capabilities.
For  Practical Action, our work will therefore continue to 
include innovating and demonstrating ways of directly 
involving women and men in the process of technology 
development, and involving them in decision-making on the 
technologies that aff ect their lives. Th is is what we have been 
doing for a number of years, and this what we will continue to 
do. But we must also seek and promote change in the policy 
and institutional environment that governs decision-making 
about technology.
We need to advocate for institutional and policy frameworks 
that enable, rather than constrain, poor people to make eff ec-
tive choices about the technologies they want to use. Th is 
includes making public sector organizations and private sec-
tor corporations properly accountable for their environmental 
and social impact. It includes mechanisms to ensure that sci-
entifi c  research and technological  innovation is in the public 
interest rather than to the advantage of the vested interests of 
the rich and powerful. It includes making information about 
technologies and technical knowledge accessible to the peo-
ple who need it, and includes building the capacity of devel-
oping countries to assess for themselves the possible impacts 
of new technologies on their societies, the livelihoods of their 
people and their natural environment.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   158 14/09/10   15:34:30
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
159
 4.4.2 Engineers Without Borders
Andrew Lamb
Background
From chairs and doors to laptops and spacecraft, technol-
ogy gives people capabilities that extend and enhance their 
own. For centuries, engineers have developed technology 
to advance people’s capabilities and have used technology 
to lift the human condition, enrich human endeavours and 
raise the human spirit. But for all this success, the work is not 
yet complete. Many engineers feel and know that, in the race 
for technological advancement, too many people have been 
left behind. Many engineers see technological development 
simply happening for its own sake in a world where extreme 
profl igacy and extreme poverty can be contemporaries, with 
skyscrapers next to slums. Many engineers fear that their work 
is being motivated only by the drive for economic advance-
ment, which seems increasingly disconnected from the 
premise of the meeting of basic needs that once formed the 
very purpose of their profession.
Many engineers, given the apparent absence of alternatives, 
are increasingly fi nding their own ways to meet some of the 
greatest challenges the human race has ever faced.  Engineers 
Without Borders (EWB) groups are part of this movement, 
and in many ways they have become a movement themselves. 
Th ey are a reaction to the failure of many governments, engi-
neering companies and engineering institutions to mobilize 
and use technology and  infrastructure to fi ght poverty and 
suff ering around the world.
Introduction to  Engineers Without Borders
 Engineers Without Borders groups draw on the expertise of 
engineers to meet basic needs and provide water, food, shelter, 
 energy,  communications, transport,  education, training and 
healthcare – and indeed dignity – to people living in poverty. 
Th ey focus their work on the poorest nations and, in their own 
countries, have become voices of awareness, understanding 
and advocacy on the role of technology in international devel-
opment. Several EWB groups have become well-established 
international development organizations in their own right, 
gaining signifi cant support from the engineering community, 
engineering fi rms and other aid organizations. A few EWB 
organizations focus some of their work on humanitarian relief 
or on key environmental concerns and sustainability issues. 
Although most of the leading EWB organizations are in devel-
oped nations, there are – excitingly – a growing number of 
EWB groups in developing countries.
Th e name  Engineers Without Borders is an evocative and pow-
erful one, which has itself contributed to the growth of the 
movement. It refers to the concept of capabilities and develop-
ment as freedom, where barriers to development are removed 
and where people can take their own path out of poverty. It 
can also refer to the idea that the engineers are working in 
places ‘where there is no engineer’, in countries that lack suf-
fi cient domestic engineering capacity (which perhaps could 
be called ‘borders without engineers’) or where that capacity is 
being misdirected. Indeed, this is perhaps closer to the mean-
ing of ‘Without Borders’ as it is used by humanitarian and relief 
organizations such as Médecins Sans Frontières or Reporters 
Without Borders, where political boundaries are secondary to 
the humanitarian imperative or universal human rights. Other 
interpretations of the name include the idea of solidarity with 
others and it emphasizes that the work is international, chari-
table/voluntary and inter-disciplinary in nature (i.e. there is no 
‘Civil  Engineers Without Borders’ or ‘Electrical  Engineers With-
out Borders’). It is worth noting that most EWB groups do not 
limit participation only to engineers, though the work itself 
does mainly focus on technology. Some of the names used by 
EWB groups could translate more accurately into English as 
‘Engineering Without Borders’ or as ‘Engineers Without Fron-
tiers’, but the ideas behind these names are similar.
History of  Engineers Without Borders
Th e fi rst organization to carry the name  Engineers Without 
Borders started in France. Ingénieurs sans Frontières (ISF) was 
established in 1982 as an association for French international 
solidarity, created to provide technical assistance to develop-
ment projects in underprivileged communities in developing 
countries and to educate the engineering community on the 
problems in those areas. In the mid-1980s, ISF Belgium was 
established and it later merged with Ingénieurs Assistance 
International (established in the mid-1990s by a national civil 
engineering professional body) to form the ISF Belgium of 
today. Ingeniería Sin Fronteras was established in Spain in 1990 
and is now the largest EWB organization in the world. Th ese 
organizations were founded by students at their universities 
and later grew to form national federations, characteristic of 
many of the EWB organizations that followed.
 Working with local people 
to mix concrete for a bridge 
anchor in Kibera, Kenya.
©
 Jo
e 
M
ul
lig
an
, E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   159 14/09/10   15:34:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
160
Th en, after the millennium, a new wave of EWB organizations 
formed in countries including Denmark, Sweden, Canada, 
USA, UK,  Australia, Greece, Italy, Ecuador, India, Nepal, Ger-
many, Egypt and, later on, Kosovo, Mexico, Palestine, Portugal, 
Rwanda, South  Africa and many others. Several of these EWB 
groups were inspired by EWB organizations that were forming 
in other countries, for example EWB Canada helped EWB-UK 
to begin in 2001, and EWB-USA helped EWB India to begin in 
2005. Th ere are now about sixty countries or territories that 
have independent organizations or groups using the name 
‘ Engineers Without Borders’.
Surprisingly, many of these EWB organizations grew independ-
ently and have therefore adopted slightly diff erent approaches 
and characteristics as a result. Many of these EWB groups 
began as student groups at universities, which then went on to 
form a national body built on these local ‘branches’ or ‘chap-
ters’. Some national groups adopted the approach of a strong 
national organization whereas others adopted an approach 
of national dialogue and coordination with no strong centre 
(both approaches have been found to have their challenges). 
Also, a few EWB groups were set up by professional engineers, 
for example, EWB Greece was set up by a group of engineers 
who worked together after the Athens earthquake in 1999. 
It has undertaken major engineering projects, such as a dam 
in Ethiopia and a maternity home in Pakistan, that are much 
larger than projects by other EWB groups. Another example 
is EWB Denmark, which was established to work in  disaster 
areas, setting up a roster of experienced engineers who could 
be recruited by humanitarian agencies (similar to RedR see 
section 6.1.10). EWB Denmark has more recently started sup-
porting branches at universities.
Th e diff erent approaches taken by national EWB groups, and 
perhaps even when and whether an EWB group emerges 
in a country at all, seems to relate more to national culture 
rather than, say, geographic or economic considerations. At 
the international level, the problems of international relations 
between EWB groups can at times refl ect the problems of 
international relations between national governments, with 
stereotypes of national characteristics being played out in 
microcosm! Attempts at international associations (whether 
regional or global) of EWB groups have struggled to fi nd con-
sensus between the diversity of approaches employed. Th is is 
certainly not helped by the lack of resources and capacity for 
national EWB groups to represent themselves properly at the 
international level, despite the support and encouragement 
received from bodies such as UNESCO and others. It is clear 
that for every EWB group in every country the challenges of 
international associations are – quite correctly – of a lower pri-
ority than their own missions, projects and challenges. Th ere 
is little doubt however that over time, as the many new EWB 
groups that have emerged in the last decade grow and become 
more established, a fully representational international asso-
 A small-scale wind turbine 
in the Philippines provides 
power and job opportunities.
©
 D
re
w
 C
or
by
n,
 E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   160 14/09/10   15:34:31
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
161
ciation will almost certainly be formed that will live up to the 
‘Without Borders’ name.
EWB in the context of international development
‘No other issue suff ers such disparity between human impor-
tance and its political priority’ is how former UN Secretary 
General Kofi  Annan described the position of water and sani-
tation in public policy. Water and sanitation is arguably the 
most vital and most urgent area of attention in international 
development for engineers. EWB groups are very active in 
this area. Yet, in this, as in other areas, groups are discover-
ing a fundamental limitation: there is a disparity between the 
importance of engineering and its place in the priorities of the 
international development sector.
In the 1960s and 1970s, international development donors 
placed greatest emphasis on big  infrastructure projects. Th e 
mistakes made in such projects then led to a focus on small, 
intermediate technologies in the 1970s and 1980s. When the 
perception became that ‘ Africa is littered with wells and pumps 
that don’t work’, the focus in the 1980s and 1990s moved more 
to the social dimensions of technology. International develop-
ment thinking moved on to a ‘rights-based’ approach in the 
1990s, which led to a focus on the  Millennium Development 
Goals, good governance and international partnerships in the 
last ten years. Many of the managers and policy-makers in the 
international development sector today were educated at a 
time when engineering was ‘out of fashion’. Engineering and 
engineers have therefore been sidelined in many organizations 
and projects.
It is in this context that engineers began to establish their own 
international development organizations. EWB groups have 
been eff ective at alerting the engineering profession to the 
challenge of international development. More recently, several 
EWB groups are showing success at alerting the international 
development community to the importance of engineering 
once again. Th ere are early signs that EWB groups are beginning 
to infl uence how the rest of the international development sec-
tor thinks and works. Part of the problem has been the general 
lack of public understanding of what the engineer does, and 
what can be off ered by diff erent types of engineer. Understand-
ing continues to improve as EWB groups now engage with aid 
agencies. But a key problem has been the skill set of the engi-
neer themselves; they have been regarded as off ering technical 
skills only. EWB members who interact with aid agencies are 
demonstrating that a new generation of engineers is emerg-
ing – engineers who understand the social, political, economic 
and environmental dimensions of their work, who can engage 
in participatory processes and who design for capabilities (i.e. 
designing for what is to be achieved, rather than how it is 
achieved). Th e problems of, for example, aid agencies building 
schools without an engineer being involved, and the possible 
consequences of unsafe structures, will slowly be addressed as 
understanding and cooperation improve.
It is worth noting that each EWB group can take a diff erent 
approach to their development work. Th is is seen most sig-
nifi cantly, and not surprisingly, in the diff erent approaches of 
EWB groups in developed countries and those in developing 
countries. Th e common ground, however, is that each EWB 
group has established some way to address the problems of the 
capacity of communities to absorb engineering assistance. For 
example, EWB-USA projects partner with community organi-
zations over many years; EWB Spain and EWB Canada employ 
expatriate staff  in the countries where they work; and EWB 
 Australia works through local partner organizations identifi ed 
during country programme planning. By providing a forum for 
engineers to learn about international development, as well as 
by learning from their own mistakes, EWB groups are improv-
ing the way that international development is done overall, and 
there is huge potential for enhanced cooperation in the future.
EWB in the context of the engineering profession
EWB groups occupy a surprising space in the engineering pro-
fession. Th ey do not suff er from the same issues and challenges 
that face engineering. EWB groups are growing, and growing 
fast, attracting many young people and signifi cant (or even 
equal) proportions of women to their memberships. Many 
EWB members are engineering evangelists who are passionate 
about their profession and who become role models for their 
peers, their juniors and their elders; they are also able to com-
municate engineering very eff ectively to the public. Despite 
the huge number of engineering organizations, the institu-
tional frameworks that guide the engineering profession are 
not set up to respond adequately to multi-disciplinary issues 
or inter-disciplinary operations, let alone global challenges. For 
EWB groups, however, these challenges are their reason for 
being, and they are able to work in a modern, inter-disciplinary 
manner with ease.
EWB members often have a strong iconoclastic attitude, but 
fi nd welcoming and supportive homes in engineering profes-
sional institutions. Engineering institutions frequently look to 
EWB groups for their  energy and enthusiasm, and provide tre-
mendous support in terms of ‘voice’ and credibility in particu-
lar; they are able to off er strong platforms for advocacy inside 
and outside the engineering community. It is a very positive 
sign that traditional engineering institutions want to embrace 
EWB groups and their ideas. Yet, EWB groups must be careful 
that they do not become fi g leaves for broader change; most 
EWB groups would not need to exist if established engineering 
institutions were responding meaningfully – or indeed at all – 
to poverty and suff ering.
Whilst many countries report declines in their numbers of 
engineers, membership of EWB groups has grown very rapidly. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   161 14/09/10   15:34:32
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
162
Th is is of course partly because they are starting from a low 
base. Still, several EWB groups around the world have mem-
berships of well over 3,000 fee-paying members, which rep-
resent a good proportion of the total number of engineers in 
their countries. 
Women can face particular diffi  culties when working in engi-
neering. In EWB groups, however, gender issues in their own 
memberships rarely need to be considered; they eff ortlessly 
attract and retain many women engineers.  Engineers With-
out Borders UK, for example, estimates that about 45 per 
cent of its members are women, which is much higher than 
in most British university engineering classes and higher than 
the national fi gures for new professional engineer registrations 
(9.8 per cent were women in 2007). In 2009, all six of EWB-
UK’s main programme areas were led by women, whilst its 
nine support and community functions were led by a fair mix 
of men and women. Examples such as these are the norm for 
EWB groups.
International development and  poverty reduction offer a 
profound motivation for people to get involved and stay 
involved in engineering. Stories of engineers – of the engineer 
sat next to you in the offi  ce or sat next to you in the lecture 
hall – working on projects to provide water and lift people 
out of poverty are very powerful. Th ey clearly depict the true 
nature of engineering’s relationship with  society. Th ey dem-
onstrate that engineers make a diff erence, not by providing a 
cure but by providing a capability. In many ways, such stories 
show the human face of engineering. For children and young 
people, stories from young engineers about their projects in 
poor communities can touch hearts and minds in a way that 
the biggest bridge or the longest tunnel never can. Th ey off er 
people-sized engineering, where projects are at a scale that 
they can identify themselves with – projects that they can see 
themselves doing in the future.
Th e way that EWB groups organize their work is strikingly dif-
ferent to that of the conventional engineering profession. Th e 
engineering profession organizes its work around historic and 
intellectual divisions: civil engineering, mechanical engineer-
ing,  electrical engineering or structural engineering to name 
but a few. What does that mean to ‘real people’? How many 
non-engineers know what a ‘civil engineer’ does? How many 
non-engineers can explain the diff erence between an electri-
cian and an electrical engineer, or a mechanic and a mechanical 
engineer? EWB groups organize their work around the pur-
pose of their projects, around themes that mean something 
to people: water, sanitation, shelter,  energy, food, transport, 
 communications and so on. Most groups have not planned 
this specifi cally, but rather it just happened naturally and is 
unrelated to the type of engineering  education of the people 
involved. For this reason, EWB members are exceptionally 
good at working in a multi-disciplinary and inter-disciplinary 
manner. A wind turbine project might require a mechanical 
engineer, electrical engineer, structural engineer, aeronautical 
engineer, electronic engineer, civil engineer and materials engi-
neer to work together. Or it might be done by a member of 
 Engineers Without Borders.
EWB in the context of engineering  education
Th e changes in engineering  education over the past ten or 
fi fteen years have created the breeding ground for new EWB 
groups. As part of their degree courses, undergraduate engi-
neers now have to learn about sustainability,  ethics, manage-
ment, public speaking, basic economics, teamwork and even 
foreign languages. Many undergraduate engineers have the 
opportunity to take classes in other areas such as science, busi-
ness, architecture or even art. Modern engineering  education 
is responding to the demands of industry in the twenty-fi rst 
century. But engineering  education is not responding to the 
demands of people in the twenty-fi rst century. 
Global problems, and poverty in particular, are not given 
adequate attention. Th e technologies being taught in univer-
sities – steel and silicon, concrete and combustion – are the 
technologies that are causing global problems such as  climate 
change, and are taught without giving adequate attention to 
alternatives. Perhaps the people that engineering  education 
is responding to least eff ectively are the students themselves. 
Many young people take engineering at university because 
they want to make a diff erence, and to be able to do or to 
build something. But for the fi rst years of their courses, many 
students do little else but study mathematics. In this void, 
EWB groups have thrived. Th ey have off ered hands-on learn-
ing through practical training courses and real engineering 
projects in which students can play a key role. 
Members of  Engineers Without Borders groups are not sim-
ply the ‘hippies’ or the ‘bleeding hearts’ of the engineering 
community. Compassion is certainly a characteristic of EWB 
members, but so too is engineering rigour. EWB groups tend 
to attract the best and the brightest engineering students who, 
despite long hours volunteering, frequently achieve higher 
than average grades. Many of the young graduate engineers 
who receive professional awards for exceptional engineering 
work with their companies are EWB members, who volun-
teer in their spare time. EWB members are highly sought after 
when they graduate from university, particularly amongst 
leading engineering consultancies. Despite this evidence that 
EWB groups attract ‘hard-core’ engineers, there still remains 
a challenge to persuade many academics that ‘development 
engineering’ and  appropriate technologies are academically 
rigorous subjects and not ‘soft options’. Th is is a challenge 
when trying to introduce such topics to the  curriculum, but 
attitudes are changing and EWB groups are working hard in 
this area. For example, EWB Spain helped to establish an entire 
Master degree course entitled ‘Engineering for Development 
 Engineering can reduce the 
hard work of carrying water 
for many women and children.
©
 E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   162 14/09/10   15:34:32
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
163
Cooperation’ at the Open University of Catalonia in Barce-
lona – a course that the university has now taken on itself. Th e 
University of Colorado at Boulder has recently established the 
Mortenson Centre in Engineering for Developing Communi-
ties, with the founder of EWB-USA as its director.
EWB in the context of  society
It is interesting to refl ect on the growth spurt in the  Engineers 
Without Borders movement. Since the year 2000, more than 
fi fty EWB groups have been established. In many developed 
countries, EWB groups were set up by university engineering 
students who were perhaps infl uenced by fundamental shifts 
in their societies. Th is new generation of engineers grew up 
hearing about famine in Ethiopia, Live Aid, the hole in the 
Ozone Layer, acid rain, the Rio de Janeiro Earth summit, the 
Rwandan Genocide, global warming, the Jubilee Debt cam-
paign, the  Millennium Development Goals, the rise of Fair 
Trade,  climate change, the Indian Ocean Tsunami and the 
Make Poverty History campaign. Th ey started university at 
the start of a new millennium. Th ey never knew a world with-
out the Internet, fast and aff ordable international travel and 
mobile  communications. Th eir social networks spanned the 
globe. Th ey might well have travelled to diff erent continents 
and seen and experienced how diffi  cult cultures live. Th ey had, 
arguably, a much more global worldview than the generations 
of engineers who came before them, and they were very con-
cerned about global issues. Th eir new perspective demanded a 
new engineering expression, and many chose EWB.
With privatization and liberalization, engineering had become 
less focused on the public good and more focused on private 
profi t. Governments and engineering fi rms seemed not to be 
addressing  human development for all, and focused more 
on economic or commercial development. Aid agencies did 
not want ‘enthusiastic amateurs’ and – not recognizing the 
potential in this new generation – were slow to engage mean-
ingfully with university-level volunteers. So where did these 
young engineers turn to if they wanted to get involved in glo-
bal issues? Th ey chose EWB.
Graduate and young professional engineers wanted jobs that 
not only paid well but that were intellectually stimulating and 
personally fulfi lling as well. When they could not fi nd ways to 
help people as part of their day job, they turned increasingly to 
the voluntary sector and to EWB groups in particular. Where 
an EWB group did not exist, these professional engineers set 
one up. Certainly, voluntary groups cannot work on the scale 
of companies – the scale that is required to meaningfully meet 
global challenges. But, one project at a time, EWB members 
realized that they could make a diff erence. It seems bizarre that 
so many engineers put their hopes and dreams into such tiny 
organizations as EWB groups when, for most of their profes-
sional lives, they would work in large fi rms that have far more 
scope and capacity to drive change. But they chose EWB.
Conclusion
 Engineers Without Borders represents a new renaissance in 
the engineering community. With a global agenda and an 
appetite for change, EWB groups could not come at a better 
time. Th e present role of engineering in development policy 
seems to be of economic importance only, and that it is a key 
path of  innovation and therefore economic growth. Th e eco-
nomic imperative of engineering is sound, but international 
development eff orts – in good governance, transparency,  anti-
corruption, health treatments and primary  education – are 
frequently crippled because basic needs are not being met 
by engineers. What is needed is a new ‘development decade’ 
where a new generation of engineers who understand global 
issues and social dimensions, play an active role. Th e signs are 
that EWB groups are helping to bring about this change in 
under standing.
For the engineering profession, EWB groups off er ideas and 
concerns that are profoundly motivating for young engineers, 
professional engineers and school children alike. Th e idea of 
helping people, the joy of hands-on engineering, the ability 
to see clearly the diff erence that an engineer can make, the 
adventure of helping solving global problems... EWB groups 
embody the very purpose of the engineering profession and 
will, for many, come to defi ne the engineering profession.
Th e EWB movement was started by students in universities 
and, as such, has had a very close association with the prob-
lems and potential of engineering  education. As EWB groups 
begin to demonstrate the value of studying technology in 
development, perhaps in the future their role will change. 
Many countries suff er from an extreme shortage of engineers. 
 Bamboo wall reinforce-
ment reduces the risk of 
collapse in earthquakes and 
saves lives.
©
 St
ep
he
n 
Jo
ne
s, 
EW
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   163 14/09/10   15:34:32
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
164
Yet how is a country supposed to develop without engineers? 
Th is lack of capacity is arguably the single biggest barrier to 
development faced by many developing countries as it lies 
at the very root of how progress is made. EWB members are 
already role models for their peers and the next generation 
in their own countries, so perhaps by extension they will 
become more involved in engineering  education in the coun-
tries that need engineers the most – to help inspire more and 
more young people into engineering in the future and to help 
build a better world.
Young engineers are attracted to EWB groups as a means of 
tackling the global problems that they have heard about as 
they have grown up. A key decision remains, however, after 
graduation. As new graduate engineers and active EWB mem-
bers they face a dilemma: should they work for an engineering 
company and become ‘an engineer’ or should they work for 
a charity and practice engineering to help lift people out of 
poverty? Th is should be a false choice. It is no longer plausi-
ble for engineers working in huge companies to come to tiny 
organizations such as EWB groups to fi nd a way to ‘save the 
world’. Companies and governments will have to change their 
modus operandi and fi nd ways to fi ght poverty, or they risk 
losing leading engineering talent.
Finally, a key challenge for  Engineers Without Borders groups 
themselves remains. EWB groups and their members are fre-
quently described as having ‘huge potential’. Th eir challenge 
over the next decade is to realize that potential. Th ey need to 
change the game in international development, in the engi-
neering profession, in engineering  education and in  society 
at large. Th ey have had a good start, but more remains to be 
done.
 4.4.3 Engineers Against Poverty
Douglas Oakervee
Th e United Nations Conference on Environment and Devel-
opment held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992 marked a turning point 
in public expectations of the private sector. Companies had 
always contributed to development through promoting 
growth, creating jobs, supporting enterprise development, 
transferring technology and paying taxes, but participants at 
the Rio ‘Earth Summit’ recognized that ‘business as usual’ was 
a wholly inadequate response to the enormous global chal-
lenges that we faced. Business, it was agreed, could and should 
do more.
It was against this background that independent non-gov-
ernmental organization  Engineers Against Poverty (EAP) was 
established a few years later. Its name captures the desire 
amongst many in the profession to place science, engineer-
ing and technology at the forefront of eff orts to fi ght poverty 
and promote  sustainable development. Supported by the UK 
Department for International Development and some of the 
UK’s leading engineering services companies, we began to 
 Schoolchildren celebrate 
a new bridge in Soweto East, 
Kenya, avoiding the open 
sewer below.
©
 Jo
e 
M
ul
lig
an
, E
W
B-
U
K)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   164 14/09/10   15:34:33
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
165
build a programme of work aimed at delivering practical solu-
tions that would help transform the lives of poor people.
Building a new NGO from scratch is time consuming and dif-
fi cult. Forging relationships, establishing credibility and devel-
oping a coherent programme takes time and this has to be 
balanced against the understandable impatience of support-
ers to see tangible results. Ten years on and we have created 
a highly innovative programme of work across the extractive 
industries, public sector  infrastructure and engineering  educa-
tion, which is delivering a development impact beyond what 
would usually be expected of a small organization with mod-
est operating costs. We have also learned four key lessons that 
we believe serve as a template for mobilizing the engineering 
industry in the fi ght against global poverty.
Firstly, solutions are needed that can rapidly go to scale. 
Poverty is a tragedy in progress for the estimated 40,000 
people who die each day of poverty related illness. Aid and 
debt reduction are important in averting this tragedy, but 
extreme poverty can only be eliminated through sustain-
able economic growth and the creation of millions of decent 
jobs. Th e impact of corporate philanthropy is negligible. It is 
the enterprise, skills and core business activities of engineer-
ing services companies and their clients where there is most 
potential. Consider for example that oil and gas majors spend 
approximately US$500 through their supply chains for every 
US$1 spent on community investment. Innovative business 
models are needed that harness this economic power and the 
core competencies of industry to rapidly scale-up business 
solutions to poverty.
Secondly, whilst it inevitable that tensions will sometimes 
exist between business and  society, strategies for development 
must focus on their interdependence. In practice this means 
developing mechanisms that align the commercial drivers of 
companies with the development priorities of the countries 
where they work to create ‘shared value’. EAP’s work in the 
extractive industries for example, has shown that contractors 
who invest in developing suppliers from low-income 
communities secure cost effi  ciencies for themselves, whilst 
creating jobs and drawing local companies into the formal 
economy. Th e principle of creating shared value could form 
the basis for a new contract between business and  society.
Thirdly, for most companies, the successful alignment of 
commercial and social priorities and the creation of shared 
value on a large scale will require a fundamental reappraisal 
of their business systems and procedures. This includes, 
importantly, the incorporation of a social dimension into 
business development, risk management and supply chain 
development. Th e management of social issues cannot be 
delegated to the public affairs or corporate responsibility 
teams. Th ey are issues that go to the heart of the business 
model and challenge the conventional wisdom of corporate 
strategy. Partnerships with NGOs can be very effective in 
helping companies to think through these opportunities 
and identify the most appropriate development challenges 
for them to take on, and from which they can derive most 
commercial benefi t.
Finally, companies should position themselves to shape 
the environment needed for good governance and private 
sector development. Th ere are a growing number of exam-
ples of companies working together to tackle development 
 challenges that no single company can resolve alone. Th e 
UK Anti-Corruption Forum (UKACF) for example brings 
together many of the UK’s leading engineering services 
companies and professional bodies to develop industry led 
actions to fi ght corruption in the  infrastructure, construc-
tion and engineering sectors. It represents over 1,000 com-
panies and 300,000 professionals, and demonstrates how 
the engineering industry can organize itself to articulate an 
informed and responsible voice in governance debates. An 
international network of similar initiatives could provide a 
signifi cant boost to eff orts in fi ghting corruption in the con-
struction industry.
Th ese lessons and our practical experience provide us with 
an opportunity to provide high-level strategic advice to our 
partners. We are, for example, a key policy adviser to Price-
Waterhouse Coopers who run the Secretariat of the Construc-
tion Sector Transparency (CoST) initiative for the Department 
for International Development.19 We are also working with the 
UK Institution of Civil Engineers to modify procurement pro-
cedures in public sector  infrastructure.20 And we are collabor-
ating with engineering consultancy Arup to develop ASPIRE – a 
sophisticated software tool for maximizing the sustainability 
and poverty-reduction impact of investments in  infrastruc-
ture.21 Th is is how we achieve our developmental impact. We 
reduce our overheads to a bare minimum and focus on strate-
gic interventions with key partners in government and industry 
that deliver practical solutions.
It was recognized in the Rio ‘Earth Summit’ that the principal 
responsibility for eliminating poverty rests with government, 
but that business had an increasingly critical role to play. Our 
partnerships demonstrate how it can fulfi l this role and simul-
taneously strengthen its competitive position. Our efforts 
form part of a broader eff ort to mobilize engineering and tech-
nology to help build a more stable, civilized and prosperous 
global environment for all people.
19 See http://www.constructiontransparency.org
20 Wells, J. et al (2006) Modifying  infrastructure procurement to enhance  social develop-
ment, EAP & ICE, London.
21 For more information: http://www.inesweb.org
 Women carrying stones, India.
©
 E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   165 14/09/10   15:34:34
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
166
 4.4.4 Engineers for a Sustainable 
World
Regina Clewlow
 Engineers for a Sustainable World (ESW) is a non-profi t engi-
neering association committed to building a better future for 
all of the world’s people. Established in 2002, ESW has grown 
rapidly and now includes thousands of members across the 
globe and collegiate chapters at leading engineering institu-
tions. Founded by Regina Clewlow (then a student at Cornell 
University) and Krishna S. Athreya (then director of women 
and minority programmes at Cornell), ESW is attracting new 
and diverse populations into engineering and mobilizing them 
to develop practical and innovative solutions to address the 
world’s most critical challenges.
ESW’s vision is a world in which all people enjoy the basic 
resources to pursue healthy, productive lives, in harmony with 
each other and with our Earth. In pursuit of this vision, ESW 
mobilizes engineers through  education, training and practical 
action, building collaborative partnerships to meet the needs 
of current and future generations. 
ESW’s primary goals are to:
Stimulate and foster an increased and more diverse com- ■
munity of engineers.
Infuse sustainability into the practice and studies of every  ■
engineer.
A growing network
ESW collegiate chapters raise awareness in universities and 
local communities about critical global issues and the role of 
engineering and technological solutions. Th ey mobilize the 
engineering community to participate in broader commu-
nity events (such as Earth Day and World Environment Day) 
showcasing engineering solutions that are creating a sustain-
able future. ESW chapters also coordinate general outreach 
programmes designed to increase interaction between engi-
neering college students and school students, focused on the 
theme of sustainability.
Within the engineering community, ESW chapter programmes 
on campuses aim to increase engineers’ understanding of 
broader societal challenges, and organize them to take action. 
ESW chapters host speakers through lectures and seminars on 
topics such as  climate change and global poverty. Each year, 
ESW has an annual conference bringing together hundreds of 
engineering students, faculty, and industry professionals for a 
dialogue on global sustainability and the critical role of engi-
neering solutions. Across the United States, ESW chapters play 
an active role in ‘greening’ their campuses by initiating pro-
grammes to reduce  energy and water consumption in college 
dormitories and off -campus student housing, coordinating 
food waste composting from dining facilities, and convert-
ing university-based  transportation fl eets to alternative fuel 
sources. ESW chapters also play a key role in initiating courses 
through which students gain hands-on, real-world engineering 
experience on how to increase access to clean water, sanitation 
and  energy in the world’s poorest nations.
Educating the next generation of engineers
Since its inception, ESW has focused on initiating and dissemi-
nating transformative engineering  curricula that integrates 
sustainability and  sustainable development. More than twenty 
sustainable engineering courses have been started by ESW 
faculty and student members at leading engineering institu-
tions. In addition, ESW collegiate chapters are now beginning 
to establish sustainable engineering certifi cates and minor 
and Master degree programmes at their institutions. However, 
such courses are still not seen as ‘mainstream’, so ESW con-
tinues to focus on developing, improving and disseminating 
educational materials in order to promote transformational 
change in the engineering community.
With the support UNESCO and the National Science Founda-
tion, ESW has hosted national and international workshops on 
engineering  education for  sustainable development. In 2005, 
ESW hosted a workshop held in conjunction with its Annual 
Conference at UT Austin, and in 2006, ESW hosted a workshop 
at UNESCO headquarters in Paris, France. Both events aimed to 
facilitate a global dialogue, to exchange experiences and best 
practices, and to mobilize engineers to address lack of access to 
clean water, sanitation and  energy in developing nations.
In February 2007, ESW co-hosted a National Science Foun-
dation (NSF) planning workshop to support and encourage 
academic institutions to build eff ective multidisciplinary pro-
grams that integrate business, engineering and sustainability. 
As the lead engineering institution on the workshop plan-
ning committee, ESW identifi ed and reported key sustain-
ability-oriented  research and educational initiatives within 
engineering.
Although through ESW and its collegiate chapters signifi cant 
progress to integrate sustainability and  sustainable develop-
ment into engineering  curricula has been made, these pro-
grams have not made it into the mainstream of engineering 
 education. ESW continues to focus on developing, improv-
ing and disseminating such educational materials in order to 
facilitate transformational change in the engineering com-
munity.
Meeting the needs of the world’s poorest billion
Since the organization was founded, ESW has coordinated 
the Summer Engineering Experience in Development (SEED) 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   166 14/09/10   15:34:34
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
167
Program. Th rough the SEED Program, teams of students and 
professionals spend between two and three months working 
on projects that increase access to technology for the world’s 
poorest.
An important characteristic of ESW SEED projects is the collab-
oration with local technical partner organizations to facilitate 
knowledge transfer, development of locally-appropriate solu-
tions, and project sustainability. ESW seeks locally-appropriate 
solutions and ensures project sustainability – transcending 
failed models of international development where engineering 
projects typically relied on imported materials and expertise 
– by partnering with local agencies that have basic technical 
knowledge.
ESW’s SEED Program has resulted in life-changing experiences 
for its participants. More than half of the volunteers who have 
participated in ESW’s SEED program abroad describe the expe-
rience as overwhelmingly positive, with comments such as ‘I felt 
for the fi rst time that I had applied myself completely to solving 
a real world problem. I was thrilled to apply my engineering 
 education to the immediate improvement of living  standards’ 
and ‘this was the best experience of my life, not only personally 
but academically’ and ‘this experience will no doubt infl uence 
my living and working decisions for the rest of my life.’
Students who participate in SEED return to their colleges with 
a renewed sense of passion and  energy for the engineering 
profession, and their career destinations after university testify 
to this.
 Engineering studies, science and technology 4.5 
and public policy
Engineering studies4.5.1 
Gary Lee Downey
What has it meant to be an engineer working in international 
development, across diff erent territories, at diff erent periods 
in time, and in association with diff erent kinds of organiza-
tions? How have visions of development and progress contrib-
uted to the formation of engineers? How have engineers come 
to see themselves as engaged in projects of societal service 
that extend beyond their countries into territories and com-
munities often alien to them? Who has tended to make such 
moves and who has not? Where and for whom have engineers 
worked? What has that work comprised, and who has ben-
efi ted? How, in particular, have engineers come to claim juris-
diction over technological developments, and how have these 
claims varied across time and territory?
At the same time, what has led engineers to be relatively invis-
ible in activities of international development compared with 
scientists and economists, given that the numbers of participat-
ing engineers far exceed the numbers from both other groups? 
When have engineers achieved great visibility in development 
projects, and under what conditions? What are likely future tra-
jectories for engineering  education and engineering work, both 
within and beyond projects of development and progress?
Th ese are the types of questions related to development that 
are of interest to researchers in Engineering Studies. Asking 
these questions is important because they call attention to the 
dimensions of international development work that extend 
beyond technical problem-solving. Engineers involved in 
development projects must always deal with both the techni-
cal and non-technical dimensions of such work. Yet the focus 
on technical problem-solving in engineering  education may 
not prepare them to do so well. Indeed, it may actively dis-
suade engineers from considering anything beyond technical 
problem-solving to be important. 
Research and teaching in  engineering studies can help. Its key 
contribution to engineers involved in international develop-
ment is to help them see and understand that technical prob-
lem-solving always has non-technical dimensions. It matters, 
for example, who is involved in decision-making, as well as 
who benefi ts from the engineers’ contributions to develop-
ment work, or who does not. It also matters how engineers 
carry their forms of knowledge with them into engagements 
with co-workers, including both engineers and non-engineers, 
within and beyond project organizations. 
Engineering studies is a diverse, interdisciplinary arena of 
scholarly  research and teaching built around a central ques-
tion: What are the relationships among the technical and the 
non-technical dimensions of engineering practices, and how 
have these relationships evolved over time? Addressing and 
responding to this question can sometimes involve research-
ers as critical participants in the practices they study, includ-
ing, for example, engineering formation, engineering work, 
engineering design, equity in engineering (gender, racial, eth-
nic, class, geopolitical), and engineering service to  society.
Th e lead organization for  engineering studies  research and 
teaching is the International Network for Engineering Stud-
ies (INES).22 INES was formed in Paris in 2004. Its mission is 
threefold:
22 Go to: http://www.inesweb.org
 Tents housing schools, 
Kashmir.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
/ F
. P
in
zo
n 
G
il
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   167 14/09/10   15:34:34
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
168
To advance 1.  research and teaching in historical, social, 
cultural, political, philosophical, rhetorical, and organiza-
tional studies of engineers and engineering.
To help build and serve diverse communities of research-2. 
ers interested in  engineering studies.
To link scholarly work in 3.  engineering studies to broader 
discussions and debates about engineering  education, 
 research, practice, policy, and representation.
Th e lead  research journal in the fi eld is Engineering Studies: 
Journal of the International Network for Engineering Studies.23 
published three times yearly.
Researchers and teachers in  engineering studies are some-
times engineers with advanced degrees in the social sciences 
and humanities. Sometimes they are social researchers and 
teachers interested in engineering  education and practice. 
Sometimes they are practicing engineers interested in the 
non-technical dimensions of engineering work. Th e work of 
 engineering studies researchers can be found most frequently 
at the annual meetings and publications of the Society for 
Social Studies of Science, Society for History of Technology, 
and other outlets for interdisciplinary science and technology 
studies. 
One reason the practices of engineers are important to study is 
because they constitute examples of knowledge put in  service 
to  society. Studying how, when, where, and for whom engi-
neers serve is crucial to understanding how engineering work 
has contributed to the emergence of key dimensions of con-
temporary life. To what extent, for example, has engineering 
 education and work been focused on developing, maintaining, 
and extending the territorial boundaries of countries? Further-
more, studying the formation, everyday work, and career tra-
jectories of engineers in the context of broader societal visions 
and initiatives off ers insights into how evolving forms of engi-
neering knowledge have become linked to varying forms of 
service. Th e participation of engineers in development work 
constitutes a case in point.
Over the past half-century, the participation of engineers 
in international development has expanded dramatically.24 
Engineers have participated in the full range of development 
activities, including large  infrastructure development and 
small-scale community development, state-led develop-
ment and non-governmental humanitarian work, and, most 
recently, emergent forms of  sustainable development. How 
have engineering practices working within visions of devel-
23 Go to: http://www.informaworld.com/engineeringstudies
24 For an overview, see Lucena, Juan C. and Jen Schneider, 2008, Engineers, Development, 
and Engineering Education: From National to Sustainable Community Development, 
European Journal of Engineering Education. Vol. 33, No.3 June 2008, pp. 247–257.
opment contributed to transformations in communities, 
societies, and landscapes? What are the implications of such 
transformations? To what extent, for example, has engineering 
development work achieved development?
Publication of this volume as the fi rst ever international engi-
neering report is stark testimony of the fact that millions of 
engineers working in the world today serve in relative obscu-
rity. Th is is true not only for arenas of international develop-
ment but for all areas of engineering work. Science has long 
been understood in popular thinking as the key site of knowl-
edge creation, with technology the product of its application. 
In this way of thinking, engineers have been located down-
stream of scientists, between science and technology. Engi-
neering is the product of applied science.
In the case of development work, engineers have often 
appeared to be mere  technicians of larger intellectual and soci-
etal projects imagined and run by others. Th e relative obscu-
rity of engineers is especially pronounced as political leaders 
have often defi ned the goals of development projects while 
scientists have gained responsibility for defi ning their means 
and economists their metrics, leaving engineers to imple-
ment what others have conceived. Th e absence of engineers 
is striking, for example, at the Science and Development Net-
work.25 One of the largest online resources on development 
work, the Network ‘aims to provide reliable and authoritative 
information about science and technology for the developing 
world.’ Engineering, although a key dimension of every topic 
covered by the network, is rarely discernible. Th e relative invis-
ibility of engineering in development vis-à-vis science perhaps 
reached a new low in 2007 when a science magazine editorial 
announced that, in October 2007, ‘more than 200 science jour-
nals throughout the world will simultaneously publish papers 
on global poverty and  human development—a collaborative 
eff ort to increase awareness, interest, and  research about these 
important issues of our time.’26 Th e editorial did not mention 
engineers or engineering. No such eff ort has been attempted 
by engineering publications. 
Yet engineering work is not captured by the image of applied 
science. Engineers make only selective use of fi ndings from the 
so-called basic sciences. Th e engineering sciences diff er from 
the basic sciences by actively seeking demonstrable gain. Once 
one begins to think about how engineers use the sciences 
along with other tools, it no longer makes sense to devalue 
or ignore the actions and agencies of engineers, not only in 
development work but also technological developments in 
general. 
25 For more information: http://www.scidev.net
26 Borlaug, Norman E. 2007.Feeding a Hungry World, Science, Vol. 318, No. 5849, pp. 359.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   168 14/09/10   15:34:34
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
169
Furthermore, an increasing number of academic fi elds are 
now claiming jurisdiction over technological developments. 
Consider, for example, all the scientifi c fi elds involved in water 
treatment. Yet few scientifi c fi elds frame their contributions 
explicitly within larger projects of service to  society, as engi-
neers have long done. Engineers are playing crucial roles, yet 
these are frequently hidden.
Judgements about the value of specifi c engineering projects 
to the welfare of diverse stakeholders or the health of ecosys-
tems span a broad spectrum. Confl ict and disagreement are 
perhaps more the rule than the exception. Precisely for this 
reason, it is both important and revealing to investigate the 
conditions of service under which engineers have contributed 
to development visions and projects in the past, are contrib-
uting in the present, and will likely contribute in the future. 
Have engineers contributed to their own relative obscurity, for 
example, when they attempt to enforce boundaries between 
the technical and non-technical dimensions of the problems 
they encounter, claiming exclusive jurisdiction over the former 
while leaving the latter to others? To what extent have engi-
neers understood their service as blind technical support that 
assigns larger societal and political responsibilities to others? 
At the same time, what have been the specifi c circumstances 
and conditions through which engineers have successfully 
achieved great visibility in development work? How have such 
people understood the connections, or tensions, between the 
technical and non-technical dimensions of their identities? 
Examining the intellectual and social contents of engineering 
service as well as the concrete conditions under which engi-
neers have actually worked can also provide crucial insights 
into how development projects have emerged, including how 
and why particular forms of engineering design, analysis, and 
construction have succeeded or failed in specifi c cases, and 
from whose points of view. It can be worthwhile, for example, 
to examine specifi c eff orts such as those by the 1960s group 
Volunteers in Technical Assistance (VITA). In what ways and 
to what extent might VITA engineers have brought to inter-
national development efforts specific expectations drawn 
from their  education in new science-based  curricula and/or 
employment in newly emerging defense industries? 27
Engineering studies researchers tend to ask diffi  cult historical, 
philosophical, social, cultural, political, rhetorical and organi-
zational questions. Consider, for example, the construction of 
a hydroelectric dam, a typical project in the early history of 
development. Engineering studies researchers are interested 
27 Pursell, Carroll. 2001. Appropriate Technology, Modernity and U.S. Foreign Aid In: 
Proceedings of the XXIst International Congress of History of Science, Mexico City,
7–14 July, pp. 175–187.
 Hoover Dam, USA.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   169 14/09/10   15:34:34
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
170
in the specific historical convergences that brought engi-
neers together with other practitioners and stakeholders and 
put their various forms of knowledge into contact with one 
another. How did these projects emerge and what contributed 
to their broader signifi cance? Who had stakes in their devel-
opment and outcomes? What were the outcomes, and for 
whom? 
It makes a diff erence to the status of engineering work that 
many hydroelectric dams in the United States were built dur-
ing the New Deal as means to revitalize economic growth and 
employment while many hydroelectric dams in what has been 
called the ‘developing world’ were built during the geopoliti-
cal competitions of the Cold War. In the fi rst case, the focus 
was on using engineers within the home country to facilitate 
recovery from the Depression, positioning the engineers as 
agents of collective welfare, sometimes even granting them 
heroic status (e.g. Hoover Dam).28 In the second, the project 
was often an explicit negotiation between political and eco-
nomic leaders in two different countries, one agreeing to 
accept technological assistance in exchange for political and 
economic commitments, and the other using engineering to 
extend and maintain political and economic infl uence through 
assistance. In this latter case, the meaning of engineering work 
was frequently more ambiguous, depending upon who was 
making the judgement. Yet even in the fi rst case, the domi-
nant accounts of collective benefi t and heroic achievement 
do not take account of the perspectives of those for whom 
hydroelectric power counted as a loss rather than a gain. It is 
probably safe to say no development project exists in which 
every stakeholder wins or fi nds their interests and identities 
affi  rmed. For those who do not benefi t or who contest its 
larger societal missions, the image of development can be a 
distinctly negative one.
Another type of question is philosophical. How do engineers 
involved in development projects define and understand 
the engineering content of their work, whether explicitly or 
implicitly? And how and why does that matter? For example, 
the achievement of eff ective low-cost, low-tech solutions for 
the removal of arsenic – a more recent type of development 
project – may be the product of engineers actively exchanging 
knowledge with members of local communities, non-govern-
mental organizations, and other fi elds of technical expertise, 
e.g. chemistry. Might engineers who are trained to see them-
selves primarily as technical problem solvers fi nd themselves 
at a disadvantage in eff ectively engaging groups who under-
stand and defi ne problems diff erently than they do? Might 
they be reluctant, if not actively resistant, to critically engaging 
the larger contexts within which they undertake development 
work? Would it make a diff erence if engineers emerged from 
degree programs and other mechanisms of formation expect-
28 Billington, David P. 2006. Big Dams of the New Deal Era: a confl uence of engineering and 
politics. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press.
ing to work with people who defi ne problems diff erently than 
they do, including both engineers and non-engineers? Would 
it make a diff erence if they emerged with a commitment to 
engage in collaborative activities of problem defi nition and 
solution?29 
Social, cultural, and political questions about engineers and 
engineering often blend together, with diff erent researchers 
calling attention to distinct dimensions. One common interest 
is in engineering identities, i.e. how participating in engineer-
ing projects contributes to reorganizing and restructuring the 
identities of engineers. Continuing our examples, one might 
ask: how did construction of the Aswan High Dam contribute 
to furthering or transforming the identities of both Soviet and 
Egyptian engineers? Did the Soviet engineers understand their 
work as action in the service of socialism, sharpening a focus 
on successful completion of the dam itself? Did completion 
of the dam enhance a sense of nationalism among Egyptian 
engineers, stimulating further interest in engineers and engi-
neering  education across Egypt?30 Or for engineers involved in 
the El Cajón Dam in Honduras, how might actively engaging 
members of local communities and possibly selecting Euro-
pean components and expertise have aff ected the standing 
and career aspirations of participating Honduran engineers? 
To what extent did they understand themselves in relation 
to other engineers, other technical experts, and members of 
the local communities they were developing their technol-
ogy to serve?31 In general,  engineering studies researchers are 
interested both in what is included in development projects 
and what is left out, in whose perspectives gain authority and 
whose do not, and in what is ultimately emphasized and what 
remains relatively hidden. 
In coming years, a key reason for the relative invisibility of 
engineers, their location and work as technical mediators, 
could become a crucial site for the examination of engineer-
ing work.32 Th e work of mediation between science and tech-
nology has long been dismissed as a relatively unimportant 
29 For accounts of two educational eff orts in this direction, see Downey, Gary Lee, Juan C. 
Lucena, Barbara M. Moskal, Th omas Bigley, Chris Hays, Brent K. Jesiek, Liam Kelly, Jane 
L. Lehr, Jonson Miller, Amy Nichols-Belo, Sharon Ruff , and Rosamond Parkhurst. 2006. 
Th e Globally Competent Engineer: Working Eff ectively with People Who Defi ne Prob-
lems Diff erently, Journal of Engineering Education, Vol. 95, No. 2, pp.107–122; Downey, 
Gary Lee. 2008. Th e Engineering Cultures Syllabus as Formation Narrative: Conceptu-
alising and Scaling Up Problem Defi nition in Engineering Education. University of St. 
Th omas Law Journal (special symposium issue on professional identity in law, medi-
cine, and engineering) Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 101–1130; and Schneider, Jen, Jon A. Leydens, 
Juan C. Lucena. 2008. Where is ‘Community’?: Engineering Education and Sustainable 
Community Development,” European Journal of Engineering Education, Vol.33, No.3, 
pp. 307–319.
30 Moore, Clement Henry. 1994. Images of Development: Egyptian Engineers in Search of 
Industry. Cairo: Th e American University of Cairo Press.
31 Jackson, Jeff ery. 2007. Th e Globalizers: Development Workers in Action. Baltimore: John 
Hopkins University Press.
32 Downey, Gary Lee. 2005. Keynote Address: Are Engineers Losing Control of Technol-
ogy? From ‘Problem Solving’ to ‘Problem Defi nition and Solution’ in Engineering Edu-
cation, Chemical Engineering Research and Design, Vol. 83. No.A8, pp.1–12.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   170 14/09/10   15:34:35
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
171
process of diff usion or circulation. But if mediation includes 
translation from isolated worlds of researchers into terms 
and means of implementation that must fi t the conditions of 
aff ected communities and lives of diverse stakeholders, such 
work is a crucial site of creative contribution. In recent years, 
engineers engaged in sustainable community development 
have found themselves mediating the perspectives and forms 
of knowledge of local communities, municipal governments, 
national government agencies, and international organiza-
tions. Is such work external to engineering practice or an inte-
gral component?
Engineering Studies researchers thus call direct attention to the 
existence and presence of engineers, as well as to the technical 
and non-technical contents of engineering work. Th ey seek 
to increase the visible presence of engineers and engineering 
work and to contribute to improving the abilities of engineers 
to both serve and critically analyse the projects they engage. 
Built into engineering knowledge and engineering work is a 
sense of altruism that has received relatively little critical 
analysis or attention. Preserving the work of putting engineer-
ing knowledge into service, making more visible what is both 
included and excluded from that service work, and enhancing 
the extent to which engineering service benefi ts widely dis-
tributed populations, including those at low-income levels, 
all depends upon both understanding and critically engaging 
what engineering is, who engineers are, and what engineers do. 
Engineering studies researchers aspire to such contributions, in 
order both to understand and to help.
Acknowledgements
Th e authors thank Saul Hafon, Olga Pierrakos and Matthew 
Wisnioski for their helpful comments on earlier drafts. Gary 
Downey acknowledges support from the U.S. National Science 
Foundation through Grant #EEC-0632839: Engineering Leader-
ship through Problem Defi nition and Solution. Juan Lucena 
acknowledges support from the U.S. National Science Foun-
dation through Grant # EEC-0529777: Enhancing Engineering 
Responsibility with Humanitarian Ethics: Th eory and Practice 
of Humanitarian Ethics in Graduate Engineering Education. 
Engineering, 4.5.2  science and 
technology policy
Tony Marjoram
Introduction
Engineering and technology policy consists of background 
information, discussions and debates, policy papers, plans, 
regulatory frameworks, legislation and laws underpinning 
actions, funding prioritization and decision-making of govern-
ment, governmental entities and agencies, non-governmental 
organizations and the private sector. Policy perspectives are 
particularly represented and refl ected in legislation and budg-
etary priorities. Engineering and technology policy includes 
the process relating to the need for, development of and deci-
sions relating to policy issues being considered and imple-
mented. Th is process includes various power interests, actors 
and lobbies in government, industry and the private sector, 
professional organizations, universities and academia; policy 
 research, institutes, journals and reports are an important input 
into the policy process, particularly in developed countries. 
Various models of decision-making may be used to analyse 
policy issues and formation, these include rational-, political- 
and organizational-actor models, although one person making 
an infl uential presentation to a relevant government minister 
can also make a diff erence – for example, to make reference 
to engineering in a national Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper. 
Engineers can make a diff erence at the personal, political and 
policy levels, and need to develop and share skills and experi-
ence in these areas.
Policies include political, managerial, fi nancial, and administra-
tive guidelines for action to achieve general or specifi c goals in 
the public and private sectors, at institutional, divisional and 
personal levels. Policies may be broadly distributive (e.g. public 
welfare,  education) or constituent (executive or legislative), 
and more specifi cally regulatory or sectoral; most policies, like 
development plans, are sectoral in nature. Policy is usually pro-
duced as part of a ‘policy cycle’, which includes the following 
phases and processes: 
Issue presentation, identification of scope, applicability,  ■
responsibilities.
Policy analysis, consultation, dialogue. ■
Policy formulation, coordination, instrument development. ■
Policy decision, adoption. ■
Policy implementation. ■
Policy monitoring, evaluation, review, reformulation. ■
While policies are goal-oriented, there may be policy ‘inter-
ference’ and counterintuitive, unexpected and unintended 
eff ects and impacts, hence the need for policy coherence, 
review and possible reformulation. Governments may have 
policies to promote  renewable  energy for example, and at 
the same time have high tax/import duties on solar panels. 
At the organizational level, executive decisions may similarly 
promote  renewable  energy but make cuts in the engineer-
ing programmes necessary to support such activities. Poli-
cies and policy frameworks are usually explicit, in the form of 
papers, instruments and processes, but may also be implicit; 
the absence of policy statements does not infer the absence of 
Acknowledg ments
The authors thank Saul Hafon, Olga Pierrakos and Matthew 
Wisnioski for their helpful comments on earlier drafts. Gary Downey 
acknowledges support from the U.S. National Science Foundation 
through Grant #EEC-0632839: Engineering Leadership through Problem 
Definiti n and S lution. Juan Luce a acknowledges support from 
the U.S. National Science Foundation through Grant # EEC-0529777: 
Enhancing Engineering Responsibility with Humanitarian Ethics: 
Th eory and Practice of Humanitarian Ethics in Graduate Engineering 
Education. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   171 14/09/10   15:34:35
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
172
policy preferences, as illustrated by the discussion of the linear 
model of  innovation and the basic sciences below. And while 
it is important to get engineering issues into policy documents 
and to have policies for engineering in terms of  education, 
capacity-building and applications, such as  poverty reduction, 
these policy statements then have to be implemented rather 
than left on bookshelves.
Policies and policy statements usually include reference to 
background, defi nitions, purpose, reason for the policy and 
intended results, scope and applicability, identification of 
policy actors, their roles and responsibilities, duration and 
modes of implementation, monitoring and response. Poli-
cies may appear as presidential orders and decrees, executive 
statements, or more often as ‘white papers’, which may follow 
the production of a ‘green paper’ for discussion and consulta-
tion. Policies need to be dynamic, monitoring results to see if 
intended outcome are being achieved and changing if neces-
sary.  
Engineering policy is mainly a sectoral policy, distinct from 
but part of the larger context of science or  science and tech-
nology policy, although this may often be overlooked (as is 
engineering as part of the broader domain of science). At the 
same time, engineering policy, similar to science policy, is also 
part of other sectoral and broader categories such as  educa-
tion,  research, defence, international development, industry, 
human resource and  infrastructure policy, all of which relate 
importantly to engineering, as an underpinning, enabling 
component of the knowledge economy. Th is present discus-
sion will mainly focus on engineering policy as part of  science 
and technology policy, which is where it is mostly mentioned, 
with reference to broader policy contexts.
Background and history 
Although there was preceding interest, the focus of attention 
on science policy and planning increased, particularly in the 
later 1940s and 1950s after the Second World War. Th e role 
of science and knowledge applications in the war – as in wars 
past – was emphatically apparent in such areas as electron-
ics, materials and nuclear science, and also in new methods of 
design, manufacture and production, for example operations 
 research, which later became systems analysis and then man-
agement science. Post-war reconstruction in  Europe was based 
on industrial development and the Marshall Plan coordinated 
by the Organisation for European Economic Co-operation, 
which later became the Organisation for Economic Co-oper-
ation and Development (OECD ) and has retained a focus on 
science-based industrial modernization and, subsequently, 
 innovation. Interest in science, technology, industrialization 
and development was also refl ected in the establishment of 
UNESCO in 1946 and UNIDO in 1966. Th e interest in  science 
and technology policy and planning was spurred by the devel-
oping Cold War and hi-tech space race into the 1980s. Into 
the 1980s interest in smaller government, the free-market and 
structural adjustment also increased however, and with it a 
decline in state-supported S&T policy. Interest in S&T policy 
developed into the 1990s and 2000s with an increasing focus 
on  innovation. Science and technology policies have tended to 
be descriptive rather than prescriptive.
Refl ecting governmental interest, departments of science and 
technology studies and policy were established in the 1960s 
at several universities around the world, especially in the UK 
and US, at the same time as increasing interest in business 
schools and MBAs. Most focused on science and technology 
studies, policy and planning, with little reference to engineer-
ing. While  science and technology policy received a boost with 
this interest and support, the study of engineering and engi-
neering policy remained a rather neglected area of interest and 
emphasis, for example, it took until 2004 for the International 
Network of Engineering Studies (INES) to be founded at a con-
ference in Paris (for INES see section 4.5.1). Why this should be 
so is discussed elsewhere, and refl ects the general public and 
policy awareness and perception of engineering. Th ere are of 
course exceptions refl ecting common usage; there are several 
university departments focused on science, engineering and 
technology policy in the US. In the UK the Policy Research 
in Engineering, Science and Technology (PREST) centre was 
established at the University of Manchester in 1977 in the 
Department of Science and Technology Policy, formerly the 
Department of Liberal Studies in Science established in 1966. 
In 2007 PREST merged with the Centre Research in Innova-
tion and Competition and became the Manchester Institute 
of Innovation Research (MIoIR). 
One of the reasons that  science and technology policy has a 
focus on basic science rather than engineering is that it devel-
oped partly at the junction of public policy and  research pol-
icy. Research policy developed in the UK from the so-called 
1904 ‘Haldane Principle’; that decisions regarding the alloca-
tion of  research funds should be made by researchers rather 
than politicians. R. B. Haldane later chaired a committee that 
became the University Grants Committee, then the Higher 
Education Funding Council. In 1918 the Haldane Report rec-
ommended that government-supported  research be divided 
into specifi c departmental  research, and more general scien-
tifi c  research administered by autonomous Research Councils. 
Th e ‘Haldane Principle’ regarding the political independence 
of  research funding became a touchstone of  research policy 
around the world and critique, for example J. D. Bernal argued 
in Th e Social Function of Science in 1939 that scientifi c  research 
should be for the social good. In 1971, Solly Zuckerman (UK 
Chief Scientifi c Advisor) criticized the artifi cial separation of 
basic and applied sciences refl ected in the Haldane Principle 
and the undue emphasis on basic science. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   172 14/09/10   15:34:35
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
173
Another reason for the emphasis on science and  research, 
rather than engineering and technology in science policy, 
relates to the fact that, in classical political science and eco-
nomics, technology is regarded as residual to the main three 
factors of production: land, labour and capital. Science policy 
has been based particularly on the so-called ‘linear model’ of 
 innovation; that  research in the basic sciences leads, through 
applied  research and development in engineering, to tech-
nological application,  innovation and diff usion. As discussed 
elsewhere in this Report, this model is of unclear origin but 
was promoted in Science: the Endless Frontier, one of the fi rst 
and most enduring manifestos for scientifi c  research pub-
lished in 1945 by Vannevar Bush, an electrical engineer who 
helped develop the atomic bomb and was responsible for the 
Man hattan Project. Th is linear thinking was reinforced by the 
work of Th omas Kuhn on the structure of scientifi c revolu-
tions. While this conceptualization has endured with scien-
tists and policy-makers on grounds of simplicity and funding 
success, many  science and technology policy specialists regard 
the  ‘linear model’ as descriptively inaccurate and normatively 
undesirable, partly because many  innovations were neither 
based on nor the result of basic science  research. 
Many  innovations in fact derive from engineers and engineer-
ing, and it is to the detriment of engineering that this ‘appliance 
of science’ model persists, when there is an awareness of the 
descriptive inaccuracies of the linear model and the fact that 
‘rocket science’ is more about engineering than science. Th e 
model is normatively undesirable with regard to engineering 
because the word ‘engineering’ does not usually feature in dis-
cussions on ‘science and technology’ policy in many countries 
(the United States is an interesting exception, where the term 
‘science and engineering’ is more commonly used). Th e notion 
that science leads to technology is further reinforced by the 
fact that the study of science and technology and associated 
policy is relatively recent, and the implicit assumption that the 
development of science is non-problematic, with  little critical 
review of how science is created, by who, and how. Th e study 
of engineering is even more recent, and even more urgent.
Science and technology policy and international 
development
Interest in  science and technology policy and international 
development began towards the end of the colonial period 
in the 1960s, along with the growth of institutions of higher 
 education in developing countries, and the take-off  of  sci-
ence and technology policy and development studies itself. 
Th is was indicated by the establishment of the  Science Policy 
Research Unit (SPRU) and the Institute for Development Stud-
ies (IDS) at the University of Sussex in the UK in 1966, and the 
subsequent publication of Th e Sussex Manifesto: Science and 
Technology to Developing Countries during the Second Develop-
ment Decade in 1970. One of the pioneers of science and tech-
nology for development was Charles Cooper who joined SPRU 
and IDS in 1969 to build the new programme and produced 
the seminal Science, technology and development: the political 
economy of technical advance in underdeveloped countries in 
1973 (Cooper, 1973),33 and was later the founding director of 
UN University Institute for New Technologies at Maastricht 
from 1990 to 2000.
In 1963, UNESCO began to organize of a series of Regional 
Ministerial Conferences on the Application of Science and 
Technology (CAST) to Development and Conferences of 
Ministers of European Member States responsible for  Sci-
ence Policy (MINESPOLs). Th e fi rst to be held was CASTALA 
for Latin America, held in Santiago de Chile in 1965, followed 
by CASTAsia in New Delhi in 1968, MINESPOL in Paris in 
1970, CASTAfrica in Dakar in 1974 and CASTArab in Rabat in 
1976. A second round of conferences took place from 1978, 
with MINESPOL II in Belgrade in 1978, CASTAsia II in Manila 
in 1982, CASTALAC II in BrasÌlia in 1985 and CASTAfrica II in 
Arusha in 1987.
It was generally considered that the fi rst round of CAST con-
ferences from 1965–1976 addressed the goal of raising aware-
ness of the importance of national eff orts to apply science and 
technology to social and  economic development, resulting in 
the strengthening and development of national science and 
technology policies and planning. 
Th e second round of CAST conferences and two MINESPOL 
conferences appear to have had less tangible results in terms 
of national S&T activities. It was apparent that such meet-
ings benefi t from preparation, focus on needs, opportunities 
and practical actions and implementation at the national 
level (Mullin, J., IDRC, 1987).34 Th is may relate to the fact that 
the two rounds of CAST conferences were interposed by 
the United Nations Conference on Science and Technology 
for Development (UNCSTD), held in Vienna in 1979, which 
concluded in compromise rather than confrontation after 
the threat of a G77 walkout. UNCSTD was the last of the 
large UN conferences of the 1970s, and although awareness 
was certainly raised regarding the issues of science, technol-
ogy and development, the Conference had a focus more on 
funding and institutional arrangements than science, technol-
ogy or development and the particularities of science policy 
and technology transfer. On the positive side, UNCSTD lead 
to the foundation of the African Network of Scientifi c and 
Technological Institutions (ANSTI) in 1980, the creation of the 
Eastern  Africa and Southern African Technology Policy Studies 
Network (EATPS) and the Western  Africa Technology Policy 
Studies Network (WATPS) in the 1980s, which merged into the 
African Technology Policy Studies Network (ATPS) in 1994.
33 Cooper, Charles. 1973. Science, technology and development: the political economy of 
technical advance in underdeveloped countries, Frank Cass, London.
34 Mullin, J., IDRC. 1987. Evaluation of UNESCO’s Regional Ministerial Conferences on the 
Application of Science and Technology to Development, IDRC, Ottawa, Canada.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   173 14/09/10   15:34:35
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
174
Th e CASTAsia conferences and associated networking and 
activities certainly also appear to have played a part in the 
Asia-Pacifi c region, especially in the rise of the knowledge-
based ‘tiger’ economies, and also in Latin America. In addi-
tion to the above, networks established by UNESCO include 
the Science and Technology Policy Asian Network STEPAN 
(established in 1988), the Network for the Popularization of 
Science and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean 
(Red-POP, 1990), and the Science and Technology Manage-
ment Arab Regional Network (STEMARN, 1994). More recent 
activities include the Red-CienciA network of  research and 
development for postgraduates in science in Central America, 
launched in 1998, and the Cariscience network of R&D and 
Postgraduate Programmes in the Basic Sciences in the Carib-
bean, launched in 1999. An increased focus on science policy 
and the basic sciences was emphasized at the World Confer-
ence on Science in 1999.
The importance of technology appropriate to local con-
ditions of aff ordability, labour availability and skills, using 
locally available materials and  energy at the smaller scale has 
been discussed elsewhere. Putting such ‘small is beautiful’ 
ideas into practice has been limited by policy at the macro 
level that favours the choice of ‘conventional’ but often inap-
propriate technologies, and ignores micro-level solutions to 
the problems of poverty that many people face in develop-
ing countries. Technology choice and decision-making is a 
vital component and consideration of  science and technol-
ogy policy, and in this context policies are required at macro 
level that promote appropriate R&D,  innovation, technical 
support, fi nance and credit at the micro-level. Th ese issues 
were the subject of, Th e Other Policy: Th e infl uence of poli-
cies on technology choice and small enterprise development 
published in 1990 (Stewart et al., 1990).35 A study of develop-
ment bank lending in the  Pacifi c Islands also indicated that 
most small loans (less than US$5,000) were for technologies 
around which many small businesses are based (Marjoram, 
1985).36 Since the 1990s, interest in micro-fi nance and micro-
credit has certainly taken off , as evidenced by the work of the 
Grameen Bank and others. Th is interest is also refl ected in the 
work of the Development Alternatives Group established in 
1983 to promote sustainable livelihoods, and publications 
such as, Th e Slow Race: Making technology work for the poor 
(Leach and Scoones, 2006).37 Th e development of policies that 
encourage appropriate R&D,  innovation and associated tech-
nical support have been less evident however, and require 
continued promotion and support. 
35 Frances Stewart, Henk Th omas and Ton de Wilde. 1990. Th e Other Policy: Th e infl uence 
of policies on technology choice and small enterprise development, ITDG and ATI.
36 Tony Marjoram. 1985. Study of small development bank loans for technology in the 
 Pacifi c Islands, Institute of Rural Development, University of the South Pacifi c.
37 Melissa Leach and Ian Scoones. 2006. Th e Slow Race: Making technology work for the 
poor, Demos, London.
Science and technology policy in practice
As noted above,  science and technology policy studies began 
in the 1960s with a focus on what are now the industrialized 
OECD countries, but not exclusively so. Various countries 
were stimulated to undertake S&T policy reviews at the time 
of the CAST conferences in the 1960s–1970s. After a lull in 
the 1980s, interest in S&T policy studies increased again in the 
1990s and 2000s with increasing emphasis on  innovation and 
the commercialization of R&D. Since 2000 and the Millennium 
Summit, interest has also increased in the role of science, tech-
nology and  innovation for development, and addressing the 
 Millennium Development Goals, especially in the context of 
 poverty reduction and  sustainable development, and most 
recently on  climate change mitigation and adaptation (see for 
example the 2005 report of the UN Millennium Project Task 
Force on Science, Technology and Innovation).38
When looking at S&T policy documents from the 1960s to 
the present, it is apparent that a fairly similar format is used 
for almost all countries. Th is usually follows the ‘Frascati Fam-
ily’ of manuals produced by the National Experts on Science 
and Technology Indicators (NESTI) group of the OECD Com-
mittee for Scientifi c and Technological Policy over the past 
forty years. Th ese focus on R&D (the  Frascati Manual, offi  -
cially known as Th e Proposed Standard Practice for Surveys of 
Research and Experimental Development was fi rst published 
in 1963, with a 6th edition in 2002),  innovation ( Oslo Manual, 
3rd edition 2005), human resources in S&T ( Canberra Manual, 
1995), data on  enrolment and graduation in higher  education, 
technological balance of payments and patents. As discussed 
elsewhere in this Report, this approach aggregates ‘scientists 
and engineers’ and emphasizes R&D and patents as indica-
tors of science and technology. Th is gives a slightly distorted 
view of science and engineering in developed countries, where 
many engineers are not involved in R&D and patenting activ-
ity, and especially in developing and least developed countries. 
Th is has serious implications for science, engineering and tech-
nology, let alone associated policy, planning and management. 
Th ese issues have been recognized, and the development of 
appropriate indicators of science, engineering, technology and 
 innovation is an important challenge for developing and least 
developed countries – where, for example, the conditions for 
 innovation are diff erent in terms of fi rms and fi rm sizes, S&T 
institutions, technological capability and absorptive capacity. 
Attempts to address these issues include the production of 
the Bogota Manual on the ‘Standardization of Indicators of 
Technological Innovation in Latin American and Caribbean 
Countries’ in 2001.
Th e most recent examples of science, engineering and technol-
ogy policy and international development, albeit more at the 
38 Task Force on Science, Technology and Innovation, UN Millennium Project, Lead 
Authors: Calestous Juma and Lee Yee-Cheong. Innovation: Applying Knowledge in 
Development. London and Sterling, Va.: Report for Earthscan Publishing, 01 2005.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   174 14/09/10   15:34:35
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
175
implicit level, relate to the production of Poverty Reduction 
Strategy Papers (PRSPs), which are documents conforming to 
the economic prescriptions of the World Bank and IMF (Wash-
ington Consensus) prepared for the Heavily Indebted Poor 
Countries (HIPC) programme by the forty poorest developing 
countries so that they may be considered for debt relief. PRSPs 
are a replacement of the Structural Adjustment Programmes 
of the 1980s and 1990s, and partner to the national develop-
ment plans produced by many developing countries since the 
1960s as preconditions for overseas aid; like ‘shopping lists’ of 
possible projects for donors. PRSPs, like most national devel-
opment plans, are generally prepared by economic planners 
and use a sectoral approach, which tend to focus on sectors 
and themes to the detriment of core cross-cutting considera-
tions such as engineering. Th is, together with the disregard 
of classical economics, meant that there was little mention 
of science, engineering and technology in the fi rst round of 
PRSPs (2000–2005), with some exceptions. Th is formed part of 
the critique of the fi rst PRSPs, together with the broader need 
for enhanced national input, and a move from ‘donorship to 
 ownership’. 
While many developing countries and donors recognize the 
importance of science, and especially engineering and tech-
nology in national development and  poverty reduction, many 
fail to put policies that promote the development and applica-
tion of science and engineering and technological  innovation 
at the centre of systematic strategies to address such issues. 
Instead, there is often a focus on  education, capacity-building 
and  infrastructure which, while important, do not tackle the 
main problem (UNCTAD, 2007).39 In  Africa, in particular, there 
is a vital need for cooperation with the African Union, the New 
Partnership for  Africa’s Development (NEPAD) and the Afri-
can Ministerial Council on Science and Technology (AMCOST) in 
developing and implementing  Africa’s Science and Technology 
Consolidated Plan of Action, 2006–2010.
Concluding comments
We need to develop a more holistic view of science and tech-
nology, better integrating engineering into the rather narrow, 
linear model focusing on the basic sciences,  research and 
development. To do this, we need to emphasize the way engi-
neering, science and technology contributes to social and  eco-
nomic development, promotes sustainable livelihoods, and 
helps mitigate and adapt to  climate change. We also need a 
better integration of engineering issues into  science and tech-
nology policy and planning, and of engineering, science and 
technology considerations into development policy and plan-
ning, PRSPs and the PRSP process in order to provide a more 
useful, benefi cial and accurate refl ection of reality.
39 UNCTAD. 2007. Alex Warren-Rodriguez, Science & Technology and the PRSP Process: A 
Survey of Recent Country Experiences, Background Paper No. 8 to the UNCTAD Least 
Developed Countries Report, School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS).
Th is apparently diffi  cult task might best be achieved by tak-
ing a more cross-cutting and holistic approach, with greater 
reference to the important role of engineering, science, tech-
nology and  innovation in economic and  social development 
and in  poverty reduction. As the core drivers of development 
and as essential elements of  poverty reduction and engineer-
ing, science and technology needs to be placed at the core of 
policies that address these issues, with particular reference to 
the development and application of engineering, science and 
technology at the national level. Development policy and PRSP 
documents would also benefi t from a broader approach and 
‘evidence-based’ analysis of the way engineering and science 
and technology drives development and reduces poverty – as 
the adage goes, without data there is no visibility, and without 
visibility there is no priority. International organizations such 
as UNESCO should play a more active role in the develop-
ment and dissemination of such a cross-cutting and holistic 
approach to these issues.
 4.5.3 Engineers in government and 
public policy
Patricia D. Galloway
Introduction
Th e roles that engineers have taken on go far beyond the 
realm of knowledge and technology. Engineering impacts the 
health and vitality of a nation as no other profession does. 
Th e business competitiveness, health and  standard of living of 
a nation are intimately connected to engineering. As technol-
ogy becomes increasingly engrained into every facet of our 
lives, the convergence between engineering and public policy 
will also increase. Th is will require that engineers develop a 
stronger sense of how technology and public policy interact.40 
Th e public is playing a much more active role in private and 
public projects alike, through more open planning processes, 
environmental regulations and elevated expectations that 
place greater responsibility on those executing projects.41
While engineers have indirectly pursued connections to public 
policy through lobbying organizations and their own profes-
sional engineering societies, the engagement of engineers in 
public policy issues has been haphazard at best. It is both the 
responsibility of the engineer and central to the image of the 
engineering profession that engineers make a better connec-
40 National Academy of Engineering. 2004. Th e Engineer of 2020, Th e National Academies 
Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C., 20055.
41 ASCE. 2004. Civil Engineering Body of Knowledge for the 21st Century, American Society 
of Civil Engineers, 1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Reston, Virginia, 2191-4400, USA, 2004, 
pp. 14.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   175 14/09/10   15:34:35
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
176
tion with public policy in the future.42 Th e engineer of the 
twenty-fi rst century will need to assume leadership positions 
from which they can serve as a positive infl uence in the mak-
ing of public policy and in the administration of government 
and industry.43 Essential public policy and administration 
fundamentals include the political process, public policy, laws 
and regulations, funding mechanisms, public  education and 
engagement, government-business interaction and the public 
service responsibility of professionals.44
Th e issue
Engineers have had little to say about the strategies that are 
driving some of the most important initiatives introduced 
over the past decade, which are those aimed at maintaining a 
livable world. Instead, to their credit, public policy experts, 
economists, lawyers and environmental group leaders have led 
eff orts to identify solutions to myriad problems, even though 
science and technology are at the centre of those solutions. 
Th e issues are big and global in nature and include conserving 
water,  energy, food and habitat while fulfi lling the rights and 
meeting the needs and desires of a growing world population. 
Why haven’t the engineers most able to innovate and design 
those solutions been part of the movement from the start? 
What are the weaknesses and, eventually, the cost of develop-
ing public policies and designing action strategies for reform 
without the infl uence of those who are best able to develop 
innovative solutions and technology? To a large extent, engi-
neers are at fault for their lack of infl uence. Engineers simply 
have not, as individual leaders or as parts of national profes-
sional groups, stepped up and actively and publicly partici-
pated in the movements that are, rightly, calling attention to 
the need for reform in how we use resources. Engineers have 
ceded the leadership roles in public forums that advocate for 
new policies, and seem satisfi ed to play a secondary role to help 
others carry out their ideas. While others design the strategy 
for reform and determine the routes nations will take, engi-
neers seem content to build the locomotives and put down 
the rails. Th e problem of engineers being second-and third-
stage implementers rather than fi rst-stage innovators is that 
there can be a cost, either in too many dollars being spent on 
a solution or a solution that cannot deliver on the expectation 
when public policy is designed without adequate recognition 
for the technical requirements necessary for success. 
Th e reason engineers are not known to the public partially lies 
in the lack of involvement of civil engineers in the public policy 
process. Over the years, engineers have simply not recognized 
42 National Academy of Engineering. 2004. Th e Engineer of 2020, Th e National Academies 
Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C., 20055, 2004 38.
43 National Academy of Engineering. 2004. Th e Engineer of 2020, Th e National Academies 
Press, 500 Fifth Street, N.W., Washington, D.C., 20055, 2004.
44 ASCE. 2004. Civil Engineering Body of Knowledge for the 21st Century, American Society 
of Civil Engineers, 1801Alexander Bell Drive, Reston, Virginia, 2191-4400, USA, 2004, 
pp. 29.
the direct link of the public policy process to their ethical and 
moral role, and responsibility to protect the health, safety and 
welfare of the public. Th ere is often a misunderstanding and 
perception that, as non-profi t organizations, our professional 
engineering societies cannot lobby or speak for the profes-
sion. Th ere is a misconception that engineers and members 
of professional engineering organizations should not hold 
offi  ce or assist in political campaigns. Engineers have simply 
taken a back seat to politics and have chosen not to get caught 
up in the perceived ‘corrupt’ and ‘political’ process, and thus 
have viewed public policy as a frustrating foe.45 However, as 
Pericles observed in 430 BC, ‘Just because you do not take an 
interest in politics doesn’t mean politics won’t take an interest 
in you.’
One of the key ingredients of engineering leadership is the 
understanding of public policy. How many engineers realize 
that policies prepared by professional engineering organiza-
tions assist legislation and the lawmakers who vote on that 
legislation? How many realize that these engineering policies 
prepared by engineers behind the scenes are actually used by 
regulators in determining what happens to  infrastructure? 
How many engineers recognize that it is these policies upon 
which  codes and  standards are developed and promoted for 
projects around the world? Public policy is not just a profes-
sional engineering organization national programme, it goes 
to the heart of the engineering profession and requires the 
 energy and volunteerism at all levels of government. 
Two major barriers holding back engineers in the public policy 
area are the lack of understanding of what their professional 
engineering organization can and cannot do, and the uncom-
fortable feeling, for many engineers, to stand up and speak out 
on public policy issues. In turn, public policy has not been a 
priority with engineers, resulting in little funding to tackle the 
one area that aff ects all engineers as well as the public: quality 
of life. Consequently, engineers hold fewer leadership positions 
and have a reduced voice with key decision-makers on critical 
engineering issues.  Politicians therefore struggle with an over-
whelming number of decisions and need sound, practical advice. 
If unavailable, decisions are too often made without it.46
Th e reasons why engineers are ideally suited to public 
policy
Engineers are trained to analyse problems and fi nd solutions 
in a rational, systematic way. Th e entire engineering mindset 
is to defi ne a problem, identify alternatives, select the best 
solution, and then implement it. Engineers are knowledge-
able about an array of subjects including business and public 
45 Galloway, P. 2004. Public Policy-Friend or Foe in Advancing the Engineering Profes-
sion, ASCE NEWS, January 2004.
46 Wiewiora, J. 2005. Involvement of Civil Engineers in Politics, Th e American Society of 
Civil Engineers Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice, 
April 2005, Vol.131.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   176 14/09/10   15:34:35
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
177
health as well as technology. Th ey are also people just like the 
rest of the population! Th ese attributes make engineers ide-
ally suited to advocate feasible solutions to problems faced by 
 society. If engineers were legislating these technological solu-
tions, public welfare would be maximized and the negative 
impact of technology would be minimized.47 Th ese oppor-
tunities will be missed if engineers continue their traditional 
non-involvement in politics. 
Th e engineer is entrusted with two key attributes that are criti-
cal to public policy and politics: the training of critical thinking 
on solving problems as well as training as to the very activities 
required to develop and sustain a good quality of life; and the 
moral and ethical obligations that they vow as part of their 
professional status to protect the health, safety and welfare 
of the public. 
Th e engineer as politician 
Contrary to stereotypes, many politicians exhibit an extraordi-
nary sense of commitment, dedication and enthusiasm,48 and 
because engineers have an obligation to further the interests of 
humankind, the role of the politician is a perfect fi t. In addition, 
because of the engineers’ ethical  standards, engineers will be 
held to higher  standards than the stereotyped politicians and, 
as such, will be held in higher regard and enlist more trust from 
the public. Engineers often have superior knowledge of current 
scientifi c issues (as compared to career politicians), which can 
be extremely useful when debating legislation regarding, say, 
emission guidelines from automobiles, clean water,  energy poli-
cies and air pollution mandates. Since the engineer must pro-
tect the public health, safety and welfare, this moral obligation, 
when combined with the engineer’s ability to think and devise 
solutions to problems, has major benefi ts for government and 
political positions. Any person in offi  ce should strive to create 
legislation, public policies and economic budgets that protect 
the public and environment while at the same time furthering 
progress.49 Engineers have a unique opportunity and responsi-
bility to the public to promote issues such as  energy, clean water 
and sustainability, and other key global issues especially through 
political involvement. 
Public policy, globalization and professionalism are all key areas 
where engineers ought to be in the forefront. If you were to have 
a vision of the perfect state, the perfect city where everything 
worked, where engineers held the top government positions, 
47 Gassman, A. 2005. Helping Politico-Engineers off  the Endangered Species List, Th e 
American Society of Civil Engineers Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Educa-
tion and Practice, April 2005, Vol.131, No. 2.
48 Gebauer, E. 2005. Engineers and Politics: Upholding Ethical Values, Th e American 
Society of Civil Engineers Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and 
Practice, April 2005, Vol.131, No. 2.
49 Gebauer, E. 2005. Engineers and Politics: Upholding Ethical Values, Th e American 
Society of Civil Engineers Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and 
Practice, April 2005, Vol.131, No. 2.
where engineers were active in public policy, where partnerships 
were formed with other cities or countries, where designing 
and building could be accomplished on budget and schedule, 
where  innovation was key and restoration was blended with the 
new, where private and public investment came together for 
better quality of life for all, where  infrastructure is maintained 
and developed to meet all demands, then where would you be? 
Many would say ‘nowhere’ because this scenario would only 
exist in an engineer’s dream.
Making the transition
Engineering focuses on actions, while politics focuses on 
compromise and negotiation. Engineering is a profession that 
focuses on fi nding solutions rather than winning arguments. 
Can the engineer make a successful transition into the political 
arena? Th e engineer’s thought and decision process strives to 
choose one solution by identifying an existing problem. Th e 
politicians follow a similar process, but select the most ben-
efi cial alternative with focus on justifi cation and compromise 
relative to their constituents’ desires. Th e political process 
places more emphasis on the stakeholders.50
However, this is where the engineer clearly holds the advan-
tage. While a non-engineer may make decisions that may 
involve compromise, an engineer can ensure that the wel-
fare of the public is not compromised, while at the same time 
assuring that the decisions for the government are made to 
the best interest of the nation. In addition, not only is govern-
ment involvement essential to the engineer’s responsibility, it 
is essential to the survival of the engineering profession as a 
whole. Government is vital in upholding the  standards of the 
profession and improving the integrity of the fi eld. Govern-
ment has the power and infl uence to take important projects 
from the drawing board to reality.51 Funding is key to criti-
cal projects that are essential for the well-being of the public. 
Th us, if the engineer were to take a major role in the regulatory 
and legislative process, the benefi ts would not only be to the 
engineering profession but to the public to whom they serve. 
If engineers are to raise the bar on their profession then public 
policy must be viewed as a friend and not as a foe. Engineers 
need to be aware of the facts of what their professional engi-
neering organizations can do in the public policy arena, as well 
as what they can do as individual members. While some profes-
sional organizations are not able to endorse specifi c candidates 
for offi  ce, due to government tax status, most do and actively 
participate in public policy and lobbying relative to legislation 
regarding engineering issues. However, as an individual, an engi-
50 Gassman, A. 2005. Helping Politico-Engineers off  the Endangered Species List, Th e 
American Society of Civil Engineers Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Educa-
tion and Practice, April 2005, Vol.131, No. 2.
51 Wiewiora, J. 2005. Involvement of Civil Engineers in Politics, Th e American Society of 
Civil Engineers Journal of Professional Issues in Engineering Education and Practice, 
April 2005, Vol.131.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   177 14/09/10   15:34:35
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
178
neer can run for offi  ce, participate in political campaigns and 
make contributions that an engineer believes are in the best 
interest of the nation and engineering issues.   
Th e engineering profession more globally must also dispel the 
perception that engineers cannot participate in public policy 
or politics just because they are engineers. Engineers often feel 
it is impossible for them to participate in public policy or hold a 
political position, indicating ‘I would not have a chance since it 
is a political appointment’ or ‘I do not feel comfortable in pre-
senting or writing letters to my political representative as I do 
not know enough about the issue at hand.’ Engineers are often 
respected and ridiculed for their intense beliefs and interests. 
In addition to engineers being more engaged, either as politi-
cians or aiding politicians, engineering  education has to revise 
its  curriculum to highlight the importance of public policy 
within the engineering profession. Engineering  education 
has arguably moved too far i n t o  purely technical content, 
to the detriment of elements essential to providing the tools 
for  engineers to become leaders, both in business and i n 
politics. Engineering  education needs to include discussions 
on how politics infl uences the engineering profession. Profes-
sors need to integrate contemporary problems, global issues 
and indeed politicians into the technical  curriculum.  Th is will 
ensure, at a basic level, that engineering graduates have a grasp 
of public policy issues and would demonstrate that politics is 
an acceptable career choice. Political involvement will allow 
engineers to directly enhance public welfare, the environment 
and the  society through their specialized knowledge and skills. 
Conclusion
Both policymakers and the public benefi t from an under-
standing of and appreciation for the value of the engineer. 
Engineers have an obligation to participate in public policy 
and public awareness. To maximize engineers’ eff ectiveness 
in public policy and public awareness, engineering societies 
should work together and leverage their resource through 
close association. Engineering societies, on behalf of their 
members, should be the advocates of the engineering pro-
fession’s common viewpoints on issues important to their 
respective nation and the profession. Engineering societies 
can contribute eff ectively in shaping public policy and public 
awareness by providing a forum for team-building and liaison, 
sharing information through collection, analysis and dissemi-
nation, and by coming to a consensus on issues. When tak-
ing action, engineering organizations should speak with a 
unifi ed voice and cooperate in their respective activities and 
with their resources.
Life will continue without engineering leadership if we let it. 
However, the results of continuing the status quo will most 
likely not be desirable for engineers or for the public. Key 
engineering leadership positions will continue to be fi lled by 
other professionals despite their lack of understanding of 
technology and its issues. If engineers turn their backs to the 
public policy process, they put their own profession in jeop-
ardy.  As is true with most areas that require change, change 
can only come about from those who are willing to stand up 
and be heard. Engineers must take a more active role in the 
legislative process to ensure that legislation is truly in the 
interest of public health, safety and welfare.
Transformation of national 4.5.4 
science and engineering 
systems
 4.5.4.1 New Zealand
Andrew West, Simon J . Lovatt and Margaret 
Austin
In 1926, a need for solutions to problems that were specifi c 
to  New Zealand’s agricultural economy stimulated the crea-
tion of the Department of Scientifi c and Industrial Research 
and, shortly afterwards,  research associations that were jointly-
funded partnerships between government and industry in 
the fi elds of dairy processing, leather, fuel (later coal), wheat, 
and later wool processing, meat processing and forestry. Th e 
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (MAF) also established 
 research facilities focusing on pastoral animal  research. Th e 
contribution of universities to  research in  New Zealand was 
initially small but became signifi cant over time. Th is was the 
shape of Research in Science &Technology (RS&T) until the 
late 1980s.
Th e  New Zealand economy was highly protected before 1984, 
through tariff s, incentives, subsidies and other government 
interventions – a protection which was unsustainable when 
combined with the oil price shocks of the 1970s. With the 
election of a Labour government in 1984 came a new public 
management model for the whole government sector, which 
also aff ected RS&T.
First was the principle of separating policy development and 
advice from funding mechanisms, and both of these from the 
provision of services. Th e intention was to clarify accountabil-
ity and performance criteria and to allow contestability for the 
provision of services.
Second was the principle that the user of a service should pay 
for the service. Th is introduced market signals to force gov-
ernment agencies to focus on user needs. Transaction cost 
analysis allowed alternative means of service provision to be 
evaluated rather than simply assuming that a service should be 
provided directly by a government department. Th is also led 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   178 14/09/10   15:34:35
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
179
to a determination to make the provision of a service subject 
to a written agreement or contract, whether the service was 
provided by an operational department or by a separate gov-
ernment-owned or private entity. Based on these principles, 
the State Owned Enterprises (SOEs) Act (1986) transformed 
all the trading departments of government (electricity, postal, 
 telecommunications, railways etc.) into companies known as 
SOEs.
When applied to  research, the ‘user pays’ principle was 
accompanied by substantial reductions in government RS&T 
funding, and the DSIR and MAF had to seek commercial 
funds to maintain staff  levels. Th is led to an increase in pri-
vate sector funding of science agencies from under 10 per 
cent in 1984–85 to over 27 per cent in 1990–91, but concern 
grew that as  research organizations sought to maximize their 
income, duplication and overlap was occurring. Th ere was 
concern too for the survival of the  research associations who 
were now dependent on funding allocated by the DSIR. Th e 
DSIR itself introduced some internal contestability by devel-
oping a series of science activity areas for funding allocation 
and reporting.
Th e government received a working party report Th e Key to 
Prosperity in 1986 and set up a Science and Technology Advi-
sory Committee (STAC). In 1988 STAC recommended that 
policy development and fund allocation for RS&T be sepa-
rated, that funding to all  research organizations be made fully 
contestable over fi ve years, that  research agencies be given 
appropriate commercial powers and further that all govern-
ment RS&T funding for science and engineering, health sci-
ences and social sciences be allocated through a single agency. 
Having all  research organizations bid into the same pool would 
allow universities to play a greater role in providing  research 
in  New Zealand and would, it was argued, bring the diff erent 
 research providers closer together. 
A bi-partisan political agreement was reached, largely in favour 
of the STAC recommendations. In April 1989 the government 
created a Cabinet portfolio for Research, Science & Technology, 
a Cabinet committee with responsibility for RS&T, a Ministry 
of RS&T (MoRST) to provide policy advice, and a Foundation 
for Research, Science & Technology (FRST) to purchase RS&T. 
Responsibility for conducting periodic in-depth reviews of sci-
ence was initially placed with MoRST but was later reallocated 
to FRST. A signifi cant change from the STAC recommenda-
tions was the establishment of a Health Research Council that 
would fund health  research separately from FRST rather than 
as a part of the Foundation.
As an independent agency, FRST had a board, with a chair and 
members appointed by the government. Th e board appointed 
a chief executive who recruited the agency’s staff . Th e govern-
ment’s budget set the overall level of funding for each year 
against the identified priority areas for funding on advice 
from MoRST after consultation with stakeholders, which 
were conveyed to FRST every year by the Minister. Th is cre-
ated a strategy-driven approach to RS&T direction, which was 
a signifi cant change from the earlier piecemeal method. All 
funding was to be on the basis of contestable bids for the full 
 research cost, rather than for marginal funding, to avoid cross-
subsidization and to ensure competitive neutrality.
During 1990 there was considerable debate over key aspects 
of how the new system would work. Some of the  research 
carried out by government departments was to assist them 
in achieving their own operational goals. A Cabinet decision 
was required to establish which  research fell into that category 
and should therefore be funded from departmental appro-
priations, and which was ‘public good’  research, and should 
therefore be administered by FRST. Th e term ‘public good’ 
required clarifi cation. It was used by government policy ana-
lysts to refer to a consumer commodity while scientists saw it 
as  research that would have positive outcome for the public. 
Analysts asked why government should fund the direct ben-
efi ciaries of  research, and the public wanted to know why gov-
ernment would consider funding  research that was not good 
for the public. All of this created some diffi  culties of commu-
nication between stakeholders. Th ese issues, along with those 
associated with ownership of intellectual property and prior-
ity setting and also the continued role of the DSIR and other 
 research-focused agencies, occupied the attention of the RS&T 
Cabinet Committee during 1990.
Th e election of a national government in late 1990 contin-
ued the changes as the wave of transformation moved from 
investment in RS&T to its provision. Early in their term of 
offi  ce a decision was made to restructure the existing DSIR, 
Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and other government 
science agencies into a series of Crown Research Institutes 
(CRIs). A task group was appointed to identify the number, 
size and specifi c roles of the CRIs by 30 June 1991. In accord-
ance with the SOE model, CRIs were to be established as cor-
porate bodies separate from the government under their own 
legislation (the Crown Research Institutes Act 1992). Govern-
ment ownership of the CRIs would ensure that RS&T capabil-
ity remained in  New Zealand, that science outputs aligned to 
government outcomes would be delivered to required quality, 
relevance, timeliness and quality constraints. In response, the 
task group proposed that each CRI should be broadly based 
on a productive sector or set of natural resources, be verti-
cally integrated, have a clear focus that was not in confl ict 
with other CRIs, be nationally based with regional centres, and 
have no minimum or maximum size. External purchasing was 
to be important, with 60 to 90 per cent of CRI  research to be 
purchased by FRST, with the remainder being purchased by 
private companies, government departments or other fund-
ing agencies. Th ere was a debate on whether the CRIs should 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   179 14/09/10   15:34:35
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
180
provide a dividend to government, as did the SOEs, but it was 
decided that fi nancial viability and a high social rate of return 
should be the goals.
Ten CRIs were proposed: AgResearch, HortResearch, Crop & 
Food Research and Forest Research (based on primary indus-
try sectors), Industrial Research (based on the manufacturing 
sector), Environmental Science & Research and Social Research 
(for the services sector), and Landcare Research, Geological & 
Nuclear Sciences, and Water & Atmospheric Research (serving 
these three resource sectors). CRIs would be responsible for 
the intellectual property (IP) they created with public funding, 
but this IP should be exploited by the private sector, with  New 
Zealand’s private companies being given fi rst right of refusal 
to take up that IP before it was off ered to overseas compa-
nies. Th e CRI Act (1992) structured the CRIs as companies 
with Boards appointed by Cabinet and accountable to the 
Ministers of RS&T and Finance, who together held the shares 
of each CRI ex offi  cio. Each Board was responsible for appoint-
ing a Chief Executive and supplying an annual statement of 
corporate intent (SCI) to the shareholding Ministers. Board 
members were not to be representative of sectoral interests 
but were to contribute a range of skills in management and 
application of  research while understanding and promoting 
linkages between the CRIs and the private sector. Responsi-
bility for providing science input to government policy was 
already the responsibility of MoRST. By the 1992–93 year, 75 
per cent of FRST’s allocations were made through 3 to 5-year 
contracts and, in addition, an allocation of ‘Non-specifi c Out-
put Funding’ (NSOF) equal to 10 per cent of the public good 
science funds, won contestably by a CRI in the previous fi nan-
cial year, was made. NSOF was to be used by CRI Boards to 
fund science programmes that were not explicitly directed by 
external priorities.
Th e ten CRIs were established on 1 July 1992. Th e CRI Boards 
having set out their direction in their SCIs found that their 
 research income through FRST’s public good contestable 
sources was inadequate to retain all of the staff , and a number 
of redundancies resulted. Th e smallest CRI, Social Research, 
was closed in 1995 because it did not establish commercial 
viability, suggesting that there was in fact a minimum practi-
cal size for a CRI. Th e last element relating to the formation of 
the CRIs was put in place in 1993 when the Crown Company 
Monitoring and Advisory Unit (CCMAU) was established to 
monitor the performance and advise and report to the share-
holding Ministers of government-owned companies, including 
CRIs. 
At the same time as the CRIs were being established, a Science 
& Technology Expert Panel (STEP) was appointed to advise 
the Minister of RS&T on longer term priorities.  New Zealand 
RS&T had 24 areas of activity and STEP recommended how 
the investments in each area ought to change over time, 
based on the potential socio-economic importance to  New 
Zealand, the ability to capture benefi ts, the R&D potential 
and capacity and the appropriateness of government funding 
for each area. STEP recommended a focus on adding value 
to production, increased competitiveness, diversification 
and nurturing of selected core competencies. Th ese recom-
mendations received bipartisan political support and led to a 
government statement. As a result, some areas of traditional 
 research such as animal production, horticulture and forage 
plant production, and geological structures found their fund-
ing reduced. Setting these priorities involved diffi  cult deci-
sions and were described soon afterwards as showing ‘the 
political will to set zero-sum priorities’ – a situation which 
drew comment internationally. In an eff ort to relieve some of 
the overall funding constraints, the 1993 Budget set a target 
of increasing investment in R&D from 0.6 per cent to 0.8 per 
cent of GDP by 2005–06. 
In late 1992 the universities agreed to transfer NZ$10.66 mil-
lion from their NZ$100 million  research funding into the pub-
lic good science fund, which by then totalled NZ$260 million, 
in exchange for being allowed to bid into that fund on an 
equal basis with other  research organizations. Th e universities 
retained exclusive access to the remainder of their  research 
funds, which were seen as being related to their teaching func-
tion. By the 2005–06 fi nancial year, 68 per cent of government 
R&D funding was allocated through the RS&T budget, where 
almost all of it was available to any organization on a contest-
able basis and subject to national science priorities, while 
another 26 per cent was allocated through the  education 
budget where it was available only to educational institutions 
and not prioritized. 
By 1994 both the investment and delivery of publicly-funded 
RS&T in  New Zealand had been thoroughly restructured. 
Th e government saw that allocating all of its funds based 
on strategic priorities left no provision to fund untargeted 
basic  research. In response, the Marsden Fund was estab-
lished with funds to be allocated on scientifi c excellence, 
as assessed by peer-review, and open to all public or private 
organizations and individuals. Th e 1995–96 budget allocated 
NZ$4 million, and by 2007–08 the Marsden Fund had grown 
to NZ$35.5 million, or about 5.5 per cent of the government’s 
RS&T budget.
Th e transformation has had some negative outcomes. Th e 
high level of contestability encouraged intense competi-
tion between  research organizations. Lack of collaboration 
across organizations and changes in investment priority over 
relatively short 4 to 6-year periods resulted in uncertainty for 
researchers and  research organizations, and loss of staff . Sur-
vival meant that senior researchers had to spend increasing 
amounts of time engaged in writing bids to secure funds for 
themselves and their colleagues.
 Research and development 
in engineering is the main 
driver of  innovation.
©
 M
. A
us
tin
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   180 14/09/10   15:34:35
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
181
Overall, the transformation of the  New Zealand RS&T sys-
tem has had positive outcomes. It increased the transpar-
ency of government investment by creating an arms-length 
relationship between funders and providers of RS&T. Th is 
made the decision-making process more objective, reduced 
the influence of personal relationships on funding deci-
sions and improved the effi  ciency of RS&T investment. By 
2003 the  New Zealand system was, by some measures, the 
most effi  cient in the OECD – producing the most papers 
per US$1 million basic  research expenditure and the second 
highest number of papers per US$1 million of total  research 
expenditure.
Th ere is little doubt that scientists and their administrators 
have been challenged by the changes, and the system will con-
tinue to evolve as multi-organizational, multi-faceted longer 
term funding takes root and genuine productive relationships 
between  research agencies, including universities, develop. Th e 
system is accountable and transparent with genuine decentral-
ization and operational authority. Research managers are free 
to manage fl exibly and to set their own commercial targets, 
and recent government announcements increasing invest-
ment in  research will reinforce the signifi cance of  research to 
 New Zealand’s prosperity.   
For further reading:  
Atkinson, J. D. 1976. DSIR’s First Fifty Years, DSIR Information Series 
115, Wellington, DSIR. 
Boston, J., Martin, J., Pallot, J., Walsh, P. 1996. Public Management: Th e 
 New Zealand Model. Auckland, Oxford University Press. 
MoRST. 2006. Research and Development in  New Zealand – a Decade 
in Review. Available at: http://www.morst.govt.nz/publications/
a-z/r/decade-in-review/report/ (Accessed: 14 May 2010). 
Palmer, C. M. 1994. Th e Reform of the Public Science System in  New 
Zealand, Ministry of Research Science & Technology, Wellington, 
 New Zealand. 
South 4.5.4.2  Africa
Johann Mouton and Nelius Boshoff
Background
Th e National Research and Development Strategy (2002)52 
identifi es one of the priorities for the country as the develop-
ment of a healthy and diverse fl ux of ‘young people seeking 
and fi nding careers in science and engineering.’ Th e national 
Department of Science and Technology’s (DST) most recent 
Strategic Plan (2007) 53 reiterates the importance of producing 
more engineers as an essential contribution to various fl agship 
programmes of the country including: an initiative around the 
52 Department of Science and Technology. 2002. National R&D Strategy. Pretoria, South 
 Africa.
53 Department of Science and Technology. 2007. Corporate Strategy 2007/2008. Pretoria, 
South  Africa.
hydrogen economy, space sciences, the Pebble Bed nuclear 
reactor and other major projects. The strategy document 
acknowledges that ‘scientists, engineers and  technologists 
remain in short supply in most sectors’ and continues, ‘the lim-
ited supply of scientists, engineers and  technologists has also 
been identifi ed as one of the constraints to the attainment 
of the goals of AsgiSA and is the focus of the Joint Initiative 
for Priority Skills Acquisition (JIPSA).’ Th e DST has developed 
two strategies in this regard, the Youth into Science Strategy, 
and the Science, Engineering and Technology Human Capital 
Development Strategy for the development of a knowledge 
economy (DST, 2007).
Th e imperative to increase the supply of engineers should 
also be understood within the broader transformational 
framework of South African science. Since the transition to 
a democracy in 1994, this has become one of the key goals in 
the transformation of the national system of  innovation, in at 
least three major ways:
To broaden the base of participation in science, engineer-1. 
ing and technology by under-represented groups such as 
African and female scientists. 
To ensure that knowledge production in these fi elds is 2. 
commensurate with national socio-economic goals (such 
as improving the quality of life of all South Africans, to 
alleviate poverty, and in general to create wealth for all 
citizens). 
To overcome the isolationist eff ects of Apartheid science 3. 
by increasing international scientifi c collaboration, which 
suff ered as a result of the academic boycotts in the 1970s 
and 1980s, and increasing the international visibility of 
South African science.
This contribution addresses three issues in engineering 
 science:
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
0
1990-1992 1993-1995 1996-1998 1999-2000 2002-2004
articles articles équivalents
Figure 1: Engineering output (1990–2004) 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   181 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
182
Research output in engineering as a proportion of overall  ■
scientifi c output in the country, and the broadening of the 
base of participation in engineering  research.
Breaking down the barriers of isolationism, increasing inter- ■
national scientifi c collaboration and shifts in the interna-
tional visibility of South African engineering papers.
Producing the next generation of engineering scientists. ■
Engineering  research output and the broadening of 
participation
Research output in the fi eld of engineering – as measured in 
terms of articles and article equivalents in peer reviewed jour-
nals – has increased steadily over the 15-year period between 
1990 and 2004 (Figure 1) to reach just over 2,000 papers in 
2004. Engineering’s share of the total scientifi c output of the 
science system in South Africa over this period increased from 
5 per cent in 1990 to 7 per cent in 2004 (Table 1).
As far as some transformation indicators are concerned, 
progress has been steady and signifi cant. Th e percentage of 
women authors of these papers has increased from 6 per cent 
in 1990 to 11 per cent (nearly doubling), whereas the propor-
tion of African authors has more than tripled, albeit from a 
small base. However, there is a disturbing trend as far as age is 
concerned with the proportion of young authors (below the 
age of 30) declining; conversely we witness an increase (from 
26 per cent to 39 per cent) in the proportion of authors over 
the age of 50. Th is trend, which is evident in all scientifi c fi elds 
in the country, has major consequences for the future know-
ledge base of the country and requires serious and immediate 
attention.
Breaking down the barriers of isolationism
A  standard bibliometrics measure of scientifi c collaboration 
is co-authorship of scientific papers. When analysing the 
fractional shares of all co-authors in the fi eld of engineering 
papers, we again found a trend to greater international col-
laboration. In the period between 1990 and 1992 slightly more 
than 6 per cent of all papers were co-authored with a foreign 
scientist. Th is proportion increased to more than 14 per cent 
in the most recent period. 
Further analysis of the origins of the foreign co-authors 
revealed that the majority of co-authors were from the USA, 
Germany, the UK and  Australia in this order. 
In a recent study on the citation profi les of diff erent scientifi c 
fi elds, an analysis was also conducted of the international 
 visibility of engineering papers in select fi elds as measured in 
terms of citation impact scores. In citation analysis a fi eld-nor-
malized citation rate of more than 1.00 is regarded as good (as 
it means that papers in a particular fi eld generated more than 
the average number of citations for all papers in this fi eld). Th e 
fact that none of the sub-fi elds of engineering achieved a score 
of 1.00 or higher (Table 2) means that the increased scientifi c 
collaboration reported above has not yet translated into high 
levels of scientifi c recognition. Stated diff erently: although 
South African engineers have increased their overall output 
over the fi fteen year period since 1990, and also increased 
their collaboration with overseas scientists, their papers are 
not highly cited in the best journals in the fi eld.
A fi eld-normalized citation rate of 1 means that a country’s 
citation performance is about the same as the international 
(western world dominated) impact  standard of the fi eld.
Producing the next generation of engineering scientists
The transformation imperative also requires that South 
Africa produces more engineers and engineering scientists 
from previously disadvantaged communities (African and 
female students). Table 3 presents a comparison of the gradu-
ation rates of engineering students at all qualifi cation levels 
Table 1: South African article output in engineering and applied technologies: 1990–2004
Year period
Engineering as 
% of national 
article output
% articles in 
engineering 
produced by 
female authors 
% articles in 
engineering 
produced by 
African authors
% articles in 
engineering 
produced by 
authors
<30 years
% articles in 
engineering 
produced by 
authors
≥ 50 years
1990-1992 5% 6% 3% 10% 26%
1993-1995 6% 7% 4% 9% 29%
1996-1998 6% 8% 7% 9% 36%
1999-2001 6% 10% 9% 8% 35%
2002-2004 7% 11% 10% 5% 39%
Source: South African Knowledgebase, CREST, Stellenbosch University (CREST. 2007. Human Capital and the South African Knowledgebase. Report submitted to the 
National Advisory Council of South  Africa)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   182 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
183
between 1996 and 2006. Th e race-by-gender analysis reveals 
that substantial progress has been made over this period in 
terms of increasing the participation and graduation rates in 
priority areas. Many more African female and male students 
as well as Indian female and male students have graduated in 
2006 compared to 1996. Less progress has been made as far 
as coloured students are concerned. White students continue 
to constitute the majority of students at all four qualifi cation 
levels, but their proportional share has declined signifi cantly 
over this period. 
Sub-fi eld
Total number of 
ISI publications
Average 
number of 
citations per 
publication 
(excl. self-
citations)
Field-
normalized 
citation rate
% self citations
% 
publications 
not cited
 Chemical 
engineering
980 3.75 0.85 26% 35%
Electrical & 
electronic 
engineering
831 2.23 0.56 27% 50%
 Mechanical 
engineering
713 2.54 0.75 33% 45%
Metallurgical 
engineering
901 1.99 0.69 23% 56%
Materials science 1746 4.04 0.81 30% 36%
Source: Centre for Science and Technology Studies (CWTS), Leiden University
Table 2: Citation profi les for selected sub-fi elds in engineering and applied technologies, 1990–2004
Race-by-sex 
group
*Professional First Bachelors 
Degree
Honours Degree or 
equivalent
Masters Degree or 
equivalent
Doctoral Degree or equivalent
1996 2006 1996 2006 1996 2006 1996 2006
African women 0.5% 11.0% 0.7% 12.4% 0.2% 4.8% 0.0% 3.8%
African men 9.3% 28.3% 14.4% 25.1% 6.1% 21.1% 0.0% 19.0%
**Coloured 
women
0.5% 0.8% 0.3% 1.0% 0.0% 0.8% 0.0% 0.0%
Coloured men 3.6% 4.2% 5.1% 3.7% 1.7% 2.9% 0.0% 1.9%
Indian women 0.8% 2.4% 0.3% 4.0% 0.0% 0.8% 0.0% 1.9%
Indian men 8.0% 7.3% 4.8% 8.0% 5.1% 7.0% 0.0% 6.7%
White women 7.4% 7.1% 3.0% 6.0% 9.6% 7.0% 18.9% 10.5%
White men 70.0% 38.9% 71.4% 39.6% 77.3% 55.7% 81.1% 56.2%
Total
100%
(1686.02)
100%
(2930.08)
100%
(573.78)
100%
(298.25)
100%
(318.76)
100%
(588.67)
100%
(53.00)
100%
(105.00)
Table 3: Race-by-gender distribution of FTE graduates in engineering per qualifi cation, 1996 and 2006
Source: Own calculations based on data from the Higher Education Management Information System (HEMIS), South African Department of Education
* Professional First Bachelor’s Degree = Degree qualifi cation with a minimum duration of four years
** ‘Coloured’ refers to individuals of mixed race.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   183 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
184
Conclusion
Engineering in South Africa has responded well to the national 
imperative to transform. Th is is evident in the demographics 
of its  research output as well as its numbers of graduate stu-
dents. It is further evidenced by its increasing internationaliza-
tion, although papers in the fi eld are not suffi  ciently cited. Th e 
ageing of the productive scientists in the fi eld is a disturbing 
trend and requires attention. Th e biggest challenge remains 
the need to increase overall output of engineers to meet the 
future industrial and scientifi c needs of the country.
SA authors Foreign authors
100 %
80 %
60 %
40 %
20 %
0 %
1990-1992 1993-1995 1996-1998 1999-2000 2002-2004
Figure 2: Co-authorship patterns for engineering papers (1990–2004)
 4.6 Engineering  ethics and  anti-corruption
 4.6.1 Engineering  ethics: overview
Christelle Didier
Introduction
Ethical refl ection in engineering is relatively more recent than 
in other professions. Nevertheless, there is an area of study 
named ‘engineering  ethics’ that was established as an autono-
mous fi eld of academic  research in the United States at the 
end of the 1970s, and has developed as a unique fi eld else-
where for example in those countries where their professional 
organizations have published codes of  ethics. Th e fi rst code was 
adopted in the United Kingdom in 1910 by the Institution of 
Civil Engineers and was followed by many others in the United 
States, and in other countries. However, while the codes are 
discussed and regularly amended in some of the associations 
that adopted them, in others they sometimes simply ‘exist’.
While some observers question its theoretical foundations 
and methods, others simply doubt that the engineers’ pro-
fessional activities may raise specifi c ethical questions. Th us 
few seem to be surprised when philosophers and ethicists 
question certain aspects of technological development – 
technological development that is barely imaginable in the 
absence of engineers. Here are two established facts: fi rst, 
technological development raises ethical questions; second, 
engineers necessarily contribute to the existence and to the 
deployment of technological development. For some, this 
confrontation compels ethical questioning in engineering. For 
others, the ethical challenge of techniques is not the concern 
of  engineers.
What is the status of engineering  ethics?
Th e concept of engineering  ethics is sometimes hard to trans-
late into languages other than English, and it is hard to under-
stand in cultural contexts other than those developed under 
Anglo-American infl uence.
In some places, such as France, the word ‘profession’ can refer 
to any kind of job; in other countries including the United 
States, Canada,  New Zealand, Ireland, South Africa ,  Australia 
and the United Kingdom, a profession is an area of activity 
whose members are provided with specifi c rights (or at least 
social recognition) and are trusted with specifi c responsibili-
ties. Th e division of the job market between ‘professions’ and 
‘occupations’ in those countries fi ts in with functionalist theo-
ries that have dominated the sociology of profession for dec-
ades. It also fi ts in with an understanding of the role and status 
of the professions in societies that can be traced back a long 
time to the early history of England. 
Th e question ‘Is engineering a profession?’ can be found in all 
of the introductions of engineering  ethics textbooks. Many 
scholars in this fi eld consider it as a key question, to which the 
answer is affi  rmative. For them, engineering  ethics is related 
to the professional status of engineering. Other scholars, 
also familiar to functionalist theories, consider that it is not 
possible to talk about engineering  ethics because engineering 
is not a ‘true’ profession. Th ese discussions about the ‘essence’ 
of engineering do not exist in countries where the demarcation 
between the professions and other types of activities is not an 
issue. Even in countries where this demarcation is meaningful, 
some scholars have an understanding of ‘engineering  ethics’ (as 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   184 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
185
‘professional’  ethics) that is broad enough to encompass many 
types of ethical problems encountered at work by engineers, 
whether they are considered as ‘true’ professionals or not.
Some American scholars consider that engineering  ethics rely 
on the fact that the engineering community has adopted  stand-
ards defi ning what is morally permissible, which are specifi c to 
its members and go beyond the requirement of law, market 
and ordinary morality. Th ey consider engineering  ethics as a 
kind of practical wisdom in the professional practice, which 
can and must be transmitted. Th is is an interesting approach 
but it relies on the adoption of such  standards, which is not 
the case all over the world. Moreover, where codes of  ethics 
do exist, these codes often suff er from a lack of legitimacy and 
reinforcement procedures. 
Following this approach, engineering  ethics would not be so 
much about promoting respect of professional obligations. 
Th e focal point of engineering  ethics would not be a status (a 
profession). Neither would it be knowledge (engineering sci-
ences).  Engineering  ethics is not an ethical refl ection on tech-
nical objects; it is the ‘ ethics of techniques’. Neither is the role 
of engineering  ethics to evaluate technical decisions (this has 
been the aim of a fi eld called ‘Technology Assessment’ since 
the 1980s). Th e focal point of engineering  ethics is an activity. 
Moreover, in our engineered world, engineering  ethics can-
not be a preoccupation reserved for engineers only, but for all 
citizens concerned by the impact of engineering decisions. Th e 
expression ‘engineering ethic’ reminds us of the human origin 
of the technologies. It explicitly refers to a type of work and to 
a human community more in charge of this work than others: 
the engineers.
What is engineering?
Until recently, human social sciences and philosophy 
showed little interest for engineers and their practice. In the 
United States, the independence of the subject ‘the history 
of technology’ from ‘the history of science’ is very recent. 
Even more recently, we can mention the eff ort of Gary Lee 
Downey and Juan Lucena to attempt to trace the outlines of a 
specifi c fi eld for  engineering studies. Several characteristics of 
engineering are described in academic literature. Some insist 
on the dual nature – scientifi c and economic – of engineering; 
engineers are scientists but also business people because the 
testing of their work does not occur in laboratories but on 
the market place. Others underline the social dimension of 
this practice, which is a combination of labour and capital. 
The knowledge of engineers has something to do with 
scientifi c knowledge, but it remains diff erent. Mike Martin 
and Roland Schinzinger have defi ned engineering as ‘social 
experimentation’. Carl Mitcham insists on the fact that the 
product of engineering is not knowledge, but ‘an object which 
transforms the world’.
What then are the main characteristics of engineering? Firstly, 
engineering takes place in a complex work environment. Th e 
agents of technical acts are engineers, but also  technicians, non-
technical executives and sometimes administrative and political 
decision-makers. Secondly, the act of engineering has the ability 
to transform the real world and produce consequences, which 
are sometimes irreversible and partially unknown. Engineering 
is characterized by the potential power and the partial uncer-
tainty of its impacts, both present and future, on the natural 
and human environment. Finally, engineering is characterized 
by a central act: the act of designing. Th is act is a process by 
which objectives or functions take shape in the imagination of 
and plans for the creation of an object, a system or a service, 
with an aim to achieve the goal or function.
What about engineers‘ responsibility?
Th e moral obligations of engineers arise from the dependence 
of the whole of  society on engineers, for certain things at least, 
such as the acts of technical design. Engineers have a great 
responsibility because if they fail to do their job with techni-
cal competency and commitment to  ethics, not only can an 
individual be harmed or killed (as is the case if a doctor fails 
to do his/her job), but dozens, hundreds, even thousands of 
individuals may be aff ected.
Although the principle of proportionate care obviously forms 
the basis of the engineers’ moral responsibility, we must keep in 
mind one diffi  culty: the phenomenon of dilution of individual 
responsibility in large corporations that may favor impunity. On 
the other hand, it may be unjust to have an individual agent 
bear the responsibility of the unwanted harm due to a structural 
failure of a collectivity. Th e line seems to be narrow between 
making the individual engineers excessively responsible and the 
abdication of any responsibility as a subterfuge for inaction. 
In the shift from the activity to the actors, from the ethical 
challenges of engineering to the moral responsibility of the 
engineers, three questions need to be addressed: What is the 
moral legitimacy of engineers when taking into account the 
ethical issues of engineering in their decisions and actions? 
What is the specifi c knowledge that they have access to? What 
is their specifi c freedom of action within the organizations in 
which they are employed?
Legitimacy
For some authors, the ethical questions raised by technical 
development do not really concern the engineers because of 
its highly political dimension. Some authors are very sceptical 
regarding the obligations of engineers in the American codes 
of  ethics that seek to protect the public against the bad eff ects 
of technical developments. Th us, engineers can express their 
point of view, with a full legitimacy, in the debates about the 
technical choices at diff erent levels: within their companies, 
with peers and other colleagues but also with staff  representa-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   185 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
186
tives, outside the company with local associations,  standard 
organizations, governmental agencies, parliamentary commis-
sions, non-governmental organizations, and so on.
Because of their position in the socio-technical system, engi-
neers are expected to be citizens of technical democracy, more 
than any other member of  society. Moreover, concerning their 
obligation within their companies or organizations, besides 
the role that consists of the communication of technical speci-
fi cations, engineers can also (and must in certain cases) sug-
gest alternatives to their superiors or their clients. Engineers 
are responsible because those who have to make the choices 
place trust in them.
Knowledge
Th e highly compartmentalized work situations of engineers 
and the labour division which characterizes the large corpora-
tions where they work, creates another risk-factor than just the 
dilution of responsibilities, such as the loss of direction and the 
non-retention of aims, which can result in an accepted blindness 
for the actors involved. Th ere is probably a moral obligation for 
engineers not to be ignorant, or worse, indiff erent, to the goals 
they are working to achieve, a well as a necessity to be able to 
express their positions clearly towards attaining those goals.
One cannot be held accountable for something about which 
one is ignorant: this has been one of the foundations of the 
notion of responsibility since ancient times. But there are igno-
rances that are more morally acceptable than others. Some 
people believe that the participation of engineers in decision-
making is simply unknowable. Th us, their moral responsibil-
ity would be indescribable. If ethical decisions are diffi  cult to 
make for engineers, ethical judgements are always possible, 
and they can improve. 
Power
Another reason put forth for saying that there is no room 
for  ethics in engineering is based on the engineers’ status as 
employees, which does not aff ord them enough freedom. Th e 
question of the engineers’ professional autonomy and of their 
power in decision-making in companies was studied by histo-
rians and sociologists who did not look at engineers as pro-
fessionals but as workers. Although it is necessary to remind 
ourselves that engineers are hardly independent professionals 
we can wonder if their freedom of action within the organiza-
tions that employ them is as narrow as some theses on the 
‘proletarization’ of engineers seem to suggest.
Th e refl ections on the specifi city of engineering, its impacts 
on the social world and its hybrid nature, social as well as 
technical, compel us to think of the place where the engineers 
exercise their power outside the most visible aspects, i.e. in the 
games of relationship vis-à-vis authority. Engineers are close to 
the ‘black box’ of technology; they are sometimes the princi-
pal actors of the closing of this box. But what we remember at 
the end are the economic and political constraints. Engineers 
appear then as employees among others whose only social 
responsibility would be to obey their hierarchy. One of the 
engineers’ obligations may consist of, in extreme cases, blow-
ing the whistle and taking the risk to bypass their obligation 
of loyalty towards their employers. But another obligation, 
less spectacular maybe, would consist of engineers contribut-
ing to the improvement of the structures in which they act, 
to turn them into more fair and responsible institutions. Th is 
point of view fi ts very well with Paul Ricoeur’s defi nition of 
 ethics as an ‘aim of the good life with and for others in just 
institutions.’
Conclusion
 Engineering  ethics is a new fi eld of contextualized  ethics, far 
from maturity. For many years already, fi rst in the USA, and now 
in some European and Asian countries, engineering  ethics has 
started to interest a larger community of scholars. Its focus has 
widened from the specifi c nature of engineering as a ‘true’ profes-
sion, to the relevant characteristics of engineering as an activity 
at the articulation of the social, the economic, the political and 
the technical. We need to focus on the challenges of  research in 
engineering  ethics and stress the interest in an epistemological 
approach to the question, aiming at defi ning the outline of the 
activity at the heart of engineering  ethics: engineering.
Th e most recent  research works in engineering  ethics also 
show a greater understanding of the diff erent scales in which 
engineering may be questioned ethically: on the individual 
micro-level, on the mezzo-level of a group, a professional 
body or a company, and on the macro-level of the planet. 
Some issues related to  sustainable development and corpo-
rate social responsibility, now considered as a relevant mat-
ter for engineering  ethics, can merge macro and mezzo levels. 
Most courses in engineering  ethics have long off ered study-
ing the ethical dilemmas that students could encounter in 
their careers. Although this approach is interesting and useful, 
numerous other entries can contribute to broaden the individ-
ual responsibility and ethical sensitivity of future engineers.
 4.6.2 Engineering  ethics: further 
discussion
Monique Frize
To be ethical and professional are terms that are synonymous 
with being an engineer. Unlike most science, the work of engi-
neers frequently directly aff ects public safety and health and 
can infl uence business and even politics. Th e engineering pro-
fession in some countries is self-regulated, which means that it 
is governed by its own association of engineers. In order to join 
this association, engineers who apply are screened for compe-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   186 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
187
tence, fi rst by examining if their degree in engineering comes 
from an accredited program (or equivalent); if not, applicants 
are required to pass a number of technical exams. All appli-
cants must complete an exam on ethical principles; and some 
associations require the passing of an exam on Contract Law 
principles. Examples of this type of regulation exist in North 
America (Canada and the United States). In other regions, the 
profession is regulated by the government, as in some coun-
tries in  Europe (France and Sweden for example). 
Morality is defi ned as what people believe to be right and 
good and the reasons for it. Th ere are typical rules of conduct 
describing what people ought and ought not to do in various 
situations. Ethics is the philosophical study of morality. It is a 
rational examination into people’s moral beliefs and behav-
iour, the study of right and wrong, of good and evil in human 
conduct. Many ethical theories exist but some are more rel-
evant to decision-making for engineers than others. For exam-
ple, theories of Subjective Relativism and Cultural Relativism 
have limited utility in ethical decision-making as they encour-
age decisions based on individual or cultural perspectives. 
Th e Divine Command Th eory is based on particular religious 
beliefs, which can vary from one religion to another. However, 
theories such as Kantianism, Act Utilitarianism, Rule Utilitari-
anism, Social Contract (Hobbes), Rights Th eory (Locke) and 
Rawl’s Th eory of Justice appear to be more helpful for decision-
making related to engineering works. 
Most professional engineering associations and technical soci-
eties provide their own ethical guidelines to help engineers 
avoid misconduct, negligence, incompetence and corrup-
tion. A complaint against an engineer can lead to discipline, 
which can include a fi ne, and/or losing the license to practice. 
Knowledge of the ethical decision-making process can guide 
engineers facing complex and difficult moral dilemmas.54 
Principles of  ethics and ethical codes are at the core of the 
duties and responsibilities of engineers. Professional engineer-
ing associations and technical societies have their own codes 
of  ethics. Although there are some small diff erences between 
these codes, there are many guidelines in common. Knowl-
edge of ethical theories and the relevant codes of  ethics help 
engineers make the most ethical decision when facing an ethi-
cal dilemma or problem.
Another important aspect of ethical behaviour in engineer-
ing is how persons from under-represented groups are treated, 
either by employers, peers or employees. Considering that 
women still make up a small proportion of the engineers in 
most countries, it is critically important to ensure that there is 
zero tolerance for harassment or discrimination in the work-
place and in engineering schools. A main obstacle is that most 
engineers (both men and many women) are not aware of the 
54 Andrews, G. and J. D. Kemper. 2003. Canadian Professional Engineering Practice and 
Ethics. Saunders College Canada, Harcourt Brace & Company, Canada, p.46.
defi nition of harassment or discrimination and thus may be 
perpetrators without knowledge of the harm that can be done. 
In Ontario (Canada), the Association of Professional Engineers 
of Ontario (created in 1922) has made these a misconduct for 
which engineers can be disciplined.55 56 
Avoiding plagiarism, confl ict of interest, fraud, and corruption 
are other forms of unethical behaviour that engineers must 
fully understand to avoid this type of misconduct.
Discussing the impact of technology on  society and on peo-
ple is another key component of ethical behaviour. Techno-
logical development brings major benefi ts and hazards in 
its wake.57 58Each of us can do our part to ensure a positive 
impact for  society and that our eff orts help to solve some 
of the world’s largest problems and challenges. Society must 
institute laws and ethical codes of conduct to guide the 
direction and impacts of the developments. To ensure that 
engineering students become socially responsible in this 
new century, it is essential to instruct them on how to assess 
the impact of their work on people and  society, and teach 
them the process of ethical decision-making. Th ere should 
be a guideline on how to include these important concepts 
in our engineering  curriculum. An over-arching principle 
to keep in mind is the dynamic nature of the issues to be 
included in such courses. 59 60
On a fi nal note, every engineer and engineering student should 
be aware of the United Nations  Millennium Development 
Goals and do their best to include these whenever possible in 
their work, especially in developing countries. Why? Because 
it is within the power of the engineer to take action and thus 
they have an ethical responsibility to do so.
55 Professional Engineers Ontario (PEO). Final Report of the Bioengineering Sub-Group of 
the Engineering Disciplines Task Force (EDTG). 25 Sheppard Ave., Toronto, ON. Available 
at: http://www.peo.on.ca/ Click on Guidelines, then on Human Rights for professional 
practice (Accessed: 15 May 2010).
56 M. Frize. 1995. Eradicating Harassment in Higher Education and Non-Traditional Work-
places: A Model, CAASHHE Conference, Saskatoon, 15–18 Nov., pp. 43–47.
57 Joy, B. 2000. Why the Future doesn’t need us. Wired. April 2000 Available at: http://
www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy.html (Accessed: 15 May 2010).
58 Centre for the Study of Technology and Society. Available at: http://www.tecsoc.org/
innovate/focusbilljoy.htm (Accessed: 15 May 2010).
59 Frize, M. 1996. Teaching Ethics & the Governance of the Profession: Ahead or Behind 
Professional Practice Realities? Canadian Conf. on Engineering Education, June. pp. 
483–489.
60 Frize, M.  2003. Teaching Ethics for Bioengineers in the 21st Century. Proc. of the 25th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE EMBS. Cancun, Mexico.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   187 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
188
Subjective Relativism: Th eory where there are no universal moral 
norms of right and wrong. Persons decide right and wrong for them-
selves.
Cultural Relativism: Ethical theory where the meaning of right and 
wrong rests with a  society’s actual moral guidelines.
Divine Command Th eory: Th eory based on the idea that good 
actions are those aligned with the will of God, and bad actions are 
those contrary to the will of God; that we owe obedience to our 
Creator and that God is all-good and all-knowing, the ultimate 
authority.
Kantianism: Th eory also referred to as the categorical imperative 
and pertaining to actions that are universally considered to be good 
and involve good will and duty. Treat yourself and others as ends in 
themselves, never as a means to an end.
Act Utilitarianism: Th eory stating that an action is good if it benefi ts 
someone and bad if it harms someone; also known as the ‘greatest 
happiness principle’ and applies to individual moral actions.
Rule Utilitarianism: Th eory stating that a moral rule should be fol-
lowed because its universal adoption would lead to the greatest 
increase in total happiness.
Social Contract Th eory: Th eory based on the benefi ts to the com-
munity, governing how people are to treat one another. It is framed 
in the language of individual rights and explains why rational people 
act out of self-interest in the absence of common agreement.
Rights Th eory: Th eory stating that everyone has rights arising simply 
from being born: Th e right to life, to maximum individual liberty 
and to human dignity. Th is theory is the basis for the ‘Charter of 
Human Rights and Freedoms’ in Canada.
Rawls’ Th eory of Justice: Th eory stating that each individual may 
claim basic rights and liberties (e.g. freedom of thought and speech, 
the right to be safe from harm, and so on) as long as these claims 
are consistent with everyone having a claim to the same rights and 
liberties.
Quinn, M. 2005. Ethics for the Information Age. Boston: Pearson/Addison-Wesley.
Brief Defi nitions of Ethical Th eories
Th is can be likened to the engineering design process. It consists of 
the following steps:
Recognize1.  an ethical problem or dilemma that needs to be 
solved; gather the information needed. Determine who is 
involved; what can or has occurred; where, when, and what 
harm can occur or has happened. 
Defi ne2.  the ethical problem. Identify what is wrong; what codes 
or laws have been breached, and how ethical theories defi ne 
this situation. 
Generate alternative solutions3. . Several approaches may exist 
and each should be listed for evaluation step. 
Evaluate4.  the possible solutions and their consequences with 
the help of the ethical theories and the codes of  ethics; con-
sider the legal aspects of the problem. 
Decision5.  and optimization. Select the most appropriate solu-
tion for the situation. Seek advice from experienced persons 
and consider all aspects. 
Implement6.  the solution. We need to keep in mind that even 
after a solution has been selected for action, this may require 
several steps and a carefully designed sequence. For example, 
if the problem threatens or has aff ected public safety, then 
this may call for immediate action to be taken. If the respon-
sible party does not act, then one must escalate the ladder of 
authority to ensure the correcting actions are undertaken. If 
this does not work, then one needs to consider going public 
with the story if this can trigger some response from the party 
responsible for the problem.
Corruption and fraud7.  refers to actions such as accepting 
bribes. Almost anyone in a position of authority – particularly 
public authority – has the potential for such wrongdoing. 
Similarly, use of government or corporate property or assets 
for personal use is fraud.
Andrews, G. and J. D. Kemper. 2003. Canadian Professional Engineering Practice and 
Ethics. Saunders College Canada, Harcourt Brace & Company, Canada. pp.142–144.
Ethical decision-making process
Secrecy ■  refers to the keeping of secrets; information 
is withheld; a breach of secrecy is an unauthorized 
distribution of confi dential information.
Privacy ■  refers to the freedom from intrusion or 
public attention; to be removed from public view or 
knowledge. 
Confi dentiality ■  refers to being entrusted with secrets 
and keeping them.
Intellectual Property  ■ (IP) is defi ned as ‘a legal entitlement 
which sometimes attaches to the expressed form of an 
idea, or to some other intangible subject matter. Th is 
legal entitlement generally enables its holder to exercise 
exclusive rights of use in relation to the subject matter 
of the IP.’
Copyright ■  refers to ‘creative and artistic works (e.g. 
books, movies, music, paintings, photographs and 
software), giving a copyright holder the exclusive right 
to control reproduction or adaptation of such works for 
a certain period of time.
A  ■ patent may be granted in relation to a new and useful 
invention, giving the patent holder an exclusive right to 
commercially exploit the invention for a certain period 
of time (typically twenty years from the fi ling date of a 
patent application).
A  ■ trademark is a distinctive sign used to distinguish 
products or services. 
An  ■ industrial design refers to the form of appearance, 
style or design of an industrial object (e.g. spare parts, 
furniture or textiles, shapes).
A  ■ trade secret is an item of confi dential information 
concerning the commercial practices or proprietary 
knowledge of a business.
Wikipedia.
Decew, J.W. 1997. In Pursuit of Privacy: Law, Ethics, and the Rise of Technol-
ogy, Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Other important concepts
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   188 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
189
 4.6.3 WFEO Model Code of Ethics
Since 1990,  WFEO has worked to prepare a Code of Ethics as 
a model to help defi ne and support the creation of codes in 
 member institutions. Th e fi nal version reproduced here was 
adopted in 2001.
Broad principles
Ethics is generally understood as the discipline or fi eld of study 
dealing with moral duty or obligation. Th is typically gives rise 
to a set of governing principles or values, which in turn are 
used to judge the appropriateness of particular conducts or 
behaviours. Th ese principles are usually presented either as 
broad guiding principles of an idealistic or inspirational nature 
or, alternatively, as a detailed and specifi c set of rules couched in 
legalistic or imperative terms to make them more enforceable. 
Professions that have been given the privilege and responsibility 
of self regulation, including the engineering profession, have 
tended to opt for the first alternative, espousing sets of 
underlying principles as codes of professional  ethics which form 
the basis and framework for responsible professional practice. 
Arising from this context, professional codes of  ethics have 
sometimes been incorrectly interpreted as a set of ‘rules’ of 
conduct intended for passive observance. A more appropriate 
use by practicing professionals is to interpret the essence of 
the underlying principles within their daily decision-making 
situations in a dynamic manner, responsive to the need of the 
situation. As a consequence, a code of professional  ethics is 
more than a minimum  standard of conduct; rather, it is a set 
of principles, which should guide professionals in their daily 
work.
In summary, the model Code presented herein expresses the 
expectations of engineers and  society in discriminating engi-
neers’ professional responsibilities. Th e Code is based on broad 
principles of truth, honesty and trustworthiness, respect for 
human life and welfare, fairness, openness, competence and 
accountability. Some of these broader ethical principles or 
issues deemed more universally applicable are not specifi -
cally defi ned in the Code although they are understood to be 
applicable as well. Only those tenets deemed to be particu-
larly applicable to the practice of professional engineering are 
specifi ed. Nevertheless, certain ethical principles or issues not 
commonly considered to be part of professional  ethics should 
be implicitly accepted to judge the engineer’s professional per-
formance.
Issues regarding the environment and  sustainable develop-
ment know no geographical boundaries. Th e engineers and 
citizens of all nations should know and respect the environ-
mental ethic. It is desirable therefore that engineers in each 
nation continue to observe the philosophy of the Princi-
ples of Environmental Ethics delineated in Section III of this 
Code.
Practice provision  ethics
Professional engineers shall:
hold paramount the safety, health and welfare of the public  ■
and the protection of both the natural and the built envi-
ronment in accordance with the Principles of Sustainable 
Development; 
promote health and safety within the workplace;  ■
off er services, advise on or undertake engineering assign- ■
ments only in areas of their competence and practice in a 
careful and diligent manner; 
act as faithful agents of their clients or employers, maintain  ■
confi dentially and disclose confl icts of interest; 
keep themselves informed in order to maintain their com- ■
petence, strive to advance the body of knowledge within 
which they practice and provide opportunities for the 
professional development of their subordinates and fellow 
practitioners; 
conduct themselves with fairness and good faith towards  ■
clients, colleagues and others, give credit where it is due 
and accept, as well as give, honest and fair professional criti-
cism; 
be aware of and ensure that clients and employers are  ■
made aware of societal and environmental consequences of 
actions or projects and endeavour to interpret engineering 
issues to the public in an objective and truthful manner; 
present clearly to employers and clients the possible conse- ■
quences of overruling or disregarding of engineering deci-
sions or judgement; and
report to their association and/or appropriate agencies any  ■
illegal or unethical engineering decisions or practices of 
engineers or others. 
 Environmental engineering  ethics
Engineers, as they develop any professional activity, shall:
try with the best of their ability, courage, enthusiasm and  ■
dedication to obtain a superior technical achievement, 
which will contribute to and promote a healthy and agree-
able surrounding for all people, in open spaces as well as 
indoors; 
strive to accomplish the benefi cial objectives of their work  ■
with the lowest possible consumption of raw materials and 
 energy and the lowest production of waste and any kind of 
pollution; 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   189 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
190
discuss in particular the consequences of their proposals  ■
and actions, direct or indirect, immediate or long term, 
upon the health of people, social equity and the local sys-
tem of values; 
study thoroughly the environment that will be aff ected,  ■
assess all the impacts that might arise in the structure, 
dynamics and aesthetics of the ecosystems involved, urban-
ized or natural, as well as in the pertinent socio-economic 
systems, and select the best alternative for development 
that is both environmentally sound and sustainable; 
promote a clear understanding of the actions required to  ■
restore and, if possible, to improve the environment that 
may be disturbed, and include them in their proposals; 
reject any kind of commitment that involves unfair dam- ■
ages for human surroundings and nature, and aim for the 
best possible technical, social, and political solution; and
be aware that the principles of ecosystemic interdepen- ■
dence, diversity maintenance, resource recovery and inter-
relational harmony form the basis of humankind’s continued 
existence and that each of these bases poses a threshold of 
sustainability that should not be exceeded. 
Conclusion
Always remember that war, greed, misery and ignorance, 
plus natural  disasters and human induced pollution and 
destruction of resources are the main causes of the progres-
sive impairment of the environment, and that engineers, as 
active members of  society deeply involved in the promotion of 
development, must use their talent, knowledge and imagina-
tion to assist  society in removing those evils and improving the 
quality of life for all people.
Interpretation of the Code of Ethics 
Th e interpretive articles that follow expand on and discuss 
some of the more diffi  cult and interrelated components of the 
Code especially related to the Practice Provisions. No attempt 
is made to expand on all clauses of the Code, nor is the elabo-
ration presented on a clause-by-clause basis. Th e objective of 
this approach is to broaden the interpretation, rather than nar-
row its focus. Th e  ethics of professional engineering is an inte-
grated whole and cannot be reduced to fi xed ‘rules’. Th erefore, 
the issues and questions arising from the Code are discussed 
in a general framework, drawing on any and all portions of the 
Code to demonstrate their inter-relationship and to expand 
on the basic intent of the Code.
Sustainable development and environment
Engineers shall strive to enhance the quality of the biophysi-
cal and socio-economic urban environment of buildings and 
spaces, and to promote the principles of  sustainable develop-
ment.
Engineers shall seek opportunities to work for the enhance-
ment of safety, health and the social welfare of both their local 
community and the global community through the practice 
of  sustainable development.
Engineers whose recommendations are overruled or ignored 
on issues of safety, health, welfare or  sustainable development 
shall inform their contractor or employer of the possible con-
sequences.
Protection of the public and the environment
Professional Engineers shall hold paramount the safety, health 
and welfare of the public and the protection of the environ-
ment. Th is obligation to the safety, health and welfare of the 
general public, which includes one’s own work environment, 
is often dependent upon engineering judgements, risk assess-
ments, decisions and practices incorporated into structures, 
machines, products, processes and devices. Th erefore, engineers 
must control and ensure that what they are involved with is in 
conformity with accepted engineering practice,  standards and 
applicable codes, and would be considered safe based on peer 
adjudication. Th is responsibility extends to include all and any 
situation which an engineer encounters and includes an obli-
gation to advise the appropriate authority if there is reason to 
believe that any engineering activity, or its products, processes 
and so on, do not conform with the above stated conditions.
Th e meaning of paramount in this basic tenet is that all other 
requirements of the Code are subordinate if protection of 
public safety, the environment or other substantive public 
interests are involved.
Faithful agent of clients and employers
Engineers shall act as faithful agents or trustees of their clients 
and employers with objectivity, fairness and justice to all par-
ties. With respect to the handling of confi dential or proprie-
tary information, the concept of ownership of the information 
and protecting that party’s rights is appropriate. Engineers 
shall not reveal facts, data or information obtained in a pro-
fessional capacity without the prior consent of its owner. Th e 
only exception to respecting confi dentially and maintaining 
a trustee’s position is in instances where the public interest 
or the environment is at risk, as discussed in the preceding 
section; but even in these circumstances, the engineer should 
endeavour to have the client and/or employer appropriately 
redress the situation, or at least, in the absence of a compelling 
reason to the contrary, should make every reasonable eff ort to 
contact them and explain clearly the potential risks, prior to 
informing the appropriate authority.
Professional Engineers shall avoid confl ict of interest situa-
tions with employers and clients but, should such confl ict 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   190 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
191
arise, it is the engineer’s responsibility to fully disclose, with-
out delay, the nature of the confl ict to the party(ies) with 
whom the conflict exists. In these circumstances, where 
full disclosure is insufficient or seen to be insufficient to 
protect all parties’ interests as well as the public, the engi-
neer shall withdraw totally from the issue or use extra-
ordinary means, involving independent parties if possible, 
to monitor the situation. For example, it is inappropriate to 
act simultaneously as agent for both the provider and the 
recipient of professional services. If client and employer’s 
interests are at odds, the engineer shall attempt to deal 
fairly with both. If the confl ict of interest is between the 
intent of a corporate employer and a regulatory  standard, 
the engineer must attempt to reconcile the diff erence and, 
if that is unsuccessful, it may become necessary to inform.
Being a faithful agent or trustee includes the obligation of 
engaging, or advising to engage, experts or specialists when 
such services are deemed to be in the client’s or employer’s 
best interests. It also means being accurate, objective and 
truthful in making public statements on behalf of the client 
or employer when required to do so, while respecting the 
 client’s and employer’s rights of confi dentiality and propri-
etary information.
Being a faithful agent includes not using a previous employ-
er’s or client’s specifi c privileged or proprietary information 
and trade practices or process information without the 
owner’s knowledge and consent. However, general technical 
know ledge, experience and expertise gained by the engineer 
through involvement with the previous work may be freely 
used without consent or subsequent undertakings.
Competence and knowledge
Professional Engineers shall off er services, advise on or under-
take engineering assignments only in areas of their competence 
by virtue of their training and experience. Th is includes exercis-
ing care and communicating clearly in accepting or interpreting 
assignments, and in setting expected outcomes. It also includes 
the responsibility to obtain the services of an expert if required 
or, if the knowledge is unknown, to proceed only with full dis-
closure of the circumstances and, if necessary, the experimental 
nature of the activity to all parties involved. Hence, this require-
ment is more than simply duty to a  standard of care, it also 
involves acting with honesty and integrity with one’s client or 
employer and one’s self. Professional Engineers have the respon-
sibility to remain abreast of developments and knowledge in 
their area of expertise, that is, to maintain their own compe-
tence. Should there be a technologically driven or individually 
motivated shift in the area of technical activity, it is the engi-
neer’s duty to attain and maintain competence in all areas of 
involvement including being knowledgeable with the technical 
and legal framework and regulations governing their work. In 
eff ect, it requires a personal commitment to ongoing profes-
sional development, continuing  education and self-testing.
In addition to maintaining their own competence, Profes-
sional Engineers have an obligation to strive to contribute to 
the advancement of the body of knowledge within which they 
practice, and to the profession in general. Moreover, within 
the framework of the practice of their profession, they are 
expected to participate in providing opportunities to further 
the professional development of their colleagues.
Th is competence requirement of the Code extends to include 
an obligation to the public, the profession and one’s peers, 
such that opinions on engineering issues are expressed hon-
estly and only in areas of one’s competence. It applies equally 
to reporting or advising on professional matters and to issu-
ing public statements. Th is requires honesty with one’s self to 
present issues fairly, accurately and with appropriate qualifi -
ers and disclaimers, and to avoid personal, political and other 
non-technical biases. Th e latter is particularly important for 
public statements or when involved in a technical forum.
Fairness and integrity in the workplace
Honesty, integrity, continuously updated competence, devo-
tion to service and dedication to enhancing the life quality of 
 society are cornerstones of professional responsibility. Within 
this framework, engineers shall be objective and truthful and 
include all known and pertinent information on professional 
reports, statements and testimony. Th ey shall accurately and 
objectively represent their clients, employers, associates and 
themselves consistent with their academic, experience and 
professional qualifi cations. Th is tenet is more than ‘not misrep-
resenting’; it also implies disclosure of all relevant information 
and issues, especially when serving in an advisory capacity or 
as an expert witness. Similarly, fairness, honesty and accuracy 
in advertising are expected.
If called upon to verify another engineer’s work, there is an 
obligation to inform (or make every eff ort to inform) the other 
engineer, whether the other engineer is still actively involved 
or not. In this situation, and in any circumstance, engineers 
shall give proper recognition and credit where credit is due 
and accept, as well as give, honest and fair criticism on profes-
sional matters, all the while maintaining dignity and respect 
for everyone involved.
Engineers shall not accept nor off er covert payment or other 
considerations for the purpose of securing, or as remuneration 
for, engineering assignments. Engineers should prevent their 
personal or political involvement from infl uencing or compro-
mising their professional role or responsibility.
Consistent with the Code, and having attempted to remedy 
any situation within their organization, engineers are obligated 
to report to their association or other appropriate agency any 
illegal or unethical engineering decisions by engineers or oth-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   191 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
192
ers. Care must be taken not to enter into legal arrangements, 
which may compromise this obligation.
Professional accountability and leadership
Engineers have a duty to practice in a careful and diligent 
manner and accept responsibility, and be accountable for 
their actions. Th is duty is not limited to design, or its super-
vision and management, but applies to all areas of practice. 
For example, it includes construction supervision and man-
agement, preparation of shop drawings, engineering reports, 
feasibility studies, environmental impact assessments, engi-
neering developmental work, and so on.
Th e signing and sealing of engineering documents indicates the 
taking of responsibility for the work. Th is practice is required 
for all types of engineering endeavour, regardless where or for 
whom the work is done, including, but not limited to, privately 
and publicly owned fi rms, crown corporations and government 
agencies/departments. Th ere are no exceptions; signing and 
sealing documents is appropriate whenever engineering princi-
ples have been used and public welfare may be at risk.
Taking responsibility for engineering activity includes being 
accountable for one’s own work and, in the case of a senior engi-
neer, accepting responsibility for the work of a team. Th e latter 
implies responsible supervision where the engineer is actually 
in a position to review, modify and direct the entirety of the 
engineering work. Th is concept requires setting reasonable lim-
its on the extent of activities, and the number of engineers and 
others, whose work can be supervised by the responsible engi-
neer. Th e practice of a ‘symbolic’ responsibility or supervision is 
the situation where an engineer, say with the title of ‘chief engi-
neer’, takes full responsibility for all engineering on behalf of a 
large corporation, utility or government agency/department 
even though the engineer may not be aware of many of the 
engineering activities or decisions being made daily through-
out the fi rm or department. Th e essence of this approach is 
that the fi rm is taking the responsibility of default, whether 
engineering supervision or direction is applied or not.
Engineers have a duty to advise their employer and, if neces-
sary, their clients and even their professional association, in 
that order, in situations when the overturning of an engineer-
ing decision may result in breaching their duty to safeguard 
the public. Th e initial action is to discuss the problem with 
the supervisor/employer. If the employer does not adequately 
respond to the engineer’s concern, then the client must be 
advised in the case of a consultancy situation, or the most sen-
ior offi  cer should be informed in the case of a manufacturing 
process plant or government agency. Failing this attempt to 
rectify the situation, the engineer must advise his professional 
association of his concerns, in confi dence.
In the same order as mentioned above, the engineer must 
report unethical engineering activity undertaken by other 
engineers or by non-engineers. Th is extends to include, for 
example, situations in which senior offi  cials of a fi rm make 
‘executive’ decisions, which clearly and substantially alter the 
engineering aspects of the work, or protection of the public 
welfare or the environment arising from the work.
Because of the rapid advancements in technology and the 
increasing ability of engineering activities to impact on the 
environment, engineers have an obligation to be mindful of 
the eff ect their decisions will have on the environment and the 
well-being of  society, and to report any concerns of this nature 
in the same manner as previously mentioned. Further to the 
above, with the rapid advancement of technology in today’s 
world and the possible social impacts on large populations of 
people, engineers must endeavour to foster the public’s under-
standing of technical issues and the role of engineering more 
than ever before.
Sustainable development is the challenge of meeting cur-
rent human needs for natural resources, industrial products, 
 energy, food,  transportation, shelter, and effective waste 
management while conserving and, if possible, enhancing the 
Earth’s environmental quality, natural resources, ethical, intel-
lectual, working and aff ectionate capabilities of people and 
socio-economic bases, essential for the human needs of future 
generations. Th e proper observance to these principles will 
considerably help towards the eradication of world poverty.
Engineers against corruption 4.6.4 
Preventing corruption in 
the  infrastructure sector – 
What can engineers do?
Neill Stansbury and Catherine Stansbury
It is now well understood that corruption in the  infrastructure 
sector causes death and economic damage. Frequent exam-
ples include building collapses where bribes paid to building 
inspectors to overlook safety issues have resulted in deaths. 
Corrupt over-pricing and diversion of funds result in inade-
quate and defective  infrastructure, and reduced funding for 
other social and economic needs such as schools and hospi-
tals.
Engineers worldwide have understood the damage caused by 
corruption and are calling for the elimination of corruption in 
the  infrastructure sector. Th e World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations has established an international Anti-Corrup-
tion Standing Committee to agree on appropriate  anti-corrup-
tion actions. Th e World Economic Forum’s Partnering Against 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   192 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
193
Corruption Initiative brings together over 100 major interna-
tional companies from the construction and engineering, oil 
and gas, and mining and mineral sectors of more than thirty-
fi ve countries, with a combined turnover in excess of US$500 
billion, committed not to tolerate bribery and to implement 
eff ective  anti-corruption procedures. At a national level, for 
example, the UK Anti-Corruption Forum is an alliance of UK 
business associations, professional institutions and organiza-
tions with interests in the domestic and international  infra-
structure, construction and engineering sectors. Th e purpose 
of the UK Forum is to promote industry-led actions, which can 
help eliminate corruption. Numerous other initiatives world-
wide are led by or involve engineers.
Engineers do not make up the complete solution to corruption 
prevention. Major reasons for corruption are the corrupt poli-
ticians or government offi  cials who use  infrastructure projects 
or military procurement contracts as their personal source of 
wealth creation, and also because of the inadequate level of 
prevention, investigation and prosecution of corruption. How-
ever, engineers are critical to the reduction of corruption in 
the  infrastructure sector in particular, as they are represented 
at every stage of the process. Engineers work for or advise gov-
ernments, project owners, funders, contractors and consulting 
engineers. Th ey are involved in the planning, design, tender-
ing and execution of the project. Corruption can be materially 
reduced if engineers work together to bring about change.
Engineers can call for action by governments in the follow-
ing areas:
Integrity in government:  ■ Effective national and 
international action must be taken to prevent 
corruption by government officials, to investigate 
and prosecute corrupt offi  cials, and to recover their 
corruptly acquired assets.
Government approvals:  ■ The need for government 
approvals, for example in the application for permits 
or payments, provides opportunities for corruption. 
Governments therefore should take the following 
actions:
–  Th e number of government approvals required, and the 
number of people required to issue these approvals, 
should be reduced to the minimum necessary to ensure 
fair and eff ective government.
–  Government departments should take steps to mini-
mize extortion by their offi  cers, to appoint a senior man-
ager to whom complaints of extortion can be made, and 
to publicize a list of fees and time-scales which should 
properly apply to government procedures. Th is commit-
ment, list of fees and time-scales should be published on 
a publicly acessible website.
Public sector projects ■ : In the case of public sector 
 infrastructure projects, the government should ensure 
that the public sector project owner implements an 
eff ective  anti-corruption system (following boxes).
Reporting: ■  Reporting systems should be maintained 
where details of organizations or individuals who 
are suspected of being involved in corruption can 
be reported. These reporting systems should be 
widely publicized. People should be able to report by 
telephone, letter or email. Reports should be capable 
of being given anonymously, and the confi dentiality of 
sources should be protected.
Investigation and prosecution: ■  Adequate resources 
need to be allocated to investigation and prosecution 
agencies to allow them to carry out their functions 
eff ectively. 
Asset recovery: ■  Greater international eff ort needs to 
be put into recovering and repatriating assets stolen 
through corrupt activities. 
Reducing corruption in  infrastructure projects at the government level
Numerous diff erent organizations participate in the con-
struction of  infrastructure projects: public or private sec-
tor project owners, funders,  consulting engineering fi rms, 
contractors, sub-contractors and suppliers. Th ese organi-
zations will normally be run by engineers, or have engi-
neers in senior management or advisory roles. Engineers 
can therefore either implement or recommend the imple-
mentation of a corporate  anti-corruption programme by 
these organizations. Th is programme should:
prohibit the organization’s staff  from engaging in any  ■
form of corrupt conduct;
specify the organization’s policy on political and  ■
charitable contributions, facilitation payments, gifts, 
hospitality and expenses;
commit the organization to take all reasonable steps  ■
to prevent corruption by the organization’s parent, 
subsidiary and associated companies, agents, joint 
venture and consortium partners, sub-contractors and 
suppliers and
provide for effective  ■  anti-corruption management 
controls, audit, staff training and whistle-blowing 
procedures.
Several organizations have developed model codes of con-
duct, systems and guidance to assist companies in improv-
ing their corporate governance:
Th e International Federation of Consulting Engineers  ■
( FIDIC) has developed Guidelines for Business Integrity 
Management in the Consulting Industry.
Transparency International (TI) has developed  ■
the Business Principles for Countering Bribery and 
accompanying guidelines, implementation plan and 
verifi cation module.
The International Chamber of Commerce (ICC) has  ■
developed Combating Extortion and Bribery: ICC Rules 
of Conduct and Recommendations.
Reducing corruption in  infrastructure projects at the organization level
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   193 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
194
Engineers can take steps at four levels to help bring about 
the reduction of corruption: government, project, corpo-
rate and individual. Th e following boxes outline the steps 
at each level. Taking these steps would result in material 
progress towards an industry in which corruption does not 
kill.
Corruption on  infrastructure projects is a complex prob-
lem. It may occur in the form of bribery, extortion, fraud or 
collusion. It can take place during any phase of a project, 
including project identification, planning, financing, 
design, tender, execution, operation and maintenance. In 
each project phase, corruption may involve any one or 
more of the government, project owner, funders, consult-
ants, contractors, sub-contractors, suppliers, joint venture 
partners and agents. It may occur at any level of the con-
tractual structure. Furthermore, corruption is concealed 
and those aware of it are either complicit in it or reluctant 
to report it. Th is makes it more diffi  cult to detect. 
Th ere is no single or simple method by which to prevent 
such corruption. As with safety and quality issues, corrup-
tion should be addressed by the use of a comprehensive 
system, which combines a number of integrated meas-
ures.
All  infrastructure projects involve engineers at a senior 
decision-making level throughout the project cycle. Engi-
neers can therefore either implement or recommend the 
implementation of eff ective  anti-corruption measures at 
project level. Th ese measures should include:
Independent assessment:  ■ An independent assessor 
should be appointed, on a full-time or part-time basis, 
whose duty is to detect and report corruption for the 
duration of the project. He/she should be suitably 
skilled, be nominated by an independent organization, 
and owe his/her duty to all participants in the project.
Pre-contract disclosure of information:  ■ The major 
project participants should provide each other with 
relevant information at an early stage in the project 
process with the purpose of helping to reveal and so 
minimize the risk of corruption. Such information 
should relate to their principal shareholders, offi  cers, 
fi nancial status, agents, joint venture partners, major 
sub-contractors, criminal convictions and debarment. 
Contractual  ■  anti-corruption commitments: Th e project 
participants should provide  anti-corruption contractual 
commitments to each other, which expressly cover the 
main types of corruption. Remedies should be specifi ed 
in the event of breach of these commitments. 
Government  ■  anti-corruption commitments : 
Government departments should provide an  anti-
corruption commitment whereby the department 
agrees to take steps to minimize extortion by its offi  cers, 
to appoint a senior manager to whom complaints of 
extortion can be made, and to publicize a list of fees and 
time-scales which should properly apply to government 
procedures.
Transparency:  ■ Critical project information on the 
identifi cation, fi nancing, procurement, execution and 
maintenance of the project should be publicly disclosed 
on a website.
Raising awareness: ■  Individuals involved in the project 
should be made aware, through publicity and training, 
of what constitutes corruption, and of the risks of 
personal involvement in corruption. 
Funder involvement: ■  Details of the funding terms 
and conditions, and any changes to these, should be 
publicly disclosed. Th e independent assessor should 
make regular reports to the funders on his activities, 
and report any suspected corruption to them. 
Compliance programme: ■  The project participants 
should be required to take all reasonable steps to ensure 
compliance by the company and its management and 
staff  with the project’s  anti-corruption requirements.
Reporting: ■  Procedures should be implemented on the 
project for confi dential reporting by project participants 
and members of the public. Th e independent assessor 
should have a duty to report suspected corruption to 
the criminal authorities.
Enforcement: ■  Th ere must be a real threat of enforcement. 
Civil enforcement should be implemented under the 
 anti-corruption commitments. Criminal enforcement 
should be implemented by the criminal authorities 
after receiving reports from the independent assessor, 
project participants or members of the public.
Th e Project Anti-Corruption System (PACS) is an inte-
grated and comprehensive system published by the Global 
Infrastructure Anti Corruption Centre (GIACC) to assist 
in the prevention of corruption on construction projects. 
It utilizes the above measures, and provides templates to 
enable these measures to be implemented.
Reducing corruption in  infrastructure projects at the project level
Engineers are professionals in their personal capacity. Th eir 
professional qualifi cation is a badge not only of their skill, 
but also of their personal integrity. Engineers can practice 
and encourage integrity both individually, and through 
their professional institutions. At an individual level, engi-
neers can simply refuse to become involved in any corrupt 
action. If all engineers refused to participate, directly or 
indirectly, in a corrupt act and refused to turn a blind eye 
to corruption, the level of corruption in the  infrastructure 
sector would immediately and signifi cantly fall. Most cor-
ruption on an  infrastructure project could not take place 
without the involvement or knowledge of an engineer. 
However, it is often diffi  cult for engineers to work alone, 
particularly when faced with corrupt government offi  cials 
and, therefore, action is most powerful if taken by profes-
sional institutions on behalf of all their individual mem-
bers. Professional institutions should: 
Publicly speak out against corruption. ■
Increase awareness among the institutions’ ■  members 
of corruption and its consequences through publicity 
and training.
Work in conjunction with other domestic and  ■
international business associations and professional 
institutions, in both the developed and developing 
world, so as to develop a coordinated approach to  anti-
corruption issues.
Work in conjunction with government bodies to  ■
ensure that national and international eff orts to curb 
corruption are well-founded, consistent and eff ective.
Maintain and enforce ■  an eff ective code of conduct, 
which commits the institutions’ members to an 
 anti-corruption policy. The code should provide a 
disciplinary mechanism under which members who 
breach the code are sanctioned. 
Many professional institutions are already taking the above 
steps.
Reducing corruption in  infrastructure projects at the individual level
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   194 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
195
Business Integrity 4.6.5 
Management Systems in 
the  consulting engineering 
industry 
Peter Boswell
Corruption is a zero-sum game where bribery, extortion, col-
lusion or fraud allows someone to profi t at  society’s expense, 
creates unnecessary waste in the procurement of projects, 
undermines the values of  society, breeds cynicism and 
demeans the individuals involved; it must be curbed for the 
eff ective functioning of a sustainable and equitable  society.
Engineering consulting fi rms in both developing and industri-
alized nations confronted by corruption in everyday work at 
home and abroad, particularly in government procurement, 
wish to supply services without concerns about corruption, 
and be assured of competitive bidding on equal terms. Moreo-
ver, clients increasingly require assurance that  consulting engi-
neering fi rms operate in a corruption-free environment.
A global consensus has developed that corruption is not 
only wrong, but also destructive to  sustainable development, 
quality projects and free market systems in an era of globali-
zation. Th e main international  anti-corruption strategy aims 
to create a strong legal framework that will make the cost of 
non-compliance an important factor, thereby increasing the 
commercial risk associated with corrupt practices. Only with 
the momentum that can be achieved by a global commitment 
similar to that for capacity-building and  sustainable develop-
ment will it be possible to make a diff erence. Moreover, to be 
controlled eff ectively, systemic corruption requires approaches 
that encompass both the demand and supply sides of the busi-
ness, and both givers and takers.
Th e International Federation of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC) 
has denounced corruption for many years in arguing that the 
principal criteria for selecting a consultant should be service 
quality and the consultant’s qualifi cations.  FIDIC considers 
systemic corruption as a priority issue. Th e  FIDIC strategy is to 
play a proactive role in joining the worldwide eff ort to combat 
corruption by supporting legislation, promoting high ethical 
 standards, cooperating with international agencies, off ering 
objective advice for procurement processes, and ensuring the 
implementation of management practices in fi rms.
Eff orts to identify specifi c courses of action that would lead 
to reduced corruption began in 1998 with the formulation of 
a strategy and action plan. Th e World Bank enthusiastically 
endorsed the initiative by establishing an Integrity Manage-
ment Task Force under  FIDIC’s leadership, with the Inter-Amer-
ican Development Bank and the Pan-American Federation 
of Consultants (FEPAC) as members. Th e task force recom-
mended the establishment of ‘integrity manuals’ based on a 
shrewd and concrete analysis of procurement procedures that 
went wrong or, at least, on a detailed risk analysis of hypotheti-
 FIDIC specifi cally outlaws corrupt behaviour through its code of 
 ethics: ‘Th e consulting engineer shall neither off er nor accept remu-
neration of any kind, which in perception or in eff ect either:
seeks to infl uence the process of selection or compensation of a) 
consulting engineers and/or their clients; or
seeks to aff ect the consulting engineer’s impartial judgment.’b) 
Th e  FIDIC Code of Ethics
Business Integrity is an organization’s ability to fulfi l its 
commitment to a code of  ethics on behalf of all its stake-
holders. So Business Integrity Management – as opposed 
to corruption control or integrity assurance – seeks to sat-
isfy stakeholders, internal as well as external. BIMS there-
fore considers the holistic implications of all elements of 
management on an organization’s products and services. 
It seeks continuous integrity assurance at every transac-
tion point along the way toward the delivery of the serv-
ices off ered. In other words, a BIMS is a set of interrelated 
elements designed for an organization that wishes to be 
managed by integrity principles; it is what the organization 
does to ensure that its work-fl ow is corruption free.
A BIMS for ensuring the ethical delivery of consulting 
services is voluntary and can be adopted by organizations 
of any size. An organization fi rm wishing to adopt BIMS 
principles must implement a BIMS that complies with the 
 FIDIC BIMS guidelines. 
 FIDIC’s BIMS is designed so that it adds value and generates 
economies of scale for organizations that are committed to 
quality management. Th e BIMS principles should be com-
patible with the ISO 9000 family of quality management 
 standards, and capable of being implemented independ-
ently, concurrently or in parallel with an organization’s 
quality management system.
A commitment to quality management aims to continu-
ously promote best practice in consulting work.  FIDIC 
strongly recommends the development of a quality man-
agement system in member fi rms, where implementation 
is a step-by-step process requiring continuous improve-
ment and a commitment in terms of policy and resources, 
regardless of the size of the fi rm. Designing and imple-
menting a BIMS involves identical considerations.
Once the BIMS is operating properly, and the organiza-
tion is confi dent that the guidelines are met, an evaluation 
process should be initiated to ensure continuous compli-
ance. Th is process can involve: fi rst-party evaluation, where 
the management and the staff  representative evaluate the 
BIMS; second-party evaluation based on client feedback; 
and third-party evaluation by an outside body. For evalu-
ation, it can seek an external audit, a peer review by an 
experienced team drawn from several organizations, or 
certifi cation based on having a recognized authority verify 
the BIMS with respect to its documentation and proce-
dures, possibly as part of an ISO 9001:2000 quality certi-
fi cation process.
Implementing a BIMS
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   195 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
196
Women in engineering: 4.7.1 
Gender dynamics and 
engineering – how to 
attract and retain women 
in engineering
Wendy Faulkner
For nearly three decades, governments and industries across 
the industrialized world have sponsored eff orts to increase the 
representation of women in professional engineering, recog-
nizing the (largely) untapped pool of talent amongst women. 
Th ese eff orts have had some impact, but engineering remains 
a heavily male-dominated occupation in most countries. 
Th ere is clearly room for improvement – not only in recruiting 
cal procedures, with participation by professionals working 
in geographically and sectorially sensitive areas. Th is concept 
became the basis for the development of a supply-side initia-
tive for the  consulting engineering industry called a Business 
Integrity Management System (BIMS).
BIMS recognized that many consulting fi rms were doing their 
best to defi ne and implement  anti-corruption policies. How-
ever, such approaches tend to be piecemeal. What was missing 
was a process that connected and transformed isolated acts of 
integrity assurance into a complete system, with formal pro-
cedures to identify potential risks, prevent and combat cor-
ruption, and implement policies for every project throughout 
an organization. Th e  FIDIC BIMS guidelines published in 2001 
provided a set of tools and a process-based approach for man-
aging an organization’s integrity, and by 2007 a  FIDIC survey 
found that there were seventy-eight member fi rms reporting 
the implementation of a BIMS that followed the guidelines.
Th e  consulting engineering industry has been well aware that 
it was not alone in addressing corruption. Supply-side initia-
tives now range far and wide across many industry sectors. 
More recently,  FIDIC has proposed a Government Procure-
ment Integrity Management System (GPIMS) for the integ-
rity of government procurement processes for consulting 
services. GPIMS accommodates the fundamental principles 
of a government’s legal system and satisfi es the protocols for 
the government procurement anticorruption policies of the 
 OECD’s Principles for Managing Ethics in the Public Service 
and of the United Nations Convention against Corruption.
women into engineering, but also in retaining and promoting 
those women who do enter the profession. 
Some of the issues are well understood. For example, the poor 
work-life balance and a lack of family-friendly policies in many 
engineering organizations are known to contribute to the dis-
proportionate loss of women from the profession. But there 
are also more subtle dynamics at play which tend to make 
engineering organizations more supportive and comfortable 
for men than women. Th ese dynamics were investigated in 
an ethnographic recent study in the UK.61 Th e two-year study 
61 Th is study was conducted between 2003 and 2005 with funding from the UK Eco-
nomic and Social Research Council (ESRC ref: RES 000 23 0151). I gratefully acknowl-
edge this support, and also the time and patience of all those engineers and their 
employers who agreed to participate in the study. A full  research report can be found 
at http://www.issti.ed.ac.uk/publications/workingpapers (Accessed: 16 May 2010). See 
also Faulkner 2005 and 2007 for early academic publications of fi ndings.
Formulation of a code of 1.  ethics. 
Formulation of a 2.  business integrity policy based mainly on 
the  OECD Anti-Bribery Convention and  FIDIC’s code of  eth-
ics, that must be documented, implemented, communicated 
internally and externally, and made publicly available.
Appointment of a representative, generally a senior member 3. 
of the organization’s management staff .
Identifi cation of requirements for the BIMS that should focus 4. 
on the processes which are vulnerable to corruption. 
Analysis and evaluation of current practices. 5. 
An organization should use tools to support the planning and 6. 
implementation of its BIMS, notably: a code of  ethics, an integ-
rity policy; the defi nition of roles, responsibilities and author-
ity; integrity procedures for the main business processes; and 
enforcement measures.
Documentation: a BIMS must be well documented in order to 7. 
provide evidence that all processes that may aff ect the  busi-
ness integrity of the services off ered have been thoroughly 
anticipated. 
Review of current practices by establishing actions to be taken 8. 
in case of failure to comply with the Business Integrity Policy.
Steps for designing Business Integrity 
Management Systems
Women and gender issues in engineering4.7 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   196 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
197
involved interviews and/or observation (through job shadow-
ing) of sixty-six female and male engineers working in a range 
of industrial sectors and engineering disciplines. Its fi ndings 
point to three issues that need to be addressed if we are to 
attract and keep more women in engineering.
What can employers do? A central aim of any diversity and 
equality eff orts must be to nurture a workplace where every-
one is comfortable and ‘belongs’. Th ere is a strong business 
case for sustained and sensitive diversity training, as a means 
of raising awareness of the kind of issues and dynamics sig-
nalled here. To be eff ective such eff orts must involve all staff , 
including middle managers, and they must be tailored to the 
particular workforce to avoid alienating the majority group or 
creating a backlash. Diversity awareness must be seen to have 
the support of senior management. ‘Top down’ policies, such 
as the banning of pornography, can also take the pressure off  
individual women and men fi ghting off ensive cultures. In some 
workplaces, more needs to be done to increase awareness that 
sexual harassment and any kind of bullying or sexist or racist 
behaviour is unacceptable, and of the procedures in place for 
handling this. 
Issue 1: Attracting more women – stereotypes don’t help!
The industry has a particular image problem in recruiting 
women. Part of the problem is that the male engineer is still 
very much seen as the norm. Th is means that many clever 
young women do not even consider a career in engineering. 
It also means that being a woman engineer marks you out as 
unusual, as women engineers are constantly reminded by the 
reactions of others. Another part of the problem is the classic 
stereotype of the engineer, of a man who is brilliant at, and 
passionate about, technology but not so good at interacting 
with people. Th is image not only says ‘technology is for men’, 
it also says being ‘into technology’ means not being ‘into peo-
ple’. As women are stereotypically ‘into people’, the image car-
ries the implicit message that women engineers are not ‘real 
women’, or perhaps not ‘real engineers’! 
In practice, the classic stereotype of an engineer bears little or 
no resemblance to actual engineers, male or female. Whilst a 
few engineers do appear to epitomize the classic stereotype, 
the vast majority are more complex and more diverse than 
stereotypes allow. Many diff erent ‘types’ of women and men 
enjoy engineering work. Moreover, the gender differences 
assumed by the classic stereotype are negligible or absent in 
two key areas.
First, although rather fewer women than men engineers have a 
‘tinkerer’ background, they all get excited about, and take pride 
in, the technologies they work with. Th ere are ‘gadget girls’ as 
well as ‘boys and their toys’; and there also are ‘non-techie’ 
men as well as women in engineering. What draws them all to 
engineering is that they enjoy maths and science and want to 
put their problem-solving abilities to some ‘practical’ use.
Second, all engineers are socially skilled. Th ey have to be; it 
simply isn’t possible to do most engineering jobs without 
some ability to communicate and engage with others eff ec-
tively! To a degree rarely understood by outsiders, the exper-
tise required of engineers is simultaneously social as well as 
technical, for example, the need to integrate business require-
ments into design decisions. Perhaps for this reason, the study 
revealed that people skills are not obviously gender diff erenti-
ated amongst engineers. Th is is a very signifi cant fi nding, not 
only because it counters the classic stereotype of the engineer, 
but also because it counters the common assumption that 
women engineers have better people skills than their male 
counterparts. 
Th is evidence is an important challenge to the conventional 
gendering of the technical-social dualism. It means that 
eff orts to recruit more women into engineering must avoid 
appealing to gender stereotypes, which associate men and 
masculinity with ‘things technical’, and women and feminin-
ity with ‘things social’. Rather, recruitment campaigns should 
‘speak to’ the enthusiasm about maths, science and technol-
ogy and the desire to be practical, which all would-be engi-
neers – women and men – share. And at the same time, they 
should strive to reach the diverse ‘types’ of people which 
engineering needs. 
Th e strategic aim here must be to ‘normalize’ engineering as 
a career choice for women, so that people inside and outside 
of engineering no longer presume that ‘the engineer’ will be 
a man. For this to happen, we need to challenge stereotypes 
about engineering as well as stereotypes about gender. 
As we have seen, the classic stereotype is completely at odds 
with the reality of engineering work. Yet the image of engineer-
ing remains largely technical – in line with the more narrowly 
technical focus of engineering  education. Indeed, many engi-
neers cleave to a ‘nuts and bolts’ identity, even though their 
work is very socially orientated, and despite the fact that they 
never touch a nut or bolt. Th e study showed that the ‘nuts 
and bolts’ identity is a comfortably ‘masculine’ one for many 
men. But workplaces that foreground this identity can serve to 
exclude other engineers, including some very talented women 
engineers. In sum, we must avoid narrowly technical images of 
engineering work if we are to attract and keep talented peo-
ple in engineering. Engineering has room for diverse ‘types’ 
of people because it encompasses a wide variety of jobs and 
roles. We need to promote and celebrate a new ‘broad church’ 
image of engineering – of useful work involving both ‘techni-
cal’ and ‘social’ expertise. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   197 14/09/10   15:34:36
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
198
Issue 2: Good practice to help women (and men) 
‘become’ engineers
Increasing the numbers of women recruited to engineering, 
though vital, is not suffi  cient to increase the proportion of 
women in engineering. Retention is a major issue – especially 
during the ten or so years it can take before entrants really 
become ‘fully fl edged’ engineers. Many women, and men, are 
lost to the profession in the course of university  education and 
early years on-the-job. Yet appropriate support and interven-
tion can make a huge diff erence. We, therefore, need to sustain 
and promote good practice at university and at work if we are 
to keep more women and men in engineering. 
Good practice in engineering  education
Th e engineering faculty can help to ‘normalize’ the female  ■
engineer amongst staff  and students. In addition, they must 
be aware of an early confi dence loss experienced by some 
female students. 
In terms of  ■  curricula, the provision of quality training in 
hands-on engineering benefi ts not only female students but 
also growing numbers of men, who do not have a ‘tinkering’ 
background. Students ‘engage’ more readily with engineer-
ing where the syllabus integrates practical and theoretical 
elements (e.g. through project work).
Good practice in supporting junior engineers on the job
Individual supervisors, mentors, colleagues or managers  ■
can have a huge impact on how smoothly junior engineers 
move up the learning curve, and on whether or not they 
stay. Th ere is a strong business case for employers to invest 
in selecting and training mentors and line managers – to 
build up rather than undermine the confi dence of junior 
engineers, to create opportunities for them to prove them-
selves successfully, and to encourage a culture where ‘there 
are no stupid questions’. 
Many employers ensure that graduates experience the full  ■
range of engineering work. However, women and men engi-
neers alike can end up in jobs that do not suit their skills and 
interests, or which are dead ends in terms of career progres-
sion, and so they drift out of the industry or fail to progress 
in the company. Th e study found suggestive evidence that 
manufacturing can be particularly unsupportive of junior 
women engineers’ careers. Th ere is a crying need for ongo-
ing, strategic support and advice over career development if 
we are to keep talented junior engineers.
Some of the support needed during early years on the job  ■
comes from peers and, for women, from other women 
engineers. Employers can do much to ensure that junior 
engineers are not isolated, and to facilitate networking and 
mutual support between junior engineers and between 
women engineers.
Issue 3: Nurturing more ‘inclusive’ workplace cultures
It is frequently claimed that women who enter engineering 
have to fi t into a masculine culture. Th e job shadowing con-
ducted for this study revealed a mixed picture. Many features 
of engineering workplaces appear quite comfortable for all, 
but some feel and operate like ‘men’s spaces’. In a number of 
subtle ways which may appear trivial individually, but which 
cumulatively amount to a dripping tap, making many engi-
neering workplaces undermine women’s sense that they 
belong, for example:
Topics of conversations: Whilst non-work chat between close 
colleagues is quite wide-ranging and inclusive, the less rou-
tine conversations with outside associates tend to lean more 
readily on stereotypically ‘safe’ subjects – such as football and 
families. Th e more narrow the range of ‘admissible’ conversa-
tion, the more people (men and women) are marginalized or 
silenced. None of those observed was openly gay.
Humour and sex talk: Engineers generally take care to avoid 
potentially off ensive jokes and topics of conversation. However, 
the humour in some workplaces is very coarse and off ensive, 
including sexist, racist and homophobic jokes as well as ‘dirty 
talk’. Any challenges are muted for fear of being ostracized. 
Routine ways of greeting or addressing one another: In gen-
eral, interactions between engineers are entirely respectful. 
However, routine ways of greeting or addressing one another 
tend to be those which men use with other men – ‘mate’ or 
‘man’, even handshakes – and so are absent when men interact 
with women engineers. Such ‘subtle absences’ may mean that 
women engineers have to work harder than men to achieve 
the same level of easy acceptance with new associates or col-
leagues.
Gendered language: Engineers routinely use the generic ‘he’ 
when referring to other engineers. At best, expressions like ‘We 
put our key men forward’ or ‘Go talk to the electrical boys’ 
render women engineers invisible; at worst, they render the 
very category ‘woman engineer’ a non-sequitur! It is not dif-
fi cult to promote gender inclusive language in engineering 
documentation as well as everyday talk.
Social circles and networks: Th ere is considerable mixed-sex 
socializing and camaraderie amongst engineers, and most 
organized social activities (except the football sessions!) 
involve women and men. However, men-only social circles are 
common in engineering. Some of these have a signifi cant infl u-
ence on how the job gets done, and on who gets promoted. 
Breaking into the ‘inner circles’ can be diffi  cult for women 
(and marginal men), for instance, where they bond on the golf 
course or over drinking sessions.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   198 14/09/10   15:34:36
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
199
Conformity and diversity: Engineering workplace cultures 
accommodate a range of men – laddish blokes, family men, 
pranksters, macho men, nerdy men, urbane men, genteel men 
– and so are likely to feel comfortable to the great majority of 
men. Women are expected to adapt and become ‘one of the 
lads’ in order to fi t in but, at the same time, not to ‘lose their 
femininity’.
Th e ‘in/visibility paradox’ facing women engineers: Women 
engineers are so visible as women they are often invisible as 
engineers. Because the norm is a male engineer, even really 
experienced women engineers may have to (re)establish their 
engineering credentials every time they encounter a new col-
league or associate – who may otherwise assume they are a 
secretary!
Sexual visibility and harassment: Women are also (hetero)
sexually visible in a way men engineers rarely experience. Most 
have encountered sexual harassment and/or heavy fl irting 
from men at some point. Often young women are unaware of 
procedures in place to deal with such harassment.
Women in engineering: 4.7.2 
Th e next steps
Monique Frize
Th e rights and position of women in many countries have 
improved substantially in the last century, but progress has 
not been linear. In certain eras, women’s access to  education 
and their ability to participate in the public domain improved, 
but later returned to previous conditions, with minimal educa-
tional opportunities or public role. In contrast with gains that 
women have made in accessing university  education, relatively 
few choose engineering, and a representative proportion of 
women is still far from being reached. Th is is especially true in 
new areas of engineering, such as nanotechnology and robot-
ics. Moreover, the increase in the  enrolment of women in engi-
neering programmes in the 1980s and 1990s has now been lost 
in three short years (2003–2006).
For many centuries, the participation of women in science has 
been cyclical with eras of advancement followed by eras of 
retrenchment. To break this cycle in the twenty-fi rst century, 
major and concurrent eff orts will be needed to reach all of the 
key stakeholders: girls and young women, parents and teach-
ers, guidance counsellors, employers of engineers, role models 
and leaders in the scientifi c and professional engineering asso-
ciations. We must bear in mind that outreach programmes 
that have been successful in the past need to be dynamic and 
fi ne-tuned for the changing teenage cultures of the new mil-
lennium; we must also reach the adults who could have some 
infl uence on their career choices.
Faculties of engineering should provide quality counselling to 
ensure that programme and course choices are a good fi t with 
the student’s interests and abilities. Once women make a com-
mitment to a career in engineering, it is critical to put in place 
retention strategies such as providing networking opportunities 
for students in lower years to meet older students, or provid-
ing tutoring for those in need of help. Long-term structural and 
cultural changes are necessary to make engineering schools and 
faculties more hospitable for female students. While the envi-
ronment has improved over the past decade, demeaning jokes 
and comments are still present and have negative eff ects.62 Stu-
dent newspapers appear to be more professional but they still 
occasionally contain inappropriate articles and sexist images. 
When planning group work for laboratories or design teams, 
it is recommended to have at least 50 per cent women in each 
group (resulting of course in some groups consisting of men 
only) since male-dominated teams tend to bring out the more 
traditional gender-linked behaviour in both men and women.63 
For example, the men will tend to ask the women to take the 
notes while they will be keen to do the hands-on work. In most 
programmes, the teaching style remains traditional64 and theory 
is seldom connected to real life applications and contexts, which 
demotivates many students but women in particular.
Tobias65 suggests that massive restructuring of the  curriculum 
and pedagogy of elementary and secondary school science is 
needed to improve science literacy. In university, Tobias found 
some bright women and men avoid science and engineering 
programmes or leave after attending a few classes; others leave 
mid-way through their degree. Retaining this type of student 
could bring positive changes to the culture and make the 
environment friendlier for everyone. Large classes are usually 
taught with traditional lectures in large halls, so it is not easy 
to apply small group self-learning methods. Rosser66 describes 
several ways to create a more ‘women-friendly culture’, arguing 
that these changes will also benefi t male students. 
Hiring more women faculty would help to attract an increased 
number of women entering into engineering graduate pro-
grammes at both the Master’s and PhD levels. Moody67 presents 
some of the frequent myths and easy excuses used to avoid 
62 Ingram, Sandra and Anne Parker. 2002. Th e infl uence of gender on collaborative 
projects in an engineering classroom. IEEE Transaction on Professional  Communication, 
Vol. 45, No. 1, pp. 7–20.
63 Ingram, Sandra and Anne Parker. 2002. Th e infl uence of gender on collaborative 
projects in an engineering classroom. IEEE Transaction on Professional  Communication, 
Vol. 45, No. 1, pp. 7–20.
64 Anderson, Inger J. T. 2002. Th e social construction of female engineers: A qualitative case 
study of engineering  education. Department of Sociology, University of Saskatchewan.
65 Tobias, S. 1992. Th ey’re not dumb, they’re diff erent: Stalking the second tier. Tucson AZ: 
Research Corp. 
66 Rosser, Sue V. 1997. Re-Engineering Female Friendly Science. New York: Teachers College 
Press, Columbia University.
67 Moody, JoAnn. 2004. Faculty diversity problems and solutions. New York: Routledge.
 Engineering needs more 
women.
©
 C
ec
ili
a R
os
s
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   199 15/09/10   10:16:03
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
200
hiring new faculty from under-represented groups; she recom-
mends nineteen practices for university presidents, provosts, 
deans and departments. She also off ers advice for academic 
search committees such as avoiding biased decision-making 
and snap judgements, seizing pretexts, and downgrading the 
institutions from which candidates obtained their degree.68 It 
is frequent to hear in male-dominated departments comments 
such as ‘we cannot lower our  standards’, suggesting that hir-
ing a woman or a person from a visible minority will have this 
outcome. In fact, the bar is often raised for these candidates 
compared to the expectations from candidates from a major-
ity group. Criteria in judging achievement, which aff ects hir-
ing, tenure, promotion and the awarding of  research chairs or 
professorships, must refl ect the quality of publications instead 
of their number. Universities also need to create policies that 
allow young faculty members – female and male – to balance 
family and career, while looking at the potential of candidates 
versus what they have accomplished by the time of the inter-
view. Biases can be reduced through  education and gender 
sensitization programmes and ensuring a fair gender represen-
tation on decision-making committees. Proactive methods to 
fi nd qualifi ed women for positions or awards will also help.
In engineering workplaces, employers can develop objective 
hiring criteria, proactively seek women applicants and sensi-
tize selection committees to recognize appropriate questions 
and illegal ones. Creating opportunities for women to meet 
and network with a fast track for women identifi ed with man-
agement potential will provide mentors for younger women, 
and hopefully lead to an integration of feminine values into 
the culture. Instituting fl exible hours can help reduce staff  
turnover and thus the cost of hiring and training new peo-
ple. Parental leave should be available to mothers and fathers 
with no negative impact on their career. Access to aff ordable 
childcare is a major factor in retaining young parents in today’s 
workplace. Providing visible assignments to people who need 
to build their self-confi dence and credibility is important.
Progress in scientific and professional associations can be 
assessed by monitoring the proportion of women elected to 
positions on the governing body, on important committees, 
receiving awards and prizes, invited as keynote speakers, pan-
elists on specialty topics and plenary sessions. Qualifi ed women 
can be found, and recognizing their achievements and exper-
tise will accelerate progress towards a fairer representation and 
add new perspectives in solving technological problems. 
Until we get rid of stereotypes about people’s aptitudes and 
behaviours, it will be impossible to create an atmosphere of 
respect and trust. Th e predominantly male view is not the only 
way to create new knowledge; the range of perspective women 
can bring will undoubtedly be a benefi t. Integrating women’s 
68 Moody, JoAnn. 2004. Faculty diversity problems and solutions. New York: Routledge.
values in a way that permeates all aspects of knowledge will 
have a positive impact. 
One way to enhance career success is to network with col-
leagues in our fi eld and with women in engineering and sci-
ence. Th e former will be helpful to ensure that our expertise 
and achievements are recognized by peers, and that we have 
opportunities to share knowledge and learn with them. Th e 
networking available within women’s organizations is also 
very important to share best practices on how to increase the 
participation of women at all levels and strategies for career 
advancement. Discussing how to balance work and personal 
life is another important aspect for everyone, women and 
men, in this new millennium where more men are sharing the 
parenting responsibilities.69
Effecting a change of attitudes and behaviour takes time. 
Equity does not just mean an equal number of women and 
men; it means equal chances of success and career develop-
ment and having a voice at meetings. It means that average 
women will succeed as much as average men. If more women 
feel comfortable in choosing these fi elds, they will achieve eco-
nomic independence and have more control over their lives. 
Women must face challenges fearlessly, discover their talents 
and skills, and believe in themselves. Men and women should 
be partners and agents of change, each in their own way.
Women and gender issues in 4.7.3 
engineering: an Australian 
perspective
Marlene Kanga
 Australia is faced with an acute shortage of engineering skills, 
especially in electrical, mechanical, civil and mining engineer-
ing.70 Th is is resulting in capacity constraints in many sectors 
of the economy, especially mining and  infrastructure develop-
ment. In such an environment, it is vital to attract both men 
and women to engineering and retain those who have quali-
fi ed as engineers within the profession. 
Women engineers currently represent less than 7 per cent of 
the engineering workforce in  Australia – one of the lowest 
participation rates of women across all professions in  Aus-
tralia. Ensuring that more women join and remain in the pro-
fession is vital from a social equity viewpoint while providing 
a means to increase excellence and address the shortage of 
engineering skills.
69 For more information on the International Network of Women Engineers and Scien-
tists: http://www.inwes.org
70 Th e Engineering Profession: A Statistical Review, Engineers  Australia March 2006, http://
engineersaustralia.org.au
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   200 14/09/10   15:34:37
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
201
Approximately 1,500 Australian women commence engineer-
ing undergraduate degrees every year, representing approxi-
mately 13.6 per cent of all engineering students in 2006. Th is 
share has remained relatively unchanged since 1994 (13.4 
per cent), although it rose to 15.7 per cent in 2001 and then 
declined.71 In addition, around 500 women commence post-
graduate engineering programmes annually. Approximately 
1,200 foreign women students commence mainly post grad-
uate engineering degrees each year, up from around 200 in 
1994. Th e overall share of women at all levels of student engi-
neering commencements is around 15 per cent and has been 
at this level for the past ten years as shown in Figure 1.
Despite the relatively small numbers, women tend to com-
plete their engineering courses with great success, represent-
ing 15 per cent of total engineering graduations, as shown 
in Figure 2. Retention levels for engineering students tend to 
be 60 per cent for women students compared to 52 per cent 
for men, on average. Th ere is anecdotal evidence that women 
engineers tend to perform better than their male counter-
parts academically, and tend to achieve a higher proportion of 
awards and university medals and prizes.
Many women engineers tend to leave the profession within 
the fi rst few years of graduating. Consequently, women engi-
neers in  Australia tend to be young. Th e annual survey con-
ducted by the Association of Professional Engineers, Scientists 
and Managers,  Australia (APESMA, 2007) reported the aver-
age age of women engineers as 31.2 years compared to 43.5 
years for men.72 Th e average age for women engineers is lower 
than the average for women scientists at 35.3 years, and for 
women information technology professionals at 42.8 years. 
The APESMA 2007 survey confirms that the retention of 
women in the engineering profession is an ongoing problem 
and that women are leaving the engineering profession at a 
rate 38.8 per cent faster than their male counterparts.
Th e statistics on membership of Engineers  Australia (the 
national professional engineering body) shows the con-
tinuing low proportion of women engineers in the country, 
comprising of less than 7 per cent of its total membership 
in March 2008. Longitudinal analysis of these membership 
statistics shows that that until 2004, women tended not to 
progress to full qualifi cation (so presumably were  leaving 
while still graduate members), and that the women who 
were qualifi ed were also leaving the profession. It appears 
that this trend may have just turned the corner and that the 
retention of women within Engineers  Australia has started 
71 Women in Engineering Studies in  Australia, Statistical Report prepared from data pro-
vided by the Department of Education, Science and Training (DEST), Engineers  Aus-
tralia, November 2007. http://www.engineersaustralia.org.au/wie (Accessed: 16 May 
2010).
72 Women in the Professions Survey Report 2007, APESMA, Melbourne. http://www.
apesma.asn.au/women (Accessed: 16 May 2010).
to improve. Figure 3 shows that the percentage of women 
members has increased steadily since 1999 from 4.0 per cent 
to 6.8 per cent.73
Women also show smaller proportions in holding positions of 
signifi cant responsibility. For example, the Engineers  Australia 
Career Review of Engineering Women (CREW, 2007) survey 
reports that 77.8 per cent of women engineers were in lower 
responsibility level positions (Levels 1 to 3 on a scale of 5). 
Th is was also refl ected in their remuneration levels where 30 
per cent of women earned less than AU$60,000 compared 
with 24 per cent of men, and that 50.6 per cent earned less 
than AU$75,000. At the higher end, only 10 per cent of 
73 Membership Statistics, Engineers  Australia, March 2008, unpublished.
 
 
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
SHARES (%)
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Doctorates
Research master’s
Coursework master’s
Bachelor’s
all commencements
Figure 1: Share of women in all student commencements in Australian 
University engineering courses
30.0
25.0
20.0
15.0
10.0
5.0
0.0
SHARES (%)
1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
Doctorates
Research master’s
Coursework master’s
Bachelor’s
All graduations
female share of total 
commencements
Figure 2: Share of women in all students graduating from Australian 
University engineering courses
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   201 14/09/10   15:34:37
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
202
women compared to 15 per cent of men earned more than 
AU$121,000.74
Women engineers face signifi cant barriers in comparison to 
other professional women in terms of an often unsupportive 
workplace culture. Two surveys conducted by the National 
Committee for Women in Engineering in  Australia indicate 
that discrimination, bullying and harassment are common, 
although the incidence has reduced since the first survey 
(CREW Survey, 2002,75 CREW Revisited).76 Th e basis of dis-
crimination reported was overwhelmingly gender, which was 
reported across all age groups but particularly by women engi-
neers less than forty years of age. It is encouraging to note that 
employers have recognized the need to address work prac-
tices to modify these behaviours, just as considerable work has 
74 Mills, J., Mehrtens, V., Smith, E. and Adams, V, CREW Revisited in 2007. Th e Year of 
Women in Engineering, Engineers  Australia, April 2008, http://www.engineersaustralia.
org.au/wie (Accessed: 16 May 2010).
75 Counting the losses: Career Review of Engineering Women (CREW) Report, Engineers 
 Australia, 2002, http://www.engineersaustralia.org.au/wie (Accessed: 16 May 2010).
76 Mills, J., Mehrtens, V., Smith, E. and Adams, V, CREW Revisited in 2007. Th e Year of 
Women in Engineering, Engineers  Australia, April 2008, http://www.engineersaustralia.
org.au/wie (Accessed: 16 May 2010).
been done to achieve safe work practices in the past decade. 
Th e current survey shows that some engineering organizations 
now provide training in equity and diversity management for 
their employees and have developed equity and diversity 
policies and organizational practices to assess their equity per-
formance that set targets for improvement.
Responsibilities for children are also a signifi cant issue for 
women engineers, where 78.1 per cent of respondents to the 
CREW 2007 survey were not responsible for dependent chil-
dren.77 Th e survey also reported that 67.1 per cent of women 
engineering respondents did not have children, as shown in 
Figure 4. Both these results are signifi cantly above the rate of 
24 per cent of all women estimated by the Australian Bureau 
of Statistics to remain childless (in 2002), refl ecting the rela-
tively young age of women engineers and also the tendency of 
women to leave once they have families.
However this is beginning to be redressed in the Australian 
engineering profession. It is encouraging that the most signifi -
cant result of the 2007 survey is the increased availability of 
family-friendly workplaces as shown in Figure 5.
Family-friendly practices are intended to assist employees to 
balance work and family commitments and consequently 
enhance their productivity. As women are still more frequently 
the primary care-givers for children, family-friendly practices 
should assist their retention and career progression. Engineer-
ing fi rms have recognized the messages about family-friendly 
workplace practices being critically important to attract and 
retain engineers and have put appropriate policies into place. 
Some 79 per cent of women respondents indicated that fl ex-
ible work hours were available. Women respondents also indi-
cated that paid maternity leave (72 per cent), leave without 
pay (91 per cent) and carer’s leave (79 per cent) was available 
in a large majority of fi rms.
77 Mills, J., Mehrtens, V., Smith, E. and Adams, V, CREW Revisited in 2007. Th e Year of 
Women in Engineering, Engineers  Australia, April 2008, http://www.engineersaustralia.
org.au/wie (Accessed: 16 May 2010).
Figure 3: Total number of women members of Engineers  Australia (1980–March 2008)
Membership 
Grade
Total Number of Women Percentage of Member Category (%)
1980 1990 2000 2003 2005 2008 1980 1990 2000 2003 2005 2008
Fellow 0 4 39 46 60 74 0 0.14 0.5 0.89 1.13 1.40
Member 46 263 496 938 1192 1613 0.3 0.9 1.8 2.94 3.73 4.78
Graduate 41 346 1741 2138 1768 1919 0.6 3.7 9.5 10.75 11.92 13.55
Student 14 467 1295 3904 4318 4760 1.4 8.2 15.0 16.83 16.00 15.72
Total 87 613 2276 3122 3020 3606 N/A N/A 4.0 5.48 5.79 6.78
Source: Engineers  Australia Membership Statistics to March 2008, unpublished
 
Figure 4: Percentage of women without children by professional discipline
Source: APESMA Survey 2007 (see note 76).
Other
Pharmacy
Business
Science
Information 
Technology
Engineering
47.6%
48.4%
49.3%
54.0%
60.2%
67.1%
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   202 14/09/10   15:34:37
A N  O V E R V I E W  O F  E N G I N E E R I N G
203
Figure 5: Availability and use of family-friendly employment practices in the engineering profession
Family friendly 
employment 
practices
Percentage reporting the availability 
of these practices (%)
Percentage reporting having used 
these practices (%)
Women Men Women Men
Flexible work hours 
available
79.0 78.3 75.5 79.4
Job sharing ** 29.6 30.4 18.0 28.7
Part-time work ** 67.7 55.5 21.2 10.1
Leave without pay ** 91.4 89.1 35.8 26.3
Carer’s leave 79.1 77.3 18.1 19.1
Paid maternity leave 72.4 70.0 11.7 N/A
Paid paternity leave 67.7 68.6 N/A 9.9
** Indicates a signifi cant diff erence in having used these practices using the Pearson Chi-squared test with a p-value of <0.05 signifying a 95% confi dence in the results.
Source: Engineers  Australia CREW 2007 survey
Engineers  Australia recognizes the importance of attracting 
and retaining women engineers. Th e vision of its National 
Committee for Women in Engineering is that engineering 
becomes an inclusive profession which values, supports and 
celebrates the contributions of women in the engineering 
team. Th e Committee ran a very successful ‘Year of Women 
in Engineering’ campaign in 2007, which increased aware-
ness of the achievements of women engineers within the 
membership of the professional institution. Th e commit-
tee also has strategies for attracting and retaining women 
in engineering which cover the entire career professional 
life cycle, from attracting girls to engineering, encouraging 
and supporting these students at university, and further 
support as they enter the profession. It is also encouraging 
employers to develop appropriate policies to retain these 
women as they start to have families and raise children. 
Examples include:
‘GirlTalk’ is a programme designed for school students to  ■
inform them about engineering as a career. A successful 
pilot has been delivered to more than 600 students, 
presented by women engineers. Th is programme will 
be delivered nationally. 
Professional development workshops specifi cally for  ■
women engineers are delivered to assist and support 
women in developing skills for dealing with a male-
dominated workplace, and to prepare them for future 
leadership roles. These workshops and seminars 
include: ‘Breakthrough Career Strategies for Women 
Engineer’; ‘Managing a Diverse Workforce, What you 
Need to Know’; ‘Women in Engineering Leadership 
Seminars’. Th ese events in 2007 and 2008 reached more 
than 1,000 women around  Australia.
A ‘Career Flexibility Policy’ has been approved in  ■
principle and is being developed, recognizing the need 
for fl exibility in maintaining chartered engineer status 
and ongoing registration on the National Professional 
Engineers Register while taking a career break or 
working part-time. 
Case studies of engagement from Engineers  Australia 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   203 14/09/10   15:34:37
Engineering  around the world5 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   205 14/09/10   15:34:38
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
206
Engineers work in similar fi elds and have similar backgrounds, 
and engineering faces similar issues and challenges around 
the world, for example, in such areas as the decline of inter-
est and  enrolment of young people in engineering. However, 
these issues and challenges diff er signifi cantly in diff erent 
regions and countries and within countries as well as in engi-
neering resources and hence opportunities available to meet 
and address these issues and challenges. Because the situa-
tion of engineering is fairly comparable in similar countries 
and regions, and in view of limited data availability in some 
countries and limited space in the Report, it was decided to 
limit the number and size of such contributions – to be per-
spectives rather than country reports. Th is chapter presents 
a brief review of engineering around the world, with an intro-
ductory overview followed by regional perspectives on Africa , 
the  Arab States, Asia and Pacifi c,  Europe and the Americas 
and Caribbean. Th ese are followed by country perspectives 
in Africa on Côte d’Ivoire,  Ghana, Nigeria and Uganda, in the 
 Arab States on Jordan, Lebanon and Tunisia, in  Asia and the 
Pacifi c on  Australia, China, India, Japan, Malaysia, and the 
South Pacifi c, in  Europe on France, Germany, Poland, Russia 
and the United Kingdom, and in the the Americas and Carib-
bean on Argentina, Brazil, Canada, the USA, Venezuela, and 
the Caribbean.
Introductory overview5.1 
Tony Marjoram
Engineering similarities and diversities 
Engineering is one of the most diverse professions in terms of 
fi elds of engineering, types and levels of engineer, where and 
how they are employed as well as the status of engineers and 
engineering, and this diversity is refl ected around the world; 
engineering is both global and local. Most political leaders and 
policy-makers appear to agree that the development and appli-
cation of knowledge in engineering and technology underpins 
and drives sustainable social and  economic development, and 
that engineering and technology are vital in addressing the 
 Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), basic human needs, 
 poverty reduction and  sustainable development, and in order 
to bridge the knowledge divide. Most would also agree that 
one of the major issues and challenges facing engineering is the 
decline of interest and  enrolment of young people, especially 
women, in engineering in most countries around the world, 
which will seriously impact on capacity in engineering and 
the capacity of engineering to address  poverty reduction,  sus-
tainable development and other MDGs. Th ese are major con-
cerns and challenges for engineering and the world. Despite 
the comments of world leaders on knowledge societies and 
economies, and the declarations made at international confer-
ences and world summits, engineering is routinely overlooked 
in the context of development policy and planning, and is 
hardly mentioned in relation to the MDGs or in many Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Papers (PRSPs) for example.
Although engineering is both global and local, most engineers 
work in larger countries and economies where most engineer-
ing activity takes place in terms of the production of know-
ledge, patents and technology. Most technology is shaped 
in such societies, in accordance with perceived market and 
consumer needs and demands, and the associated support 
systems and  infrastructure in engineering. Th is technology is 
then innovated and used around the world where such sup-
port  systems and  infrastructure may be weaker; technology 
transfer is a complex process. Very few countries have the engi-
neering resources to design and manufacture jet engines for 
example, and few have the resources to maintain them. Similar 
considerations apply to the latest automobile technology – 
cars require increasingly sophisticated diagnostic and main-
tenance tools and equipment, and the home or back-street 
adjustment of carburettors, points and plugs of a generation 
ago, as with other modern ‘non user serviceable’ technologies, 
is no longer possible. 
Whilst engineering faces similar issues and challenges around 
the world, the scale and specifi city of these issues and chal-
lenges diff ers signifi cantly in diff erent regions and countries 
and within countries, as well as in the engineering resources 
and hence opportunities available to meet them. Th is raises 
important issues regarding the need for technology and engi-
neering to be appropriate to local contexts and needs, as 
well as important issues and questions regarding technology 
policy, choice, decision making and management. Th ese are 
major considerations regarding eff ective technology transfer, 
although the international focus has more often been on the 
protection of intellectual property as a key consideration, for 
example in the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intel-
lectual Property Rights (TRIPS) – the most important instru-
ment for the globalization of intellectual property laws and 
a compulsory membership requirement of the World Trade 
Organization. Almost gone are the days of Humphry Davy 
and his refusal to patent the miner’s safety ‘Davy lamp’ for the 
‘cause of humanity’.
Engineering capacity, capacity-building and  education
Similar and specifi c issues face engineering around the world 
including: engineering capacity and capacity-building,  edu-
cation, training and associated  standards and  accreditation; 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   206 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
207
national and  international cooperation, networking and part-
nerships; engineering  infrastructure, applications and  innova-
tion; and engineering policy and planning, information and 
indicators. In the context of capacity and  education, although 
there are at present increasing numbers of young people in 
tertiary  education, many countries are reporting a shortage of 
engineers, and indications that they are not producing enough 
engineers to maintain current capacities or meet expected 
increases in capacity in growing and emerging industries. 
Many countries also report for example, particular shortages 
in certain areas of engineering (e.g. mechanical, civil, medical 
and biochemical engineers in the manufacturing, industry, 
 infrastructure, health and mining sectors), at certain levels (e.g. 
 technicians and  technologists), and an impending demand for 
engineers in such areas as nuclear power,  renewable  energy, 
and other emerging industries associated with  climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. On top of this, many countries are 
concerned about a serious potential decline in engineering 
capacity in the medium and longer term in all areas as many 
engineers approach retirement, and birth rates are declining in 
many industrialized countries. 
Universities have an obvious and important role in engineering 
 education, training, capacity and capacity-building, continu-
ous professional development ( CPD), engineering  standards 
and professional  accreditation. Larger countries and econo-
mies usually have a diversity of universities with schools or 
faculties of engineering including ‘ research universities’ with 
backgrounds in  research and development and  innovation, 
and supported by government and foundation funding, often 
linked to industry and private sector support. Th is is less the 
case in developing and especially least developing countries 
where there are usually only a few universities that focus par-
ticularly on undergraduate teaching. Given the attractions 
of  research for academic staff , promotions linked to papers 
published and the fact that many obtained PhDs in developed 
country universities, the temptation to migrate felt developing 
country engineers are signifi cant, as is the impact of their  brain 
drain on engineering capacity and national development. 
Almost all countries report an under-representation of 
women and related gender issues in engineering, which is 
refl ected in university  enrolment but begins at secondary and 
even primary school level. Eff orts to promote the participa-
tion of women in science and engineering in many countries 
increased university  enrolment in these areas in the 1980s and 
1990s from an average of 10–15 per cent to 20 per cent and 
above in some countries. Th is relates particularly to maths, 
physics, chemistry and all areas of engineering. Unfortunately, 
since 2000, progress and  enrolment appears to have declined, 
back to 10 per cent in some countries. In other countries the 
participation of women in engineering is less than this, and 
in a few countries there are almost no women engineers at 
all. Interest in  women and gender issues in engineering relates 
not only to equity and equality, but with a shortage of engi-
neers and an under-representation of women in engineering 
it makes sense to promote the role of women in engineering. 
Th is will also help attract young men into engineering, and 
bring a more gender-sensitive approach to engineering. We 
urgently need to get more women and under-represented 
groups into engineering to maintain and promote knowledge 
societies and economies, address the MDGs and reduce  brain 
drain and associated impacts on developing countries. 
Networking and partnerships
Universities and university teaching and  research engineers are 
also vital in promoting national and  international cooperation, 
networking and partnerships in engineering, in conjunction 
with practicing professional, consulting and business engi-
neers. Th is often takes place and is facilitated by professional 
engineering societies and institutions, which may be fi eld spe-
cifi c or collective for the engineering profession as a whole, or 
unfortunately absent in some developing and least developed 
countries. Professional engineering societies and institutions 
play a vital role in promoting engineering  education, training, 
 CPD and capacity-building,  standards,  accreditation, informa-
tion and advocacy through the development of networking 
and partnerships, and national and  international cooperation. 
Th e lack or limitation of engineering organizations is a further 
constraint on their development, and requires the full support 
of the national and international engineering community.
Infrastructure, applications and  innovation
As regards the engineering  infrastructure, applications and 
 innovation, as mentioned elsewhere, we live in engineered 
technocultures where all buildings,  water supply and sanita-
tion,  transportation,  energy and communication systems, and 
other aspects of the physical and non-physical  infrastructure 
and other applications are engineered and innovated, as were 
many aspects of our tangible and intangible cultural heritage. 
Infrastructure around the world has suff ered from a lack of 
maintenance in recent years, especially since the  economic cri-
sis and especially in developing countries. So it is interesting to 
observe that one of President Obama’s fi rst announcements 
on taking office was that  infrastructure maintenance and 
development would be one focus of economic recovery and 
regeneration. Maintenance and reliability engineering, and 
the design of  infrastructure for reliability and ease of main-
tenance, are important considerations discussed elsewhere in 
this Report. Engineering  infrastructure, applications and  inno-
vation are also vital in addressing the MDGs in the context 
of basic needs and  poverty reduction, in  sustainable develop-
ment,  climate change mitigation and adaptation, and also in 
the context of  emergencies and  disaster response, reconstruc-
tion and mitigation. Engineering and technology applications 
need to be appropriate to local contexts, and local engineers 
for example need to be involved in aid-supported projects 
involving engineering in developing countries.
 Tidal barrage.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   207 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
208
Engineering policy, planning and management
Engineering policy, planning and management, and associated 
information and indicators, are necessary to facilitate engi-
neering  education and capacity-building, the development of 
networks and partnerships,  infrastructure, applications and 
 innovation. Serious issues and challenges in this context relate 
to the fact that engineering is often be overlooked in the pol-
icy context, as is engineering as part of the broader discussion 
of ‘science’. Although interest in science and technology stud-
ies and policy developed in the 1960s, the focus was mainly on 
science and technology studies, policy and planning, with little 
reference to engineering, and the study of engineering and 
engineering policy have remained a rather neglected area of 
interest and emphasis. At the same time,  statistics and indica-
tors on science and engineering are aggregated in international 
data gathering, which is of little use in the analysis of science or 
engineering, or of diff erent branches of science and engineer-
ing. Th ere is therefore an important need, and opportunity, to 
develop the fi elds of  engineering studies, engineering policy, 
planning and management, and to develop better  statistics 
and indicators on engineering as an input to policy and plan-
ning. Th ese fi elds need to be developed with specifi c reference 
to the role of engineering policy, planning and management 
for development.
Regional perspectives on engineering5.2 
Africa 
Nelius Boshoff and Johann Mouton
Th e engineering discourse in Africa is largely focused on mat-
ters related to capacity-building and the contribution of engi-
neering projects to  sustainable development. Th e discourse 
informs engineering initiatives in Africa . Th e development of 
the African engineering profession in recent years has also 
benefi tted from the activities of the Engineering Council of 
South Africa (ECSA).
For example, in 2005, ECSA signed an important memoran-
dum of understanding with the New Partnership for  Africa’s 
Development (NEPAD). Th is signifi ed the intent of ECSA and 
NEPAD to collaborate in building engineering capacity in 
Africa where ECSA, for instance, assumed responsibility for 
the design and quality assurance of educational programmes 
in engineering for African countries. However, even prior to 
the signing, ECSA was already providing support to African 
countries as far north as Ethiopia (Poggiolini, 2004)78. ECSA is 
also collaborating with the South African Centre for Scientifi c 
and Industrial Research to create centres of excellence in the 
Southern African Development Community (SADC) region 
(ECSA, 2007).79 Only twelve countries in Africa  have national 
science academies (Cameroon, Egypt,  Ghana, Kenya, Mada-
gascar, Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Zambia 
and Zimbabwe), and of these only South Africa  has an engi-
neering academy.
Sub-Saharan Africa, with the exception of South Africa, lags 
behind in terms of engineering capacity and  research produc-
tivity. Th e building of engineering capacity-building in Africa 
 is dependent on a number of factors and conditions such as 
large internationally-funded engineering projects to serve as 
learning sites, the prioritization of engineering  education and 
the creation of engineering schools and even engineering acad-
emies that can provide recognition to promising engineers 
(Juma, 2006).80 Existing engineering  research capacity and 
expertise in Africa  can be highlighted by looking at the pub-
lication patterns of engineering researchers, in particular the 
country affi  liations of publications and fi eld classifi cations for 
the journals in which the publications appear. Figure 1 shows 
that between the early 1990s and the most recent reporting 
period, African-based researchers more than doubled their 
total publication output (from 3170 to 7886).
Th e ISI Web of Science database by Th omson Scientifi c was 
used as the main data source. Publications, for our purpose, 
78 Poggiolini, D. 2004. Achieving new heights in professionalism. IMIESA, September 2004, 
pp.63–65.
79 ECSA. 2007. Media Release. Engineering Council of South  Africa, 1 June 2007.
80 Juma, C. 2006. Engineering  education vital for  Africa’s growth. Th e East African, 16 
October 2006.
Figure 1: Number of publications produced by African-based researchers in 
engineering and applied technologies, 1990–2007
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1990-1992 1993-1995 1996-1998 1999-2001 2002-2004 2005-2007
3170
3772
4698
5500
6356
7886
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   208 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
209
Figure 2: Country breakdown of ISI publications produced by African-based researchers in Engineering and Applied 
Technologies, 2005-2007
Ten most productive 
countries in 2005-2007 
by rank
1990-1992 2005-2007
Publication count
Proportion 
of publications 
(out of 3170, %)
Publication count
Proportion 
of publications 
(out of 7886, %)
1. Egypt 1312 41.4% 2385 30.2%
2. South  Africa 924 29.1% 1775 22.5%
3. Algeria 142 4.5% 1098 13.9%
4. Tunisia 65 2.1% 1080 13.7%
5. Morocco 176 5.6% 606 7.7%
6. Nigeria 292 9.2% 375 4.8%
7. Libya 44 1.4% 95 1.2%
8. Cameroon 13 0.4% 78 1.0%
9.  Ghana 26 0.8% 53 0.7%
10. Kenya 43 1.4% 52 0.7%
Note that publication counts cannot be totalled due to multiple-country co-authorships of publications.
Figure 3: Sub-fi eld breakdown of ISI publications produced by African-based researchers in Engineering and Applied 
Technologies, 1990-1992 and 2005-2007
Field of classifi cation
1990-1992 2005-2007
Publication 
count
Proportion of 
publications
(out of 3170, %)
Publication 
count
Proportion of 
publications
(out of 7886, %)
Materials science 955 30.1% 2608 33.1%
 Chemical engineering 337 10.6% 1290 16.4%
Electrical & electronic engineering 411 13.0% 942 11.9%
Energy & fuels 256 8.1% 617 7.8%
Mechanics 206 6.5% 586 7.4%
Nuclear science & technology 386 12.2% 510 6.5%
Metallurgy & metallurgical engineering 321 10.1% 510 6.5%
 Mechanical engineering 155 4.9% 473 6.0%
 Civil engineering 159 5.0% 379 4.8%
 Environmental engineering 160 5.0% 337 4.3%
Instruments & instrumentation 105 3.3% 322 4.1%
Mining & mineral processing 185 5.8% 263 3.3%
Note that publication counts cannot be totalled due to multiple sub-fi eld classifi cations of journals in which publications appear.
were taken to mean articles, reviews, notes and letters. Th us, 
it is possible in the ISI Web of Science database to extract only 
articles produced by authors in African countries, specifi cally 
for the broad fi eld of engineering and applied technologies. 
We created the broad fi eld by grouping together 33 sub-fi elds 
(agricultural engineering, automation & control systems, 
software engineering, etc.). Note that Figure 1 excludes pub-
lications appearing in journals not indexed by the ISI Web of 
Science. In the case of South Africa,  about 20 per cent of the 
country’s total publication output in engineering and applied 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   209 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
210
technologies can be found in national journals not indexed 
by the ISI – Fig.1 therefore only includes for South Africa  the 
80 per cent of publications appearing in ISI journals.
Th e fact that the total article output for Africa  steadily and 
 linearly increased between 1990–1992 and 2005–2007 does 
not mean that all African countries contributed equally to 
knowledge production activities in engineering and applied 
technologies. Figure 2 shows that in 2005–2007, only Egypt, 
South Africa,  Algeria and Tunisia produced more than 10 per 
cent of the total publication output in this fi eld. Of these, 
Egypt and South Africa  are the most signifi cant contributors 
accounting for 30 per cent and 23 per cent respectively of pub-
lication output. It is also clear that, besides Egypt and South 
Africa,  Francophone countries dominate output in engineer-
ing. Algeria and Tunisia signifi cantly increased their share of 
publications between 1990–1992 and 2005–2007.
Figure 3 gives a breakdown of publications in terms of sub-
fi elds. Materials science, chemical engineering and electrical 
& electronic engineering are the three fi elds, which account 
for most papers. An interesting trend is refl ected in Africa’s 
publication in the fi eld of nuclear science and technology: 6.5 
per cent of engineering publications in 2005–2007. However, 
although this represents a decrease compared to the corre-
sponding percentage for 1990–1992 (12 per cent of all engi-
neering publications in Africa), the number of articles in this 
sub-fi eld has actually increased. Th e same observation applies 
to metallurgy and metallurgical engineering.
 Arab States
Federation of Arab Engineers
Since the dawn of civilization, the contributions of Arab-
Islamic engineering and architecture and the achievements of 
Arab-Islamic civilization to the sciences of astronomy, phys-
ics, mathematics, medicine, chemistry and others, are indeed 
notable and undeniably signifi cant.
In modern times (the latter part of past century and the early 
twenty-fi rst century), Arab engineers have a mammoth task 
and an extremely important role to play in the development 
of their countries. Governments of various Arab countries 
have, to diff ering degrees, invested in engineering institutions 
and have given support for thousands of individuals, through 
grants and other fi nancial assistance, to acquire engineering 
skills in various engineering disciplines. 
Engineers – both in general and those of developing countries 
– have the challenge of nurturing abilities to best utilize new 
technologies, be conversant in foreign languages and under-
stand the culture, issues and challenges of more developed 
countries. Th ey have to conform to the appropriate utiliza-
tion of natural resources, act on environmental protection 
and consider diverse eff ects of their projects in both technical 
and social dimensions. It is imperative that appropriate enti-
ties develop programmes of training to enhance the current 
capabilities of engineers.
Although statistics reveal a vast number of Arab engineers 
graduate in various fi elds, many with PhDs, the output has 
never been assessed. Th e table below shows headline data 
available on Arab engineers.
 Europe
Lars Bytoft
Introduction
 Europe is facing two main challenges. Th e fi rst is globalization, 
which means that a new division of trade and labour is emerg-
ing and that targeted measures to keep  Europe competitive 
Country
Engineers per 100,000  
(excluding expatriates)
Engineers per 100,000  
(including expatriates)
Comments Year
Kuwait 369 821 1997
Saudi Arabia 113 460 2005
Emirates 68 1,135 2005
Bahrain 130 385 1997
Jordan - 1,392 Includes architects 2008
Egypt - 2,800
May include  technicians 
and architects
1997
Morocco - 80
Tunisia 300 - 2007
Source: Th e above statistics were extracted from material by Dr. Khalid Bin Salem Al-Sultan.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   210 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
211
are needed. Th e second is solving the environmental problems 
facing both  Europe and the world. Both European national 
governments and the European Commission have put for-
ward some very ambitious plans for the handling of these 
challenges, but one vital obstacle may jeopardize the plans: 
the current shortage of engineers in many European countries, 
which will worsen in the future because of demography and a 
declining interest in science and technology studies.
Background
In order to meet the challenges of globalization and the new 
international division of labour, many national European gov-
ernments and the European Union (EU) have set up a number 
of ambitious goals. Some of these goals are contained in the 
 Lisbon agreement, where European countries have agreed to be 
the world’s leading ‘knowledge region’. Th is implies, amongst 
other things, that countries have agreed to spend at least 3% 
per cent of national GDP on  research and development.
In addition, the threats from climatic changes and access to 
secure  energy supply have led the EU to launch the so-called 
‘Climate Change and Energy Package’ with some relatively 
ambitious goals on  energy policy and  renewable  energy 
sources. To achieve these goals, and other targeted measures, 
the EU needs to improve the skill levels of its workforce. In 
engineering especially, there will be an increase in demand 
from both the public and the private sector. Th e public sector 
will need more engineers to meet the infrastructural challenges 
in  energy, transport, healthcare, waste handling,  education 
and so on. Th e private sector will need more engineering skills 
if it wants to reap the benefi ts of the changing international 
div ision of labour.  Europe will not be able to compete within 
many of the labour-intensive segments of production and 
services, and therefore private companies need to be more 
technology-and- research intensive.
Until recently, the growing demand for engineering skills in 
both the public and private sectors in  Europe was met by a 
complementary growth in both relative and absolute supply. 
In the past fi fteen years however, there has been a decrease 
in the relative number of graduating engineers in  Europe.81 
To make things even worse, the generally ageing European 
population and the age structure of the engineering workforce 
results in a massive retirement from the engineering profes-
sion within the near future. By then, the shortage of engineer-
ing skills will be a joint European problem.
European-wide statistics do not exist, but several country-spe-
cifi c studies have shown that the shortage of engineers is and 
will be severe. A German study from 2007 showed that Ger-
man companies in 2006 had around 50,000 vacancies for engi-
81 Described in the  OECD Policy Report Evolution of Student Interest in Science 
and Technology Studies, May 2006. Available at: http://www.oecd.org/datao-
ecd/28/55/36720580.htm (Accessed: 16 May 2010). 
neers that could not be fi lled.82 In Denmark, a recent study has 
shown that by 2020 the labour market will be lacking 14,000 
engineers (in comparison, there were approximately 80,000 
engineers in the Danish labour market in 2008).83 Th e situation 
seems to be similar in all European countries, but with varia-
tions in timetable.
In some countries, the lack of engineers is already severe either 
in general or in particular specializations. One sector that 
seems to be especially hard hit by the lack of engineers is the 
public sector. In many European countries the demography is 
such that the public sector within the next 10–15 years will 
have to recruit a disproportionately large number of new engi-
neers because of retirements. Th is can be a very diffi  cult exer-
cise in a situation where the commodity is scarce and where 
the private sector in many cases will be able to off er better 
salaries, job opportunities and professional careers.
The opportunities for engineering graduates appear to be 
good, especially if compared with those of other faculties. Engi-
neering remains the university  curriculum that is most likely to 
provide a graduate with a job in a short period of time. How-
ever, many engineers express dissatisfaction with the quality 
of the job they fi nd, as well as with the level of their salaries.84 
Furthermore engineers working in technical offi  ces of private 
companies can often feel an ‘inferiority complex’ compared 
to colleagues working in the sales and marketing offi  ces. Th ey 
feel that the technical contribution does not receive enough 
consideration in today’s production sector.
Another source of dissatisfaction comes from the now pre-
carious nature of the labour market. Th is reality does not give 
young graduates a long-term perspective, which could some-
how compensate for the decreased prestige and salary of an 
engineering career.85 More attractive career prospects can be 
found by engineers who leave their original technical voca-
tion in order to take up commercial or management positions. 
Th ose engineers working as freelance professionals fi nd it dif-
fi cult to compete against the technical services available from 
the globalized labour market.
Th e bottom line is that European visions about staying com-
petitive and creating a sustainable  society will be halted by an 
existing and growing shortage of engineering skills if nothing is 
done about it. Th e European Federation of National Engineer-
ing Associations (FEANI) therefore fi nds it urgent to address 
the ‘shortage problem both within each European country and 
82 Verein Deutscher Ingenieure (Association of German Engineers, VDI), 2006.
83 Danish Society of Engineers (IDA), 2007.
84 Monastersky, R. 2004. Is there a science crisis? Th e Chronicle of Higher Education. Vol. 
50, July 2004.
85 Vines, J. 2005. Engineering a crisis on the supply side. Australian Financial Review, 
March 2005.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   211 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
212
on an overall European level. Many European countries have 
already taken national actions, but in FEANI we believe there 
will be comprehensive synergetic eff ects in a joint European 
eff ort to expand and utilize the pool of engineering skills.
Americas and Caribbean
Vladimir Yackovlev and Luiz Scavarda
Th e working group on Science, Technology and Innovation of 
the UN Millennium Project issued a declaration that ‘develop-
ing countries will probably remain bogged down in poverty 
unless they do what the developed countries have done to 
reach sustainable growth: incorporate science, technology and 
 innovation in their  economic development strategies.’ ‘Engi-
neering with social responsibility’ could be added to the list, 
indeed, the specifi c importance of more and better-prepared 
engineers must be recognized in Latin America.
One of the reasons cited for Latin America lagging behind in its 
development is that practically all economists of the region have 
placed their hopes on the role of the market and have ignored 
the fundamental role played by  research and engineering in the 
development process. Th e International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
has published data showing that the two regions of Southeast 
Asia and Latin America each contributed 10 per cent to the 
total GDP of the world in 1980, but today the contribution of 
South East Asia has risen to about 27 per cent whereas the Latin 
American contribution has fallen to about 7 per cent.
It is worth noting that, over the same period, the number of 
engineers in emerging Asia grew steadily whilst Latin America 
has a relatively small number of engineers.
In order to achieve  sustainable development in a country or 
a region, certain characteristics have to be developed such as 
a solid basic  education, high literacy rates, and the existence 
of well-educated professionals and highly-trained  technicians 
who can adopt and adapt new capabilities. Such economic 
changes as seen in these IMF data can however be attributed 
to fundamental diff erences in national policies.
Indicators of the Latin American region fall below what might 
be considered desirable, perhaps because of some of the fol-
lowing factors:
Public  ■  research is driven largely by scientifi c curiosity rather 
than market needs or the need to fi nd solutions to the 
problems of the region.
Th ere is little cooperation between universities, industry  ■
and public  research institutes.
Th ere is a lack of an  ■  innovation culture in industry, linked 
with demand.
Th ere is low investment in knowledge, with Latin America  ■
spending only around 0.6 per cent of GNP on  research and 
development.
Investment in  ■  research and development has diminished or 
remained at the same level in the region.
The interest for the engineering profession among high  ■
school students is minimal in Latin America.
Th e number of graduates with doctoral degrees and the  ■
number of researchers in the economically active popula-
tion (a key indication of capacity) are several orders of mag-
nitude below those of OECD  countries and some countries 
in South East Asia. 
Our world today is, beyond any doubt, under the infl uence of 
technology. Technology and knowledge is what determines 
the competitiveness of enterprise; it is technology that brings 
the capability for  innovation and development. And it is the 
engineer who is the specialist in technology.
It is, therefore, not too risky to suggest that we need to increase 
the numbers of engineers in developing countries, especially if 
we look at the results achieved in countries in South East Asia. 
However, care must be taken not to be swayed by numbers alone 
– the quality of these engineers must be jealously guarded. Such 
numbers are merely an indication of the role of the engineer in 
development but they are also a call for action for state policies 
to develop more and better-prepared engineers.
FADING FORTUNES
Gross domestic product, as percentage 
of world total
Developing Asia
Latin America,
excluding Caribbean nations
Note: GDP is recalculated based on relative purchasing power of national currencies.
Source: International Monetary Fund
30%
25
20
15
10
5
0
1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005
Figure 1: GDP as percentage of world total
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   212 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
213
Country perspectives5.3 
Africa5.3.1 
 Côte d’Ivoire
Issié Yvonne Gueye 
Introduction
In the 1960s and 1970s engineering eff orts in the Côte d’Ivoire 
focused on civil and agricultural engineering. After the mili-
tary-political crisis faced for six years, Côte d’Ivoire is now at 
a crossroads economically, politically and technologically. To 
thrive, and given the needs for reconstruction and  sustainable 
development, it is imperative that renewed eff orts are placed 
on engineering, particularly with regards to international 
 standards, to allow the country to become part of the global 
knowledge and information  society. Engineering  electrical 
engineering has an important role to play as it adds value to 
long-term development and speeds up  poverty reduction.
Economy
Th e economy of the Côte d’Ivoire is broadly split between agri-
culture at 22 per cent, industries at 26 per cent and services 
at 52 per cent of GDP. Some 34 per cent of the population 
is engaged in subsistence farming. Th e country is oriented 
towards private enterprise, with government participation 
through parastatal companies. Multinational corporations are 
involved in two-thirds of the largest businesses in such areas 
as construction,  energy, petroleum, construction and food 
processing.
For many years, Ivorian engineers were highly regarded and 
enjoyed good job security, partly due to the infl uence and 
the lobbying of the Federation of Engineering Organizations 
(FIACI); most high positions in government as well as in pub-
lic and private companies were held by engineers.  For exam-
ple, from 1975 to 2002 many members of the board of FIACI 
worked in the ministries of  infrastructure,  telecommunica-
tions or agriculture.
Engineers today work mainly in public and private companies 
and consulting fi rms of the country, in similar sectors such as 
agriculture and food processing, construction and civil engi-
neering,  energy, petroleum, chemistry and mining, computing 
and  communications and industrial processing. According to 
the available data, as of 2002,86 engineers made up 1.2 per cent 
of the working population.
86 Kouassi, L. and Amani, M. 2002. Recensement général de la population et de l’habitation 
de 1998. Institut National de la Statistique, Vol. IV, Analyse des résultats, août 2002.
Higher Education
Early in the 1960s, the Côte d’Ivoire developed a long-term 
strategy to build technological capacities to meet the chal-
lenges of national development. Professional technical centres 
and technical high schools were established to meet indus-
try’s demand for  technicians and to prepare youth towards 
engineering careers. Th e route to higher  education is through 
four years of secondary school and three years to baccalaure-
ate required for entry into universities or Grandes Ecoles. Th e 
Grandes Ecoles were created to develop senior  technicians and 
engineers, with the fi rst of these established in 1962 for civil 
engineering sciences, with extensions to geology and min-
ing available from 1973. Th e fi rst national university opened 
in Abidjan in 1964, followed by three specialized provincial 
annexes. Th e national Institute of Technical Education, the 
School of Agricultural Engineering and the School of Statistics 
and Economy were also launched. Private universities emerged 
to absorb the growing number of candidates, and trained two-
year degree  technicians in various fi elds.
Data from 2005 shows that higher  education in the Côte 
d’Ivoire comprises: three public autonomous universities 
with 69,436 students; six private universities with 2,209 stu-
dents; four public Grandes Ecoles with 10,150 students; 
and 108  private Grandes Ecoles with 94,745 students. Th ese 
structures fall under the remit of the Ministry of Higher Edu-
cation.87 88 In addition, there are twenty-eight centres giv-
ing post-baccalaureate professional and technical training 
to 15,604 students. Th ese are under the remit of the Minis-
try of Technical Education. In sum, 192,144 students are in 
higher  education. Women make up 29.7 per cent of this total. 
According to national statistics, 8 per cent of the population 
have gone through higher  education.
New and next steps
To better engage in the global economy and to accompany the 
industrialization process, the government has initiated policies 
to encourage  innovation, covering areas such as taxation and 
intellectual property. For example, the Ivorian Offi  ce of Intel-
lectual Property89 (a member of the African Offi  ce of Intel-
lectual Property and the World Organization for Intellectual 
Property) was created in 2005 charged with promoting inven-
87 Ministère de l’enseignement Supérieur: Direction de la Planifi cation et de l’Evaluation, 
Statistiques 2004–2005. For more information: http://www.afristat.org/index.
php?option=com_content&view=article&id=404&Itemid=58&pays=CI (Accessed: 15 
May 2010).
88 Ministère de  l’enseignement  Supérieur: Direction des Enseignements Supérieurs 
Privés. Statistiques 2006–2007.
89 Offi  ce Ivoirien de la Propriété Intellectuelle, Documents de Présentations et Publica-
tions. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   213 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
214
tion, protecting patents, licensing and protecting trademarks. 
Its statistics show that seven patents were granted in 2005, 
eighteen in 2006 and sixteen were granted in 2007.
Since independence, major steps have been taken in position-
ing engineering to face the challenge of development in the 
Côte d’Ivoire. Yet, much still remains to be achieved in a dif-
fi cult economic environment. To move forward and to address 
post-war reconstruction needs, new steps that could be taken 
include:
New engineering policy reforms that position the national  ■
technology and  innovation system to fi t new priorities and 
to improve the quality and relevance of technical  educa-
tion. Th ese reforms should enhance educational competive-
ness and improve the status of engineers.
Invest heavily in improving the quality and relevance of  ■
engineering  education, which means improving continuous 
professional development and paying for educators, as well 
as improving reference materials, learning resources and 
laboratories to adapt them to new technologies.
Bridge the training process with professional experience in  ■
private and public sectors to encourage employment and 
 innovation. 
Create a better environment for women engineers. ■
Develop the  ■  research and development environment of 
engineering educational institutions.
Initiate more technology incubators such as technology  ■
parks in partnership with industrial partners.
Improve engagement with engineering organizations. ■
Launch a regular national survey focused on engineers,  ■
engineering and the engineering profession.
Further reading
Blanke, J. 2007. Assessing Africa’s Competitiveness in a Global Context. 
World Economic Forum , Global Competitiveness Report 
2008–2009.
Khelfaoui, H. La science en Côte d’Ivoire [in: Les sciences en Afrique], 
Paris, IRD, 92 p.
INP-HB. Institut National Polytechnique Félix Houphouët Boigny 
(INP-HB), Wassi Technologies, Chiff res clés.
Ministère de l’économie et des fi nances. 2007. La Côte d’Ivoire en 
chiff res, Vol. 2007. 
List of persons met or interviewed 
Nahounou, Bobouho. Former  General Director of Institut National 
Polytechnique Félix Houphouët Boigny (INP-HB). 
Sibi, Bonfi ls. Deputy Executive Director of IEPF, Québec, Canada.
D’aby, Amon. Director for the Center for Advising and Assistance to 
Enterprises (INP–HB). 
Ouattara, Souleymane. Sous Directeur des Enseignements Supérieurs 
Privés.
Kouame, Kouabra. Chargé d’Etudes à l’Offi  ce Ivoirien de la Propriété 
Intellectuelle.
Uganda
Eriabu Lugujjo
Challenges and prospects of engineering  education 
and training in Uganda
Education and training of graduate engineers in Uganda 
started in 1970 with the opening of the Faculty of Technol-
ogy at Makerere University with an intake of twenty-seven 
students. Eight years ago, another university, Kyambogo Uni-
versity, began engineering programmes. Th ese two institutions 
now constitute the nucleus of engineering teaching, learning 
and  research in the country.
Th e Uganda Institute of Professional Engineers (UIPE) came 
into being in 1972. Th e numbers of graduate engineers trained 
since is approaching 3,000. Th ese numbers are still very low to 
serve a population of about 29 million.
Th e challenges experienced so far in educating and training of 
engineers are both systematic and external, but derive their 
origin from several factors ranging from socio-economic, 
techno-economic, governance, demographic and institutional 
change. Th e changing role of universities over the past thirty 
years has also contributed to the diversifi cation of the chal-
lenges. Besides fostering excellence in scholarship through 
teaching and  research, universities are expected to:
become instruments of socio-economic policy; ■
become partners in community and regional development; ■
on occasion, align  ■  research priority with national strategic 
development goals;
be seen as tools for rural development so that they can  ■
address rural de-population; and 
produce highly-qualifi ed graduates, who not only carry out  ■
 research but also manage its applications in industry and 
business.
Faculties of engineering are being increasingly asked to 
provide value for money in terms that the public sector – 
rather than academics – understand, but universities are still 
reminded to maintain  standards of excellence in teaching 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   214 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
215
and  research and are required to seek as much fi nancial sup-
port as possible from sources other than government. Th is 
is the terrain under which engineering is taught, learnt and 
practised in Uganda. Th e challenges of engineering training 
institutions are discussed from inputs (students), delivery 
(human capacity, hardware, and  infrastructure) and outputs 
(graduates, employment opportunities and linkages with 
industries).
Access,  enrolment and opportunities 
Th ere has been increased  enrolment (more than fi ve-fold) dur-
ing the past decade. Th is relatively high level of growth may be 
explained by demographic changes, gender mainstreaming, 
relatively more schools off ering science subjects at advanced 
level and partly by some privatization of university  education. 
Private universities have off ered more opportunities, for stu-
dents that can aff ord to pay, to join engineering programmes. 
However, maintaining the balance between the provision of 
greater access to engineering programmes and using the lim-
ited available facilities, without aff ecting the learning in view 
of scarce resources, is one of the challenging tasks. A number 
of students who join engineering programmes do so only on 
the strength of their grades rather than their interest or moti-
vation. Essentially, some are not prepared for or suited to the 
programmes, but it is diffi  cult to build interest and motivation 
in engineering given that, for example, four or fi ve students 
might have to perform one experiment simultaneously, par-
ticularly in the early years of study. Such limitations in teach-
ing resources, needless to say, compromise inquisitiveness 
and may hamper the potential of even the most enthusiastic 
 students.
Staff , welfare and retention
It has become increasingly diffi  cult to sustain a credible staff  
development programme in engineering faculties. Th e reasons 
are many, but the most signifi cant are:
Th e best-qualifi ed staff  must be hired on a competitive basis  ■
but pay in universities is low.
All lecturers in engineering faculties are required to have a  ■
PhD – a requirement regarded by many as being too exclu-
sive and unsustainable.
Th e longest-serving and best-qualifi ed staff  resign in desper- ■
ation and frustration, as the universities do not have incen-
tives such as mortgages, staff  transport, medical schemes or 
vehicle loan schemes and so on.
Any benefi ts due to the lecturer are consolidated and taxed  ■
heavily.
Off spring of those who die in-service are not catered for. ■
Freezing staff  recruitment, due to a lack of funds to pay staff ,  ■
is common.
Expansion of establishment, even where it is justifi ed, meets  ■
stiff  resistance, possibly because it impacts on fi nances.
Vertical mobility in engineering is hampered by rigid pro- ■
motional requirements at each ladder as promotion policy 
emphasizes papers in international journals rather the gen-
eral and specifi cally teaching output of staff .
Universities also experience ‘ ■  brain drain’ as their best gradu-
ates remain overseas after winning opportunities to go 
abroad for further study. Some of those who return and 
rejoin the workforce are forced to abandon university ser-
vices due to poor working conditions such as low pay and 
an absence of incentives.
Delivery modes 
Engineering classes have grown relatively large. It is no longer 
unusual to find a class of eighty-five students. With such 
 numbers, the traditional lecturing mode of ‘chalk’ is still 
widely practised. Tutorials where students are divided into 
small groups are rarely conducted. Th is is mainly because the 
few staff  members are excessively overloaded and there are 
few teaching assistants. Th e universities have tried to recruit 
part-time supporting academic staff  but they are not enough 
to adequately cope with the problems. Timetabling for part-
time staff  is a very big problem as they are fully deployed 
elsewhere. Laboratory work has continued to suff er due to 
insufficient functional equipment, and obsolete ones lack 
spare parts. Most of the existing equipment/apparatus is obso-
lete. Four or fi ve students, especially in the early years of study, 
perform one experiment simultaneously. Th is state of aff airs, 
needless to say, compromises their inquisitiveness, enjoyment 
and potential.
Relevance of engineering programmes
Th e relevance of any programme should be analysed accord-
ing to its role and place in  society, its mission, relationships 
with the public and private sector, community and sources 
of funding, and its interaction with other levels and forms of 
 education. Traditionally, relevance of engineering programmes 
was judged according to the appropriateness of the train-
ing to meet the needs of the government and wider public 
service. Th is has changed however, due to restructuring and 
the privatization of the economy. Engineering programmes 
have to respond positively and quickly to the demands of the 
marketplace and industry, whilst at the same time produce 
graduates who can create jobs through fast adaptability and 
entrepreneurship. Engineering faculties review and update 
their  curricula once every fi ve years or so, and do introduce 
electives that are deemed essential. Th is area, however, is still 
challenging.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   215 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
216
Links with industry
Industry plays a major role in the training of engineering grad-
uates and professionals. Students at Makerere and Kyambogo 
universities for example, receive industrial training at the end 
of the second and third years of study. Lecturers and students 
have to participate in looking for industrial training places, but 
it has become increasingly diffi  cult to fi nd places as most of 
the industries are privatized and regard training university stu-
dents as being outside their mandate. Furthermore, small-scale 
industries are too small to run coherent training programmes. 
Th ere are a numbers of weaknesses in these programmes; 
training programmes are not jointly developed by industries 
and universities, and supervision or visitation of students by 
lecturers is not regular enough to allow ample discussion and 
consultations.
 Ghana
Peggy Oti-Boateng
 Ghana’s immediate post-independence economic history 
typifies the deplorable situation in which most African 
countries (south of the Sahara) found themselves at 
independence. With no peers to learn from, the early leaders 
had no choice but to embrace the prevailing development 
economics theories, which were tinted with the ideological 
slants of the two dominant powers of the world at the time.
 Ghana tackled the problem of industrialization with a top-
down approach without giving due consideration to the 
resources on which the ambitious projects would thrive. Th is 
led to many projects being unsustainable, factories closing 
down and increasing rates of unemployment. Th e resultant 
economic hardships and social agitations which followed 
made policy-makers in  Ghana seek alternative development 
strategies other than the ‘big push’ approach of the late 1960s 
and early 1970s.
 Ghana, like many developing countries, has suff ered from 
international policies of trade liberalization. Th e indiscrimi-
nate open door policy of import without protection of local 
emerging industries has put many budding informal indus-
tries out of business. For example, Josbarko used to be the 
sole supplier of bolts and nuts to one of the largest boat 
building enterprises in  Ghana. However, with the advent of 
trade liberalization, these companies had to face stiff  compe-
tition from cheaper mass-produced and often poor quality 
imported bolts and nuts from China and South East Asia. 
Th e story is similar for many light engineering, food process-
ing and manufacturing companies. Many of these compa-
nies have reverted to buying and selling, to the detriment of 
national technological capability advancement for industrial 
and socio- economic development. In the service industry 
however, the explosion of informal industries in many parts 
of the country resulted in lower product quality  standards 
to the detriment of the consumer, who developed a strong 
preference for imported products.  
Recognizing the need to accelerate the country’s industrial 
growth in 2000, the government initiated the ‘golden age of 
business’ policy with the aim of attracting local manufactur-
ers to go into production. Th is policy, laudable though it is, 
has not made any diff erence in integrating  research and the 
transfer of  innovation for  poverty reduction and enterprise 
development. One of the key issues identifi ed was the slow 
pace at which  appropriate technology  innovations are used 
for enterprise development and working for the poor. Numer-
ous technologies developed remain on the shelves of universi-
ties and  research institutions because of the non-existence of 
a policy to eff ect this link with the informal sector. Th is led to 
a decline in market-driven internationally-competitive indus-
trial growth in  Ghana.
A cursory look at  Ghana’s history shows that the problem 
with the country’s interventions in industrial development 
is the lack of effective mechanisms to sustain the various 
models that have evolved. Apart from the debilitating eff ect 
of excessive state control during the implementation of the 
policy of import substitution during the fi rst republic, and 
of the military governments that followed, the absence of 
long-term thinking to ensure the sustainability of the new 
enterprises was the main cause of their eventual collapse. 
Th e movers of  Ghana’s grassroots industrial revolution in the 
1980s and 1990s had recognized the importance of harness-
ing the country’s large human and technical capabilities as a 
catalyst for the country’s, albeit limited, industrial take-off ; as 
witnessed in the proliferation of secondary industries during 
the period. What was missing though, was a strategy to help 
formalize the informal enterprises which had evolved, and to 
help them become competitive, for example, access to reason-
ably cheap sources of raw materials, access to relevant technol-
ogy for the manufacture of quality and competitive products, 
access to the benefi ts of favourable international trade agree-
ments, access to favourable and innovative government and 
donor support. Th e on-going poverty alleviation programmes 
in  Ghana have mostly used the promotion of productive enter-
prises as the main thrust of their interventions. In most cases 
though, the required impact has not been achieved because 
the needed purpose-built mechanisms and structures for sus-
tainable wealth creation were missing.
 Ghana is potentially a very rich country. Agricultural pro-
duction and the export of primary natural resources (such 
as gold and timber) constitute a strong base for  Ghana’s 
economy. It is therefore not surprising that attempts to revi-
talize  Ghana’s industrial development have taken the form 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   216 14/09/10   15:34:39
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
217
of adding value to the country’s agricultural produce and 
natural resource endowments. Th e problem confronting 
these eff orts has been the diffi  culty in getting the right mix 
of interventions to obtain maximum benefi t from the proc-
ess of adding value.
Th e country’s poverty status is, therefore, the outcome of a 
management problem. In other words, with  Ghana’s very 
favourable conditions – abundant natural resources, human 
resources, productive enterprises and a seemingly unlimited 
capacity for adding value to its wide range of exports – the 
country’s economic fortunes can be turned around and made 
to benefi t the poorest.
Nigeria
Felix Atume
Th e major problem facing the growth of the engineering 
profession in Nigeria (and indeed in many sub-Saharan 
African countries) is the lack of involvement of engineers 
in policy matters. Political leaders, it seems, hardly take 
into consideration the key role that engineers and engi-
neering can play in development. Examples abound, all 
tiers of government in Nigeria have embarked on massive 
projects to provide  infrastructure but frequently without 
adequate engineering input. Th e result is that huge sums of 
money are spent but the desired results are not achieved. It 
is indeed sad that African engineers have little or no voice 
in their governments; they hardly infl uence decisions, par-
ticularly on development plans. Consequently, engineering 
is overlooked and development is stalled even when huge 
resources are committed. Engineering can only take root if 
engineers are involved in policy matters and therefore have 
a say in government.
Th e cumulative eff ect is that many young people in Africa 
 are no longer interested in joining the engineering profes-
sion. Th ey are running to law, economics, accountancy and 
marketing. Th e sense is that the position of engineering in 
 society is falling. Engineering grows through challenges. Afri-
can engineers must be challenged by their leaders if they are 
to rise to the challenge. Th e reasons for the decline of the 
engineering profession in Africa  include, but are not limited 
to, the following:
Poor salary after graduation: A university engineering gradu-
ate, if they are lucky enough to secure employment in a Nige-
rian government body, will earn a monthly salary of about 
US$200.
Lack of future opportunities for growth: Engineering gradu-
ates in Nigeria have very few employment opportunities, 
for example, there are only four oil refi neries and none is 
working at full capacity (Nigeria is the sixth largest crude 
oil producer in the world) and therefore, opportunities for 
chemical, mechanical and civil engineers are limited. Over 
the last three years, more than 300 textile mills have closed 
down and Nigeria now relies upon massive importation of 
finished textile products from Japan,  Europe and China. 
Major fi rms in the tyre industry have moved to South Africa, 
 and all the car assembly plants have either closed or a work-
ing at low capacity. Because industries are not growing, 
there are few employment opportunities and consequently 
Nigerian engineers are now waiting an average of four years 
after graduation before getting their fi rst jobs. Nigeria today 
produces an average of 3,500 engineers from universities and 
polytechnics. For a country of 140 million people, that is far 
too small, but even they cannot fi nd work.
Maintenance of  infrastructure: Whilst maintenance could 
provide signifi cant employment opportunities, unfortunately 
there appears to be no culture of maintaining  infrastructure 
– a problem that is more acute but that is not restricted 
to Nigeria or even Africa.  Engineers have little support for 
work in this area aff ecting roads, bridges, airports, seaports, 
schools, hospitals and other key public institutions. In turn, 
this negatively aff ects  society’s perception of engineering and 
of engineers.
Low involvement of Nigerian engineers in major projects: Local 
engineers have not been actively involved in major engineer-
ing projects in Nigeria. In the oil and gas sector, Nigeria started 
producing oil at commercial quantities in the early 1960s 
but even now Nigerian participation in this work is still quite 
minimal. Th e proportion of Nigerian engineers in oil and gas 
was still less than 10 per cent in 2002, though now there is a 
programme to raise this to 30 per cent by the end of 2010. 
Similar examples can be found in major  infrastructure project, 
being led by large multinational companies. Such situations 
have stalled the development of a robust indigenous engineer-
ing capacity that creates tension with local engineers. More 
policies that promote indigenous engineering practice are 
needed.
Quality of engineering  education: UNESCO recommended that 
the government should allocate about 25 per cent of annual 
budgets to  education but previous governments in Nigeria 
allocated as low as 1.8 per cent. Th e result is that many engi-
neering schools are poorly equipped and use obsolete equip-
ment that cannot promote eff ective learning. Th ere’s also 
little emphasis on entrepreneurship. How can we develop 
engineers in this way? Nigeria must invest more in engineering 
 education to produce the desired capacity to take on devel-
opment.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   217 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
218
 5.3.2 Arab States
Tunisia
Kamel Ayadi
Tunisia is often given as an example in the Arab Region and 
in Africa  for its  science and technology policy. By devoting 
1.2 per cent of its GDP to scientifi c  research, 2.2 per cent to 
higher  education and around 8 per cent to  education as a 
whole, Tunisia ranks very highly in these measures for devel-
oping countries. With limited natural resources, Tunisia has no 
choice but to rely on its human capital, and it prides itself on 
its highly-educated workforce. Education has been a priority in 
Tunisia since it gained independence more than half a century 
ago. Today primary school  enrolment is at 100 per cent and 
access to tertiary  education is approaching 40 per cent. It has 
been able to keep a steady GDP growth rate of 5.5 per cent 
over the past two decades, and GDP per capita has reached 
US$7,938 (purchasing-power-parity). Women constitute 51 
per cent of all tertiary graduates and make up more than one-
third of the total workforce.
In spite of these accomplishments, Tunisia is faced with serious 
challenges and, in particular, that of a relatively high unem-
ployment rate among university graduates. Reducing unem-
ployment to a reasonable rate would require the attainment of 
a new economic growth level, with a strong knowledge-based 
industry and value added services. Tunisia is working to change 
a reputation that sees it as a low-cost destination possessed of 
a skilled yet inexpensive workforce. Th is is particularly true for 
the textile industry dominated by off -shore activities, which 
emerged in the mid-1970s from the liberalization movement. 
Most of this industry is based on subcontracting activities with 
low technological added value. Th is provides an explanation 
for the modest role played by engineers in the industry sector, 
although engineers have been instrumental in the develop-
ment of other sectors such as  infrastructure and agriculture.
Th e number of engineers registered in the Tableau de l’Ordre 
des Ingénieurs has reached 22,000. Th e real number of practic-
ing engineers far exceeds this fi gure, perhaps even exceeding 
30,000. Th e engineering community increases every year by 
3,000 new engineering graduates from the sixteen engineering 
schools and faculties in Tunisia, as well as a number of engi-
neers trained abroad. Although the number of new graduates 
has doubled in the past fi ve years, it remains low compared to 
other countries of similar size and comparable  economic devel-
opment with Tunisia. With three engineers for every thousand 
inhabitants (Tunisia’s population is 10 million), Tunisia still falls 
well below the average (which ranges in developed countries 
from 8 to 15 and in emerging countries from 4 to 7 per thou-
sand). Th e Tunisian Prime Minister recently announced the 
intent of his government to double the number of graduates 
in engineering in the short term in order to sustain economic 
growth in the country, and to meet the needs of companies, 
particularly foreign investors.
Historically, engineering was one of the few main professions 
to emerge right after Tunisian independence was declared in 
1956. Engineers played a crucial role in the establishment of 
the newly created state. Th ey fi lled the void left by the depar-
ture of colonists, particularly in the running of the economy 
and the functioning of facilities. Engineers then easily attained 
positions of leadership in government and state-owned com-
panies, which represented the main driving force of the econ-
omy. Being an engineer in Tunisia was at that time socially and 
fi nancially rewarding. As a result of this inherited image, engi-
neering became extremely attractive to the best students for 
two or three consecutive decades. However, this situation has 
changed substantially over the past years. Tunisia has observed 
a disturbing decline in interest in  engineering studies among 
younger generations. 
Th e Tunisian experience in engineering  education is relatively 
recent, although the creation of the fi rst Tunisian engineer-
ing school goes back more than a century. In a relatively short 
period of time, less than four decades, Tunisia was able to 
establish a network of engineering institutions across its ter-
ritory and consolidate its reputation in educating well-skilled 
engineers. These schools were able to supply the growing 
economic demand for engineers, particularly up to the 1980s, 
where state-owned companies and government were the main 
employers. Th e role of the engineering schools was nearly con-
fi ned to supplying the needs of the public sector, and  curricu-
lum was designed to meet that particular need. A few years 
later, when the public sector demand for engineers declined – 
some activities even came to saturation – employment oppor-
tunities for engineers shrank, and the engineering profession 
started to experience unemployment for the fi rst time. 
Economic reforms implemented at the end of the 1980s led to 
the emergence of the private sector as a new economic force. 
Th is transformation stimulated the job market, resulting in 
an increase in demand for skilled engineers, particularly from 
private companies who were exposed to tough competition 
from European companies. Th is diversifi cation of the job mar-
ket provided new employment opportunities for engineer-
ing graduates but also brought new requirements for skills. 
Criticism of the engineering  education model and  curriculum 
started to emerge for the fi rst time. It became evident that 
engineers in a liberalized economy, with new private economic 
actors and diff erent needs, should not continue to be taught 
in the same old way. Criticism concerned the focus on theo-
retical studies and the low exposure of students to hands-on 
experience. Interaction between university and industry was 
absent. Both had evolved in separate paths with little inter-
action and cooperation. Curriculum was not adapted to the 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   218 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
219
evolving competencies required by companies, which resulted 
in low employability of new graduates. Criticism also focused 
on imparting analytical skills with no particular importance 
given to ‘soft skills’, including communication, management, 
teamwork and leadership.
Engineering schools were slow in responding to the new 
demand due to a lack of autonomy and preparedness to 
reshape their  curricula to international  standards. Th e higher 
engineering  education system was not equipped with mecha-
nisms that would enable it to adapt to the job market’s fast-
evolving needs, particularly in areas where technology changes 
directly aff ect  education. Accreditation, quality control and 
evaluation, which could have provided the regulatory mecha-
nisms to adjust engineering  curricula, were absent.
Th e fi rst attempt to address these inadequacies occurred in 
1992. A major change was made to the pedagogical structure 
of engineering training. Th e engineering diploma was previ-
ously structured to create two types of engineers and one type 
of  technician, tailored on the French model, creating a more 
elite corps of engineers oriented towards design and concep-
tion and a second group for the production market (under the 
assumption that production activities require less qualifi ed 
engineers than design activities). Th e 1992 reform merged the 
two engineering diplomas into one degree of fi ve years and the 
duration of  technician training was lengthened to three years. 
Th e number of institutions teaching  technicians was increased 
signifi cantly to overcome a shortage of  technicians. Before the 
reform, three times as many engineers as  technicians were 
being produced. Now the pyramid was reversed. In addition, 
the  curriculum was also revised, integrating ‘soft skills’, practi-
cal courses and ‘alternating  education’. Th is method alternates 
students’ schedules between classroom work and industry 
internships.
Accreditation and quality control in engineering  education 
was fi nally integrated for the fi rst time in the legal tertiary 
 education framework in February 2008 with the new Higher 
Education Guiding law. It is a revolutionary and progressive 
law in the Tunisian Higher Education regulatory landscape. It 
has established for the fi rst time accountability for higher  edu-
cation institutions and professors, set up autonomy for univer-
sities, installed quality control, and institutionalized evaluation 
and  accreditation. Th e implementation of these principles is 
a fundamental prerequisite for setting up an eff ective higher 
 education system in accordance with international  standards. 
Other measures are also being implemented as part of this 
reform towards increasing graduates employability of gradu-
ates and adjusting  curricula to meet employment market 
needs. Th is reform was initiated two years after Tunisia had 
decided to adopt the LMD (Licence-Masters-Doctorate)  edu-
cation model, following the European trend initiated by the 
Bologna Process. Th e Tunisian economy is closely tied to the 
European market and most Foreign Direct Investment comes 
from  Europe, but this is changing and the  education system 
will have to adapt further. Without such eff orts, Tunisia will 
not be able to retain its best students and attract foreign stu-
dents and academics to its institutions.
Th e ambition of Tunisia is to become a regional centre of high 
value-added services and a hub for outsourcing advanced 
activities. Th is goal will be within reach if Tunisia succeeds in 
becoming a regional pole in higher  education.
Lebanon
Abdel Menhem Alameddine
Meeting future challenges – private engineering 
 education in the Arab world
Universities that do not work for the best interest of their 
 society can never claim prestige and can never be in the top 
leagues. Th e university as an institution plays a vital role in 
the progress of modern societies and humanity. Historically 
considered as intellectual shrines for academic curiosity and 
philosophy and a hub for an elitist group, mass  education in 
the twentieth century has placed universities at the heart of 
the social and economic lives of any nation. Th is new trend 
made institutions of higher  education a major key player in the 
development of local economies and in the strategic planning 
of cities and nations.
Innovation in  research is synonymous with a successful uni-
versity. We cannot now imagine any university providing only 
technical knowledge; technical schools and colleges provide 
this. Universities have to innovate in  research and explore new 
ideas and tools both in science and humanities in order to 
progress in terms of technical knowledge. Th is is a core element 
of our system of  education that is too often under-represented 
in the Arab world. What is important is not how many uni-
versities we have or what affi  liations we have made with for-
eign Western universities, but how much we have invested in 
 research and scientifi c and technological exploration. Research, 
therefore, is not an added-value but an essential asset in the 
success of any university in the twentieth-fi rst century.
Colleges of engineering are not key players in the development 
of our nations, unlike in developed countries where engineer-
ing schools are the founders and partners in the develop-
ment cycle of their societies. Indeed, both local and national 
development depends heavily on the expertise of engineering 
colleges. With the boom in the Gulf, after the historically sky-
rocketing prices of oil, the Arab world is commissioning gigan-
tic construction projects. Th ousands of young engineers are 
hired every year to meet the market demand. Th ere is a golden 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   219 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
220
opportunity here for Arab engineering colleges to benefi t from 
this prosperity in order to innovate in engineering. Th is oppor-
tunity has not yet been taken. 
New private engineering schools have mushroomed in the last 
decade, but this should be monitored carefully. Our immediate 
inclination is to approve and highlight its successes, but there 
is also the danger of overlapping, consumerism and commer-
cialism. Th e question of overlap is vital since we have private 
engineering institutions copying educational programmes from 
the West or from prestigious universities in their area. Such a 
tendency deteriorates quality  education and leads to consumer-
ism and commercialism; institutions of this kind are run as busi-
nesses and  education is often not their top priority.
Th e role of the private engineering schools  
Private engineering schools and colleges have to rise to the 
new challenges that the world is facing with the growth and 
mobility of capital and technology. Th ere is a special role for 
private engineering  education in the Arab world to foster the 
knowledge that the modern world is seeking. State universi-
ties in Arab regions have limited capability to adapt to the 
fast changes happening in the world and, therefore, private 
 education in the fi eld of engineering has a golden opportunity 
– indeed, a business opportunity – to innovate in technology 
and to assist in building a competitive knowledge  society. Th e 
examples from Asian countries such as Singapore and Malay-
sia are promising in terms of partnerships that could be estab-
lished between universities, the state and business. 
Th e real challenge is therefore to innovate and not imitate 
in the fi eld of engineering  education in Arab countries. His-
torically, engineering  education comprised the traditional 
domains that are well known: civil, electrical and mechanical. 
With the invention of computing and developments in infor-
mation technology, these domains have expanded and special-
ization has become the norm. It seems that every year a new 
fi eld of engineering is introduced to higher  education. Th ese 
fi elds are often created on the demands of the labour market. 
Such multi-disciplinarity in engineering is the approach that 
Arab universities will have to adopt in order to survive and 
create a new Arab renaissance in construction, business,  tele-
communications and  innovation. If the Arab renaissance of 
the nineteenth century was a revolution for the Arab cultural 
identity, there is a need now for a renaissance in the teaching 
of engineering; and there is no place for failure because the 
expectations are so high and the changes are so fast.
Arab scholars should be proud of their history and could learn 
from their relics to build their future. One can look proudly 
at the Arab contribution to engineering through the inven-
tions of the water wheel, cisterns, irrigation, water wells at 
fi xed  levels and the water clock. In the year 860, the three 
sons of Musa ibn Shakir published the Book on Artifi ces, which 
described a hundred technical constructions. One of the ear-
liest philosophers, al-Kindi, wrote on specifi c weight, tides, 
light refl ection and optics. Al-Haytham (known in  Europe as 
Alhazen) wrote a book in the tenth century on optics, Kitab 
Al Manazir. He explored optical illusions, the rainbow and the 
camera obscura (which led to the beginning of photographic 
instruments). Al-Haytham did not limit himself to one branch 
of the sciences but, like many Arab scientists and thinkers, 
explored and made contributions to the fi elds of physics, anat-
omy and mathematics. 
So the challenges for Arab private institutions is to be inspired 
from a glorious history to build innovative engineering facul-
ties that can compete in the fast world of globalization. Th e 
Arab world is not isolated and we should learn from other 
nations including Asian countries such as Japan, Korea, Singa-
pore and Malaysia on how to combine theory with practice. 
Our responsibilities towards our nations and future genera-
tions are serious with the admission that the current situation 
in the engineering profession is not everything it could be and 
needs to be. Arab nations should have the will, through their 
government ministries of higher  education and through their 
professional organizations, to give educational systems the 
fl exibility to adopt new programmes, improve existing pro-
grammes and to monitor  accreditation associations eff ectively 
so as to ensure the quality of engineering  education in our pri-
vate institutions.
Jordan
Jordan Engineers Association
Jordan lies among Iraq to the east, Palestine to the west, Syria 
to the north and Saudi Arabia to the south. It retains an his-
toric presence as a link between cultures going back to ancient 
Mesopotamia and Egypt. A medium-sized country, with an 
area of 89,287 km2, it has a population of 5.5million90 growing 
at 2.8 per cent (world average is 1.3 per cent). Some 80.2 per 
cent of Jordan’s population is under the age of 30.
Th e association for registering engineering professionals was 
founded in 1958, becoming the Jordan Engineers Associa-
tion (JEA) in 1972. Th e association has two headquarters, in 
Amman and in Jerusalem where engineers living in the West 
Bank in the Palestinian Territories register.
Th e association’s objectives and goals are:
To organize the vocation of engineering to promote its sci- ■
entifi c and vocational level, to take benefi t thereof in eco-
nomic, civilization and pan-national mobilization.
90 Census of 2004
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   220 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
221
To defend members’ interest and dignity, and to keep the  ■
vocation’s traditions and honour.
To enhance the scientifi c and vocational level of the engi- ■
neer, and to activate and support scientifi c engineering 
 research.
To contribute to planning and the development of engineer- ■
ing, industrial and vocational  education programmes, and 
to work towards raising the eff ectiveness of the employees 
in the engineering fi eld.
To contribute to studying common character topics among  ■
Arab and Islamic countries and other countries, and to 
exchange information, expertise and engineering publica-
tions.
To secure a good  ■  standard of living for engineers and their 
families in cases of disability, old age and other emergent 
situations.
To work in any area that may assist the association to  ■
achieve its vocational goals.
To cooperate and coordinate with offi  cial bodies in the  ■
kingdom in its capacity as a consulting body in its fi eld of 
specialization.
To collaborate and coordinate with Arab, Islamic and inter- ■
national vocational engineering unions and to be a member 
thereof.
Th e total number of men and women engineers of the associ-
ation was 70,829 in 2007, increasing by about 7 per cent each 
year. As a proportion of the population, this is equal to eleven 
engineers per thousand people, and is among one of the high-
est rates in the world. Th e association includes 1,200 compa-
nies employing 6,230 people. Some 8,828 engineers work in 
the government while 9,950 engineers work with contracting 
companies, factories and private companies. Around 8,400 
registered engineers are employed abroad, while the number 
of engineers registered with the association in Jerusalem 
comes to 5,000.
Th e increasing numbers taking interest, studying engineering 
sciences and joining the JEA is a result of the good standing 
engineers have in  society. Th ere are now more engineering 
educational institutions and opportunities to take engineer-
ing majors. Th e construction sector in particular, alongside 
other engineering sectors, has benefi ted from strong growth, 
including the opening of new markets for engineering work 
in several other countries. In addition, Arab engineers are 
increasingly coming to practice engineering in Jordan. Pub-
lic and private sector commitment to the JEA’s regulations 
is proving eff ective with good cooperation in this area. Th e 
engineers salary scale, which was issued under a resolution of 
the association’s council (and which came into eff ect in 2008), 
determined that the minimum salary for a newly graduated 
engineer should be JD400 (US$560), and the minimum salary 
for an engineer with over twelve years experience should be 
JD1350 (US$1,900).
Asia and Pacifi c5.3.3 
China
Zhong Yixin
A brief note on engineering  education reform in China
According to the 2005 statistics, China has thirty-fi ve million 
intellectuals among which are ten million engineers. China has 
1.3 million engineering graduates per year, including 650,000 
university graduates. China therefore has largest number of 
engineers in the world. However, there have been relatively 
few engineering projects contributed by Chinese engineers in 
these last few years, which is a matter of great concern for Chi-
nese engineering  education.
Engineering  education reform has been one of the most impres-
sive recent successes in China. Chinese engineering  education 
is quite diff erent from that in Western countries and the issues 
typically faced by Western countries, such as women’s partici-
pation in engineering and the  enrolment levels of students in 
engineering  education, are not yet problems faced by China. 
However, in common with many other countries, the calls for 
reform of engineering  education have been growing louder 
and louder in China. Such calls emphasize the strengthening 
of student abilities with  innovation skills, and improving the 
performance of students with more practical training. 
Table 1: JEA members by engineering branch and nationality in 2007
Branch/
nationality
Jordanian Arab Foreign Total
Civil 19,071 849 203 21,123
Architectural 5432 469 49 5,950
Mechanical 14,368 317 45 14,730
Electrical 23,762 506 31 24,299
Mining and 
metallurgy
915 15 3 933
Chemist 4,728 60 6 4,794
Total 68,276 2,216 337 70,829
Rate 96.4% 3.1% 0.5% 100%
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   221 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
222
An engineering student in university in China has a four-year 
 education. Students spend two years on basic courses such as 
mathematics, physics, chemistry, humanities, social sciences 
and so on, eighteen months on the fundamental courses of 
their major, and another six months on a practical project. Th e 
majority of the time, students learn from teachers in the class-
room with some experimentation in the laboratory, so that 
have very little opportunity to practice their abilities, either in 
scientifi c  research or hands-on projects. In addition, the cover-
age of engineering is very specialized. A university engineer-
ing graduate only possesses a small portion of the knowledge 
needed in real-world engineering.
Widely accepted proposals for the reform of engineering  edu-
cation in China include:
Widening engineering  ■  education to properly cover practical 
engineering.
Updating the structure of the  ■  curriculum so that it includes 
the latest knowledge.
Reforming the teaching paradigm with more interaction  ■
between the teacher and the student.
Encouraging students to raise more questions inside and  ■
outside the classroom.
Strengthening the  ■  research and development training in 
university labs.
Providing more opportunities for students to gain experi- ■
ence in industry.
Recruiting new faculty members with more practical expe- ■
rience in engineering.
Establishing closer links between universities and business. ■
India
Prem Shanker Goel and Arvind K. Poothia
Over the past few years, India has been registering 8 per cent 
to 9 per cent GDP growth, largely due to growth in informa-
tion technology (IT), IT-enabled services and core industrial 
output. Th is can be correlated with the increased availability 
of a talent pool, which is young and confi dent. From being an 
importer of several goods and the recipient of aid, India has 
now become an exporter of fi nished goods and services and 
has off ered aid to less developed countries. Globalization has 
opened up opportunities for India, such as outsourcing of IT 
and engineering services into the country.
Th ere are enhanced expectations from engineering  education. 
Global competitiveness places signifi cant demands on  inno-
vation and entrepreneurship, and international  accreditation 
demands new perspectives on engineering  education, requir-
ing timely and appropriate responses from the Indian engi-
neering  education system.
Technology denial regimes demand  innovation in strategic sec-
tors and India has performed well in developing several criti-
cal technologies: in space, defence and nuclear  energy. Denial 
of technologies is not confi ned to the military sector. Th ere 
is a new urgency towards technology development by Indian 
industry with the recognition that ‘purchasable technology’ 
is out of date, and contemporary technology is not purchas-
able. Managing  innovation for the developing world environ-
ment must take into account special needs and circumstances, 
such as: appropriateness to local needs, resources and culture; 
easy-to-use and aff ordable technology; employment gaps and 
opportunities, and so on.
Several higher technological institutions, such as the thirteen 
Indian Institutes of Technology (IITs) and the twenty National 
Institutes of Technology (NITs), have established centres for 
 innovation, entrepreneurship and incubation. Among their 
key terms of reference are phases such as ‘add commercial 
value to academic knowledge’ and ‘market the intellectual 
and  infrastructure resources for national development.’
Th e IITs are distributed across the country and represent 
higher technological institutes, declared as institutions of 
national importance. Admission to the IITs is made through 
a national examination held simultaneously at a multitude of 
centres across the country. About 300,000 students compete 
in this exam for 4,000 places, resulting in a selectivity of 1 
in 75.
Th e Indian engineering  education system is characterized by: 
the preponderance of private (self-fi nancing) colleges about 
80 per cent of all colleges; acute faculty shortages, a defi cit of 
about 40,000 places; acute shortages of PhDs, about 15,000; 
acute shortages of MTech graduates, about 30,000; meagre 
production of PhDs; and an internal  brain drain (particularly 
engineering graduates seeking employment outside the engi-
neering profession into areas such as IT and management). 
Quality assurance in engineering  education is achieved through 
the National Board of Accreditation, which is currently seeking 
membership of the  Washington Accord.
Industry has been proactive in establishing collaboration 
with academia to enhance graduates’ skills and employ-
ability. Employability enhancement and talent management 
are assuming signifi cant importance in dealing with young 
engineers, whose employment preparedness and expecta-
tions are becoming serious problems. Employers are quite 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   222 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
223
dissatisfi ed with the academic and employability  education 
provided by the technical institutions, and several strategies 
have emerged to bridge the gap such as ‘fi nishing schools’, co-
curricular experiences and similar. Attrition rates in several 
industries are high, and talent management, which involves 
strategies for identifying, attracting, retaining and managing 
talent, is important.
While the fruits of globalization have benefi ted the burgeoning 
middle class, who are able to take advantage of technological 
advances including the Internet and mobile phones, a large 
proportion of the population remains illiterate and unable to 
aff ord such technologies, and is yet to experience prosperity. 
Th is has resulted in great inequalities in  education, technology, 
information and quality of life. Furthermore, India already faces 
severe shortages in several critical resources covering  energy, 
water and qualifi ed personnel. Future challenges exist in sev-
eral areas such as ensuring balanced development that benefi ts 
as much of the population as possible, adopting a  sustainable 
development path, ensuring access, equity and quality in all 
sectors of  education, ensuring employment and employ ability 
for the population, and enhancing literacy and science and 
technology literacy among the population, among others. 
Still, world-class accomplishments have been achieved in 
engineering, in areas such as space science and technology, 
information technology services, biotechnology, technology-
enhanced learning,  renewable  energy technologies, and so 
on. Th e use of new fuels for  transportation and of  renewable 
 energy technologies for power, cooking, heating and cooling is 
increasing. And industry is coming to appreciate the impera-
tives of a ‘triple bottom line’. Expectations from engineering in 
India are indeed considerable.
Malaysia
Azni Idris and Rohani Hashim
Th ere are signifi cant social and economic inequalities between 
developed and developing countries. Many of the underlying 
causes of these diff erences are rooted in the long history of a 
country’s development and include political, historical, social, 
cultural, economic and geographical factors, and also their 
relations with other countries.
Th ese inequalities are also brought about by the important 
diff erences in their scientifi c and technological  infrastructure 
and their implementation of science and engineering policies. 
An essential prerequisite to a country’s technological develop-
ment is the necessity of a good  education system and eff ective 
human resources in engineering (key factors that, for example, 
contributed signifi cantly to Japan’s economic success after the 
Second World War). 
In developing countries, economic growth – and, more widely, 
 human development – can be enhanced by a comprehensive 
science and engineering policy. However, science and engineer-
ing can play their role in development only when the integrity 
of the whole sector ( research institutions, universities,  research 
priorities and human resources involving creative scientists) is 
preserved. Th us, the strategy in developing countries is one of 
increasing funding for  research and development, and to set 
priorities for the science and engineering sectors with short, 
medium and long-term plans.
Many developing countries have made important contribu-
tions to the development of science and technology. Th e prac-
tical application of science through engineering has created 
an environment for the pursuit of science and engineering 
 education in developing countries where funding scientifi c 
and engineering enterprises is widely accepted as a vital and 
long-term investment.
Engineering  research and development
Malaysia is a country that has undergone rapid changes in the 
way industrial and technological  research is conducted, which 
give birth to a strong, developing economy. Federal funding 
on  research in Malaysia was RM1.2 billion (US$340 million) 
during 2001 to 2005. Th is is a ratio of about 0.69 per cent Gross 
Expenditure on Research and Development as a proportion of 
Gross Domestic Product (GERD/GDP). Th is is low in contrast 
to Malaysia’s more developed neighbours, such as  Australia 
1.000.000
900.000
800.000
700.000
600.000
500.000
400.000
300.000
200.000
100.000
0
  GRI   IHL   Private
2000 2002 2000 2002 2000 2002 2000 2002
Information, Comp. 
& Comm. Tech.
Applied Science & 
Techno
Engineering 
Sciences
Agricultural
Field of Research and Year
Ex
pe
nd
it
ur
e 
(R
M
 m
ill
io
n)
Figure 1: R&D Expenditure by sector, 2000–2002 
Source:  MOSTI, 2005
GRI: Government Research Institution, IHL: Institution of Higher Learning
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   223 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
224
with 1.53 per cent, Taiwan with 2.05 per cent and South Korea 
with 2.68 per cent  in 2000. In relative terms, Malaysia’s  research 
and development (R&D) spending is however consistent with 
its level of development (MOSTI, 2005).91 
In 2002, 39.1 per cent of R&D expenditure in Malaysia went to 
engineering sciences  research, shown in Figure 1. In the United 
Kingdom, 60 per cent of R&D funding went to science and 
engineering, indicating the importance of industrial and tech-
nological  research in the UK’s economic success.
Comparing the sectors, the private sector in Malaysia spent 
on engineering science as a priority, followed by  information 
and communication technology and applied science and 
technologies. Contributions from industry in more developed 
nations are high, for example about 60 per cent of  Australia’s 
R&D funding came from companies (including both cash and 
in-kind) and in South Korea industry contributed 75.1 per cent 
in 2003 (MOSTI, 2006).92 
91 MOSTI. 2005. Ministry of Science and Technology and Innovation, Report on Malay-
sian Science and Technology Indicators, 2004 Report.
92 MOSTI. 2006. Ministry of Science and Technology and Innovation, Report on Evalua-
tion of R&D Projects Funded Under IRPA in 7th Malaysia Plan.
Th e technological development and advancement of a coun-
try is measured partly by the number of R&D outputs, and par-
ticularly the number of patent applications fi led and approvals 
granted. Th e source of most of Malaysia’s approved patents 
was the applied science and technology sector, where the fi eld 
of chemistry and metallurgy has contributed 28 per cent of 
approved patents since 1988. In 2002, engineering related pat-
ents were about 47 per cent (MOSTI, 2005).
Productivity in patent generation can be used as a perform-
ance indicator for  research  innovation and to benchmark 
developing and developed nations. Figure 2 shows the total 
patent count for Malaysia, ASEAN countries and also selected 
developed countries for comparison. Th e relative patent count 
for ASEAN nations has not been very high, with the exception 
of Singapore. Th is could be due to low-quality  research output, 
poor  innovation strategy (whereby intellectual property pro-
tection was neglected by researchers), or poor commercializa-
tion of patents. In contrast, countries such as US, Germany, 
Taiwan and Singapore have achieved very signifi cant increases 
in patent counts, following  innovation drives and a strong 
focus on technological R&D.   
The science and technological  research programme form-
ulated in Malaysia has achieved signifi cant success where pub-
lic funding was suffi  ciently given to support applied science 
and engineering  research. Th e primary focus on  research  inno-
vation and the drive for higher commercialization of R&D has 
created many new and innovative outputs that are useful to 
industry, employment and nation building. 
Japan
Yumio Ishii
How did Japan manage to be the only nation in Asia to avoid 
becoming a colony of western powers and to succeed in mod-
ernizing despite having begun modernization nearly one hun-
dred years later than western civilization? Why was Japan able 
to recover from the loss of the Second World War and develop 
its current prosperous economy? Th e answer lies in  education 
and the technology transfer. However, will Japan’s successes 
continue into the twenty-fi rst century? What problems face 
Japanese  society, and what are the possible solutions to such 
problems? Th ese issues are from the viewpoint of a civil engi-
neer who contributed to the development of Japan through 
the implementation of  infrastructure. 
Th e basis of Japan’s development – science and 
technology in the Edo era
Th e Edo era (1603–1867) was a feudal era, however it was 
not the dark age that this term might evoke as there was 
progress in science and technology. As an example, survey-
 Australia
Germany
Netherlands
South Korea
Switzerland
Taiwan
United Kindom
14000
12000
10000
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
120000
100000
80000
60000
40000
20000
0
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Malaysia
Indonesia
Philipines
Th ailand
Singapore
 
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001
Japan
United States
 Figure 2: Patent counts in selected countries (fi led in United States), 2001
Source: MOSTI, 2005
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   224 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
225
ing techniques allowed for the completion of a map of the 
Japanese islands. In commerce, a money exchange system was 
established across the border of fi ef. Agriculture was the main 
industry; the industrial revolution was late in coming com-
pared to western countries. Th e power sources available were 
of cattle, water mills and wind (in the sails of ships) and there 
was no manufacturing system. Advancements were made in 
river embankment construction, new paddy fi elds, irrigation 
systems, shore reclamation, port development, road building 
and bridge construction. At the beginning of the seventeenth 
century Japan’s largest river, the Tone, was completely changed 
to protect Tokyo from fl ood. Tokyo had become the largest 
city in the world with a population of one million. Th e city had 
a sophisticated water supply system, but no sewage system – 
though there was an arrangement that allowed excrements 
to be exchanged for agricultural products so that it could be 
used as fertiliser. Tokyo was the cleanest city in the world at 
the time.
Th e success of modernization – the Meiji Restoration
Th e revolution in 1867 or the ‘Meiji Restoration’ transferred 
governing power from the Shogun to the people under the 
authority of the Emperor. It was the beginning of the mod-
ernization of Japan. Th e basis for modernization was the high 
 standard of  education of ordinary Japanese people, which 
allowed for the successful introduction of new technologies. 
Commoners paid tuition for their children to learn reading, 
writing and counting at Terakoya private schools; the com-
moners managed to fi nd ways to educate their children, even 
when on the edge of starvation themselves. Education led to a 
strong sense of national identity that helped Japan to resist the 
invasion of western powers (as opposed to the semi-colonial 
status of China at the time). Government policies for technol-
ogy development and transfer also contributed to moderni-
zation. Th e Government of Japan employed 146 foreign civil 
engineers as consultants. Th e railway network stretched across 
the entire nation just thirty years after the start of operations 
in 1872. A modern water supply and sewage systems began 
to be installed in large cities. Hydropower generation and a 
transmission network were completed. Large fl oodways and 
river improvement works allowed for the development of 
urban areas and industrial sites. As a result, at the beginning of 
the twentieth century, the Japanese industrial revolution was 
complete just forty years after the start of modernization and 
Japan was closely catching up with the West.
Reconstruction and economic growth after the Second 
World War 
Th e loss of the war in 1945 was also considered a defeat in the 
fi elds of science and technology. Japan revisited its experiences 
from the Meiji Restoration and learned from those successes. A 
great deal of importance was placed on  education. Junior high 
school  education was made compulsory and more opportuni-
ties were created at high schools and universities. Th e western-
ization of the fi nancial and economic system, the appointment 
of foreign consultants, the large numbers of students going 
overseas to study, and the introduction of foreign technolo-
gies in manufacturing all helped Japan’s economy to recover. In 
1961, the Prime Minister of Japan proposed a national scheme 
to double the national income in ten years in order to give 
the people something to strive for. Th e plan was actually ful-
fi lled in just six years. Th e introduction of contractor and con-
sulting engineer systems followed, brought from the West. In 
planning and engineering techniques, new concepts such as 
highway network theory, cost/benefi t analysis, new designs of 
dams and mechanized manufacture were introduced from the 
USA. Th e development of civil engineering achieved such lead-
ing  infrastructure as the Shinkansen railways, and once again 
formed the basis of economic growth. However, at the same 
time, new problems of pollution, ecosystem destruction and 
rapid urbanization became more prominent.
Current challenge: the  economic crisis and lessons from 
the Great Depression
Th e Tennessee Valley Authority project, the interstate high-
way network and a group of dams established as a part of the 
New Deal solved the Great Depression and formed the basis of 
America’s growth after the Second World War. Japan followed 
America’s example and used ‘big government’ to promote 
public investment in  infrastructure as a basis for its post-war 
recovery. Th is led to successful economic growth. However, 
in the 1980s, following the market fundamentalism of west-
ern countries, Japan started a shift to ‘small government’ 
with resulting reductions in public investment. Focus shifted 
to short-term results and inequality and social divides wid-
ened. Public investment declined after a peak in 1998, and was 
almost halved by 2008. Th is market fundamentalism is gener-
ally agreed to be the cause of the latest  economic crisis facing 
Japan, and indeed facing the world economy.
Th e results of the New Deal show us that short-term economic 
stimulation to create domestic demand through job security 
and public investment coupled with long-term economic poli-
cies and  infrastructure investments is the solution to this crisis. 
It is important that public investment fl ow enhances Japan’s 
 infrastructure in the long term so that they become assets that 
contribute to societal development.
We must simultaneously mitigate and adapt to  climate change. 
Th e momentum of  climate change will continue even if green-
house gas emissions start to reduce, so the principal player 
in adaptation measures will be  infrastructure. Infrastructural 
 disaster prevention measures such as river banks, breakwa-
ters, dams and early warning systems need investment, along 
with non-infrastructural measures such as the regulation of 
landuse. Th ese measures can only be implemented by ‘big gov-
ernment’.
 ASIMO robot by Honda.
©
 S
te
ve
 N
ag
at
a
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   225 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
226
Future challenges:  climate change
Japan has realized one of the most  energy effi  cient advanced 
economies in the world. Surviving the oil shocks twice, Japan 
has also reduced greenhouse gas emissions. Th e per capita 
emissions of Japan are the lowest of advanced countries and 
Japan consumes the smallest  energy per unit GDP in the world 
as well. Th is is a new area where Japan could show leadership. 
It is estimated that civil engineering and construction activi-
ties account for over 40 per cent of Japan’s greenhouse gas 
emissions. Measures such as rationalization of material (steel, 
cement) production, a reduction in construction processes 
and traffi  c as well as a  transportation modal shift should be 
deployed. In adaptation work, engineers will play key roles in 
the implementation of both infrastructural and non-infra-
structural measures.
Future challenges: demographic and generational 
change
In 1945, at the end of the war, Japan had a population of sev-
enty-two million and the proportion of the population aged 
sixty-fi ve and older was only 5 per cent. In 2004, the popula-
tion peaked at 128 million with an aged population rate of 
20 per cent. In 2050, population will decrease to 101 million 
with an aged rate of 36 per cent. How can Japan’s economy 
support such change? History has shown that increasing 
women’s participation in the workforce has at least the 
same eff ect as an increase in population; improvements to 
the  transportation  infrastructure to increase the commut-
ing population (including visitors from overseas) also has 
the same eff ect as an increase in population; and innovative 
 infrastructure will increase Japan’s productivity and allow 
for increased trade in growing foreign markets, even with a 
smaller population.
Indiff erence to science by the younger generation 
However, the indiff erence to science and technology among 
young people presents Japan’s economy with serious prob-
lems. Th e roots of this problem include: the spread of a mind-
set where money is supreme – perhaps encouraged by market 
fundamentalism – leading to the decline of their interest in 
science and technology careers; the low social and economic 
status of scientists and engineers, exacerbated by a cost-driven 
mentality (however, the 2005 Promotion of Quality of Public 
Works Act provides, for the fi rst time, that public procurement 
is to be evaluated on quality as well as on cost); the anonym-
ity of people in science and technology fi elds, which particu-
larly applies in civil engineering because in Japanese culture 
it was considered refi ned and polite for experts to maintain 
 anonymity.
Promoting engineering, science and technology in Japan
Promoting the development of science and technology, par-
ticularly engineering, is crucial for Japan as a country with 
no abundant natural resources. Like many other developed 
countries, Japan is facing issues such as an ageing population 
with fewer children, a decline in interest in engineering among 
young people, the intensifi cation of technology competition 
due to globalization, and growing negative perceptions regard-
ing the ethical dimensions of science and engineering. Japan is 
working to tackle some of these issues, as highlighted below.
Basic Law and Basic Plans on Science and Technology
In 1995, Japan published the Basic Law on Science and Technol-
ogy to emphasize and promote these areas with more eff ective 
planning, and to clarify the roles of the state and local public 
organizations. Based on this law, the Basic Plans on Science 
and Technology for fi ve-year periods were created and imple-
mented. Th e Th ird Basic Plan (2006–2010) primarily focuses 
on ‘science and technology being supported by the public and 
to benefi t  society’ and ‘emphasis on fostering human resources 
and a competitive  research environment.’ Th is plan succeeds 
the three concepts in the Second Basic Plan, which were: ‘a 
nation contributing to the world by creation and utilization of 
scientifi c knowledge’; ‘a nation with international competitive-
ness and ability for  sustainable development’; and ‘a nation 
securing safety and quality of life.’ Th e Ministry of Education, 
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) is promoting 
basic  research and putting high priority on the fi elds of life sci-
ences, information and  communications, environment, nan-
otechnology and materials,  energy, manufacturing technology, 
 infrastructure and frontier science.
Enhancing the  ethics of scientists and engineers
In 1999, the Institution of Professional Engineers, Japan (IPEJ) 
revised its Ethics Outline of 1911. In the same year, the Japan 
Society of Civil Engineers (JSCE) also renewed its Principles and 
Practical Guide to the Code of Ethics, and in 2007 it established 
a Committee on the Code of Ethics and Social Responsibility 
– in charge of materials used for training engineers in indus-
try and universities and so on. In 2006, the Science Council of 
Japan (SCJ) issued a statement consisting of ‘Code of Conduct 
for Scientists’ and ‘Toward Autonomous Implementation of 
the Code of Conduct for Scientists’ and requested that all sci-
entifi c organizations draw up their own related ethical codes 
of conduct. It also requested that they design and implement 
an  ethics programme for  research. Th e defi nition of ‘scientists’ 
in the statement includes engineers.
Strengthening communication and dialogue between 
scientists/engineers and the public
MEXT and the engineering societies have fostered and 
increased people’s opportunities to touch, experience and 
learn about science and technology through exhibitions in 
science and technology museums, free seminars, science and 
technology café sessions, among others. From 1999, White 
Books for Children on science and technology have been pub-
lished each year on selected themes (for example Th e World of 
Particle Beams, 2006).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   226 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
227
Fostering the public’s interest in science and technology
Th e Japan Science and Technology Agency has organized 
robot tournaments and manufacturing events in schools 
and universities. It has also produced broadcast programmes 
introducing interesting topics, science experiments and use-
ful technologies in manner that is easy to understand for 
citizens or younger people. In Japan, events such as ‘Science 
and Technology Week’ and a ‘Day of Civil Engineering’ bring 
together many events nationwide to augment the public’s 
interest.
Creating an enabling environment for wider 
participation
Laws have been revised and various programmes have been 
implemented to make the participation of youth, the elderly, 
women and foreigners in the activities of science, engineering 
and technology easier.
Adaptation to globalization
To improve the quality of engineering  education in Japan and 
to adapt to the global environment, the Japan Accreditation 
Board for Engineering Education (JABEE) was established in 
1999. In June 2005, JABEE was admitted as a signatory of the 
 Washington Accord. Between 2001 and 2006, JABEE accred-
ited 346 programmes at more than 140 educational institu-
tions.
Professional engineer system
Th e Professional Engineer System in Japan (the government-
licensed qualifi cation for engineers) was established with the 
enactment of the Professional Engineer Law in 1957, which was 
revised in 1983 and 2000. Before the 2000 revision, registration 
as a ‘P.E.Jp’ was by an examination after a minimum seven years 
of engineering practice. After the revision, a primary exam-
ination was introduced to certify that applicants possess the 
academic ability equivalent to that of a four-year university 
graduate. Based on the Osaka Action Agenda adopted at the 
Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit meet-
ing of 1995, the ‘ APEC Engineer Mutual Recognition Project’ 
was introduced for the  mobility of engineers within the APEC 
region (there are currently fourteen member states partici-
pating).
Conclusion
Science and technology have made extremely signifi cant con-
tributions to Japan’s growth. Engineering in particular, helped 
to support and ensure this growth. As we enter the twenty-fi rst 
century, Japan is confronting a number of challenges includ-
ing  economic crisis,  climate change, population decrease and 
indiff erence to science of younger generation, however Japan’s 
scientists and engineers are endeavouring to overcome these 
challenges and they are ready to act internationally.
 Australia
Peter Greenwood
 Australia has a land area of 7.7 million square kilometres and 
jurisdiction up to 13.5 million square kilometres of ocean, in 
stark contrast to its population of about twenty million.  Aus-
tralia’s size diff ers from many other countries with a similar 
population involving long transport links and major  infra-
structure, including  communications outside urban areas, 
with resources and  infrastructure projects absorbing engineer-
ing resources from other geographical areas. Nevertheless, 
 Australia’s contribution to world trade is considerable.
 Australia has enjoyed a decade of economic growth based 
mainly on a long-lasting boom in minerals and  energy 
resources – a key area of wide-ranging engineering involve-
ment. Engineers also play a role in the international supply of 
goods and services, which tend to be high-value though low-
volume on a world scale. Th ough  Australia no longer relies on 
wool for prosperity, it still has a thriving trade in commodi-
ties. Th ere are strong agriculture, forestry and fi shing sectors 
supplying overseas markets in grains, timber products, wine 
and beer, wild and farmed fi sh products, and other food prod-
ucts including small quantities of saff ron, wasabi mustard and 
exotic hops for beer making. In these days of diversifi cation 
it is not surprising to learn how many engineers are involved 
in these seemingly non-technical areas. Australian engineers 
have worked on innovative projects as diverse as fi sh farm 
feed-control systems, satellite navigation-controlled plough-
ing as well as carbon sequestration.
Economic growth comes at a cost to the environment (includ-
ing  climate change) and places pressure on  infrastructure and 
other community needs.  Australia has a  history of engineer-
ing and technical  innovation that has become very important 
in the face of globalization. Australian scientists and engineers 
have established reputations as leaders in a number of areas. 
 Australia has a small but innovative automobile and vehicle 
parts industry. Th e ship building industry is a world leader 
with innovative projects in military ship-building and in high-
speed catamarans. A successful submarine fi rm has evolved, 
which is now capable of maintaining and developing the 
country’s non-nuclear fl eet.  Australia even has a modest but 
highly regarded team that has achieved spectacular results in 
supersonic fl ight. Despite massive fossil fuel reserves,  Australia 
is a world leader in photovoltaic cell  research and other solar 
 energy studies. Th ere is a long history in the use of hydroelec-
tricity in the country and additional resources are now going 
into wind power and geothermal  energy. Climate change and 
sustainability have become key economic drivers.
The shortage of trained technical people is a dilemma. A 
survey of 200 organizations in 2006 by the professional body 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   227 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
228
Engineers  Australia showed that more than 70 per cent of 
organizations in  Australia employing professional engineers 
experienced engineering skill shortages in 2007 and 82 per 
cent of those reported incurred cost increases and project 
delays because of shortages.
In many respects,  Australia shares the problems faced by other 
developed countries:
Climate change including scarcity of water, increasing tem- ■
peratures, rising sea levels and extreme weather events.
Energy market restructuring and pressure to change the  ■
 energy mix.
Neglected investment in  ■  infrastructure such as roads and 
ports.
Unsatisfactory health and  ■  telecommunications facilities.
A shortage of aff ordable housing. ■
Declining enrolments in science subjects in schools and dif- ■
fi culties in the tertiary  education.
An underlying skills shortage, particularly in the engineer- ■
ing sector.
Skilled migration has increased, although international  ■
shortages reduce its eff ectiveness and emphasize the ethical 
dilemma of recruiting engineers from developing countries.
Th e engineering profession in  Australia is very active inter-
nationally through the Association of Consulting Engineers 
 Australia (ACEA) and the Association of Professional Engi-
neers and Scientists (APESMA), as well as Engineers  Australia. 
In the last few years we have provided the president of  FIDIC 
and now  WFEO. Australian engineers are also very active in 
the national Registered Engineers for Disaster Relief (RedR) 
and  Engineers Without Borders (EWB) organizations. CSIRO, 
the federal government’s national  research organization, has 
divisions in many engineering-related areas such as  energy, 
transport,  communications and climate modeling. Engineers 
 Australia is prominent internationally in engineering  educa-
tion  accreditation through the  Washington Accord and in 
engineers’ mobility though the  Engineers Mobility Forum and 
the APEC engineer agreement.
Major eff orts are being made by government, industry and the 
engineering profession to resolve the problems that Australian 
engineering is facing, and to overcome the expected long-term 
eff ects of skills shortages.
South Pacifi c
Andrew Cleland and Leiataua Tom Tinai
In Samoa, and the same may well apply to other nations, the 
term ‘engineer’ is generally taken to mean, say, a car mechanic 
or somebody that carries a pair of pliers in their back pocket. 
People know what a teacher does, what a lawyer does, what 
a medical doctor does, what an accountant does and what 
a policeman does. When you mention the word ‘engineer’, 
the same people hesitate (and sometimes ask ‘Can you fi x my 
car?’). Th is is a key challenge for the engineering profession in 
the islands of the Pacifi c and we must inform people what it is 
that engineers do.
South Pacifi c island nations vary in size from close to one 
million people (Fiji), through those of the order of 50,000 to 
250,000 people (such as Vanuatu, Samoa and Tonga) through 
to small nations of less than 20,000 people (Cook Islands) and 
very small nations of less than 10,000 people (such as Niue). 
A typical South Pacifi c nation has one or more main islands, 
with a number of small islands scattered over large expanses 
of ocean.
Th e extent of engineering  infrastructure varies; main islands 
often have reticulated water and electricity, but wastewater 
treatment systems can be localized. Diesel generators are a 
common source of electricity across the region. Telecommuni-
cations systems on main islands are generally of good quality. 
Radio is used between smaller islands. Airports are of gener-
ally good quality and many smaller islands have landing strips. 
Road quality depends on the suitability of local materials. 
Th ere are few multi-storey buildings and building materials are 
often imported. Timber-framed houses with metal roofs are 
common, whereas commercial buildings are increasingly built 
of concrete. Port facilities are progressively being upgraded 
from wooden to concrete structures. Th e South Pacifi c islands 
often suffer major infrastructural damage during cyclones 
when disruptions to power and water supply, and damage to 
buildings, ports and roads is common.
Historically,  infrastructure development was funded through 
foreign aid, particularly from  Australia and  New Zealand. Aus-
tralian and  New Zealand  standards have been used as the de 
facto  standard for construction projects through the super-
vision of projects by engineers from the donor nation. More 
recently, capital for  infrastructure has started to come from a 
wider range of sources, including the private sector, and fund-
ing agencies have not necessarily required adherence to inter-
national  standards. Th is has created a greater need for local 
regulation of  standards. 
Th e Pacifi c Island nations of Samoa, Fiji, Tonga, Vanuatu and 
Cook Islands (the Polynesian Pacifi c family) and their engi-
 Remains of Tonga shop 
after fi re, the tilt-slab fi rewall 
survived but the internal con-
crete and steelworks collapsed.
 Fire spread to timber 
frame of Tonga Co-operative 
 Federation, destroying the 
three storey complex.
© A. Cleland - Arthur Budvietas & Fisilau Leone
© A. Cleland - Arthur Budvietas & Fisilau Leone
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   228 14/09/10   15:34:40
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
229
neers are linked with the Institution of Professional Engineers 
 New Zealand (IPENZ). Th e engineers of the Solomon Islands 
and Papua New Guinea are linked with Engineers  Australia. Of 
these nations, Samoa and Fiji have passed acts of parliament 
for professional engineers, creating, in 1984, the Institution of 
Professional Engineers Samoa (IPES) and, in the 1960s, the Fiji 
Institution of Engineers (FIE), respectively. Nations like Tonga, 
Vanuatu and Cook Islands are developing a legal framework 
but are hindered by a lack of qualifi ed engineers to deliver pro-
fessional services and to monitor the quality of the design and 
construction of  infrastructure.
Looking at Samoa, the present number of members in IPES 
is 110, compared to only sixteen when it was created. Samoa 
has its own Building Code NBC 1992. Th is code references the 
Australian and  New Zealand codes for most of the engineer-
ing works. Other  standards often used and referenced are the 
 FIDIC and British codes. In Fiji, FIE’s register had one hundred 
engineers in 2007, though this compares to 140 in 2000. It is 
however estimated that there are 300 to 400 engineers in Fiji. 
Tonga has no engineering body and therefore no registration 
system. Th ere are fewer than twenty engineers in Tonga, of 
which about sixteen are academically qualifi ed. Th ere is no 
engineering body in Vanuatu or the Cook Islands, and there-
fore no registration systems. Most engineers in the Pacifi c 
Island nations received their qualifi cations from outside their 
home countries. A good proportion of these qualifi cations are 
obtained from other island nations like Papua New Guinea and 
Fiji, though there is concern of the  standard of qualifi cations in 
engineering, which is also now becoming a social barrier.
Th e South Pacifi c is fundamentally diff erent to developing 
countries in Africa,  the Americas or even Asia in that it is peo-
ple-poor and has large coastlines. Economies of scale are poor 
and building critical mass in engineering skills is diffi  cult. More 
specifi cally:
Aid-funded projects are not necessarily developing local  ■
capability or capacity; there is often no requirement to 
involve local fi rms in the projects.
Construction capability is very low (technical and trades),  ■
and there is poor training and supervision of construction 
workers; some practices are unsafe.
Access to codes of practice and relevant  ■  standards is poor. 
Th ere is a lack of a practical and systematic building code 
for a number of nations. Furthermore, due to the small size 
of the nations, the capability of government and regulatory 
agencies to implement and enforce building regulations is 
insuffi  cient. For similar reasons, the legislation, regulations 
or codes are often out of date or incomplete.
Th e engineering workforce is ageing and there are problems  ■
in attracting young people into engineering  education; 
those sent to study in  Australia or  New Zealand often do 
not return. Th e degrees off ered in Fiji or Papua New Guinea 
are not accredited to an internationally recognized  standard 
such as the  Washington Accord or Sydney Accord.
New engineering knowledge and knowledge of methods for  ■
handling new building materials is lacking.
Quality and variability of materials is an ongoing issue; some  ■
imported materials are of poor quality, and local materi-
als may not be suitable. Th e capability to test materials and 
quality-assure their reliability is poor.
Cyclones, tsunami and earthquakes pose largely shared  ■
issues, but are not dealt with well in the design of public 
 infrastructure and private sector construction projects 
across the region.
Th e issue of asset degradation due to harsh tropical con- ■
ditions is insufficiently well handled; some technology 
brought in from overseas is inappropriate.
To overcome these issues, regional approaches are preferred 
that cover the whole South Pacifi c. IPENZ provides facilita-
tion so that engineering communities in the various nations 
can collaborate. All the issues are being address, and exam-
ples of specifi c solutions include: the creation of a profes-
sional identity for engineers through a ‘South Pacifi c Engineers 
Association’ (SPEA) built around the provision of professional 
development, adherence to the agreed competence  standards 
and development and enforcement of technical  standards 
(the SPEA can also assist in attracting regional funding for 
these activities); the development of a South Pacifi c Building 
Code, with regular updating; and benchmarking of Fijian and 
Papua New Guinean qualifi cations in relation to the compe-
tence  standards.
 5.3.4 Europe
Germany
Willi Fuchs
Th e German economy has one major card to play in the fi eld 
of international competition – Germany’s engineers. Th e con-
tribution of engineers to the welfare of the country is huge and 
the engineering industry continues to be the world’s number 
one exporter of, for example, machinery and industrial plant; 
in this fi eld the annual turnover for 2007 was approximately 
€193 billion (€138 billion for export). Another strong industrial 
 Concrete block masonry 
wall being erected for small 
shop.
 Close up.
© A. Cleland - Arthur Budvietas & Fisilau Leone
© A. Cleland - Arthur Budvietas & Fisilau Leone
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   229 14/09/10   15:34:41
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
230
fi eld is the automotive sector with an annual turnover of €254 
billion in 2006 (€155 billion for export). Th ese two industrial 
sectors employed about 22 per cent of German engineers.
At present, there are about one million engineers in Germany. 
Of these, 64 per cent are national social insurance contributors 
and the rest are self-employed or work as civil servants. Th e 
majority of engineers work in the fi eld of mechanical engineer-
ing (186,000), followed by  electrical engineering (155,000), civil 
engineering (149,000) and then architecture (114,000). Th e 
rather new sector of industrial engineering (i.e. an engineer-
ing  education with complementary economics studies) has 
42,000 employed engineers.93 
Th e status of engineers
Since the 1970s the status of engineers has been protected by 
the laws of engineers, (Ingenieurgesetze). Th e recognition of 
engineering qualifi cations is the responsibility of the federal 
states. In short, only a person who has studied engineering sci-
ences and graduated in this fi eld can be called an engineer. 
Engineering  education in Germany is delivered by forty-two uni-
versities and ninety-nine universities of applied sciences (Fach-
hochschulen). Th e system is changing from a one-tier diploma 
system into a two-tier bachelor and master system. Th ough 
many study programmes have already converted, graduate 
numbers are developing slowly; in the year 2006 no more than 
3,181 master degrees and 1,648 bachelor degrees were awarded 
(in comparison to 22,599 students with a diploma from universi-
ties of applied sciences and 10,906 students with diplomas from 
universities in engineering science in the same year). When Ger-
many decided to replace the highly regarded title of ‘Diplom-
Ingenieur’ with a Bachelor and Master system, it met with a lot 
of resistance from the engineering associations.
In 2006 the federal government launched an excellence 
enhancing programme in which additional funds were made 
available. In a strong competition nine universities reached the 
status of an ‘elite-university’, which tends to become a major 
attribute for further increasing academic reputation. Each elite 
university will receive a total additional funding of approxi-
mately €100 million.
Regulation of the profession
The legal protection of the title ‘engineer’ ensures that it 
remains exclusive to graduated engineers, though students 
are entitled to use the title as well during their studies. Fur-
ther regulation of the profession takes place in the fi eld of 
civil engineering, where certifi ed experience and competence 
is required by the authorities for engineers and architects in 
order to sign applications and calculations for construction 
works. To certify, engineers must be enrolled in the registers of 
93 Source: Federal Statistic Offi  ce of Germany
the Engineers Chambers in their federal state. Around 40,000 
engineers are members of the Engineers Chambers nationally. 
Th e chambers have lists of specialists for several fi elds, who 
are entitled to elaborate offi  cial opinions and assessments (for 
example as expert witnesses in legal disputes).
Engineering associations
Membership in an association, for most engineers, is not man-
datory but many are members of Deutscher Verband Technisch-
Wissenschaftlicher Vereine (DVT), which comprises fi fty-fi ve 
associations. Th e DVT represents Germany in international 
organizations such as FEANI and  WFEO. Of the associations, 
the largest engineering association in Germany is the Verein 
Deutscher Ingenieure (VDI) with 135,000 individual members. 
Another, the Verband der Elektrotechnik, Elektronik und Infor-
mationstechnik (VDE) has 33,000 individual members. Asso-
ciations also act as regulation and  standards institutions in 
cooperation with the national  standards organization. Th e VDI 
alone publishes more than 1,700 technical regulations, many 
of them are also in English.
Th e current situation
Th e shortage of engineers has become a serious problem for 
most industrial sectors in Germany. After years of positive 
 economic development, all kinds of engineering professions 
are in need – even the civil construction sector, which had 
long suff ered from having more engineers than jobs. Accord-
ing to the federal employment offi  ce, engineering vacancies 
have increased by 50 per cent in the last two years. In the same 
period, the number of unemployed engineers fell by 60 per 
cent. Due to the eff ects of demographic change and the more–
or-less stagnant interest of students in engineering sciences, 
the number of available engineers may start to decrease.
For many companies the single most important factor that 
restricts their growth is the shortage of qualifi ed engineers. Look-
ing at the fi gures of the federal employment offi  ce, the vacancies 
have increased by 50 per cent in the last two years. Th e market 
demand on engineering skills can also be seen in the develop-
ment of the unemployment rates. In the last two years the 
amount of unemployed engineers has reduced by 60 per cent.  
Outlook
To solve some of these problems in the short term, Germany 
changed its immigration laws in 2007. Th e laws make it easier 
for more skilled personnel to enter the country and stream-
line and improve the process. In the longer term, engineering 
 sciences needs to attract more students. As a result, new con-
cepts are being discussed and introduced into universities. With 
the demographic trends in Germany in mind, more engineers 
and more companies have to be attracted into lifelong learning 
and other schemes to maintain their employability. Th e policy 
of allowing skilled people to take their pension somewhere 
between the age of fi fty and sixty has come to an end.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   230 14/09/10   15:34:41
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
231
German engineers and German engineering have a very long 
history and an excellent reputation. Th e label ‘made in Ger-
many’ still stands for high quality and  innovation. Like other 
Western economies, Germany faces some major challenges 
such as demographic shifts, the change from an industrial 
 society to a service  society, and the eff ects of globalization, 
and so on. Th rough the activities of many major players in the 
technical community, German  society has become aware of 
the important role its engineers play.
France
François-Gérard Baron
Long before the word ‘engineering’ was invented, the engi-
neers’ ancestors were already making large contributions to 
 human development and culture. When Romans designed a 
water distribution system (for example in Nimes, where they 
built the Pont du Gard aqueduct), they contributed not only 
to higher quality of life but improved public health for all. So 
too did the city engineers in nineteenth century Paris when 
they built the sewer network; indeed, they saved many lives.
Although it is common to stress the negative eff ects of tech-
nology on the environment and on quality of life, and to 
complain about disruption to services, engineers have prob-
ably never been badly needed in our  society. Th e scope of the 
challenges that engineers are being asked to face seems to be 
constantly enlarging. From traditional skills onwards, engineer-
ing now involves signifi cant responsibilities in  energy manage-
ment, environmental issues, public and global health,  poverty 
reduction and cultural heritage.
At a time when  sustainable development is acknowledged as 
a priority issue, a dramatic responsibility has been placed on 
engineers for  innovation and the development of new prac-
tices. Meanwhile, they must also take on responsibility for 
maintaining  infrastructure that is in need of signifi cant invest-
ment. Th e role of engineers is even more strategic in reducing 
global poverty and mitigating the eff ects of  climate change.
Engineers also have a responsibility towards the past as well as 
the future. Many civil works, such as bridges, dams and ports, 
need to be renovated, and old and ancient monuments need 
to be restored. Engineers are vital for cultural heritage; the Abu 
Simbel temples in Southern Egypt could never have been saved 
without the engineer’s expertise. Th is role is particularly impor-
tant in former colonies where state governments have little 
fi nancial and technical resources to prioritize these projects.
Engineering has a long tradition in France, dating from even 
before the medieval and renaissance periods when hundreds 
of castles, cathedrals and monuments were erected using tra-
ditional expertise. Formal training of engineers began during 
the eighteenth century. One of France’s most famous engineers 
is Vauban, who erected a number of fortifi cations during the 
reign of Louis XIV. His works are now protected by UNESCO’s 
World Heritage Programme. 
Th e fi rst school of engineers, the Ecole Nationale des Ponts et 
Chaussées, was founded by Louis XV to train civil engineers. It 
marked the beginning of specialized engineering  education in 
France. Today, unlike most European countries, the majority 
of French engineers are still educated in schools of engineers 
after the baccalaureate. Very few come from universities. Of 
the around 160 schools of engineers, a few are called ‘grand 
schools’ such as Polytechnique, Centrale, and Mines et des Ponts 
et Chaussées. Th e Grandes écoles are backed by government 
ministries such as Defence, Industry and Public works. Th e fees 
are therefore very low compared to private universities (most 
of the other schools of engineering are private). Th e main way 
to enter a school of engineering is by examination after two or 
three years training following the baccalaureate. Th e last dec-
ade has seen the development of engineering in universities.
France has around 600,000 engineers, of which 400,000 have 
diplomas. Th ey are joined by 30,000 students who receive their 
engineering diploma every year. French engineers are usually 
seen as leaders in the fi elds of civil engineering, aircraft and car 
manufacturing, chemistry and the agricultural industry. French 
engineers are known as highly competent in problem-solving.
Th ere are several important points regarding the professional 
recognition of engineers in France:
Th e title ‘engineer’ is not protected in France. ■
According to the Bologna Declaration, French engineers  ■
are only ‘long cycle’, which means that most diplomas are 
obtained after fi ve years of  education (including two years 
training). However, many schools are now developing a 
Master’s degree.
Th ere is no recognized professional body. However, schools  ■
of engineers are accredited by the Commission des Titres, 
which audits them periodically.
Although many engineering schools are devoted to sectoral  ■
disciplines, there are no offi  cial statuses for these sectors 
(such as civil, chemical, mechanical, and so on).
Most engineering schools have launched their own alumni sys-
tems, collecting membership and providing services to current 
and former students, such as careers advice, events and profes-
sional development. Around 160 of them are merged into a 
federation called the Conseil National des Ingenious et Scienti-
fi ques de France (CNISF), founded in 1860 by Napoleon III. Th e 
role of this federation, which is totally independent, include 
representation of the profession within France and abroad, 
 Th e breathtaking, record-
breaking Millau viaduct in 
France.
G
FD
L 
- W
ik
im
ed
ia
 - 
Si
m
on
 C
ol
e
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   231 14/09/10   15:34:41
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
232
promoting engineering skills, and disseminating scientifi c and 
technical matters. Besides CNISF, consulting engineers are rep-
resented by two main organizations, SYNTEC and CICF.
United Kingdom
Jim Birch
Th e Engineering Council UK and the Engineering UK jointly 
publish annual reports on the state of engineering in the UK.
Secondary Education
Th e increased number of students taking GCSE mathemat-
ics, sciences,  information and communication technology, 
and design and technology is partly due to the increase in the 
size of the 16-year old cohort over the last decade. Th e data 
indicates that there has been an upward trend aff ecting all the 
aforementioned GCSE subjects in the percentage of students 
reaching a grade C or above. GCE A-level numbers appear to 
be rising again in mathematics but they are still falling in phys-
ics. GCE A-level students who achieve grades A to C have seen 
an encouraging growth trend over the last decade. While the 
overall student numbers for science, engineering and technol-
ogy subjects is at best static, average grades within subjects are 
on the increase. Th ere is some concern that with substantial 
numbers of learners being moved to single science or applied 
science GCSE, there will be a reduction in the cohort taking 
A-level subjects suitable for entry to university programmes.
Further  education, vocational  education and training
Research indicates that engineering  technicians make up a 
substantial part of the UK workforce, nearly 2 million jobs, or 
just over 7 per cent of the total workforce. Sixteen per cent 
of  technicians work in manufacturing and 8 per cent work 
in construction. It is also worth noting that many engineer-
ing  technicians work in other sectors. Data suggests that the 
success rate for engineering, manufacturing and technology 
courses in further  education appears to be rising, from 71 per 
cent in 2002–03 to 74 per cent in 2004–05. Th is is counterbal-
anced by a fall in starts, but may well indicate that the candi-
date capability is rising.
Higher Education
In 2005 there were over 330 institutions off ering higher  edu-
cation courses in the UK with over 306,000 undergraduate 
degree awards being made during the year; 85,000 of these 
were awarded in Science, Technology, Engineering and Math-
ematics (STEM) subject areas. Nearly 120,000 postgraduate 
degrees were awarded at masters and doctoral level in 2005, 
with 34,000 being awarded in STEM subjects. Th e last fi ve 
years have seen an expansion in overall student numbers tak-
ing STEM subjects within the UK Higher Education system. 
STEM student numbers have increased by nearly 25 per cent 
from 424,000 in 2001 to just under 529,000 in 2005. Engineer-
ing and technology as a whole has seen increases in home stu-
dent numbers of 12 per cent over the past fi ve years, rising to 
17,200 home acceptances in 2005.
Graduate recruitment
Engineering and technology see the largest percentage of 
graduates working in fi nance and business (28 per cent), with 
the second largest group working in manufacturing (24 per 
cent). Whilst engineering and technology sees 28 per cent of 
its graduates entering the fi nance and business fi eld, it is simi-
lar for social studies graduates (28 per cent) and mass com-
munication and documentation graduates (27 per cent); the 
drain to fi nance and business is not a phenomenon specifi c 
to engineering and technology. Th e propensity of graduates 
to enter careers in professional engineering diff ers across the 
engineering disciplines. Five out of the top seventeen graduate 
salaries are attributed to engineering disciplines, with chemical 
engineering leading the way in third place with an average sal-
ary of just below £23,000.
Engineering salary levels
According to the UK Offi  ce of National Statistics data, the 
average annual gross earnings of professional engineers was 
£33,300 at the end of 2002 whereas the profession’s Survey of 
Registered Engineers found the average annual gross earnings 
for registered Chartered Engineers in 2005 to be £53,000. Th e 
median Chartered Engineer salary in 2005 was £45,500 (up 
from £43,500 in 2003).
Professional registration
Registration is not a legal requirement in the UK but over a 
third of engineers who are eligible have chosen to voluntar-
ily register with the Engineering Council. Th e total number of 
registrants has declined from just over 267,100 in 1995 to just 
under 243,000 in 2005, representing a fall of 9 per cent over the 
decade. Th is is partly a demographic trend as new registrations 
have seen positive growth over the last two years, reversing the 
declining trend in new registrations seen over the last decade. 
Th e median age of registered engineers in 2005 was 55 and is 
increasing.
Engineers in the economy
The number of top business executives with engineering 
qualifi cations in FTSE 100 companies fell from 17 in 1997 to 
12 in 2004 but rose to 14 in 2006. Th e manufacturing sector 
still dominates the employment of registered engineers. Th e 
proportion of employment in manufacturing rose from 32 per 
cent in 1995 to 40 per cent of employment in 2003. In 2003, 
the remaining 60 per cent are found throughout all other sec-
tors of the economy. Th e export of engineering services is a 
signifi cant contributor to UK balance of trade, generating an 
annual surplus of US$5 billion.
 Th e annual report on 
engineering in the UK.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   232 14/09/10   15:34:42
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
233
Table 1: List of UK Professional Engineering Institutions
Name Website Licensed to assess
British Computer Society (BCS) www.bcs.org CEng, IEng
British Institute of Non-Destructive Testing (BInstNDT) www.bindt.org CEng, IEng, EngTech
Chartered Institution of Building Services Engineers (CIBSE) www.cibse.org CEng, IEng, EngTech 
Chartered Institution of Highways & Transportation (CIHT) www.ciht.org.uk CEng, IEng
Chartered Institute of Plumbing & Heating Engineering 
(CIPHE)
www.ciphe.org.uk IEng, EngTech
Chartered Institution of Water & Environmental Management 
(CIWEM)
www.ciwem.org.uk   CEng, IEng, EngTech 
Energy Institute (EI) www.energyinst.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Agricultural Engineers (IAgrE) www.iagre.org CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) www.ice.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE) www.icheme.org CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Cast Metals Engineers (ICME) www.icme.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Engineering Designers (IED) www.ied.org.uk  CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Engineering & Technology (IET) www.theiet.org
CEng, IEng, 
EngTech, ICTTech
Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) www.ife.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Gas Engineers & Managers (IGEM) www.igem.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Highway Engineers (IHE) www.theihe.org CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Healthcare Engineering & Estate Management 
(IHEEM)
www.iheem.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Lighting Engineers (ILE) www.ile.co.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Marine Engineering, Science & Technology 
(IMarEST)
www.imarest.org CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Mechanical Engineers (IMechE) www.imeche.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Measurement & Control (InstMC) www.instmc.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Royal Engineers (InstRE) www.instre.org CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Acoustics (IOA) www.ioa.org.uk CEng, IEng
Institute of Materials, Minerals & Mining (IoM3) www.iom3.org CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Physics (IOP) www.iop.org CEng
Institute of Physics & Engineering in Medicine (IPEM) www.ipem.ac.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Railway Signal Engineers (IRSE) www.irse.org  CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institution of Structural Engineers (IStructE) www.istructe.org  CEng, IEng, EngTech
Institute of Water (IWO) www.instituteofwater.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Nuclear Institute (NI) www.nuclearinst.com CEng, IEng, EngTech
Royal Aeronautical Society (RAeS) www.aerosociety.com CEng, IEng, EngTech
Royal Institution of Naval Architects (RINA) www.rina.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Society of Environmental Engineers (SEE) www.environmental.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Society of Operations Engineers (SOE) www.soe.org.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Th e Welding Institute (TWI) www.twi.co.uk CEng, IEng, EngTech
Source: Engineering Council UK
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   233 14/09/10   15:34:42
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
234
 An Ekranoplan A-90 
Orlyonok – a remarkably 
effi  cient aircraft.
Table 2: List of UK Professional Affi  liates:
Name Website
Association of Cost Engineers (ACostE) www.acoste.org.uk
Association for Project Management (APM) www.apm.org.uk  
Chartered Quality Institute (CQI) www.thecqi.org  
Institute of Automotive Engineer Assessors (IAEA) www.iaea-online.org
Institute of Asphalt Technology (IAT) www.instofasphalt.org
Institution of Civil Engineering Surveyors (ICES) www.ices.org.uk
Institute of Corrosion (ICorr) www.icorr.org
Institute of Concrete Technology (ICT) ict.concrete.org.uk
Th e Institution of Diesel & Gas Turbine Engineers (IDGTE) www.idgte.org
Institute of Explosives Engineers (IExpE) www.iexpe.org
Institute of Mathematics & its Applications (IMA) www.ima.org.uk
Institute of Metal Finishing (IMF) www.uk-fi nishing.org.uk
International Council on Systems Engineering UK Chapter (INCOSE) www.incose.org
Th e Institute of Nanotechnology (IoN) www.nano.org.uk
Institute of Refrigeration (IoR) www.ior.org.uk
Th e Institute of Telecommunications Professionals (ITP) www.theitp.org
National Agency for Finite Element Methods & Standards (NAFEMS) www.nafems.org
Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE-UK) www.sae-uk.org
Safety & Reliability Society (SaRS) www.sars.org.uk
Source: Engineering Council UK
Russia
Vladimir Sitsev
Th e engineering movement in Russia has evolved since the 
middle of the nineteenth century, through the consolida-
tion of the scientifi c community, the formation of a domes-
tic engineering corps and through representatives of business 
(industrialists and entrepreneurs) interested in accelerated 
development of domestic production. Th e Russian Technical 
Society (RTS) was established in 1866 with a charter approved 
by the Emperor.
Th e RTS allowed individual membership and brought together 
prominent scientists, naturalists, members of the Russian 
Academy of Sciences (established in 1724), specialist practi-
tioners and large industrialists. It covered a wide range of areas 
including chemical production, metallurgy, mechanical engi-
neering, mechanics, machine building, construction, mining, 
architecture, shipbuilding, marine technology, artillery manu-
facture and weapon production as well as, later, the rapidly 
developing areas of aeronautics, aircraft modeling,  electrical 
engineering and also the operation of technical devices and 
machinery.
Among the founders and active members of the RTS were 
eminent scientists, designers and engineers including A. M. 
Boutlerov, N. N. Zimin, D. I. Mendeleyev, D. K. Chernov, S. O. 
Makarov, A. N. Krylov, V. G. Shoukhov, A. S. Popov, N. E. Zhou-
kovskiy, and others. Th e fi rst elected Chairman of the RTS was 
General Major of the Engineering Corps, Baron A. I. Delvig.
Th e RTS supported wide participation, and its scientifi c and 
technical activity has led to the creation of chemical, forestry, 
mining, civil, technological, water, electrotechnical, polytech-
nic, metallurgical engineering societies, among others. Th e RTS 
regional network grew fast; along with Saint Petersburg (where 
the RTS headquarters were located and the permanent Tech-
nical Exhibition was displayed) and Moscow, large branches 
were formed in Nizhniy Novgorod, Kiev, Kharkov, Odessa, and 
in a number of other industrial centres of the Russian Empire. 
In 1872, the Polytechnic Museum opened in Moscow and a 
decade later, the fi rst in Russia Higher Engineering Courses for 
Workers were opened.© C
CB
YS
A 
- W
ik
im
ed
ia
 - 
M
ik
e 
19
79
 R
us
sia
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   234 14/09/10   15:34:42
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
235
countries. More than 40 per cent of Polish families already 
have personal computers with Internet access. It is also worth 
noting that the export and import indicators have been grow-
ing and that their balance is favourable to Poland.
Progress in engineering  education is good. Poland has sixteen 
technical universities and nine higher  education institutions. 
Polish students and graduates have been awarded top places in 
international competitions. Indeed, Polish skills have attracted 
fi rms such as Microsoft and various aviation corporations to 
establish branches in Poland. Th e achievements of Polish engi-
neers abroad (and particularly in the European Union) must 
also be recognized; they have been described in detail in the 
recently published Encyclopaedia of World Research and Engi-
neering Heritage of Polish Engineers.
Against this background, showing the distinctive nature of 
Polish industry, it is important to highlight the potential and 
activities of the Polish Federation of Engineering Associations 
(PFEA), which represents the Polish engineering profession, and 
is one of the largest civil  society organizations in Poland. PFEA 
has 120,000 individual members from thirty-seven branches 
of engineering associations and two associations of Polish 
engineers abroad (in the UK and Canada). Its publishers off er 
thirty-four professional magazines for engineers, with twenty-
three magazines for branch associations. PFEA also supports 
the ‘Technical Progress Centre’ and ‘Science and Technology 
Commercialization Team’. Th e PFEA has signifi cant scientifi c 
and technical potential, which positively aff ects all engineering 
activity across the country.
Despite this generally favourable evaluation of the potential of 
Polish engineers, unfortunately, in the EU25 statistics on inno-
vative activity, Polish scientifi c and technical potential scores 
poorly. An analysis of possible causes of this situation has 
revealed two principal issues. Firstly, the funding available for 
the realization of innovative projects is not suffi  cient. Th e total 
annual expenditure per annum on  research and development 
from the state budget and from businesses varies between 
0.55 per cent and 0.60 per cent of GDP. Secondly, many multi-
national companies have invested in Poland but they use the 
 innovations developed in their  research and development 
facilities, which are often outside Poland. 
Th e strategic goals and aspirations of Polish engineering are 
analogous to those of other developed countries. Th e signifi -
cance of the above statistics is that Poland is striving to involve 
itself in more high- and macro- technologies. ‘Niche produc-
tion’, characterized usually by a territorially-limited market, 
must supplement supply for trade fl ows to be balanced.
Th e rising changes in trade, both globally and regionally, infl u-
ence national economic tactics. In Poland, the economic strat-
egy for the next fi ve years is additionally (if only temporarily) 
After the revolution of 1917 and the Civil War, such an organi-
zational structure soon made it possible to reconstruct the 
scientifi c and technical movement, which by that time had 
become a mass movement, on common principles united by 
the All Union Council of Scientifi c Engineering and Technical 
Societies (VSNTO). Th e fi rst chairman was academician, G. M. 
Krzhizhanovskiy, the author of the famous State Commission 
for Electrifi cation of Russia plan.
Th e main principles for the scientifi c and technical movement in 
Russia, established as guidance by its founders, were preserved 
and developed over time. Th ese included: the public creative 
nature of the activity; its enlightening, humanitarian purpose; 
the encouragement of achievements; the spread of advanced 
experience of engineering work; a high level of civic duty and 
patriotism. Th ese principles were manifested by guiding the solu-
tions to key scientifi c and technical problems, the advancement 
and implementation of large initiatives and the utmost strength-
ening of the union of  education, science and production.
Th e RTS principles also survived the end of the USSR. Th ey are 
continued by the International Union of Scientifi c and Engi-
neering Public Associations (USEA) that replaced VSNTO, and 
which, since 1992, has brought together the creative scientifi c 
and technical unions of the former soviet republics (with the 
exception of the Baltic States).
At present, the USEA in Russia coordinates the work of nearly 
fi fty scientifi c and technical associations (industry societies, 
unions, associations) and has regional branches in most of the 
Russian Federation. Leading associations of the country’s tech-
nical higher educational institutions actively participate in its 
activities. Th e USEA was a co-founder of the Russian Engineer-
ing Academy (RIA).
Th e activities of the USEA, as a creative scientifi c and technical 
organization, support the Russian government’s priority direc-
tions in the development of science, technologies and engineer-
ing. Th is covers areas as diverse as security and counter–terrorism, 
living systems, nanotechnology, information and telecommuni-
cation systems, prospective military equipment, environmental 
management, transport, aviation, space systems, power engineer-
ing and  energy effi  ciency. Th e USEA also raises public awareness 
and recognition of the role of engineers in Russia, such as through 
the government-supported Engineer of the Year awards.
Poland
Jan Kaczmarek
Th e GDP of Poland has in recent years been reaching the aver-
age value for the EU25 countries and it is improving. Average 
life expectancy is comparable to that of highly developed 
 Mir Station.
©
 W
ik
im
ed
ia
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   235 14/09/10   15:34:43
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
236
modifi ed by preparations for the European Football Champi-
onship in 2012. Th e most important part of the preparations 
has become the building of new transport routes in accord-
ance with the most modern engineering  standards. Neverthe-
less, the need for housing,  communications and information 
technology still remain social and engineering priorities.
In view of the national strategy, the Polish PFEA sets as its pri-
mary goal to continue to provide a high level of support for 
technological progress in small- and medium-sized businesses 
(which employ two-thirds of the workforce in Poland). Th e 
PFEA has taken on the constant task to strive towards a rapid 
increase in the level of engineering initiative, especially aimed 
at achieving a high rate of  innovation among all engineers, par-
ticularly amongst its members, for the benefi t of all  society.
Th e leading motto of all Polish engineers, in both good and 
bad periods of Polish history, has remained, ‘Here and now not 
a day goes by without progress – for the country of our fathers, 
for the Polish nation and for all the people of Earth.’
Th e Americas and Caribbean5.3.5 
USA
Charles Vest
Engineering fuelled the United States’ rise to global eco-
nomic and geopolitical leadership during the latter half of 
the nineteenth century and fi rst half of the twentieth century. 
Engineering  research and practice led to the creation of tech-
nologies that have increased life expectancy, driven economic 
growth and improved the quality of life of U.S. citizens and 
people around the world. Th e products, systems and services 
developed by U.S. engineers are essential to security, public 
health and the economic competitiveness of American busi-
ness and industry. In the future, the U.S. engineering enterprise 
will generate technological  innovations to address challenges 
in the areas of economic recovery – aff ordable healthcare, sus-
tainable  energy sources, suffi  cient water supplies and global 
security.
Th e strength of engineering enterprise in the U.S. has several 
historical roots. Th e production demands of two world wars 
and the massive government works projects during the 1930s 
contributed to the rapid growth of engineering capability in 
both practice and  research, in addition to its contribution to 
the U.S.’s burgeoning industrial strength and economic dyna-
mism prior to 1945. In the aftermath of the Second World War, 
the American government invested in basic science, engineer-
ing  research and in higher  education. It combined this with 
large-scale government expenditure on applied  research and 
on advanced technology development and procurement. Th is 
was mainly to meet national security needs. Th is approach 
accelerated the growth of the U.S. engineering enterprise in 
a large, diverse, distributed and open national  innovation sys-
tem, populated by a vast number of universities, government 
laboratories, private non-profi t laboratories as well as private 
companies.  
Th e role of higher  education and  research in the U.S.
A particular contribution to the engineering prowess of the 
United States was the excellence and eff ectiveness of its higher 
 education system. Th is consists of a diverse array of institu-
tions, ranging from two-year community colleges through to 
small liberal arts colleges and to  research-intensive universi-
ties (both public and private). Such diversity provides a wealth 
of environments and opportunities for students to select a 
school that best matches their needs and capabilities, and also 
represents a wide range of funding sources. Th is strength was 
substantially leveraged by a tremendous expansion of access 
to higher  education subsequent to the Second World War. It 
was a means to provide useful activity and skills training to 
a large number of returning soldiers, it supported  economic 
development in the growing western states, and it supported 
the continued  research and development needs of govern-
ment and industry. Th is government–university partnership 
has transformed American universities, has been remark-
ably productive, and has made the country a world leader in 
 research-intensive engineering and science  education.
Strengths of the engineering workforce in the U.S.
In addition to the strength of engineering  education and the 
productivity of American  research universities, several other 
factors have contributed significantly to the high quality, 
mobility, accessibility and entrepreneurial nature of the US 
engineering and technical workforce. Th ese include:
A highly individualistic, entrepreneurial culture nurtured  ■
in U.S. industry and in many U.S.  research universities by 
private practices, public policies and various institutional 
mechanisms, such as technology business incubators and 
venture capital fi rms that encourage risk-taking.
A history of regulatory and other public policy commit- ■
ments conducive to high-tech start-up companies, including 
the competition-oriented or technology diff usion-oriented 
enforcement of intellectual property rights and antitrust 
law (competition policy), as well as a relatively risk-friendly 
system of company law, particularly bankruptcy law.
A strong indigenous talent base that has been continu- ■
ously and richly augmented by a large and diverse supply 
of talented scientists and engineers from other countries. 
Th e openness of U.S. campuses, laboratories and compa-
nies to talented men and women from other nations in sci-
 Warsaw University of 
Technology.
© Polish Federation of Engineering
Associations (NOT)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   236 14/09/10   15:34:43
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
237
ence, engineering and management has been a major factor 
in our academic excellence, our cultural richness and our 
economic success (close to 60 per cent of engineering PhD 
degrees awarded annually are currently earned by foreign 
nationals.94 Foreign nationals residing in the United States 
were named as inventors or co-inventors in 24.2 per cent of 
the patent applications fi led from the United States in 2006, 
up from 7.3 per cent in 1998).95 
Global challenges to engineering practice,  research and 
 education in the U.S.
Th e United States has long been a leader in engineering  educa-
tion, especially at the graduate level, and certainly in the qual-
ity and accomplishment of our  research universities overall. It 
has been one of the world’s most technologically innovative 
nations thanks, in large part, to the quality and productivity of 
its engineering workforce. However, several factors are chang-
ing rapidly in the twenty-fi rst century.
Th e last half of the twentieth century was dominated by phys-
ics, electronics, high-speed  communications and high-speed 
long-distance  transportation. It was an age of speed and 
power. Th e twenty-fi rst century appears already to be quite 
diff erent. It is increasingly dominated by biology and informa-
tion, but also by macro-scale issues around  energy, water and 
sustainability. Th ese are issues that should be strengths of U.S. 
engineers, but the context is rapidly evolving.  
Th e impact of R&D expenditures
Th e U.S. once had the highest national expenditure on R&D, 
but today North America,  Europe and Asia account for about 
one-third of the world’s R&D expenditure each. Th e U.S. is 
losing ‘market share’ in every quantitative category used to 
evaluate R&D. From 1986 to 2003, the U.S. share of global R&D 
spending dropped by 9 per cent. Th e U.S. dropped its share 
of scientifi c publications by 8 per cent, its share of new of sci-
ence and engineering Bachelor’s degrees by 10 per cent, its 
share of U.S. patents by 2 per cent and it dropped its share of 
new science and engineering PhDs by 30 per cent. Th e coun-
try graduates about 60,000 bachelor-level engineers per year, 
where China is now graduating about 250,000 per year. Th ese 
changes refl ect the global success of many other countries and 
we celebrate such advances. But the U.S. is recognizing that we 
must continue to innovate and develop our engineering and 
technology sectors as a nation. 
Global production of engineers
Th e rise of production of engineers globally is tremendous. 
For example, China now educates about 250,000 bachelor-
level engineers per year while the U.S. graduates about 60,000. 
94 American Society for Engineering Education
95 Wadhwa, Vivek, Gary Gereffi  , Ben Rissing, and Ryan Ong. 2007. Where the engineers 
are. Issues in Science and Technology, Vol. 23, No.3 (Spring), pp. 73–84.
Certainly, there are defi nitional and quality diff erences, and 
numbers aren’t everything, but Floyd Kvamme, a highly expe-
rienced high-tech venture capitalist, says that, ‘venture capital 
is the search for smart engineers.’ Th erefore, for example, the 
U.S. needs to address the fact that fewer than 15 per cent of 
high school graduates have a suffi  cient math and science back-
ground to even have the option of entering engineering school.
Speed and changing nature of  innovation 
Th e pace of change in  innovation is also presenting new chal-
lenges. Engineers must work and innovate at ever-accelerating 
rates. When the automobile was introduced into the market, it 
took fi fty-fi ve years – essentially a lifetime – until one quarter 
of U.S households owned one. It took about twenty-two years 
until one-quarter of U.S. households owned a radio. Th e Inter-
net achieved this penetration in about eight years. Such acceler-
ation drives an inexhaustible thirst for  innovation and produces 
competitive pressures. Th e spread of  education and technology 
around the world magnifi es these competitive pressures.
Finally, globalization is also changing the way engineering work 
is organized and the way companies acquire  innovation. Today, 
service sector employment is approaching 70 per cent of the U.S. 
workforce. Th e development and execution of IT-based service 
projects is usually accomplished by dividing the functions into 
a dozen or so components, each of which is carried out by a 
diff erent group of engineers and managers. Th ese groups are 
likely to be in several diff erent locations around the world. In 
the manufacturing sector, this new distribution of work is even 
more dramatic.  For example, the new Boeing 787 aeroplane 
reportedly has 132,500 engineered parts that are produced in 
545 global locations. Indeed, the Chief Executive Offi  cer of glo-
bal IT fi rm IBM, Sam Palmasano, says that we have now moved 
beyond ‘multinational corporations’ to ‘globally integrated 
enterprises’.  An emerging element of this evolving engineer-
ing context is ‘open  innovation’, where companies no longer 
look solely within themselves for  innovation, nor do they just 
purchase it by acquiring small companies. Today, they obtain 
 innovation wherever it is found – in other companies, in other 
countries, or even through arrangements with competitors. But, 
more and more often, U.S. engineers are fi nding themselves in 
competition for work with engineers from other countries who 
are often paid far less than what U.S. engineers expect to earn.
Working in this evolving context requires a nimble new kind of 
engineer and engineering organization. 
More and more often, U.S. engineers are fi nding themselves 
in competition for work with engineers from other countries, 
and these other engineers are often paid far less – in some 
countries as little as one-fi fth the rate of U.S. engineers. To do 
well in this environment, U.S. engineers not only need the sorts 
of analytic skills, high-level design, systems thinking and crea-
tive  innovation that are normally provided in the current  edu-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   237 14/09/10   15:34:43
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
238
cation system, but will also require a variety of the sorts of ‘soft 
skills’ that are often overlooked. Th ese include  communica-
tions and leadership skills, the fl exibility to adapt to changing 
conditions, the ability to work in multicultural environments, 
an understanding of the business side of engineering and a 
commitment to lifelong learning.96 
Perhaps even more dramatic than the changes brought about by globali-
zation and competition are the new engineering frontiers. Two emerg-
ing frontiers of engineering are ‘tiny systems’ and ‘macro systems’. Tiny 
systems are those developed in the ‘Bio/Nano/Info’ sphere where things 
get increasingly smaller, faster and more complex. Here there is little dis-
tinction between engineering and natural science. Research and product 
development are done by teams of men and women from various sci-
entifi c and engineering disciplines who rapidly move from reductionist 
science to synthesis and system building. Macro-systems are of ever-
increasing size and complexity. Work at this frontier may be associated 
with systems of great societal importance:  energy, water, environment, 
healthcare, manufacturing,  communications, logistics and urbanization.
New Engineering Frontiers
Domestic challenges
Other worrisome trends are already adversely aff ecting the 
U.S. capacity for  innovation. Th ese trends include:
A large and growing imbalance in government  ■  research 
funding between the engineering and physical sciences and 
biomedical and life sciences.
A near-total emphasis on highly applied  ■  research and prod-
uct development in both industry-funded and government-
funded  research at the expense of fundamental long-term 
 research.
An erosion of the engineering  ■  research  infrastructure due to 
inadequate investment over many years.
A decline in interest of American students in engineering,  ■
science and other technical fi elds.
A growing uncertainty about the ability of the United  ■
States to attract and retain gifted engineering and science 
students from abroad at a time when foreign nationals con-
stitute a large and productive component of the U.S. R&D 
workforce.
Inspiring America’s youth is a real concern as is grappling with 
the low level of public understanding of engineering and what 
96 National Academy of Engineering.  Th e Engineer of 2020: Visions of Engineering in the 
New Century. 2004. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
can be done to improve this.97 Th e predominant engineering 
demographic of the American white male population is in 
decline, yet the U.S. faces very real challenges in fully engag-
ing women and minorities98 in the engineering profession at 
levels proportionate to the representation in the population at 
large. Only 18.1 per cent of engineering bachelor’ degrees went 
to women in 2006–2007, the lowest share since 1996. Female 
enrollment remained virtually unchanged in 2007 at 17.5 per 
cent. Th is is signifi cantly lower than the total student body, 
where women comprise 58 per cent of enrolled undergradu-
ates. African-American and Hispanic student representation 
has remained consistently low for the past decade. Despite 
comprising over 27 per cent of the U.S. population, these two 
groups account for only 11 per cent of engineering bachelor’s 
degrees awarded to U.S. students.
Rising to these challenges
Th e only acceptable response to the aforementioned chal-
lenges is to lead. Leading will require upping the U.S. com-
mitment to  education and training at all levels. It will require 
increasing investments by both U.S. government and indus-
try in R&D and  innovation. Leading will require inspiring and 
preparing a generation of young people to push the frontiers 
of science and technology and to solve the real problems we 
face, issues like  energy, environment, food, effi  cient delivery of 
healthcare, the shift to a global service economy, and world 
security.
In August 2007, the American Congress passed legislation, the 
America COMPETES Act, which would be one step in the right 
direction when it is fully funded by Congress. Th is legislation 
would jump-start improvement in U.S. pre-college science 
and math  education, strengthen and sustain long-term basic 
 research, and help to ensure that the U.S. is one of the best 
places to study, conduct and innovate.
Other eff orts to address the current climate for 
engineering
Many organizations in the United States, including industry 
and higher  education institutions, have recognized the need 
for and the importance of revolutionary change in engineer-
ing  education, and have begun to take steps forward. Th e U.S. 
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET)99 
has developed a new approach that off ers engineering schools 
more fl exibility to update their  curricula and to introduce 
 innovations. Some of the key ideas that have been piloted and 
tested include: 
97 National Academy of Engineering. 2008. Changing the Conversation: Messages for 
Improving Public Understanding of Engineering, Washington, DC: National Academies 
Press.
98 Minority populations in the U.S. currently include African American, Asian, Hispanic, 
and Native American people.
99 Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology. 2006. Engineering Change: A Study 
of the Impact of EC2000. Baltimore, MD: ABET, Inc. See also: http://www.abet.org
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   238 14/09/10   15:34:43
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
239
Providing the fl exibility in engineering  ■  curricula to pursue 
a variety of careers with an engineering background.
Expanding  ■  research-based and student-centered learning 
approaches in the undergraduate engineering  curricu-
lum.100 
Educating engineers for leadership in an increasingly tech- ■
nological  society by broadening engineering  education and 
emphasizing communication, teamwork, policy, environ-
ment and  ethics. 
Developing a variety of lifelong learning programmes in  ■
engineering, as well as the innovative use of on-line learn-
ing tools. 
Developing various initiatives to attract under-represented  ■
groups (i.e. women, African-Americans, Hispanic-Americans, 
Native-Americans) to engineering, and to attract domestic 
students to graduate studies in engineering.101
Emphasizing, throughout the engineering  ■  curriculum, not 
just the technology, the benefi ts that engineers bring to 
 society.
Action by the U.S. National Academy of Engineering
Much of what will be exciting and valuable in the twenty-
fi rst century will be the work of engineers who will move tiny 
systems technology into macro-systems applications. For 
example, the application of bio-based materials design and 
production, personalized predictive medicine, biofuels, and 
nanotechnology based  energy production and storage devices. 
Th ese engineers and researchers, driven by ‘fi re in the belly’ 
and their obsessive concentration on solving challenging puz-
zles, will be the ones to take us forward. In an eff ort to encour-
age such exploration and initiative, the U.S. National Academy 
of Engineering announced in February 2008, fourteen grand 
challenges of the twenty-fi rst century.
One of dominant themes over the next century is likely to be 
sustainability of the planet, and fi ve of the grand challenges 
listed above relate to this theme. As our global  society seeks 
ways to maintain itself in a sustainable way relative to the envi-
ronment, it will be up to engineers to fi nd ways to do such 
things as make solar power economical, provide  energy from 
fusion, and develop methods to pull carbon dioxide out of 
the atmosphere and store it in the Earth’s crust. Engineers will 
also play an important role, alongside doctors and medical 
researchers, in improving human health by developing  better 
100 A National Academy of Engineering Committee, Understanding and Improving K-12 
Engineering Education in the U.S., will release a report in 2009 on pre-college engineer-
ing  education. Go to: http://www.nae.edu
101 National Academy of Engineering’s, Engineer Your Life, is an example. Go to: http://
www.engineeryourlife.org.
ways to store, analyse, and communicate health information, 
and by designing more eff ective drugs. Because today’s power-
ful technologies off er many opportunities for misuse, another 
job of engineers will be to fi nd ways to prevent such misuse 
whenever possible, for example, by thwarting terrorists who 
would use nuclear terror and by securing cyberspace. Finally, 
engineers in the coming century will have a major role to 
play in enhancing human capacities by advancing personal-
ized learning and engineering tools of scientifi c discovery for 
example.
So, meeting some of these challenges is imperative for human 
survival. Meeting others will make us more secure against 
natural and human threats. Meeting any of them will improve 
quality of life. Th e twenty-fi rst century will be very diff erent 
from the twentieth century. Engineering will be enormously 
exciting and it will also be increasingly rich and complex in its 
context and importance.
Canada
Darrel John Danyluk
Engineering in Canada is a regulated profession, and all engi-
neers responsible for engineering work require a licence from 
the provincial or territorial jurisdiction in which they practice. 
Th ere are six engineering organizations that represent ele-
ments of the engineering profession in Canada. Th ese are:
Make solar  ■  energy economical
Provide  ■  energy from fusion
Develop carbon sequestration methods ■
Manage the nitrogen cycle ■
Provide access to clean water ■
Restore and improve urban  ■  infrastructure
Advance health informatics ■
Engineer better medicines ■
Reverse-engineer the brain ■
Prevent nuclear terror ■
Secure cyberspace ■
Enhance virtual reality ■
Advance personalized learning  ■
Engineer the tools of scientifi c discovery ■
U.S. National Academy of Engineering 
Grand Challenges
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   239 14/09/10   15:34:43
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
240
Engineers Canada ■
Th e Canadian Academy of Engineering ■
Th e Association of Canadian Engineering Companies ■
Th e National Council of Deans of Engineering and Applied  ■
Science
Th e Engineering Institute of Canada ■
Th e Canadian Federation of Engineering Students  ■
Th ese organizations are linked through the Canadian Engi-
neering Leadership Forum, which brings together the presi-
dents and chief executives of each body to address national 
engineering matters.
Established in 1936, Engineers Canada (Engineers Canada is 
the operating name of the Canadian Council of Professional 
Engineers) is the national organization of the twelve provincial 
and territorial associations that regulate the practice of engi-
neering in Canada and license the country’s more than 160,000 
professional engineers. Engineers Canada serves members by 
delivering national programmes that ensure the highest  stand-
ards of engineering  education, professional qualifi cations and 
professional practice. It facilitates the national  mobility of engi-
neers through an inter-association mobility agreement that 
enables engineers to obtain a license to practice in other prov-
inces and territories. Engineers Canada represents its mem-
bers in national and international aff airs, and coordinates the 
development of national policies, positions and guidelines on 
behalf of the engineering profession. It also promotes greater 
understanding of the nature, role and contribution of profes-
sional engineers and engineering to  society, and undertakes 
federal government relations and national media relations. 
Th rough its Canadian Engineering Accreditation Board, Engi-
neers Canada accredits Canadian undergraduate engineering 
programs that meet the profession’s high  education  stand-
ards. Th rough its Canadian Engineering Qualifi cations Board, 
Engineers Canada develops national guidelines on the quali-
fi cations,  standards of practice and  ethics expected of profes-
sional engineers. Th e International Committee is responsible 
for keeping Engineers Canada’s Board of Directors abreast 
of new opportunities to maintain or enhance international 
mobility for Canadian engineers, and for monitoring the use 
and viability of Engineers Canada’s existing mutual recognition 
agreements on the full or partial recognition of engineering 
qualifi cations
Th e Canadian Academy of Engineering (CAE) was founded 
in 1987 and was one of the highlights of the celebration of 
the centennial of engineering as an organized profession in 
Canada. Th e academy is an independent, self-governing and 
non-profi t organization established to serve Canada in mat-
ters of engineering concern, and which comprises many of the 
country’s most accomplished engineers. In 1991, the Canadian 
Academy became a full and active member of the Interna-
tional Council of Academies of Engineering and Technological 
Sciences ( CAETS).
The Canadian Federation of Engineering Students (CFES) 
is a community strengthened and enriched by a nationally 
diverse engineering student body. To enhance student life, 
the CFES facilitates communication, the sharing of ideas, and 
the exchange of information between member schools. To 
ensure that students grow both personally and professionally, 
the CFES keeps abreast of the changes taking place in  society 
aff ecting engineering students and the engineering profession. 
CFES is a unifi ed voice for students both nationally and inter-
nationally, and assists in ensuring that Canadian engineering 
students grow and prosper in the twent-fi rst century.
Th e Engineering Institute of Canada (EIC) is an umbrella organ-
ization for twelve engineering technical societies that organize 
inter- society cooperation in activities such as advocacy, con-
tinuing professional development and interaction, and events 
such as the Canadian Conference on Climate Change Technol-
ogy.
Th e National Council of Deans of Engineering and Applied 
Science represents many of the forty academic institutions in 
Canada that off er accredited engineering programmes. Th e 
deans meet bi-annually to exchange information on engi-
neering trends that impact  education delivery in the short, 
medium and long-term. 
The Association of Canadian Engineering Companies was 
founded in 1925. ACEC is the national association of consult-
ing fi rms that provide engineering and other technology-based 
intellectual services to the built and natural environment. 
Member companies off er professional engineering services 
worldwide to private sector and government clients. The 
Association’s membership consists of approximately 600 inde-
pendent  consulting engineering fi rms and twelve provincial 
and territorial member organizations who off er, collectively, 
thirty-fi ve types of services in 273 specializations.
Th e Confederation Bridge has been named one of the fi ve most 
signifi cant Canadian engineering achievements of the twentieth 
century. Th e 12.9 kilometre bridge connects the eastern Canadian 
provinces of Prince Edward Island and New Brunswick, across the 
Northumberland Strait. When the bridge opened in 1997 after three 
and a half years of construction, it replaced the existing ferry service 
with a faster and more effi  cient  transportation link. Built and oper-
ated by Strait Crossing Development Inc., the Confederation Bridge 
is the longest bridge over ice-covered saltwater in the world.
 Th e Confederation Bridge 
(see box).
©
 St
ra
it 
Cr
os
sin
g 
Br
id
ge
 L
im
ite
d
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   240 14/09/10   15:34:43
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
241
Brazil
Luiz Carlos Scavarda do Carmo and Cláudio 
Amaury Dall’Acqua
Brazil, the largest country of Latin America has 8.5 million 
square kilometres of territory (of which 49.3 per cent is cov-
ered by the Amazon rainforest), 190 million inhabitants and a 
GDP of more than US$1 trillion. It has about 9,000 kilometres 
of coast and one of the biggest fl uvial networks on the planet. 
It shares borders with every South American country except 
for Chile and Ecuador. Brazil is now one of the four emerging 
global economic powers (with Russia, India and China).
Brazil has a well-developed agricultural industry, is the worlds’ 
second biggest food producer, and its territory is very well 
served with fresh water resources. A robust, complete and 
sophisticated industry positions Brazil as a major player in 
some industrial fi elds, such as automobiles and commercial 
airplanes, and it is the world leader in deep water oil explora-
tion. About 55 per cent of its annual exports (totalling US$160 
billion) are manufactured products. Brazil leads ambitious 
aerospace and nuclear power development programmes. 
Additionally, of its total  energy matrix of 239.4 tons of oil 
equivalent, 44.9 per cent is from renewable sources (14.7 per 
cent from hydroelectricity and 30.2 per cent of biomass). Th e 
service sector is dynamic and technologically up-to-date. 
Th e  telecommunications network has more than 100 million 
mobile phones, and of the 6.7 million homes with computers, 
4.9 million are linked to the Internet.
Brazil suff ers from enormous income distribution inequalities 
and lacks severely in its  infrastructure. Some 81 per cent of 
the population live in urban centres – located at the south, 
southeast and northeast regions along the Atlantic Ocean – 
with a defi cit of more than 5.6 million houses. Only 52 per 
cent of Brazil’s urban areas have sewer systems. Th ere are sig-
nifi cant inequalities in population distribution and large areas 
are informally occupied in the centre and north region of the 
country. Th e railway network is not suffi  cient and though 
there are 1.6 million kilometres of road, of which only 12 per 
cent are paved. Th e extensive coast and great network of big 
rivers are still only modestly explored as transport routes. Th is 
very broad picture of engineering in Brazil shows us that it is a 
fast-developing country, still under construction and present-
ing enormous potential, opportunity and challenges. Engi-
neering in Brazil has already reached a good technical level 
with these advanced industries. However, engineering has not 
reached the status of being a strategic element of  sustainable 
development. 
Engineering as a profession faces a relatively low number of 
engineers, estimated at only 550,000 in the economically 
active population – about 6 engineers per 1,000 people. Brazil 
has 1,325 engineering courses with 300,000 engineering stu-
dents, equivalent to 7.75 per cent of all university students, 
and graduates 25,000 engineers per year. In 2005, about 30,000 
engineers graduated, but even this number is three times 
smaller than for South Korea, which has a population one-
quarter of the size of Brazil. Despite the shortage of engineers 
in the labour market – a market that demands professionals 
for  infrastructure construction and industrial and services 
expansion – there is no observed increase in youth interest for 
this most important profession. Indeed, statistics show that 
the number of students is increasing in areas of social studies 
but not in technical studies, meaning that technical profes-
sionals are in extreme demand.
In the 1990s, the Brazilian government promoted the open-
ing of the commercial and industrial markets to international 
competition, adhering to the wave of globalization. It resulted 
in an enormous decrease in Brazilian  consulting engineering 
Th e organizational stakeholders of a process of develop-
ment based on engineering are the schools of engineering, 
industry, government and professional societies. Th ough 
they share the same fi nal objective, their plans and inter-
mediary targets diverge. Th e great challenge in Brazil is to 
develop and sustain national programmes and projects 
that bring these stakeholders together to address engi-
neering  education, and to develop a new process to deliver 
new engineers, not only to reduce shortages but to inno-
vate and create an entrepreneurial ecosystem.
Appropriate professional competencies must be forged 
including an interdisciplinary attitude, geographical and 
cultural mobility, strategic thinking and marketing wis-
dom, and teamwork and leadership with people from dif-
ferent walks of life and from other countries.
Two examples of what Brazilian projects are trying to 
achieve are highlighted below. Both are focused on the 
complexity of engineering-based development, including 
the integration of several stakeholders and the improve-
ment of both higher  education and secondary  education. 
Such efforts are important for positioning engineering 
within the agenda of Brazilian civil  society.
Project Inova: this initiative of the National Conference of 
Industry has received the full support of all organizational 
stakeholders. Th e project is creating a forum on the double 
purpose of engineering in Brazil, that is, to promote leader-
ship in industrial  innovation and to guarantee  sustainable 
development. One of the vital aspects of Project Inova is 
that it stems from the limitations to strengthening engineer-
ing in Brazil. For example, the number of students enrolling 
at schools of engineering depends not only on intrinsic tal-
ent and interest, but also on the quality of  education and 
motivation for engineering received in secondary schools.
Case Poli 2015: an initiative of the Polytechnic School of 
University of São Paulo has established a new mission for 
students that will graduate after 2015: ‘Th e engineer of the 
future will apply scientifi c analysis and holistic synthesis 
to develop sustainable solutions which will integrate the 
social, environmental, cultural and economic systems.’
Projects to change engineering in Brazil
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   241 14/09/10   15:34:44
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
242
domestically and the denationalization of some dynamic tech-
nologically productive sectors. Many highly qualifi ed Brazilian 
engineers moved or have been transferred to other countries, 
usually the most developed. Outside the country, although 
Brazilian engineering companies were doing business on all 
continents, they had a modest presence when compared with 
the presence of engineering fi rms from nations such as China 
and India.
Another Brazilian engineering challenge – and indeed a 
political challenge – is the necessity to increase the exports 
of products with a higher technological content or added 
value. Th ough more than half of Brazilian exports are manu-
factured products, a great proportion has low technological 
content or depends on imported technologies and compo-
nents. Th is decreases national economic gains and means 
that job creation and private investment in the country are 
not reaching their potential. In a global economy, where 
the complexity of the interactions among distinct play-
ers is increasing at an unprecedented rate, engineering has 
become a special tool for  sustainable development, and 
mainly for developing nations. Th e social and environmen-
tal challenges of the twenty-fi rst century cannot be met 
without a new breed of professional engineers who have a 
broader vision for  society.
Venezuela
Vladimir Yackovlev
Venezuela has an area of 916,000 square kilometres and a 
population of 28 million people. It has a literacy index of 93 
per cent (2004), and 83 per cent (2006) of the population has 
access to treated water. Th e GNP per capita is US$6,209 with 
an annual growth rate of 5 per cent. Th e offi  cial fi gures for 
infl ation and unemployment are 17.3 per cent and 10.5 per 
cent respectively (2008), although there is a high rate of self-
employment in the informal sector of the economy. Th e main 
industrial activities are oil refi ning, metallurgy, iron and steel 
industries, food processing and the chemical industry.
Th e country has some 180,000 engineers and architects who, 
by law, have to be registered in the Colegio de Ingenieros de 
Venezuela in order to be able to work as professionals. Th is 
represents 6.5 professionals per 1,000 population. Th e growth 
of engineering professionals is 6.7 per cent annually, which is 
much higher than the population growth of the country at 
1.3 per cent.
The Colegio de Ingenieros de Venezuela is the professional 
 society that serves as the guardian of public interest, acts as 
an advisor to government, promotes the progress of science 
and technology and supervises the professional activities of 
its members. Engineers contribute through their professional 
activity in the design, construction, operation and mainte-
nance of  infrastructure, and through industry, educational 
institutions and engineering enterprise. However, it must be 
pointed out that  infrastructure is deteriorating rapidly in all 
areas and that attention should be paid to this looming prob-
lem.
In September of 1998, the National Congress passed a law cre-
ating the ‘National Academy of Engineering and the Habitat’. 
Th is is an academic corporation with thirty-fi ve permanent 
members and three corresponding members from each state 
of the country. Its main purpose is to contribute to science 
and technology in the diff erent disciplines of engineering and 
the habitat, and to conduct studies on the development of 
the country.
Undergraduate  engineering studies are off ered in forty uni-
versities in the country, and some of these institutions have 
several campuses in different cities. About 47 per cent of 
these universities are supported by the state and 53 per cent 
are private institutions. Th e growth of private universities is a 
recent phenomenon that has developed in the last quarter of 
a century. According to the latest statistics provided by the 
planning offi  ce for the university sector, there are a total of 
87,020 students studying engineering. Of those, 2,906 are reg-
istered in the agricultural and forestry sectors, whilst the rest 
are studying in more traditional areas such as civil, mechanical, 
chemical engineering, among others. A noteworthy statistic 
is that 41.3 per cent of the total number of students studying 
engineering are women.
Engineering studies are normally completed in a period of fi ve 
years and graduates are awarded a professional qualifi cation, 
such as ‘Mechanical Engineer’. Venezuelan universities off er 
graduate studies in engineering, leading to M.Sc., ‘Specialist’, 
Dr.Sc. or Dr.Eng. degrees. Th ere are 290 graduate programmes 
currently being delivered, of which 47 per cent are programmes 
leading to the ‘Specialist’ degree, 48 per cent are M.Sc. pro-
grammes and 5 per cent are doctoral programmes.
Argentina
Conrado Bauer, Mario Telichevsky and 
Miguel Yadarola
Argentina is the eighth largest country in the world with an 
area of 2.8 million square kilometres. It has a population of 
around 40 million, a GDP of US$245.6 billion and GDP per cap-
ita of US$6,548 (2007). Th e literacy rate is 97 per cent (2003). 
Th e number of practicing engineers in Argentina is estimated 
at 115,000.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   242 14/09/10   15:34:44
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
243
As the main agent of physical transformation, technological 
creation and productive  innovation, engineering has a central 
role in social and  economic development. However, as in many 
countries, this is is often not well understood by policy-mak-
ers. Th is is partly due to rising apathy towards politics, how-
ever a new generation of engineers is working to overcome 
this limitation to cooperate in national development planning 
and in projects with foreign fi nancing. Th e main engineering 
challenges discussed in Argentina are:
Improving transport  ■  infrastructure, its operation, the modes 
of transport used and safety.
Urgently increasing the  ■  energy supply.
Expansion of urban sanitation. ■
Better ■  distribution of activities and population to reduce 
inequality and transform informal settlements.
Promotion of ■  engineering  enrolment, graduation and train-
ing.
Argentina has more than eighty institutions that educate 
and graduate engineers. Of these, seventy are public col-
leges or national universities (including twenty-four regional 
schools of the National Technological University) with free 
inscription for secondary school graduates, and the others 
are private and paid for by the students. Together they off er 
395 grade courses, of which 376 grant twenty-one special-
ized degrees that are selected in a process of  curriculum 
unifi cation being conducted by the Federal Council of Engi-
neering Deans (CONFEDI).102 Courses are completed in fi ve 
years but statistics show that only 9.6 per cent of students 
comply fully. Th e dropout rates from these studies is also 
very high. Th e total numbers of graduate engineers in the 
period 1998–2003 was 11,460 from national universities, 
10,250 from the National Technological University and 4,090 
from private universities. Th e main engineering fi elds were 
computer sciences and industrial, electronic, civil, chemical 
and mechanical engineering. It is estimated that, at present, 
women make up nearly 20 per cent of all engineering stu-
dents. Th ere are also many courses for postgraduate study, 
which are increasingly in demand.
Quality control of engineering courses is part of a system of 
 accreditation defi ned by the Argentine National Law of Higher 
Education. Th e National Council of Evaluation and Accredita-
tion (CONEAU)103 plans evaluations and grants programmes 
licenses for three or six years. Accreditation guidelines and 
102 Federal Council of Engineering Deans (CONFEDI). Go to: http://www.confedi.org.ar
103 National Council on Evaluation and Accreditation, Argentina. Go to: http://www.
coneau.gov.ar
procedures are similar to those of ABET, the  Washington 
Accord and the EMF. To improve the usefulness of the system, 
some engineering institutions consider that the evaluations 
should include the opinion of practicing engineers working in 
professional activities and productive sectors.
CONFEDI is analyzing, in cooperation with the Secretary of 
University Policies of the Ministry of Education,  curricula and 
pedagogy104 with a view to updating engineering  education 
to deliver the outcomes and competences needed for 2015. 
Some guiding concepts for this process include: better con-
textualization so that engineers can meet the needs of the 
country; more attractive training that increases formative, 
creative and practical activities; closer relations with regional 
population, production and problems; and the consideration 
of social situations. Many of these concepts were postulated 
by UNESCO in the Delors Report105 in 1996, with inspiration 
for engineering  education such as ‘learning to know, learning 
to do, learning to live together and learning to be’ as the four 
pillars of  education throughout life.
In the last decades of the twentieth century, Argentina
suff ered a costly ‘ brain drain’ of engineers. With economic 
recovery, demand is still not being satisfi ed by the number of 
new graduates. Enrolment in engineering programmes began 
to decline in 1990 and reached its lowest level between 1996 
and 1999. Economic recovery began in 2000 with policies 
encouraging local production; with the result that  enrolment 
increased 11 per cent between 2000 and 2007. Th ere were 
some 30,000 enrolments of engineering students in 2005, but 
that same year fewer than 5,000 engineers graduated, showing 
that many left at intermediate level.
For this reason, the national government is encouraging 
engineering students to enrol and complete their studies 
with scholarships and funds in order to improve engineer-
ing schools. Th ere are funds to promote the return of highly 
qualifi ed Argentine engineers who have left the country. Th e 
Offi  ce of Science, Technology and Productive Innovation of 
the national government was upgraded to a new ministry last 
year, and it leads promotional programmes to expand and 
enhance engineering  education and  research, and their links 
with production. Th e national government annual budget for 
engineering was estimated to be just less than US$700 million 
in 2008, after it was increased at a rate of 16 per cent per year 
between 2000 and 2008. We must also add to this amount the 
contributions of private schools and productive enterprise to 
educate and train engineers.
104 Secretary of University Policies, Ministry of Education. Go to: http://www.me.gov.ar/
spu/
105 Jacques Delors. 1996. Learning: the Treasure Within. Report to UNESCO of the Interna-
tional Commission on Education for the Twenty-fi rst Century. UNESCO publishing, 
Paris.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   243 14/09/10   15:34:44
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
244
Investments in engineering  research and development have 
historically been low in Argentina as the priority was to fund 
the sciences. In recent years, technological  research has been 
receiving increasing support from the national government 
and, in smaller proportions, from the private sector. In 2003, 
the total investment in  research and development was 0.5 per 
cent of the GNP, in 2008 it will be 0.8 per cent and it is planned 
to reach 1 per cent by 2010.
Legally, Argentine engineering is controlled by institutions 
called ‘Professional Councils’ and ‘Engineering Colleges’ that 
are governed by engineers and are located all over the country. 
Th ey manage the professional registration, activities and  ethics 
of engineering on behalf of the State. Besides those institu-
tions, engineers are freely organized in regional associations or 
engineers’ centres. Together, they constitute the national asso-
ciation UADI,106 which is member of UPADI, the Pan-American 
association, and  WFEO. Th e missions of UADI and its centres 
are generally to represent engineers and to improve their pro-
fessional activities for the service of their country. Engineer-
ing professional practice is regulated by codes of  ethics, which 
are approved and applied by the Professional Councils, and 
advised by Argentina’s National Academy of Engineering.107
Caribbean
Gossett Oliver
Engineering and its varied products, services and insights are 
infl uential in all walks of life and in all corners of the world as 
a major force directing our thoughts, actions and the course 
of civilization. A country’s ability to cope with its many chal-
lenges and to satisfy the demands of its citizens depend to a 
large extent on the development and application of engineer-
ing, which has its grounding in the knowledge of science and 
technology.
With very few exceptions, all developed nations are masters of 
the generation and use of science and technology (S&T), while 
underdeveloped nations have lesser capacity in the deploy-
ment of these instruments. It can be argued that scientifi c 
and technological capabilities are the major forces separating 
developed from developing countries and are, moreover, wid-
ening the gap between the rich and poor. A crucial step in clos-
ing these development gaps in the Caribbean is the willingness 
of the leaders to craft policies, strategies and plans to use engi-
neering innovatively to tackle socio-economic problems and 
to protect their environment.
106 UADI. Go to: http://www.uadi.org.ar
107 National Academy of Engineering. Go to: http://www.acadning.org.ar
Only two of the English speaking Caribbean islands (namely 
Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago, with a total population of 
about six million) have had a long history in scientifi c aware-
ness and application. Th ey were among the earliest Caribbean 
islands to craft laws to guide the use of science and technol-
ogy for the exploitation of domestic natural resources. Th is is 
perhaps not surprising considering the fact that Jamaica was 
among the fi rst in the American hemisphere to enjoy electric-
ity, build a railway, establish botanical gardens as well as inno-
vatively apply  research results to boost sugar cane production. 
Small countries like those in the Caribbean have a compara-
tively limited number of professionals and material resources, 
yet they will have to face most, if not all, of the challenges of 
larger, better equipped jurisdictions. Th is is forcing the Carib-
bean population to be more innovative in using the resources 
available in order to gain maximum effi  ciencies, and to remain 
fl exible and adaptable to rapid change.
Th e Caribbean’s management of science and technology has 
to become adept at using few skilled and trained individuals 
in a very considered and focused manner to achieve benefi cial 
results. Decisions on what to tackle locally, what to acquire 
from the outside and how to marry the two are ineluctable 
and burning questions. Monitoring, evaluation and learning 
become essential in these endeavours.
Th e Caribbean realizes that it has to use existing technology 
and engineering knowledge to tackle chronic production 
problems, while meticulously building a stronger  research and 
development base to seek answers and anticipate problems. 
Th e Caribbean therefore has to strengthen its knowledge sur-
veillance capabilities and partnership, creating systems to cope 
with its limited natural resources.  
Although the Caribbean has a strong university system and 
science pedigree, it has been difficult to translate domes-
tic scientifi c results into technologies, products and services 
because of insuffi  cient capital goods, funding, implementa-
tion machinery, engineering and entrepreneurship capacities. 
Th e Caribbean’s private sector (perhaps with the exception of 
Trinidad and Tobago) is not only small but largely conservative 
in its approach to development; it shies away from taking risks 
in technological investments while taking comfort in Govern-
ment papers, securities and retail trading. Many in the private 
sector shun  innovation and technological upgrading.   
Crime has become a major concern. Th e islands’ coastlines are 
diffi  cult to police without modern surveillance and detection 
technologies to prevent the entry of contraband, illicit drugs 
and weapons.
Th e Caribbean essentially has all the main infrastructural S&T 
components, except for risk and venture capital funds for tech-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   244 14/09/10   15:34:44
E N G I N E E R I N G  A R O U N D  T H E  W O R L D
245
nology-led projects and pilot plans facilities. Improvement in 
the assessment capabilities of banks to estimate risks in the 
knowledge economy is needed. Ways to encourage university 
and other tertiary graduates to commercialize knowledge and 
create novel products and services are also vital elements in a 
successful domestic economy.
Key strategic sreas
Accordingly, the following strategic areas for engineers are cru-
cial to set the Caribbean on a path of peace and prosperity:
(i) Collection and use of vital national S&T 
information
In a knowledge-led world, information is the most important 
currency. Th e market does not allow for proper fl ows of timely 
information and, therefore, government must establish institu-
tions, set policies and implement plans in order to ensure that 
the vital statistics of the countries are collected, analysed and 
distributed to inform business development and social adjust-
ments. Also, the Caribbean has to tap into regional and global 
networks to follow technological trends, scientifi c develop-
ments and business and trade signals that may have signifi cant 
impact on local enterprises and cultural norms.
Th e following initiatives are the minimum requirements to 
 fulfi ll such purposes: 
Gather accurate information on what S&T skills, institu- ■
tions, organizations and projects exist.
Match this knowledge with the present industrial, manu- ■
facturing, service and social demands and thereby identify 
and fi ll vital gaps. 
Establish performance criteria and  ■  standards to monitor 
and evaluate domestic S&T and engineering activities to 
help their progress and ensure optimum use of resource. 
Establish a review mechanism to permit national budgeting  ■
by performance, especially S&T activities within ministries 
and main statutory bodies. 
Share tacit knowledge specifi c to the Caribbean situation,  ■
especially for the production of goods, services and recre-
ation.
(ii) Intelligence capabilities
Intellectual capital is the development bedrock of nations and 
this is fed by the development and analysis of domestic informa-
tion and the pursuit of knowledge from the global arena. Conse-
quently, the importance of eff ective intelligence management to 
promote business expansion and vitality has never been greater. 
Policy and planning will require high quality social intelligence 
from a variety of quarters, if resources are to be allocated opti-
mally and development aims achieved in a timely fashion. An 
information network that spans the globe is therefore of signifi -
cance to the local prospects for socio- economic development. 
Th is is especially so for small states like the Caribbean.  
Th e following objectives are therefore paramount:
Develop social intelligence networks, engaging missions,  ■
embassies and other bodies abroad.
Train diplomats, politicians and other government offi  cials  ■
as well as trade union bosses and national leaders in S&T 
currency and their impacts. 
Develop systems for local S&T intelligence to maximize col- ■
lection, analysis, dissemination and feedback.
(iii) Deepen and expand Information and 
 Communication Technology competence
Informatics and  telecommunications are currently at the centre 
of the accelerated rate of globalization and increased production 
and trade. Th ese technologies were the results of scientifi c dis-
coveries, which led to a range of practical developments includ-
ing electricity, radio waves, the laser, the transistor, the World 
Wide Web and the web browser. Th eir infl uences have been 
profound in almost all walks of life and already have provided 
economic benefi ts in states with high levels of diff usion, use and 
improvement of these technologies, while countries that are 
lagging in this fi eld are also being left behind in knowledge shar-
ing and application. To make these technologies work for socio-
 economic development, several factors are required including, 
liberalization and open competition, expanded  infrastructures, 
balanced regulations,  innovation in management and organiza-
tion, and the use of these technologies in an increased number 
of fi rms and institutions to improve production and marketing. 
Accordingly, widespread competence in this fi eld is necessary to 
ensure the ability to gain, share and use information construc-
tively throughout the  society.  Areas where this competence is 
needed in the Caribbean include enhancing  information and 
communication technology policy and skills in:
Software Development ■
Design and Hardware Assembly ■
Cultural Product ■
Services for the main drivers of the economy (e.g. tourism  ■
and banking)
(iv) Environmental preservation
Socio- economic development will not be sustainable if envi-
ronmental protection is not factored into the change process. 
Th is is especially true of the small tropical islands of the Carib-
 Trash being loaded and 
compacted in a landfi ll.
©
 O
liv
er
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   245 14/09/10   15:34:44
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
246
bean which have a fragile ecology and growing population, as 
well as  transportation and industrialization pressures. To be 
able to strike a balance between  economic development and 
 human development, environmental protection using the best 
local information is required, and this will depend on astutely 
directed  research and the creative use of its results leading to 
the attainment, for example, of international  standards. Th e 
science of biodiversity, biosafety and bioremediation accord-
ingly will become vital:
Policy initiatives to ensure the minimum requirements for pro-
tecting the environment and citizens must include:
Improving R&D to reduce ecological pressures, as well as,  ■
address the exigencies of natural and man-made hazards, 
including droughts and fl oods. 
Setting up biosafety regulations and measures.  ■
Improving building code. ■
Providing information to eff ect a balance between con- ■
struction and agriculture.
Zoning to ensure that flatter, more suitable lands are  ■
reserved for agriculture.
Finding ways to successfully implement environmental  ■
preservation strategies.
Introducing appropriate, more effi  cient and less polluting  ■
fuels into the region’s  energy mix could make a profound 
diff erence.
(iv) Technologies for coping with hazards
Th e Caribbean is in a hazard-prone zone and subject to fre-
quent hurricanes, fl ooding and earthquakes. Th e Caribbean 
must therefore pay critical attention to modern technologies 
such as material and nano-technologies to improve the selec-
tion of sites, the suitability of material and the cost of con-
struction.
More aff ordable and safer housing for much of the popula-
tion is an urgent requirement. Th e island must therefore do 
the following:
Conduct a survey of the various construction material  ■
and technologies that are available for building in tropical 
zones.  
Create awareness among R&D institutions of the opportu- ■
nities for work in this area. Foster a greater engagement of 
professional societies in these endeavours.
 Eff ects of Hurricane Dean in 
2007.
©
 O
liv
er
¢ 
AR
U
P
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   246 14/09/10   15:34:44
Engineering for Development:  6 
Applications and Infrastructure
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   247 14/09/10   15:34:50
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
248
Engineering and associated  capacity building, applications and 
 infrastructure is of vital importance in social and  economic 
development, as indicated in the comments of world leaders on 
knowledge societies and economies, and in the declarations of 
international conferences and world summits. Yet engineering 
is routinely overlooked in the context of development policy 
and planning – it is hardly mentioned in relation to the  Millen-
nium Development Goals (MDGs), or in many Poverty Reduc-
tion Strategy Papers (PRSPs), for example. Th is chapter focuses 
on engineering for development applications and  infrastruc-
ture, with particular reference to the  Millennium Development 
Goals and related international development priorities, and the 
connection to engineering  standards. Th ere is an initial focus 
on  poverty reduction, with a case study from South Africa,  and 
 sustainable development, including a study on the MDGs,  sus-
tainable development and engineering  standards. 
Th e importance of technology in  climate change mitigation 
and adaptation has been emphasized by the IPCC and rec-
ognized by many governments, and the role of engineering 
in this context is vital. Engineering is also vital in  emergen-
cies and  disaster response, reconstruction and risk reduction, 
as recently evidenced by the Haiti earthquake. Technologies 
for development need to be appropriate to context, and the 
importance of ‘ appropriate technology’ has been recognized 
and promoted since the 1960s, albeit with mixed reception 
around the world. Th e case for  appropriate technology is 
presented here, with an interesting case study on the use of 
appropriate  building technologies. Sections on engineering 
 infrastructure include contributions on  water supply and 
sanitation,  energy,  transportation,  communications, reli-
ability and maintenance management. Th ere is a concluding 
section on the development of  infrastructure in developing 
countries, including a discussion of  Infrastructure Report 
Cards, designed to focus attention on the importance of 
 infrastructure – with case studies from South Africa,  Aus-
tralia and USA.
Country Instrument Date Total Infrastructure
European 
Union
European Council 
Agenda (includes 
Member Country 
stimulus packages 
given below) 
11-12 Dec 08 US$ 252 billion US$ 218 billion for extra 
measures 
 Australia Announcement 15 Oct 08 US$ 7.4 billion  
12 Dec 08 US$ 2.2 billion US$ 2.2 billion
Brazil Signed into law 23 Jan 09 US$ 20 billion US$ 37.7 billion
Canada Announcement 13 Jan 09 US$ 30 billion  
Chile  5 Jan 08 US$ 2.0 billion US$ 0.7 billion
Stimulus Packages: Infrastructure Component
Fiscal Stimulus Package Survey 2009
Th e global fi nancial crisis has led to most major countries 
announcing a stimulus package – a special fi scal package of 
spending and tax measures meant to increase economic activ-
ity (more formally, fi scal stimulus aims to boost economic 
activity during periods of economic weakness by increasing 
short-term aggregate demand). These packages generally 
include a signifi cant percentage for  infrastructure projects that 
require consulting and engineering services. Th e International 
Federation of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC) monitors the over-
all eff ect of this  infrastructure spending on the demand for 
these services.
As mentioned in the Introduction, it is interesting to report 
here the results of the  FIDIC survey of economic stimulus 
packages around the world – with stimulus packages totalling 
US$2035 billion, with US$1163 billion earmarked specifi cally 
for  infrastructure, and an estimate of US$20 billion that will be 
spent on engineering consultancy services.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   248 14/09/10   15:34:51
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
249
Country Instrument Date Total Infrastructure
China Announcement 10 Nov 08 US$ 600 billion US$ 540 billion
China, 
Hong Kong
  US$ 7.2 billion  
China, Taipei   US$ 1.8 billion  
Egypt  Dec 08 US$ 2.7 billion  
France   US$ 32.8 billion US$ 13.2 billion
Germany 1st and 2nd Stimulus 
Packages
Dec 08 - Jan 09 US$ 64.3 billion US$ 17.6 billion
Hungary   US$ 6.5 billion  
India  7 Dec 08 and
2 Jan 09
US$ 60 billion US$ 33.5 billion
Israel  Nov 08 US$ 5.7 billion US$ 2.9 billion
Italy   US$ 101 billion US$ 20.9 billion
Japan  Aug - Dec 08
(3 packages)
US$ 133 billion  
Korea  Nov 08 US$ 11 billion US$ 7.8 billion
Malaysia  4 Nov 08 US$ 1.9 billion US$ 0.9 billion
Netherlands   US$ 7.6 billion  
Peru  8 Dec 08 US$ 3.3 billion  
Portugal   US$ 8.3 billion  
Russia USD 12.7 billion  US$ 20 billion  
Singapore Announcement 23 Jan 09 US$ 14.9 billion US$ 3.2 billion
Spain   US$ 47.9 billion US$ 11.3 billion
Sweden Announcement 5 Dec 08 US$ 1.1 billion US$ 0.1 billion
Switzerland Government approved  US$ 0.8 billion  
Th ailand Government approved 16 Jan 09 US$ 3.6 billion  
UK Announcement Nov 08 US$ 30 billion  
USA American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act 
draft
15 Jan 09 US$ 550 billion US$ 180 billion
Vietnam   US$ 6.0 billion US$ 3.0 billion
Stimulus Packages: Infrastructure Component (continuation)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   249 14/09/10   15:34:51
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
250
 Engineering, the MDGs and other international 6.1 
development goals
Engineering and the 6.1.1 
 Millennium Development 
Goals
Jo da Silva and Susan Thomas
We will have time to reach the  Millennium Development Goals 
(MDGs – a set of targets to reduce global poverty and improve 
living  standards by 2015) worldwide and in most, or even all, 
individual countries, but only if we break with business as 
usual. Success will require sustained action between now and 
the deadline of 2015. It takes time to train the teachers, nurses 
and engineers; to build the roads, schools and hospitals; and 
to grow the small and large businesses able to create the jobs 
and income needed. So we must start now. And we must more 
than double global development assistance over the next few 
years. Nothing less will help to achieve the goals.
Th e role of engineering is vital in meeting the MDGs. Th e con-
text of this for Arup is our Drivers of Change initiative, which 
includes  research on poverty and other topics directly related 
to the  Millennium Development Goals. As an example of how 
engineers can be proactive, British engineering fi rm Arup has 
established an International Development team. Th e work of 
this team responds to the  Millennium Development Goals by 
seeking to maximize the long-term benefi ts of investment in 
developing countries so as to reduce poverty and vulnerability, 
whilst also minimizing environmental impacts.
Th e role of engineering
Community  infrastructure is key to alleviating poverty and 
thus engineers have a vital role to play in all the MDGs. With-
out ready access to clean water and sanitation, productivity is 
severely reduced through illness and time spent in water col-
lection. Without roads, the poor are unable to sell their goods 
at market. Basic  infrastructure is not a luxury that can wait for 
better economic times, but a precondition for creating them, 
and its provision is an urgent and ongoing requirement.
The Table below shows the relationship between physical 
 infrastructure and the MDGs, indicating the importance of 
socio-economic inputs.
Historically, poverty alleviation strategies have focused on 
direct intervention to provide facilities that are lacking. Invest-
ments by international lending agencies over the past two to 
three decades have concentrated on solutions to defi ciencies 
in  infrastructure that are usually expensive, often with appar-
ently limited thought to ongoing operation and maintenance. 
Investment in  infrastructure is equivalent to an increase in 
Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF). GFCF measures the 
value of additions to fi xed assets purchased by business, 
government and households less disposals of fi xed assets 
sold off  or scrapped. So it is a measure of the net new invest-
ment in fi xed capital assets. Its aim is to measure the value 
of net additions to fi xed capital stock, but somewhat con-
fusingly, GFCF is called ‘gross’ because it does not include 
the depreciation of assets.  FIDIC uses national estimates of 
GFCF to estimate the demand for  consulting engineering 
services (see article PDF and  FIDIC Annual Survey). Using 
the same methodolgy, the stimulus packages summarized 
above translate to an additional demand of some USD 20 
billion in services.
Th e demand for  consulting engineering services
Some fi ve years ago, Arup began an investigation into the global 
areas of infl uence that have been identifi ed as most likely to have 
a major impact on  society, on our business, and on the business of 
our clients. Th e results of this  research to date have been published 
in a series of cards that illustrate the social, technological, economic, 
environmental and political impacts of each driver. Th e topics pub-
lished comprise  energy, waste,  climate change, water, demographics 
and urbanization. Th e topic selected for  research in 2007 was pov-
erty as a driver of change, and this refl ects Arup’s mission to ‘shape 
a better world’. Globally, 2.4 billion people have no sanitation facili-
ties; 2.3 billion lack reliable sources of  energy; and 1.2 billion do not 
have safe drinking water. Addressing these defi ciencies, and others 
relating to transport and communication, is essential if the  Millen-
nium Development Goals are to be achieved.
Drivers of change
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   250 14/09/10   15:34:51
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
251
Poverty alleviation requires interventions that involve consid-
erable social and cultural change. Poverty has many aspects, 
and solutions require more than a technical or engineering 
basis. Provision of  infrastructure alone will not alleviate pov-
erty, without also providing access to that  infrastructure.
Now is the time to focus on identifying barriers to progress. 
Th is could involve stepping to one side of the MDGs and 
instead looking at a needs-based approach. Understanding 
needs is vital for addressing those needs. But, as engineers, too 
often we create the stage upon which the drama of life unfolds 
without actually understanding the purpose of the play. As a 
profession and as practitioners we are not predisposed to take 
the time to explore an issue in breadth, to think about how 
the issue we are studying may relate to, or indeed be caused 
by, another not on the table.
 Community  infrastructure 
is a key to alleviating poverty.
Th e eight  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs), agreed 
at the United Nations Millennium Summit in September 
2000 by nearly 190 countries to reduce global poverty and 
improve living  standards, are as follows: 
Goal 1: Eradicate extreme poverty and hunger. Halve, 
between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people whose 
income is less than US$1 a day; halve, between 1990 and 
2015, the proportion of people who suff er from hunger.
Goal 2: Achieve universal primary  education. Ensure that 
by 2015, children everywhere, boys and girls alike, will be 
able to complete a full course of primary schooling.
Goal 3: Promote gender equality and empower women. 
Eliminate gender disparity in primary and secondary  edu-
cation, preferably by 2005, and in all levels of  education no 
later than 2015.
Goal 4: Reduce child mortality. Reduce by two-thirds, 
between 1990 and 2015, the under-fi ve mortality rate.
Goal 5: Improve maternal health. Reduce by three-quar-
ters, between 1990 and 2015, the maternal mortality ratio.
Goal 6: Combat diseases including HIV/AIDS, malaria and 
other diseases. Have halted by 2015 and begun to reverse 
the spread of HIV/AIDS; have halted by 2015 and begun to 
reverse the incidence of malaria and other major diseases.
Goal 7: Ensure environmental sustainability. Integrate 
the principles of  sustainable development into country 
policies and programmes and reverse the loss of environ-
mental resources; halve, by 2015, the proportion of people 
without access to safe drinking water and basic sanitation; 
by 2020, to have achieved a signifi cant improvement in the 
lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers.
Goal 8: Develop a global partnership for development. 
Address the special needs of the least developed coun-
tries and Small Island Developing States; develop further 
an open, rule-based, predictable, non-discriminatory 
trading and fi nancial system; deal comprehensively with 
developing countries’ debt; in cooperation with develop-
ing countries, develop and implement strategies for decent 
and productive work for youth; in cooperation with phar-
maceutical companies, provide access to aff ordable and 
essential drugs in developing countries; in cooperation 
with the private sector, make available the benefi ts of new 
technologies, especially information and  communications.
Looking at the shape of the MDGs, it can be seen that 
Goals 1 to 6 are focused on clear indicators to tackle the 
key poverty issues, with specifi c targets underpinning the 
goals. Goal 7 however is concerned with a limiting factor 
– that we only have one planet. In contrast, Goal 8 is an 
enabling factor – focusing on the role of business and part-
nership in achieving the goals.
Th e  Millennium Development Goals 
©
 Jo
e 
M
ul
lig
an
, E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   251 14/09/10   15:34:51
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
252
In the past there has been considerable focus on sustainability. 
Sustainability can be considered as a utopia, a world where the 
human race and the environment are in balance. Sustainable 
development is then the process whereby we try and get to 
this balance point. But this has not been reached to date and 
instead, the world is suff ering from poor environmental health, 
a shortage of resources and the sickness of biosystems.
Rather than focus on the abstraction ‘sustainability’, we 
should shift our attention to securing a happier, more secure 
future for people. Th e end needs to become the future suc-
cess of human  society in households, neighbourhoods, com-
munities and nations. We must become clearer that from the 
perspectives of rationality and morality, the elements of sus-
tainability: economics, environmental stewardship, and civil 
 society, can never be considered as legitimate ends in them-
selves. Th ey are always means towards a preferred future that 
creates greater opportunity for more people over a longer 
period of time. Sustainability is both a physical reality and a 
political choice.  
In a resource-constrained world – our world – a unifi ed design 
approach is the most rational pathway to long-term value 
creation. Taken seriously, a unifi ed approach requires us to 
address issues in depth, in breadth, at their intersections, and 
over time. Behavioural psychologists, sociologists, physicists, 
anthropologists, economists, and public health offi  cials all 
need to be engaged in a broader defi nition of the design and 
engineering.
Within this framework, ‘unifi ed design’ becomes the most 
robust way to seize opportunities. It also prevents any sin-
gle interest from capturing the idea of design and holding it 
hostage, impeding progress toward the ultimate goal: opti-
mizing conditions for sustained  human development over an 
extended period of time. 
The challenge for the engineering profession is to move 
upstream; to recognize the role that engineers should play 
in planning projects, timescale issues and budgets. Engineers 
need to be seen as more than just  technologists. It needs to be 
recognized that the engineering profession can excel at deliv-
ering integrated solutions.
Sir Ove Arup said that, ‘Engineering problems are under-
defi ned, there are many solutions, good, bad and indiff erent. 
Th e art is to arrive at a good solution. Th is is a creative activity, 
involving imagination, intuition and deliberate choice.’  Engi-
neers need to be involved in that creative activity.
How can engineers help to close the  infrastructure gap?
Closing the  infrastructure gap represents an enormous oppor-
tunity to support the development of a sustainable built 
environment that supports individuals and communities to 
reach their full potential. Realizing this opportunity requires 
that the actors involved in the design and delivery of  infra-
structure services understand how these services will be both 
sustainable and pro-poor in the local context. It necessitates 
an understanding of the complex inter-relationships between 
 sustainable development, poverty alleviation and  infrastruc-
ture service provision, as well as appropriate mechanisms for 
engaging local community stakeholders in the design and 
delivery process.
Th e role of engineering in contributing to achieving the MDGs 
can be considered by:
understanding the issue/opportunity; ■
agreeing that the issue/opportunity should be addressed  ■
and is a priority;
knowing what to do about the issue/opportunity and how  ■
it relates to other issues/ opportunities; and
choosing to do what we know how to do today and improv- ■
ing on that tomorrow.
The most well known needs-based approach is probably 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, which is often depicted as a pyra-
mid consisting of fi ve levels. Th e higher needs in this hierarchy 
only come into focus when the lower needs in the pyramid 
are satisfi ed. Defi ciency needs must be met fi rst. Once these 
are met, seeking to satisfy growth needs drives personal 
growth. Once an individual has moved upwards to the next 
level, needs in the lower level will no longer be prioritized. If 
a lower set of needs is no longer being met, the individual will 
Figure 1: Maslow’s hierarchy of needs
morality, 
creativity, 
spontaneity, problem 
solving, lack of prejudice, 
acceptance of facts
self-esteem, confi dence, 
achievement, respect of others, 
respect by others
security of: body, employment, resources, 
morality, the family, health, property
friendship, family, sexual intimacy
breathing, food, water, sex, sleep, homeostasis, excretion
Self-actualization
Esteem
Love/belonging
Safety
Physiological
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   252 14/09/10   15:34:52
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
253
Service Physical  infrastructure Examples of socio-economic inputs MDG Goal(s)
Primary/ direct 
MDG impact
National and international 
movement and Import/export of 
goods and people
Ports/harbours
Airports
Highways
Railways
Trade relations and agreements 8 Global partnership
Service industries e.g. banking Offi  ces Skills training
External investment
8 Global partnership
Manufacturing and processing Factories • 
Industrial units• 
Skills training 8 Global partnership
Acute health care Hospitals
Pharmaceuticals
Medical training
Aff ordability
Accessibility
4, 5, 6, 8 Diseases
Further  education Universities
Colleges
Secondary schools
Academic links
Curriculum development
Aff ordability
8 Global partnership
Communications Wireless networks
Mobile networks
Telephone networks
Telecentres
Local skills training
Private sector enterprise
3, 6, 7, 8 Global partnership
Power supply Power stations
Electricity distribution
Demand management
Aff ordability
7, 8 Global partnership
Agriculture and food distribution Local roads
Irrigation
Local markets
Training
Information
1, 4, 5 Eradicate extreme 
poverty
Public transport and accessibility Pedestrian/cycle routes
Bus systems
Water transport
Needs assessment
Aff ordability
Road safety
1, 2, 7, 8
Primary healthcare Health centres Health promotion
Health training
3, 4, 5, 7 Maternal health
Primary  education Primary schools Teacher training
Aff ordability
Curriculum development
2, 3, 7 Universal Primary 
Education
Community mobilisation Community centres
Public buildings
Community demand
Building skills
1, 3 Eradicate extreme 
poverty
Shelter Houses Building skills
Siting
Demand
1, 7 Eradicate extreme 
poverty
Disaster Risk Reduction Communal shelters
Flood defences
Community awareness
Warning systems
1 Eradicate extreme 
poverty
Sanitation and waste management 
and disposal
Latrines
Drainage systems
Sewerage systems
Solid waste transfer
Landfi ll sites
Recycling plants
Hygiene promotion
Community management
Community recycling
1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 7
Child mortality
Water supply Point sources
Treatment
Storage
Distribution systems
Hygiene promotion
Community management
Maintenance training
Private sector enterprise
1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 7
Child mortality
Relationship between physical  infrastructure and the mdgs (from essential  infrastructure, bottom, to 
advanced economic  infrastructure, top)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   253 14/09/10   15:34:52
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
254
temporarily re-prioritize those needs by focusing attention on 
the unfulfi lled needs, but will not permanently regress to the 
lower level.
Engineering solutions are integral to mitigating poverty; how-
ever engineering is not the sole contributor to successful pov-
erty alleviation programmes, which also entail attention to 
social, economic and political infl uences.
Sustainable engineering will be achieved when the engineer-
ing solutions adopted take into account their use of natural 
resources. Optimum solutions will have a positive or neutral 
impact on natural resource consumption. Unsound engineer-
ing solutions, by comparison, may leave the environment 
depleted and  society poorer over time.
Lifecycle engineering takes into account the operational and 
maintenance cost of the engineering solution proposed, such 
that the completed projects have eff ective and aff ordable 
operational and maintenance regimes.
Empowered engineering will take into account the capabilities 
of the local community, particularly its engineering and 
technical professions. Where possible, the solutions 
developed will involve local professional and technical staff  
and will establish an ongoing engineering and operational 
resource.
Appropriate engineering will consider various options that 
meet the engineering needs of the project, and may adopt 
techniques of labour-based construction, which diff ers sig-
nifi cantly from labour-intensive construction. Th e latter basi-
cally substitutes men for machines whereas labour-based 
construction aims to change the technology involved to 
what is appropriate for manual labour.
 Stakeholders 
Culture 
Population 
Equity Livelihoods Macro 
Viab
ility
 
Ma
ter
ial
s 
En
er
gy
 
Bi
od
iv
er
sit
y
 
 ECONOMICS
Best case Worst case
SO
C
IE
TY
 
INSTITUTIONS
 
EN
V
IRO
N
M
EN
T
Se
rv
ic
es
 
H
ea
lth
 
Vu
lne
rab
ility
 S
tru
ctur
es 
Skills Polices Reporting 
Air 
Land  
W
ater
Figure 2: Th e ASPIRE model and too
ASPIRE is a software based tool 
for assessing the sustainability 
of  infrastructure projects which 
recognises  poverty reduction as an 
overarching objective. It provides 
a holistic appraisal framework 
encompassing the four key 
dimensions of environment,  society, 
economics and institutions.
Arup, in partnership with  Engineers Against Poverty, has developed a Sustainable Project Model – an integrated plan-
ning, monitoring and evaluation tool for assessing sustainability and  poverty reduction performance for  infrastructure 
projects in developing countries. Th e tool is called ‘ASPIRE’ Th is work has been led from Arup International Devel-
opment; a team formed to provide a centre of excellence for sustainable urban development and  infrastructure in 
developing countries. Th e team provides a focal point for organizations, donors and public and private sectors to more 
readily access the wealth of knowledge and technical expertise in the fi rm. Th e aim is to create dignifi ed living and work-
ing conditions, which are fi nancially viable in the long-term, and provide people with real economic opportunities to 
help them fulfi l their potential.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   254 14/09/10   15:34:52
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
255
 Community participa-
tion with slum dwellers and 
planning for new housing in 
Pune, India.
Poverty reduction6.1.2 
Tony Marjoram
Poverty is conventionally defi ned as living below US$2 per day 
and extreme poverty as living below US$1.25 per day. It there-
fore relates particularly to the developing and least developed 
countries, although not exclusively so – there are of course 
examples of relative poverty in most cities and countries 
around the world. In 2008, the World Bank estimated that 
2.6 billion people lived on less than $US2 a day and 1.4 billion 
people lived below US$1 a day in 2005. Th e eradication of pov-
erty, especially extreme poverty, is the fi rst of the  Millennium 
Development Goals of the United Nations. Poverty depends 
on social and economic context and such issues as access to 
land and resources, and is a measure of income and resource 
distribution and inequality. Poverty leads to ill health, disease 
and death, and is a barrier to opportunities such as  education. 
Poverty has a gender dimension; 60 per cent of the world’s poor 
are women, who are also in many countries mainly responsible 
for family care, food production, water supply, fuel gathering 
and cooking. At the same time, most of these women are ineli-
gible for bank loans because they are not employed or entitled 
to own property. 
While it is usually considered, measured and indicated fi nan-
cially, poverty relates essentially to the access of people to the 
resources with which to address their basic human needs, 
especially food. Th is depends on resource availability and pop-
ulation pressure; people living in poverty, closer to the poverty 
line, spend more of their income on basic needs such as food, 
and are especially vulnerable to increases in the cost of living. 
Th is in turn depends on natural factors such as drought and 
famine, and also on government policies regarding income 
and resource distribution. In the 1980s, for example, free-
market policies of economic liberalization and structural 
adjustment cut government support of social programmes, 
subsidies and public fi nancing in developing countries and 
lead to an increase in poverty and a substantial increase in 
inequality within and between countries. In the context of the 
deprivation of resources for an adequate  standard of living, 
poverty is also a denial of basic human rights to food, housing, 
clothing, a safe environment, health and social services,  educa-
tion and training, decent work and the benefi ts of science and 
technology. Th e world has never been as rich as it is today, yet 
over one billion people suff er from extreme poverty even as 
freedom from poverty has been recognized as a fundamental 
human right.
Poverty reduction – access to knowledge and knowledge 
applications …
Th e access of people to the resources with which to address 
their basic human needs also depends crucially on knowledge, 
and access to knowledge. Th e Industrial Revolution and devel-
opment of agricultural technologies and the steam engine in 
particular literally revolutionized rural and urban productiv-
ity to match increasing populations, and dramatically reduced 
poverty, albeit with Dickensian eff ects until human and politi-
cal rights caught up with industrial development. Th is helped 
to break the perception, partly refl ected in the Malthusian 
debate, that until this period, food shortages and poverty 
was an inevitable fact of life. Apart from food supply, produc-
tion and processing, other areas of basic need include  water 
supply and sanitation, housing,  energy,  transportation, com-
munication, income generation, employment and enterprise 
creation.
The application of knowledge in engineering, science and 
technology has been and will continue to be vital in address-
ing basic human needs and the reduction of poverty as well as 
driving economic and  social development, as it is vital in  emer-
gency and  disaster response, reconstruction and prevention, 
and will be in  climate change mitigation and adaptation. Engi-
neering and technology consists of ‘hardware’ tools, equip-
ment and  infrastructure, and ‘software’ engineering knowledge 
that designs, produces and develops the technology that sur-
rounds and supports people around the world. Th e applica-
tion of engineering and technology helps address poverty at 
macro, meso and micro levels. At the macro, national and, 
increasingly, global levels, engineering and technology brought 
the Industrial Revolution, economic and  social development, 
productivity and growth. 
At the macro level, while classical economics ignored techno-
logical change, neo-classical and later economic growth theo-
ries paid increasing reference to technology and  innovation 
as the main drivers of  economic development and growth. 
Conventional economics also emphasizes economic growth 
as the main factor in the reduction of poverty, despite long 
term criticism of the ‘trickle down’ eff ect. Recent  research also 
indicates that growth does not necessarily reduce poverty, but 
also requires government policies that reduce inequality.108 
Infrastructure plays a key role here.
At the meso level, many businesses in developed and devel-
oping countries are medium and small-scale enterprises with 
less than 250 or fi fty employees respectively, while many more 
businesses are at the micro level with less than 10 employees. 
Around the world, especially in developing and least devel-
oped countries, micro, small and medium scale enterprises 
(MSMEs) account for the vast majority of companies and the 
majority of jobs, up to 50 per cent of GDP, and higher growth 
compared to larger industries. Many MSMEs are also focused 
on particular technologies and  innovations. Th e butchers, bak-
ers and candlestick makers of old have now been joined or dis-
108 “Th e Developing world’s bulging (but vulnerable) middle class”, World Bank Policy 
Research Working Paper 4816, January 2009.
©
 V
ic
to
ria
 H
ick
m
an
, E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   255 14/09/10   15:34:53
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
256
placed by electricians, plumbers, mechanics, and TV, Internet, 
mobile phone and solar panel companies.
… applications of engineering and technology
It is in direct applications at the community and family level 
– in both villages in rural areas and in urban communities – 
that technologies are most vital and visible in addressing basic 
human needs and improving the quality of life of ordinary 
people. As previously mentioned, engineering and technol-
ogy is vital for the provision and development of food sup-
ply, production and processing,  water supply and sanitation, 
waste disposal, housing,  energy,  transportation, communica-
tion, income generation, employment and enterprise creation. 
Examples include the development of agriculture by women, 
(in what is now Papua New Guinea and Melanesia where they 
are still the main small farmers – in one of the few places where 
life expectancy for women is less than men), equipment (such 
as animal- and engine-powered farm machines), domestic food 
processing tools, equipment and techniques, the construction 
of wells, water tanks and improved toilets, better housing and 
cooking stoves, low-cost roads and, of course, almost ubiqui-
tous mobile phone use. Technology for the poor does not have 
to be poor technology nor low technology. All this technology 
and enterprise helps create income and jobs. 
Many of the engineers involved in the initial development, 
application and  innovation of technologies that reduce pov-
erty and human suff ering on such a large scale go forgotten or 
unsung, as does even the fact that these technologies were cre-
ated by engineers. Roman engineers created systems of  water 
supply and sanitation that developed into systems that now 
serve major cities, for example in London with systems devel-
oped by people such as Joseph Bazalgette following years of 
cholera epidemics and ‘Th e Great Stink’ of 1858. While many 
millions appreciate the development of fl ush toilets, electric 
power, the motor car, the radio and television, how many of 
us recall the names of Th omas Crapper, Nikola Tesla, Edison, 
Guglielmo Marconi, Paul Gottlieb Nipkow and John Logie 
Baird? Hopefully, the next generation of engineers, who need 
to meet the great challenge of  climate change mitigation and 
adaptation, will be inspired by their often nameless forebears.
As indicated, poverty has a gender dimension, and women 
contribute signifi cantly to family survival, particularly in the 
use and  innovation of technology in food production, water 
supply, fuel gathering and cooking. Poverty reduction activi-
ties relating to technological  innovation, as in other areas, has 
to be based on a dialogue with and understanding of gender 
roles to be eff ective, not only in reducing poverty and not add-
ing to the work of women, but also in reducing gender and 
related disparities. Women in many countries, for example, 
gather fuel and suff er higher incidence of eye and lung disease 
due to smoky cooking conditions; they need to be involved in 
the design, development and  innovation of improved smoke-
less cooking stoves. Gender equality is also a human right, and 
the access of women to  education, technology and micro-
fi nance for enterprise and job creation contributes signifi -
cantly to household income, health and well-being, social and 
 economic development and the reduction of poverty.
Applying engineering and technology to  poverty 
reduction
Engineering and technology need to be appropriate to the 
social, economic, educational and knowledge situations of 
people living in poverty in order to facilitate and enable them 
to address their own basic needs, alleviate poverty and pro-
mote sustainable livelihoods and development. People living 
in poverty are also more vulnerable to  emergencies, natural 
and human induced  disasters, and there is an important asso-
ciated role for engineering and technology in  emergency and 
 disaster preparedness, mitigation and response. 
Th is requires eff ective policy formulation, implementation, 
and the integration of engineering and technology into Pov-
erty Reduction Strategy Papers, as discussed elsewhere in 
this report. It also requires eff ective capacity and capacity-
building, and the  education and training of young engineers, 
particularly those in developing countries, to be aware and 
sensitive to the role of engineering and technology in  poverty 
reduction. Government ministries and departments, donor 
agencies, universities, NGOs and other relevant organizations 
need to be encouraged and supported in this process with 
the transfer of information and experience. Groups such as 
 Engineers Without Borders and activities such as the Daimler-
UNESCO Mondialogo Engineering Award can also help facili-
tate this process.
Poverty reduction: case study 6.1.3 
of  infrastructure in South 
Africa
 Ron Watermeyer
Forecasts of the demand for new  infrastructure expressed at 
the American Society of Civil Engineers’ convention in Bal-
timore in 2004 indicated that approximately 80 per cent of 
the world’s new  infrastructure from 2020 to 2030 will be con-
structed in developing countries. Th e provision of such  infra-
structure is expected to be underpinned by  poverty reduction 
objectives such as those relating to the stimulation of eco-
nomic growth, the creation of jobs, the attainment of social 
progress and stability, and the promotion of the sustainable 
utilization of natural resources (as opposed to a strict protec-
tionist stance). 
Th e South African construction industry is by nature a labour 
intensive industry with a capacity to absorb relatively unskilled 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   256 14/09/10   15:34:53
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
257
workers. Th e potential to deliver focused employment and 
business opportunities through  infrastructure delivery was 
explored in the construction and maintenance of  infrastruc-
ture in the late 1980s. 
Th e South African post-apartheid government in 1994 rec-
ognized the potential that government procurement had for 
economic transformation and to address social and develop-
ment issues. It accordingly embarked upon a programme of 
procurement reform in 1995 to focus on good governance and 
the use of procurement as an instrument of social and devel-
opment policy. Th e outcome of this process was the devel-
opment of a fair, equitable, transparent, competitive and cost 
eff ective procurement system that promotes objectives addi-
tional to the immediate objective of the procurement itself. 
Job creation,  poverty reduction and broad-based African eco-
nomic empowerment remain important issues on the South 
African agenda for development. Approaches to the delivery 
of  infrastructure projects include the selection of technolo-
gies, methods of construction and construction materials, as 
the choices made in these areas determine the quantum and 
nature of employment that is created and where it is gener-
ated. Emphasis is also placed on the development and nurtur-
ing of small, medium and micro-enterprises.
Lessons learned in South Africa
  ■ Th e construction and maintenance of  infrastructure proj-
ects can be used to provide work opportunities to vulner-
able groups and business opportunities to marginalized 
businesses in order to address inequities within a  society, 
and in so doing address poverty. 
Innovative procurement arrangements,  ■  appropriate tech-
nologies and construction methods are required to increase 
work opportunities. Accepted norms and  standards need 
to be reconsidered and, where appropriate, reassessed using 
a fi rst principle approach in order to arrive at diff erent out-
comes. Certain technologies, which have fallen into disuse 
in developed countries through the high cost of labour, may 
have to be ‘re-discovered’ and implemented. Th e perfor-
mance of indigenous technologies needs to be quantifi ed 
and documented so that it can be applied with confi dence.
Appropriate  ■  standards and comprehensive design guidance 
and construction  standards are needed to replicate out-
comes from pilot projects at scale. National  standards and 
best practices have an important part to play in converting 
 research and  innovation into mainstream activities, and in 
promoting their use.
A uniform, fl exible, predictable, rule-based procurement  ■
system is essential for increased investment in  infrastruc-
ture, reducing opportunities for corrupt and fraudulent 
practices and ensuring that allocated budgets are spent.
Procurement documents need to be structured in a generic  ■
manner so that procurement measures and appropriate 
 standards aimed at reducing poverty can be readily incor-
porated in such documents and communicated to partici-
pants in the procurement process. 
Capacity-building is required to ensure eff ective and effi  - ■
cient implementation.
Supply side measures need to be in place to enable those  ■
targeted to make use of the opportunity presented through 
the provision of  infrastructure.
Linking the delivery of  infrastructure delivery to 
the  Millennium Development Goals 
Procurement is fundamental to the delivery of buildings and 
engineering  infrastructure. A wide range of tools, techniques, 
technologies,  standards and approaches has been developed 
in South Africa  in response to the  poverty reduction impera-
tive. Th ese include using the procurement of  infrastructure 
to provide work opportunities to vulnerable groups, increas-
ing employment generated per unit of expenditure (through 
the promotion of small-scale enterprises and usage of labour-
based technologies and methods), and providing business 
and work opportunities to groups of people who are socially 
and economically marginalized in order to address inequities 
within  society.
Th is has been achieved without necessarily compromising inter-
national best practice and good governance objectives relating 
to procurement system requirements. Th ey enable aspects of 
Chapter 7 of Agenda 21 to be implemented, namely,  ‘establish 
and strengthen indigenous building materials industry based, as 
much as possible, on inputs of locally available natural resources 
and to promote the use of labour-intensive construction and 
maintenance technologies which generate employment in the 
construction sector for the underemployed labour force found 
in most large cities, while at the same time promoting the devel-
opment of skills in the construction sector.’ As such they con-
tribute to the reduction of the proportion of people living on 
less than US$1 per day and those that suff er from hunger (i.e. 
MDG 1: to eradicate extreme poverty and hunger).  
Th e  standards approach to implementing procurement proc-
esses which was developed in South Africa,  and which is now 
being incorporated into ISO 10845 Construction Procurement, 
not only provides a practical means to root out corruption, 
which is placing  sustainable development at risk, but also pro-
vides a rule-based trading system that improves governance 
and reduces poverty (i.e. MDG 8: to develop a global partner-
ship for development).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   257 14/09/10   15:34:53
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
258
Th e challenge in responding to the MDGs is to integrate the 
systems and techniques that have been successfully used in 
pilot projects in developing countries into the mainstream 
of public sector  infrastructure delivery and to increase the 
capacity of the public sector to deliver in response to current 
increasing investment in  infrastructure. Th e  standards and 
best practice approach adopted in South Africa  provides a 
workable model for mainstreaming outcomes of pilot projects 
and provides an excellent platform for developing capacity. 
Th e next few decades for civil and structural engineering will 
not be ‘business as usual’. Civil and structural engineers will 
need to deliver  infrastructure in a manner that contributes 
directly to  sustainable development objectives that are per-
tinent to developing countries, including the reduction of 
poverty.
Sustainable development6.1.4 
Tony Marjoram
Engineering and  sustainable development
Countries around the world face increasing and daunting 
challenges regarding the need for their development to be 
environmentally sustainable and to counter  climate change 
and the associated eff ects of a changing climate. Resource use 
needs to be sustainable for future generations, and we need 
to protect our environment from pollution, degradation and 
deterioration. Natural resource use is becoming critical in 
some areas, (e.g. peak production of oil and environmental 
‘tipping points’). Natural  disasters are more frequent and aff ect 
more people. Th e gap between the rich and many poor coun-
tries continues to widen. All these issues are a major threat to 
global prosperity, security, stability and  sustainable develop-
ment. One cannot address issues of sustainability and  climate 
change mitigation without fi rst addressing issues of poverty, 
consumption and the distribution of resources.
Engineering lies at the heart of addressing the majority of 
these issues. All countries now recognize these issues and 
agree that there is an urgent and overwhelming need to 
reduce emissions and use resources more effi  ciently to mini-
mize the catastrophic eff ects of  climate change. Th e question, 
amid increasing population and consumerism, is how can we 
achieve this? Such questions were fi rst raised in 1972, with the 
publication of Limits to Growth by the Club of Rome, which 
created major interest, concern and a new paradigm of debate. 
Many countries also understand that engineering is one of the 
most important activities in the context of  sustainable devel-
opment,  climate change mitigation and adaptation. By 2009, 
many countries had already introduced policies and initiatives 
for  climate change mitigation and adaptation prior to the 
United Nations Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen. 
Th e Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has empha-
sized the importance of technology and fi nance, and hence 
engineering, in  climate change mitigation and adaptation, 
and this is echoed elsewhere in this Report. Addressing these 
issues, and the specifi c outcomes and follow-up to COP15, will 
be one of the greatest demands and challenges that engineer-
ing has ever faced.
One of the major areas of need for engineers and the develop-
ment of engineering will be in the area of sustainable or green 
engineering. It will also be a challenge for the engineering com-
munity to make sure that engineering and technology are at 
the centre of the  sustainable development and  climate change 
mitigation agenda. 
Th e greening of engineering
To address the  sustainable development agenda, investment 
in technology and  infrastructure will need to increase signi-
fi cantly. It is likely that coal use will double by 2030, and so 
the need for carbon capture, sequestration and related tech-
nologies will be a challenge on a scale similar to that of the 
petro chemical and fossil fuel industry. Many countries are 
also looking to develop or redevelop nuclear power, which 
will be equally challenging because the nuclear industry has 
declined over the last decades. Th e  renewable  energy sector 
has been developing rapidly over the last decade, and will 
need to develop further to keep up with demand. Th e same 
applies to developments in the housing and  transportation 
sectors. Th e demand for engineers will increase dramatically. 
While increasing market demand will help attract young peo-
ple into engineering, it takes over fi ve years to develop courses 
to produce graduates; so urgent government action will be 
required to support course development and associated R&D 
and  innovation. Although investment in current technology 
is the pressing issue, R&D for new technology is also required, 
and governments need to invest now to encourage the devel-
opment of R&D and industry in the sustainable direction and 
the next main wave of technological development. 
An important contribution to the ongoing ‘Limits to Growth’ 
debate in 1997 was the publication of Factor Four on doubling 
wealth and halving resource use by Ernst von Weizsäcker. Th e 
debate has intensifi ed with increasing concern over  climate 
change, coupled with the recent fi nancial and  economic crisis 
and the interest of politicians around the world in a ‘green new 
deal’ to help lift economies out of recession. Von Weizsäcker109 
and the Natural Edge Project110 have recently shown that 
109 Ernst von Weizsäcker. 1997. Factor Four: Doubling Wealth, Halving Resource Use; and 
Ernst von Weizsäcker and Th e Natural Edge Project, Earthscan, 2009, Factor Five: Trans-
forming the Global Economy through 80% Improvements in Resource Productivity.
110 Th e Natural Edge Project,  Australia. Critical Literacies Portfolio - Introduction to Sustain-
able Development for Engineering and Built Environment Professionals (with UNESCO, 
2007); Whole System Design: An Integrated Approach to Sustainable Engineering (with 
Earthscan, 2008); Factor Five: Transforming the Global Economy through 80% Improve-
ments in Resource Productivity (Earthscan, 2009).© 
La
m
b
 Batad rice terraces.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   258 14/09/10   15:34:53
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
259
engineering and  innovation makes it possible to improve 
resource use and wealth creation by a factor of fi ve or an 80 
per cent improvement in resource use. It is hoped that such 
information and advocacy will help promote political will and 
behavioural change toward a new wave and paradigm of green 
engineering and technology. 
Sustainable development,  climate change mitigation and 
adaptation will therefore need to be at the centre of the engi-
neering agenda. Th e same considerations apply and are con-
nected to engineering and related issues of  poverty reduction 
and the other  Millennium Development Goals; one cannot 
address issues of sustainability and  climate change mitigation 
without addressing issues of poverty, consumption and the 
distribution of resources, as many of these issues are also con-
nected. 
Engineering  education and capacity-building
Despite the emphasis of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change (IPCC) of technology and fi nance, and hence 
engineering, in  climate change mitigation and adaptation the 
role of engineering and technology in  sustainable develop-
ment is often overlooked. At the same time, as also discussed 
elsewhere, there is a declining interest and  enrolment of young 
people, especially young women, in engineering. Th is will have 
a serious impact on capacity in engineering, and our ability to 
address the challenges of  sustainable development,  poverty 
reduction and the other MDGs. One of the fi rst challenges 
for engineering will be to make sure that there are enough 
appropriately qualifi ed and experienced engineers to meet this 
demand and this will require the development of new courses, 
training materials and systems of  accreditation. Young people 
will hopefully be attracted to such courses, and this will help to 
raise overall awareness of the role and importance of engineer-
ing in development. Young people need to be enthusiastically 
encouraged to go into engineering, as engineering will be at 
the very centre of eff orts to build a carbon-free future.
What can we do to promote the public understanding of engi-
neering, and the application of engineering in these vital con-
texts? As discussed elsewhere, it appears that the decline of 
interest and entry of young people into science and engineer-
ing is due to the fact that these subjects are often perceived 
by young people as nerdy, uninteresting and boring; that uni-
versity courses are diffi  cult and hard work; that jobs in these 
areas are not well paid; and that science and engineering have 
a negative environmental impact. Th ere is also evidence that 
young people turn away from science around age ten, that 
good science  education at primary and secondary schools is 
vital, as poor science teaching turns young people off  science. 
An international workshop on engineering  education 
for  sustainable development (EESD) was organized by 
UNESCO and Tsinghua University and held in Beijing in 
November, 2006. Th e idea for this workshop was proposed 
at the World Engineers’ Convention, held in Shanghai in 
November 2004, on the theme ‘Engineers Shape the Sus-
tainable Future’. Th e ‘Shanghai Declaration on Engineering 
and the Sustainable Future’ called upon the engineering 
community, governments and international organizations 
to promote engineering for our sustainable future. Th e 
workshop identifi ed and emphasized the need for:
Engineers to take greater responsibility and  ■
commitment for shaping the sustainable future, to 
create and apply technology to decouple human well-
being from resource consumption, waste and pollution, 
to preserve and enhance the health of humanity and 
our environment.
High  ■  standards and  ethics of professional practice, for 
a creative, innovative, interdisciplinary, integrative and 
holistic approach to EESD, promoting inclusiveness in 
such areas as the participation of young people, women 
and associated issues relating to EESD.
Learning and teaching materials, methods and capacity  ■
in EESD, and for better incentives for engineers to work, 
 research and publish in engineering and  sustainable 
development (e.g. in  accreditation, work opportunities, 
 research grants, peer-reviewed publications).
Advocacy, lobbying, partnerships, networking and  ■
cooperation at national and international level to 
exchange and share knowledge and good practice to 
promote technology applications for health, wealth and 
the promotion of peace and  sustainable development.
Th e workshop recognized and emphasized the importance 
of governments, intergovernmental and non-governmen-
tal organizations in this process. The workshop called 
upon UNESCO and the World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations ( WFEO) to play a more active role, in con-
junction with governments, international and national 
partners, networks and organizations, to promote the 
development and application of engineering to  sustain-
able development through  international cooperation. To 
do this, the workshop emphasized the need for activity in 
engineering  education for  sustainable development in the 
following areas in engineering  education and  sustainable 
development:
Development of partnerships and networking and a  ■
network of excellence.
Development of websites and journals for paper  ■
publication and the exchange of information.
Development of virtual libraries (such as the virtual  ■
engineering library in Sudan created with support from 
UNESCO).
Development and exchange of learning and teaching  ■
materials (such as the Natural Edge Project material on 
sustainable engineering supported by UNESCO). 
Promote new learning and teaching methods and  ■
approaches (such as problem- and activity-based 
learning).
Th e development and application of knowledge in engi-
neering and technology is vital for sustainable social and 
 economic development,  climate change mitigation and 
adaptation, and the promotion of  international coopera-
tion and bridging the ‘knowledge divide’ in this area. Th e 
main challenges facing engineering are to position engi-
neering at the centre of the  sustainable development and 
 climate change mitigation and related policy agendas, and 
at the same time positioning  sustainable development and 
 climate change mitigation as a central agenda for engineer-
ing.
International Workshop: Engineering Education for Sustainable 
Development, Tsinghua University, Beijing, November, 2006, 
organized by UNESCO and Tsinghua University, supported by the 
China Association for Science and Technology, Chinese Academy 
of Engineering and World Federation of Engineering Organizations, 
Alcoa Foundation.
Action agenda for engineering
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   259 14/09/10   15:34:54
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
260
Th ere are clear needs to show that science and engineering are 
inherently interesting, to promote public understanding and 
perception of examples of this, and to make  education and 
university courses more interesting.
Th e promotion of public understanding and interest in engi-
neering is facilitated by presenting engineering as a part of the 
problem-solving solution to  sustainable development and  cli-
mate change mitigation. University courses need to be made 
more interesting through the transformation of  curricula and 
pedagogy and the use of less formulaic approaches that turn 
students off , and with more activity-, project- and  problem-
based learning, just-in-time approaches and hands-on applica-
tions relating to  sustainable development. Th ese approaches 
promote the relevance of engineering, address contemporary 
concerns and help link engineering with  society in the context 
of  sustainable development, building upon rather than dis-
placing local and indigenous knowledge. 
Th e fact that ‘relevance’ works is demonstrated by the growth 
of  Engineers Without Borders and similar groups around the 
world that attract students through its connection with  sus-
tainable development, and the desire expressed by the youth 
to ‘do something’ to help those in need. Engineering has 
changed the world, but is professionally conservative and slow 
to change, therefore we need innovative examples of schools, 
colleges and universities around the world that have pio-
neered activity in such areas as  problem-based learning. It is 
also interesting to look at  reform and transformation in other 
professions such as medicine, where some of the leading medi-
cal schools have changed to a ‘patient based’ approach. If the 
doctors can do this, when there is no  enrolment pressure, then 
so can engineers. Engineers practice just-in-time techniques in 
industry, why not in  education?
Systems engineering and engineering for the Earth 
system
Engineering is about systems, and so it should be taught. Engi-
neers understand systems, and the natural world is the very 
epitome of a whole system, so it is surprising that engineers 
have not been more interested in holistic and whole systems 
approaches in the past. Engineering, however, derives from the 
seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth century knowledge 
models and the ‘modern science’ of Galileo, Descartes and 
Bacon, based on reductionism and the objectifi cation and con-
trol of nature. So the rediscovery of holistic thinking is perhaps 
not surprising and indeed overdue, prompted, for example, by 
the renewed interest in biomimetics that links engineering and 
technology with natural life structures and systems. Th is marks 
a belated return to the biomimetics of Leonardo da Vinci in 
the fi fteenth and sixteenth centuries, although this rediscovery 
has been facilitated by the development of computer science 
and technology and new materials. One wonders what Leo-
nardo would have done with these technologies!
Transformation in engineering  education needs to respond 
to rapid changes in knowledge production and application, 
emphasizing a cognitive, problem-solving approach, synthesis, 
awareness,  ethics, social responsibility, experience and prac-
tice in national and global contexts. We need to learn how to 
learn and emphasize the importance of lifelong and distance 
learning, continuous professional development, adaptability, 
fl exibility, interdisciplinarity and multiple career paths, with 
particular reference to engineering and sustainability. 
In the context of the need for transformation in engineer-
ing  education to include  sustainable development and wider 
social and ethical issues, the work of such groups as Th e Natu-
ral Edge Project and their Engineering Sustainable Solutions 
Program is most timely and relevant, such as the publication 
of material on  sustainable development for engineering and 
whole system design.
It is also important because, while the need for holistic and 
integrated systems approaches in engineering have been rec-
ognized and spoken about for some time, there is still a need 
to share information on what this means in practice, and to 
share pedagogical approaches and  curricula developed in 
this context. Th is is particularly important for universities 
and colleges in developing countries who face serious con-
straints regarding human, fi nancial and institutional resources 
to develop such  curricula, learning and teaching methods. It 
is also timely in view of the UN Decade of Education for Sus-
tainable Development, 2005–2014, for which UNESCO is the 
lead agency.
Catching the next wave of  innovation for sustainability
Such transformation of engineering and engineering  educa-
tion is essential if engineering is to catch the ‘seventh wave’ of 
technological revolution; relating to knowledge for  sustain-
able development,  climate change mitigation and adapta-
tion, and new modes of learning. Th is follows the sixth wave 
of new modes of knowledge generation, dissemination and 
application, knowledge and information societies and econo-
mies, in such areas as ICT, biotechnology, nanotechnology, 
new materials, robotics and systems technology, character-
ized by cross-fertilization and fusion,  innovation, the growth 
of new disciplines and the decline of old disciplines, where 
new knowledge requires new modes of learning. Th e fi fth 
wave of technological revolution was based on electronics 
and computers, the fourth wave of oil, automobiles and mass 
production, the third wave of steel, heavy engineering and 
electrifi cation, the second wave of steam power, railways and 
mechanization, and the fi rst wave of the technological and 
industrial revolution and the development of iron and water 
power.
Th e main applications challenges relate to how engineering 
and technology may most eff ectively be developed, applied 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   260 14/09/10   15:34:54
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
261
and innovated to promote  sustainable development and 
address  climate change mitigation and adaptation. It is appar-
ent that these challenges are linked to a possible solution to 
these challenges, and many young people and student engi-
neers are keen to address these international issues, espe-
cially those relating to  sustainable development and  climate 
change. Th is is refl ected, as mentioned earlier, by the interest 
of young people in  Engineers Without Borders groups around 
the world, and the UNESCO-Daimler Mondialogo Engineering 
Award, featured elsewhere in this Report. To promote engi-
neering and attract young people we need to emphasize these 
issues in teaching  curricula and practice.  
Sustainable Development 6.1.5 
and the WEHAB Agenda 
Darrel Danyluk and Jorge Spitalnik
Engineering contributes to creating the groundwork for devel-
oping appropriate solutions to a wide array of issues aris-
ing from the  Millennium Development Goals. Th e acronym 
‘WEHAB’ comes from the following action areas recognized as 
being key to addressing these issues:
Water and sanitation ■
Energy ■
Health ■
Agriculture productivity. ■
Biodiversity and ecosystem management ■
Issues and challenges in each one of these fi ve areas requires 
strong engineering participation and action needed to:
adopt suitable procedures based upon the development  ■
context of a given region;
design and implement appropriate projects for assuring  ■
 sustainable development; and 
ensure established  ■  standards of quality for implementation 
and operation.
Th e main issues and challenges relevant to engineering con-
tributions to  sustainable development are given in the box 
below, set out according to WEHAB action areas:
Special consideration is to be given in developing countries 
to: building human capacity and knowledge; increasing use of 
technologies that are appropriate to the context; improving 
operational and managerial skills; and strengthening  education 
and training. Th is will require suffi  cient fi nancial investment 
and cooperation with developed countries and international 
organizations.
Options to solve problems related to  ■  sustainable development 
cannot be selected on the basis of doctrine or ideology. 
Scientifi cally-sound and thoroughly-engineered solutions are 
needed to address sustainability matters of a technical nature. 
Decision-makers must be mindful of the need to analyse 
the feasibility and the technological availability of proposed 
options.
A prime responsibility of the engineering profession is  ■
determining the feasibility of technological, economic and 
environmental factors of a given option and then recommending 
the most suitable one to decision-makers.
Sustainable development solutions applied in developed  ■
countries are not necessarily adequate for developing ones. 
Solutions need to be context-specifi c for them to be feasible 
under the prevailing conditions in the given country or region.
Notes on issues and challenges table
 Engineer testing repairs on 
steel pile.
©
 P
au
la
 W
es
t, 
Au
st
ra
lia
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   261 14/09/10   15:34:54
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
262
ISSUES CHALLENGES
W
at
er
 an
d 
sa
ni
ta
tio
n
Awareness of quality and quality features, and the importance of effi  cient water use and water • 
conservation should be conveyed to all elements of the population. Th is will lead to more effi  cient 
water demand patterns and improve water resource management across all sectors, especially in the 
agriculture sector.
Implement appropriate low-cost and environmentally sustainable water-use and supply • 
technologies, and develop capacities in areas of water desalination, treatment of contaminants, 
rainwater harvesting and effi  cient water use. Th is should be achieved through technology 
transfers,  capacity building and the sharing of best practices.
Irrigation projects that improve food production should be promoted. Subject to health and • 
environmental  standards and regulations, use of greywater should be encouraged for certain irrigation 
or industrial purposes.
Assess the impact of natural •  disasters,  climate change and climate variability on surface and 
groundwater resources, water supply, and sanitation, implement monitoring and early warning 
systems, and identify relevant mitigation and adaptive technologies.
Technology transfer on potable-water production and treatment, sanitation, wastewater • 
treatment, effl  uent water reuse and residuals management is required, particularly in developing 
countries. In rural areas, on-site sanitation  infrastructure represents a crucial contributor toward water 
resource-management and the safety, and security of potable water supply.
Strengthen regulations and policies that dictate the prevention of pollution resulting from • 
wastewater discharges, solid-waste disposal, and industrial and agricultural activities.
Protect the ecosystems and acknowledge their critical role. Rehabilitate catchment areas by • 
managing and regulating water fl ows, and improving water quality.
Develop low-cost and effi  cient drinking-water and wastewater treatment technologies, • 
including for water quality and reuse.
Ensure eff ective human capacity and knowledge capability for building, operating and • 
maintaining sanitation and sewer systems.
En
er
gy
Energy-supply planning should consider all sources of •  energy based on mature and feasible 
technologies, while ensuring acceptable discharge limit (GHG) emissions. Development of carbon-
sequestration schemes requires urgent implementation.
Make access to reliable and aff ordable •  energy services available to all, with particular 
attention to the rural and urban poor.
Th e optimal •  energy mix for any country depends on its available natural resource bases, 
population distribution, growth of  energy demand, and the status of its technical and economic 
capability.
Develop and use advanced and cleaner fossil-fuel technologies. Develop other clean •  energy 
sources to decrease dependence on fossil fuels.
Unattainable patterns of consumption – especially in the •  transportation sector –need to be 
changed to assure  energy effi  ciency.
Improve •  energy effi  ciency in households, the transport sector and industry.
Innovative bio-fuel technologies can make crucial contributions to decreased dependence • 
on fossil fuels for  transportation and to lowering GHG emissions.
He
al
th
Health risks from environmental pollution must be dramatically reduced and, in particular, indoor-• 
air pollution from burning biomass in confi ned spaces must be eliminated. In the  transportation 
sector in developing countries, lead and sulfur must be phased out from use in gasoline.
Minimise the human impacts of mining, and address safe and sustainable livelihood • 
opportunities in small-scale mining ventures.
Pollution in agriculture should be reduced with the application of new waste treatment and • 
management technologies.
Th oroughly implement technologies to prevent or contain marine pollution.• 
Adequate treatment, disinfection, and proper operation and maintenance procedures are to be • 
used to prevent waterborne diseases from entering the distribution system.
Substantially reduce burning low-quality biomass in confi ned spaces. Th oroughly implement • 
low-cost and effi  cient ventilation technologies for uses in the poorer communities.
Ag
ric
ul
tu
re
 p
ro
du
ct
iv
ity
Sustainable agriculture and rural development need to be expanded to increase food production, • 
to enhance food security and to reduce hunger.
Increase public and private fi nance for sustainable agriculture and agricultural •  research.
Th ere is urgent need to implement programs to prevent land degradation and erosion, and to • 
improve soil fertility and agricultural pest controls.
Require policies for sustainable management of land and other agricultural resources in • 
developing countries.
Specifi c technologies to allow development of small-scale aquaculture and sustainable coastal and • 
small-scale fi shing activities, mainly in small island states, will require international support.
Bi
od
iv
er
sit
y a
nd
 ec
os
ys
te
m
 m
an
ag
em
en
t
National development policies should give high priority to technical and fi nancial support to • 
developing countries for conservation and sustainable use of biological resources. Th is should occur 
while ensuring fair and equitable sharing of benefi ts arising from utilisation of genetic resources.
Carry out application and development of the ecosystem approach for biodiversity • 
management.
A signifi cant reduction in the current rate of loss of biological diversity is required, along with • 
strengthened control of invasive alien species.
Require Environmental Impact Analysis and Project Life Cycle Planning for mine • 
development before starting extraction of mineral resources.
Marine environmental protection needs to be strengthened and a network of marine protected • 
areas should be implemented worldwide. Th e ecosystem approach in fi sheries and in marine 
biological diversity should be broadly applied.
Provide fi nancial and technical capacity to improve value-added processing, to upgrade • 
scientifi c and technological information, and to reclaim and rehabilitate degraded sites.
Th e protection of ecologically sensitive areas and natural heritage requires a special worldwide • 
treatment.
Transfer of marine science and technology to maintain or restore depleted fi sh stocks to • 
levels of sustainable yield.
Support natural resources management, including addressing environmental economic and social • 
impacts of mining operations, is essential.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   262 14/09/10   15:34:55
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
263
Sustainable development and 6.1.6 
 standards: the construction 
industry 
Ron Watermeyer
Th e built environment
Th e built environment is the physical world that has been 
intentionally created by humans through the application of 
science and technology in the control and use of forces and 
materials of nature for the benefi t of humanity. It is essential 
to almost every aspect of  society, national  infrastructure and 
economic activity. 
Th e building and construction industry plays an important 
role in  sustainable development because it is such a key sec-
tor in national economies. Th e built environment represents a 
large share of the economic assets of individuals, organizations 
and nations, and it is one of the single largest industrial sec-
tors with all the consequential aspects of employment, eco-
nomic importance and environmental impact. Proper housing 
and  infrastructures are key elements in determining quality 
of life and it has a signifi cant interface with  poverty reduc-
tion through the provision of basic services and through the 
potential to engage the poor in construction, operation and 
maintenance activities.
Landuse and materials extraction by the building and construc-
tion industry accounts for a very large usage of natural resources. 
Energy use, liquid and solid waste generation, transport of con-
struction materials, and consumption of hazardous materials 
are other sources of negative environmental impact from this 
sector. In OECD  countries, buildings are responsible for 25–40 
per cent of total  energy use. In  Europe, buildings account for 
40–45 per cent of  energy consumption in  society, contributing 
to signifi cant amounts of carbon dioxide emissions.
Th e evolution of  standards for buildings
Buildings providing shelter for humans, animals or property 
of any kind are central to the built environment and the econ-
omy of any country in addition to the well-being of its people. 
Buildings shape and defi ne the environment in which humans 
live, work and relax. 
It is not surprising that building  standards have been in place 
ever since people have been able to capture their thoughts in 
writing. Th e earlest known building code is that of Hammurabi 
(about 1780 BC), the sixth king of Babylon. In terms of this 
code, builders were required, at their own cost, to make stable 
any walls that appeared to be unstable prior to the comple-
tion of the house and to compensate the owner in the event 
of collapse. 
With urbanization and the erection of many dwelling places 
in close proximity to each other came the scourge of fi re and 
health risks associated with poor sanitation. Over the cen-
turies, many cities were razed by fi re and millions of people 
died as a result of poor sanitary conditions in highly populated 
areas. Lawmakers in the nineteenth century developed build-
ing laws to improve sanitation and to diminish the outbreaks 
and disastrous consequences of fi res in cities. 
In the twentieth century, minimum  standards for the con-
struction and maintenance of buildings were developed to 
protect public health, safety and general welfare. Issues such 
as structural safety and serviceability, fi re safety, health and 
hygiene, moisture penetration, safety, accessibility and usabil-
ity were addressed. 
United Nations summits
Agenda 21, which establishes a conceptual framework for sus-
tainable construction, fl owed out of the 1992 Earth Summit 
in Rio de Janeiro. Th e main challenges of sustainable construc-
tion that emerged from this agenda were:
Promoting  ■  energy effi  ciency:  energy saving measures, exten-
sive retrofi t programmes, transport aspects and the use of 
 renewable energies.
Reducing use of high-quality drinking water: relying on rain- ■
water and grey water, reducing domestic consumption with 
water management systems, waterless sanitation systems 
and the use of drought resistant plants.
Selecting materials on environmental performance: use  ■
of renewable materials, reduction of the use of natural 
resources and recycling.
Contributing to a sustainable urban development: effi  cient  ■
use of land, design for a long service life, the longevity of 
buildings through adaptability and fl exibility, convert exist-
ing buildings, refurbishment, sustainable management of 
buildings, prevention of urban decline and reduction of 
sprawl, contribution to employment creation and cultural 
heritage preservation.
Contribution to poverty alleviation. ■
A healthy and safe working environment. ■
Th e United Nations Millennium Development Declaration, 
which was launched in 2000, supports the Agenda 21 prin-
ciples of  sustainable development. However, it acknowledges 
that progress is based on sustainable economic growth, which 
must focus on the poor, with human rights at the centre. Th e 
Declaration calls for halving the number of people who live on 
less than one US$1 a day by the year 2015. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   263 14/09/10   15:34:55
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
264
Th e United Nations, ten years after the Rio de Janeiro Earth 
Summit, held a World Summit on Sustainable Development 
in Johannesburg. Th e Johannesburg World Summit in 2002 
resulted in a clearer understanding of the relationship between 
poverty and environmental protection. It stressed that the 
fundamental global action associated with the international 
agenda for  sustainable development is to fi ght poverty and to 
protect the environment.
Standards for the twentieth century
Th e built environment, in serving both  society and economic 
activity, has not only positive outcomes and impacts but also 
detrimental ones. Th e balancing of these positive and detri-
mental aspects on the health and safety of both the public 
and the workforce on the physical environment, on sustain-
able livelihoods and on sustainability for future generations 
is a very important function of the built environment profes-
sional. Safeguarding the built environment against the hazards 
associated with development is not enough. Development 
must also be carried out eff ectively and effi  ciently, and solu-
tions to negative impacts need to be rapidly communicated 
within the global community and replicated elsewhere. Th e 
Earth’s resources are fi nite. Current growth rate trends indicate 
that the world’s population will increase from 6.5 billion to 13 
billion by 2067. To accommodate this growth in a sustainable 
manner, the built environment of 2067 will need to be very dif-
ferent from what we see today. Time is not on our side. 
In previous centuries  standards for building and construction 
works refl ecting societal values and expectations addressed 
the hazards threatening communities by providing methods, 
procedures and systems. Today sustainability in building and 
construction works includes economic, environmental and 
social impacts, which are all interdependent and increasingly 
complex as the world’s population grows against a back-
ground of diminishing resources. Standards, and particularly 
international ones, are needed to communicate new concepts, 
methods, procedures and processes to built environment pro-
fessionals. Standards that provide the framework within which 
the challenges of the day may be satisfi ed and facilitate the 
rapid implementation of solutions, will improve the quality of 
life for this generation and the generations to come.
MDGs and 6.1.7  standards
Ron Watermeyer
Th e  Millennium Development Goals
The eight  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) to be 
achieved by 2015 form a blueprint accepted by all the world’s 
countries and the world’s leading development institutions. 
Th ese goals – acknowledging that progress is based on sus-
tainable economic growth and must focus on the poor with 
human rights at the centre – have galvanized unprecedented 
eff orts to meet the needs of the world’s poorest people and 
provide time-bound and quantified targets for addressing 
extreme poverty in its many dimensions. 
Kofi Annan, during his tenure as Secretary-General of the 
United Nations, established the important linkages between 
science and technology and  sustainable development. In 2002 
he said, ‘Let me challenge all of you to help mobilize global sci-
ence and technology to tackle the interlocking crises of hun-
ger, disease, environmental degradation and confl ict that are 
holding back the developing world.’  
Sustainability versus  sustainable development
Sustainability is the state in which ecosystem components and 
functions are maintained for the present and future genera-
tions while meeting the current needs of people. Sustainable 
development is development that meets the needs of the 
present without compromising the ability of future generations 
to meet their own needs. Sustainable development is rooted in 
the simple concept of providing a better quality of life for all, 
now and for generations to come. It is a way of looking at all 
resources that will lead to a quality of life for the current gen-
eration, without compromising that of future generations. 
A  standard is ‘a document, established by consensus and approved 
by a recognized body, that provides, for common and repeated 
use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for activities or their results, 
aimed at the achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given 
context’ (ISO/IEC Guide 2). 
Standards:
facilitate the efficient and safe development, manufacturing  ■
and supply of products and services and the construction and 
maintenance of buildings and  infrastructure;  
facilitate fair trade within and between regions or countries; ■
enable suppliers, service providers and contractors to produce  ■
consistent products and outputs;
provide a means for regulation of matters relating to health,  ■
safety and the protection of the environment;
disseminate technical advances and  ■  innovation, new processes, 
procedures and methods, and good management practice;
safeguard consumers, and users of products and services; and  ■
provide solutions to common problems. ■
Standards are accordingly fundamental to economic growth and 
development.
Th e role of  standards in  economic development 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   264 14/09/10   15:34:55
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
265
Note: Worldmapper (www.worldmapper.org/index.html) is a collection of world maps, where territories are re-sized on each 
map according to the subject of interest.
Figure 3: Total Population for comparison
Figure 2: Land Area for comparison
Figure 1: Absolute poverty (people subsisting on up to 2 US$/day)
Drivers of  economic development in underdeveloped 
countries
Engineering is underpinned by processes (successions of logic-
ally related actions occurring or performed in a defi nite man-
ner) and systems (orderly or regular procedures or  methods). 
Innovative and new engineering processes and systems 
brought into the mainstream of engineering practice, in either 
developed or developing countries, typically follow a project 
cycle involving:
  ■ research and development;
documentation of processes and systems; ■
implementation on a pilot basis; ■
refi nement of processes and procedures;  ■
roll out to industry through awareness, training, skills devel- ■
opment and  capacity building;
replication through  ■  standards, which establish a framework 
of acceptable and recognized engineering practice within 
which engineering practitioners can arrive at solutions. 
Th is last point emphasizes that economic growth is driven 
by the replication at scale of knowledge, skills and systems 
through  standards.
Regional diff erences in approaches to  sustainable 
development
While the challenge of  sustainable development is global, the 
strategies for addressing sustainability are local and diff er in 
context and content from region to region. Such strategies 
need to refl ect context not only in the local economy but 
also in the social environment, which includes social equity, 
cultural issues, traditions, heritage issues, human health and 
comfort, social  infrastructure and safe and healthy environ-
ments. Th ey may also, particularly in developing countries, 
include  poverty reduction, job creation, access to safe, 
aff ordable and healthy shelter and mitigation of loss of live-
lihoods.
Given the disparity in  standards of living between the devel-
oped and developing countries, their approach in general to 
the social component is very diff erent. Th is results in diff er-
ent development priorities between the ‘North’ (developed 
nations) and ‘South’ (developing nations). In countries with 
dual economies such as South Africa,  the priorities differ 
regionally, depending on where the poor or affl  uent live.
Th e so-called ‘green’ agenda focuses on the reduction of the 
environmental impact of urban-based production, consump-
tion and water generation on natural resources and ecosys-
tems, and ultimately on the world’s life support system. As 
such it addresses the issue of affl  uence and over consumption 
and is generally more pertinent to affl  uent countries. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   265 14/09/10   15:34:55
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
266
Figure 4: Th e fundamental diff erences between the 
‘green’ and ‘brown’ agendas
N
O
RT
H
GREEN AGENDA BROWN AGENDA
SO
U
TH
Ecosystemic 
well-being Key concern Human well-being
Forever Time frame Immediate
Local to global Scale Local
Future generations Concerned about Low income groups
Protect an work with Nature Manipulated and use
Use less Services Provide more
Affl  uence and over 
consumption
Poverty and 
underdevelopment
On the other hand, the so-called ‘brown’ agenda focuses on 
poverty and under development. As such, it addresses the 
need to reduce the environmental threats to health that arise 
from poor sanitary conditions, crowding, inadequate water 
provision, hazardous air and water pollution, and the accu-
mulation of solid waste. It is generally more pertinent in poor, 
under-serviced cities or regions.
Linking the MDGs to  standards
Th e link between the application of knowledge in engineering 
and technology and the reduction of poverty through sustain-
able economic and  social development is well understood. 
Th e importance of the exchange of knowledge in engineer-
ing and technology transfer is also understood. What is not 
understood is the linkage of  standards, indigenous engineering 
practice and  economic development.
Th e International Standardization Organization (ISO) has 157 
member countries. Developing countries comprise 65 per cent 
of its member bodies, 94 per cent of its corresponding mem-
bers and 100 per cent of its subscriber members.  One of ISO’s 
seven key objectives for 2010 relate to facilitating developing 
country participation in the development of international 
 standards. Yet the participation of such countries in ISO work-
ing groups and technical committees is generally very poor. 
Frequently  standards are written without direct input from 
any developing country. 
Standards are the tools of engineers. Engineering practice is 
accordingly shaped by those who draft  standards, yet very lit-
tle attention and investment is given to  standards develop-
ment in developing countries. Much is given to  research and 
capacity-building without considering the means of commu-
nicating the practical outcomes of  research and the basis for 
practice, namely  standards.  
MDGs will only become an integral part of the  standards 
agenda when the role that  standards play in  economic devel-
opment is understood, and developing countries have both 
the capability and capacity to develop their own  standards 
and also to participate fully in the development of interna-
tional  standards. 
Climate change: technology, 6.1.8 
mitigation, adaptation
Rajendra Kumar Pachauri
Background
Science, engineering and technology are of particular importance 
in the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 
Th ey are the knowledge basis on which policies and actions to 
mitigate and adapt to  climate change are made. Science is vital 
in the understanding of  climate change and the complex inter-
relationship between human activities and the environment. 
Engineering and technology are vital in providing solutions for 
mitigation and adaptation. In terms of understanding  climate 
change, major fi ndings of the IPCC Fourth Assessment report 
indicate that the mean global temperature has unequivocally 
increased since the beginning of industrialization, by about 
0.74ºC, and that this increase has accelerated in recent years (Fig-
ure 1). Another major fi nding is that the sea level has risen by 
17 cm in the twentieth century, most particularly over the last 
10–15 years. Th ese eff ects are not uniform, the Arctic for example 
is warming at twice the rate as the rest of the world, with higher 
impact on associated fl ora and fauna such as the polar bear.
The Fourth Assessment Report also indicated that human 
activity is ‘very likely’ the reason for global warming over the 
last fi fty years (up from ‘likely’ in the Th ird Assessment Report). 
Th e level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere, one of the major 
drivers of  climate change, has increased over the last 650,000 
years (Figure 2). At the observable level, glaciers have been 
in retreat for over a century. Th ere are also changes in aver-
age precipitation, increasing on average in temperate regions 
while declining in tropical, sub-tropical and the Mediterra-
nean regions, with a signifi cant increase in extreme precipita-
tion events. Changes in precipitation patterns, along with the 
increase in extreme temperature conditions, will have obvious 
impacts in terms of drought, fl ooding, heatwaves and fi res.
Urgent need for action
Negotiations are, of course, at an advanced stage to arrive at 
an agreement beyond the end of the fi rst commitment period 
of the Kyoto Protocol in 2012, and one important element or 
concern with regard to how to develop a suitable and eff ective 
agreement is contained in Article 2 of the UN framework on 
 climate change. Th is Article essentially states as the ultimate 
objective of the Convention our ability to prevent a danger-
ous level of anthropogenic interference with  climate change, 
and this would focus on issues like food security and the ability 
of ecosystems to be able to rebound once we create a certain 
level of damage through  climate change. While understand-
ing that defi ning ‘dangerous’ is a value judgement, science can 
certainly provide a basis by which the international commu-
nity can come up with a defi nition of what would constitute a 
dangerous level of  climate change. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   266 14/09/10   15:34:55
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
267
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
-0.8
14.6
14.4
14.2
14.0
13.8
13.6
13.4
13.2
°C
1860 1880 1900 1920 1940 1960 1980 2000
 Period Rate
 50 0.128±0.026
 100 0.074±0.018
 Years °/decade
Annual mean
Linear trends
Smoothed series
5-95% decadal 
error bars
Global mean temperature
Evolution of global mean temperature
D
iff 
er
en
ce
 (°
C
) f
ro
m
 1
96
1-
90
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
Figure 1: Graph showing the rise in global temperaturesTh is issue is still undecided, and while the EU has come up with 
the 2ºC target as the maximum that should be allowed, this 
is not universally accepted, and there are some who are even 
questioning whether this might be too high, and that maybe 
we should think in terms of something lower, particularly 
since temperature increases correlate closely with some of 
the most threatening impacts of  climate change. Climate 
change will reduce biodiversity and perturb the function-
ing of most ecosystems as well as compromising the services 
they provide. Th is will have particular impacts on the poorest 
communities in the world who depend particularly on nature 
and the land, and will also impact upon the ability of societies 
and communities to pursue sustainable livelihoods. IPCC has 
assessed that 20–30 per cent of plant and animal species are 
at risk of extinction if increases in global average temperature 
exceeds 1.5º–2.5ºC. Th is is a serious observation that should 
really make the human race sit up and think, and see how we 
might prevent such an outcome, which could very well take 
place in the lifetimes of at least the young generation of today.
Turn to some projections of the future: where are tempera-
tures likely to reach by the end of this century? IPCC has 
assessed a number of plausible scenarios in terms of tech-
nological changes, economic growth, social changes and insti-
tutional changes, and we fi nd that at the lower end of these 
scenarios a best estimate of 1.8ºC by the end of the century. At 
the upper end of the scenarios – if we have vigorous growth 
and an increase in emissions of greenhouse gases, we are likely 
to end up with an increase of 4.0ºC as our best estimate. Th ere-
fore, the future looks something like what is shown in Figure 3, 
where a large range of possible temperature increases is indi-
cated. However, if one looks at even the lower-most projection 
of 1.8ºC, and then combines this with the 0.74ºC increase that 
took place during the twentieth century, then it is apparent 
that we will likely have a temperature increase of over 2.5ºC 
by the end of this century above that at the beginning of the 
century. Th e world has to decide how acceptable this range of 
possible temperature increases will be, and their likely conse-
quences and impacts.
Expected impacts
Some ecosystems are highly vulnerable such as coral reefs, 
marine shell organisms, tundra, arboreal forests, mountains 
and Mediterranean regions. We can also identify, as we have 
done in the Fourth Assessment Report, some impacts that 
cause concern; malnutrition could be exacerbated by the 
reduced length of the growing season in the Sahelian region. 
In some countries yields from rain-fed agriculture will be par-
ticularly vulnerable given the fact that there are going to be 
changes in precipitation levels as well as patterns. Th ese could 
be reduced by up to 50 per cent by 2020.  In one projection 
we have made, between seventy-fi ve million and 250 million 
people would be exposed to increased water stress in 2020 in 
Africa,  and we need to remember that  climate change adds 
stress to societies where stresses already exist. In such cases, 
marginal impacts could in a sense be the last straw that breaks 
the camel’s back. 
Th ese societies, which are poor and affl  icted by several other 
stresses, would therefore now most likely face an additional 
set of stresses induced by  climate change, and we need to be 
particularly concerned by this. As Gandhi once said, in deci-
sions related to development, you must look at the impact on 
‘the last man’, the most underprivileged. In the set of policies 
we are discussing for combating  climate change, we need to 
have a specifi c and focused concern on the poorest communi-
ties in the world who will obviously face the worst impacts of 
 climate change. Food and security and loss of livelihood would 
of course also be exacerbated by the loss of cultivated land 
and the eff ects on sea areas for fi sheries, as well as inundation 
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
350
300
350
1
0
 10000 5000 0
Time (before 2005)
400
350
300
 1800 1900 2000
Year
Global atmospheric 
concentrations of
greenhouse gases
increased markedly as
result of human activities
In 2005 concentration of
CO2 exceeded by far the
natural range over the last 
650,000 years
Changes in CO2 from ice core and modern data
C
ar
bo
n 
D
io
xi
de
 (p
pm
)
Ra
di
at
iv
e 
Fo
rc
in
g 
(W
m
-2
)
Figure 2: Human contribution to  climate change
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   267 14/09/10   15:34:56
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
268
Extreme
High
Medium
Mississipi
Grijalva
Orinoco
Amazon Niger
Mahanadi
Chao Phraya
Zhujiang
Changjiang
Mekong
Mahakam
Krishna
Godavari
Volta
Nile
Shatt
el Arab
Indus
Ganges
Brahmaputra
Senegal
Moulouya Sebou
Rhine
Sao Francisco
Red
Figure 4: Coastal settlements most at risk
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
and coastal erosion in low-lying areas of tropical Asia. Th ere 
is already evidence in several parts of the world, and  research 
that is being done in India, that show that  climate change is 
already impacting unfavourably on yields, particularly wheat. 
Th is is due to the fact that during the growing cycle for wheat 
even a 1.0ºC change in temperature can have an unfavourable 
impact on productivity. Over and above that, with more fre-
quent and more severe fl oods and droughts, there is an added 
impact on agricultural output, which raises questions of food 
security on a global basis. Coastal settlements are most at risk; 
Figure 4 gives a picture of some major cities that are located in 
coastal areas. Mega-deltas in Asia are particularly vulnerable. 
Th ese include Dhaka, Calcutta, Shanghai and others, and the 
fi gure shows red dots indicating those locations at extreme 
risk, those at high risk and others that are subject or likely to 
be subjected to medium level risks. Th e spread is quite diverse, 
and there is no region in the world that is immune to the dan-
gers of coastal fl ooding.
Need for adaptation...  
The main conclusion from the above information is that 
adaptation is inevitable and, given the inertia in the system 
and the fact that even if we were able to stabilize concen-
tration of gases at an acceptable level today, the impacts of 
 climate change will continue for a long period of time. Th e 
world therefore has no choice but to adapt to  climate change 
as a necessary priority, at least to a certain level of predicted 
 climate change. We also know that adaptation is taking place 
through a range of practices, and there are societies across the 
globe that have dealt with the vagaries of natural changes in 
climate and consequently have developed coping strategies 
in response to such changes that have been quite eff ective. 
But what is happening now will test the limits of how much 
these societies can cope with the changing climate. We now 
have to think in terms of some new sets of measures and 
responses. Adaptation capacity is limited and uneven across 
and within societies. Th e poor, even in the richest countries, 
do not have the capacity to adapt; this can be illustrated with 
reference to what happened with Hurricane Katrina or Hur-
ricane Rita, where the poorest sections of  society in the city 
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
A2
A1B
B1
Year 2000 Constant
concentrations
20th century
Continued emissions 
would lead to 
further warming 
of 1.8°C to 4°C over 
the 21st century, 
on diff erent 
depending on 
diff erent scenarios
Multi-model averages and assessed ranges for surface warming
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0
1900 2000
Year
2100
G
lo
ba
l s
ur
fa
ce
 w
ar
ni
ng
 (°
C
) 
Figure 3: Projected temperature rises 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   268 14/09/10   15:34:56
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
269
ing into the twenty-second century. Based on the assessment 
we carried out, this clearly shows that an increase in emissions 
cannot be allowed any later than 2015. Beyond 2015, emissions 
will have to decline and the reductions that would be required 
to hold equilibrium temperatures at this ceiling – correspond-
ing to levels of concentration shown in Figure 5 – show that by 
2050 CO2 emissions will need to be reduced by 85–50 per cent 
relative to the level in 2000. Th is is relevant with reference to 
the fact that the EU set their target at 2.0ºC. Higher levels of 
warming could have been set as well as higher levels of con-
centration of these gases, which would give a little more lati-
tude, a little more time. However, human  society has to decide 
whether it wants to limit the damage that would take place 
as a result of inaction by taking suitable mitigation measures, 
or if we continue with ‘business as usual’ and allow things to 
reach a level where the impacts would be even more serious. 
It is important to emphasize that mitigation eff orts have to 
start as soon as possible; over the next two or three decades 
mitigation eff orts will have a major impact on the likelihood of 
success to achieve lower stabilization levels in the future. 
Costs of mitigation
It is often reported that the costs of mitigation in terms of 
job losses and reduction in economic output would be crip-
pling to economies around the world. Th e data presented in 
Figure 6 clearly contradict this. Looking at the lowermost set 
of numbers (44 –535 parts per million) as the level at which 
we can stabilize these emissions, then it is apparent that the 
cost in 2030 to global economic output would not exceed 3 
per cent of GDP, which on an annual basis amounts to only 
0.12 per cent of GDP per year. In a graphical form, Figure 7 com-
pares GDP without mitigation and with stringent mitigation, 
and shows the marginal diff erence of shifting the growth line 
very slightly. Both fi gures indicate that the global economic 
output and prosperity in 2030 would hardly be aff ected by 
the adoption of stringent mitigation strategies, perhaps only 
postponed by a few months, which is a small price to pay when 
of New Orleans had no recourse at all to protect themselves, 
and suff ered worst from the damage that took place. Climate 
change therefore poses new risks that will require new invest-
ments in adaptive responses. In the island nation of the Mal-
dives for example, which is severely threatened by sea level 
rise, the capital island of Malé has a protective barrier that has 
certainly provided the island with some protection. However, 
such measures are not possible for the entire coastal region of 
Bangladesh for example, or other parts of the world that are so 
vulnerable, so there are limits that have to be appreciated in 
potential responses for adaptation.
Adaptation is of course necessary to address impacts resulting 
from global warming that are unavoidable due to past emis-
sions and the inertia of the system. However, adaptation alone 
cannot cope with all the projected impacts of  climate change 
as the impacts of  climate change and cost of adaptation will 
increase as global temperatures increase. We therefore need to 
view adaptation measures though a prism of reality, beyond 
adaptation alone, otherwise we risk being lulled into a sense of 
false security based on the perception that everything will be 
well if we just adapt to  climate change. As indicated above, this 
will not be a practicable or even feasible option in many cases. 
We therefore need a mix of strategies including adaptation, 
 research and development into new and improved technolo-
gies, and mitigation of the main factors causing global warm-
ing and  climate change, especially greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions. Mitigation and adaptation have to go together, and 
this will have to be the central core of strategy, policy and man-
agement in dealing with every aspect of  climate change.
... and mitigation 
IPCC has assessed a range of stabilization levels at which 
the concentration of greenhouse gases could be stabilized 
 (Figure 5). In the top row we considered the level of 445–490 
parts per million of CO2 equivalent. Holding stabilization at 
this level would lead to an ultimate equilibrium temperature 
of 2.0º–2.4ºC - which would be achieved in a time scale stretch-
Stabilization level 
(ppm CO2‒eq)
Global mean 
temp. increase at 
equilibrium (°C)
Year CO2 needs to 
peak
Year CO2 emissions 
back at 2000 level
Reduction in 2050 
CO2 emissions 
compared to 2000
445 – 490 2.0 – 2.4 2000 - 2015 2000 - 2030 –85 to –50
445 – 535 2.0 – 2.4 2000 - 2020 2000 - 2040 –60 to –30
535 – 590 2.8 – 3.2 2010 - 2030 2020 - 2060 –30 to +5
590 – 710 3.2 – 4.0 2020 - 2060 2050 - 2100 +10 to +60
710 – 855 4.0 – 4.9 2050 - 2080 +25 to +85
855 – 1130 4.9 – 6.1 2060 – 2090 +90 to +140
Mitigation eff orts over the next txo to three decades will have a large impact
on opportunites to achieve lower stabilization levels
Figure 5: Characteristics of stabilization scenarios
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   269 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
270
compared to the likely costs relating to the economic impacts 
of  climate change discussed above. 
Mitigation potential 
Th e IPCC Working Group Th ree report looked at a whole 
range of options by which emissions could be reduced, and 
quantifi ed what is possible in several sectors. We looked at 
the  energy supply, industry,  transportation, household and 
commercial buildings, and concluded that the potential for 
mitigation is enormous (Figure 8). 
Engineering and technological solutions
Th e range of stabilization levels of GHGs is something that 
the IPCC decided after looking at the range of technologies 
that are currently available or expected to be commercial-
ized in the coming decades. Th e stabilization level projected 
by the IPCC can be achieved even with existing technologies. 
Th e news would be even better if we were to invest enough in 
 research and development over a period of time to develop 
new technologies and new methods, by which there would be a 
substantial decline in the cost of mitigation with a correspond-
ing substantial increase in the eff ectiveness of  mitigation. 
What are these technological solutions? If we look around the 
economic sectors, we can immediately see that  energy supply 
is particularly important because this accounts for 26 per 
cent of greenhouse gas emissions, and we clearly need a shift 
in supply technologies and supply options, including renewa-
bles of course, and advanced coal, gas and nuclear technolo-
gies, super-critical steam plants, and a whole range of other 
technologies. Carbon dioxide capture and storage will be an 
important element of the solutions we apply, and combined 
heat and power and nuclear fusion could be a possible solu-
tion in the future. Apart from nuclear fusion, these are all tech-
nologies that are within our reach. 
Th e transport sector accounts for 26 per cent of world  energy 
use, and there are a whole range of possibilities that the IPCC 
have assessed. Air traffi  c is one particular segment which clearly 
needs attention because of its rapid growth, and improvements 
in air traffi  c effi  ciencies, as far as  energy use is concerned, is cer-
tainly lagging behind several other sectors of the economy. Rail 
transport is another area where a shift to rail and an improve-
ment in rail technology can make a signifi cant diff erence. 
Buildings are important because they will account for 38 per 
cent of baseline emissions in 2020.  Th ere is a whole range of 
actions that could be taken to make buildings and the use of 
 energy within them much more effi  cient (these are listed on 
Figure 9). Engineers, architects and builders really need to apply 
their minds and innovate in some of these areas in order to 
develop some fairly dramatic solutions. In this respect, effi  cient 
appliances and heating and cooling devices are unexceptional. 
Agriculture is also an area where technological solutions can 
and do certainly reduce emissions. Th e importance of effi  cient 
water management also needs to be highlighted given the fact 
that some parts of the world are going to encounter serious 
problems with water supply. We will have to move to a far 
more effi  cient system of water resource management and the 
use of water-effi  cient technologies in agriculture, as several 
countries in the world use 80 per cent of their water supply for 
agriculture alone. 
Trajectories towards 
stabilization levels 
(ppm CO2‒eq)
Median GDP reduction 
(%)
Range of GDP reduction 
(%)
Reduction of average 
annual GDP growth rates 
(percentage points)
590 – 710 0.2 ‒0.6 – 1.2 < 0.06
535 – 590 0.6 0.2 – 2.5 < 0.1
445 – 535 Not available < 3 < 0.12
Mitigation measures would induce 0.6% gain to 3% decrease of GDP in 2030
Figure 6: Estimated costs of mitigation
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
Illustration of costs numbers
GDP
Current
GDP without
mitigation
GDP with
stringent
mitigation
Time
80%
77%
~1 Year
2030
Figure 7: Th e costs of mitigation relative to GDP
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   270 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
271
We also need to consider the fact that both livestock as well 
as agriculture contribute to greenhouse gas emissions. In the 
case of bio- energy crops, which are also potentially impor-
tant solutions, there is one vital consideration (particularly in 
the context of biofuels): we have to be assured that there 
is no competition with food crops. Th ere is a lot of criticism of 
policies being pursued in some parts of the world where land 
that has traditionally been used for producing agricultural 
crops is being diverted to biofuels. Th ere is also the problem 
of fertiliser use and greenhouse gas emissions resulting from 
the use of fertilisers and chemicals. 
Key policy issues 
Th e IPCC has assessed a number of national policies and these 
include providing incentives for the development, acquisition, 
deployment and diff usion of technologies. Th is is absolutely 
critical because developing technologies alone is not going to 
help; we need a policy framework within which these will be 
deployed and utilized eff ectively. Information and  education 
is essential and we also need to highlight the importance of 
lifestyle and behavioural changes because unless one brings 
about a shift in values it is unlikely that purely technological 
solutions will give us the answers we are looking for. 
One critical element that is missing in current policies is an 
eff ective carbon price because this would provide a signal 
and create incentives for producers and consumers to signifi -
cantly invest in low GHG products, technologies and proc-
esses. While some may contend that technology is the answer, 
merely developing these technologies will not be adequate 
unless this is supported by a system that places an eff ective 
price on carbon because consumers and producers are obvi-
ously not going to change their patterns of behaviour in terms 
of production and consumption unless there is a market 
inducement to move to low carbon technologies. An eff ective 
price on carbon is absolutely crucial to bring about change. 
As Mahatma Gandhi rightly said: 
‘A technological  society has two choices; fi rst it can wait 
until catastrophic failures expose systemic defi ciencies, distor-
tion and self-deceptions; secondly a culture can provide 
Cumulative emission reduction GtCO2-eq
Cumulative émissions reductions for alternative mitigation measures
2000-2030
emissions reductions for 650 ppm
additional reductions for 490-540 ppm
2000-2100
IMAGE
MESSAGE
AIM
IPAC N/A
Energy conservation 
& effi  ciency
Fossil fuel switch
Renewables
Nuclear
CCS
Forest sinks
Non-CO2
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 0 120 500 1000 1500 2000
Figure 8: Emissions reductions relative to mitigation measures
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
Improved thermal 
envelope
Active solar  energy Passive solar  energy
Effi  cient appliances
and heating
and cooling devices
Insulation material Photovoltaic
Sun-face glazing, airflow 
windows, buried pipes
Efficient lamps, cooking 
stoves, electric appliance
Window glazing,
low-emissivity coating
Heating and water heating Daylight sensors
Heat pumps,
earth-pipe cooling
Figure 9: Technological solutions to reduce emissions
So
ur
ce
: IP
CC
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   271 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
272
social checks and balances to correct for systemic distortion 
prior to catastrophic failures.’
Engineering and engineering  education 
Th e engineering profession possesses the power to bring about 
change and can ensure that solutions are devised that really 
helps solve the problem of this major challenge of  climate 
change facing the world. Th ere are several steps that need to be 
taken. Firstly, engineers and scientists have to work with govern-
ments to ensure that policies are devised that have a rational 
basis, that they are based on adequate analysis, and that there 
is a clear evaluation of options and their outcomes. What is also 
critically important is to introduce some degree of training for 
engineers, perhaps right at the level of basic engineering  educa-
tion, by which attention can be directed to some of the critical 
challenges that confront the profession in meeting the threat of 
 climate change. Th e same importance applies equally to meas-
ures that address mitigation and adaptation. In the case of adap-
tation, if we take an example such as excessive, frequent and very 
severe fl oods, then we need a totally enhanced  infrastructure to 
protect life and property. Looking at the problem of cloudbursts 
and extreme precipitation events, we can see that we require 
more effi  cient drainage systems.
All of this can be introduced at the level of basic engineering 
 education so that young people who graduate and enter the 
engineering professions can focus on some of these problems 
and possible solutions far more eff ectively. Th is is something 
in which the lead needs to be taken by the engineering pro-
fessions themselves, and it is important that this is communi-
cated to the engineering profession.
Conclusion
While not wanting to create a nightmare scenario, we have 
been very surprised by some of the facts and fi ndings that 
have come out of the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC, 
and what causes most concern is the fact that there is an accel-
eration, not only of changes related to the climate but also the 
impacts that are associated with them. Th ere is therefore a 
sense of urgency that we all need to accept and act on because 
only then will we be able to come up with solutions that are 
timely and eff ective that – as the above quotation from Gan-
dhi suggests – will help us move away from defi ciencies, distor-
tions and, most importantly, self-deception.
Th is contribution is based on the 2007 international lecture by Dr R. K. 
Pachauri entitled Global Climate Change: the role of Science and Tech-
nology in Mitigation And Adaptation presented at the Royal Academy 
of Engineering, London, on 3 October 2007. Th e contribution was 
prepared prior to the fi nancial/ economic crisis beginning in Septem-
ber 2008, although the case presented above remains essentially the 
same over the longer term. While global GDP has declined, the impact 
on longer term trends, and the need for investment into improved 
 energy,  transportation and related GHG-reducing technologies in un-
changed.
Disaster risk reduction6.1.9 
Badaoui Rouhban
Introduction
Natural  disaster loss is on the rise. Th e vulnerability of the 
human and physical environment to the violent forces of 
nature is increasing. In many parts of the world,  disasters caused 
by natural hazards (such as earthquakes, fl oods, windstorms, 
landslides, drought, wildfi res, tsunami and volcanic eruptions) 
have caused the loss of human lives, injury, homelessness, and 
the destruction of economic and social  infrastructure. Over 
the last few years, there has been an increase in the occur-
rence, severity and intensity of natural  disasters, highlighted 
by the devastating Indian Ocean tsunami, the major Kashmir 
earthquake in Pakistan, hurricane Katrina in the USA, the 
Nargis cyclone in Myanmar and the Sichuan earthquake in 
China. Losses from human-induced  disasters (such as confl ict, 
war, structural collapses and famine) are considerably adding 
to the toll. Recent oil spills, plane crashes, bridge and building 
collapses, and so on act as frequent and tragic reminders of 
calamities provoked by everyday human activity.
Preparing for  disaster  emergencies and facing future hazards is 
a global source of concern. Indeed, population growth, urbani-
zation, alteration of the natural environment, sub- standard 
dwellings and construction, inadequate  infrastructure mainte-
nance, global  climate change and grinding poverty in numer-
ous communities are all exacerbating the risks of  disasters. 
Whereas natural hazards are often unexpected or uncontrol-
lable natural events of varying magnitude, reduction of risks 
stemming from such events is both possible and feasible if the 
sciences and technologies related to natural hazards are prop-
erly applied through engineering. 
Advances in the technology of  disaster risk reduction
Science and technology help us to understand the mechanisms 
of natural hazards having atmospheric, geological, hydrologi-
cal and biological origins, and to analyse the transformation of 
these hazards into  disasters. Knowledge of the mechanisms of 
violent forces of nature is made up of an orderly system of facts 
that have been learned from study, experiment and observa-
tion of natural phenomena and their impacts on humankind 
and the environment. Th e scientifi c and technological disci-
plines involved include basic and engineering sciences, natural, 
social and human sciences. Th ey relate to the hazard environ-
ment (i.e. hydrology, geology, geophysics, seismology, volcan-
ology, meteorology and biology), to the built environment 
(i.e. engineering, architecture and materials) and to the policy 
environment (i.e. sociology, humanities, politics and manage-
ment).
Engineering science has contributed considerably to  disaster 
risk reduction. Th ey have led to remarkable  innovations in pre-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   272 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
273
paredness, in  emergency response, in rehabilitation and recon-
struction as well as in long-term risk mitigation measures. 
Over the last three decades, knowledge of the intensity and 
distribution in time and space of natural hazards and the tech-
nological means of confronting them has expanded greatly. 
Progress in the science and technology of natural hazards and 
of related coping mechanisms have also made it possible to 
introduce signifi cant changes in the approach to the problem 
of  disasters. Major advances have been made in the develop-
ment of global meteorological models and their application to 
large-scale weather prediction – enabled by the development 
of supercomputers. Although earthquake prediction is still 
not possible, considerable ability exists today to make more 
accurate forecasts, and to give warning, of several impending 
hazard events. Engineers have developed technologies and 
techniques that decrease the vulnerability of buildings – be 
they schoolhouses or skyscrapers – and other elements of 
socio-economic life to earthquakes and hurricanes.
Earthquake-resistant design has proven very eff ective, notably 
in some instances witnessed/demonstrated during the recent 
earthquakes that have occurred in Kashmir in Pakistan and 
Sichuan in China, where good constructions behaved quite 
well compared to the numerous other structures that col-
lapsed completely. Most experts believe that better earthquake 
resistant-building designs and construction practices would 
have greatly reduced the consequences of the earthquakes 
in Bam, Iran; in Kashmir, Pakistan; and in Sichuan, China. Th e 
Indian Ocean tsunami’s death toll could have been drastically 
reduced if a tsunami early warning system, similar to the one 
existing in the Pacifi c, was in place and if the warning, already 
known to scientists, was disseminated quickly and eff ectively 
to the coastal populations. Warning of violent storms and of 
volcanic eruptions hours and days ahead save many lives and 
prevent signifi cant property losses in some countries of Asia 
and Latin America.
In November 1970, the Bhola tropical cyclone left 500,000 
dead and 1,300,000 homeless in Bangladesh. In May 1985, a 
cyclone of comparable strength struck the same area; the loss 
of life totalled less than 10,000 deaths; the death toll caused by 
Cyclone Sidr in 2007 was just over 4,000. Th e diff erence with 
the 1970 tragedy relate to improvements in hazard prediction, 
early warning and evacuation  infrastructure in Bangladesh.
Outlook for engineering and technology in  disaster risk 
reduction
Engineering and technology are among the principal drivers 
of reducing vulnerability to  disasters. Modern technologies 
should be further applied and developed that mitigate the 
exposure to natural hazards of the physical and built environ-
ment, and other elements of socio-economic life. One com-
ponent of the expected breakthroughs in  disaster reduction, 
in some instances, shall be enhanced capacity to control or 
modify the  disaster events themselves including through engi-
neering measures. Technologies based on new methods of 
communication, information handling and computation bring 
unprecedented opportunities for the hazard-prone communi-
ties to become better prepared.
Building a culture of  disaster prevention entails a great responsi-
bility for all professionals active in engineering and technology. 
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
Number
Year
1900 1905 1910 1915 1920 1925 1930 1935 1940 1945 1950 1955 1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010
Figure 1: Number of natural  disasters per year (1900-2009)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   273 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
274
Engineers should participate in actions addressing the entire 
 disaster cycle ranging from the long-term mitigation phase, 
through the preparedness phase, the  emergency response, 
going through the post- disaster rehabilitation, reconstruc-
tion and development phases. In many countries, the need for 
the establishment or improvement of early warning systems 
remains. Hazard-zoning and risk assessment represent early 
tasks that require the full contribution of engineers. Mitigation 
of risks will rely on structural and non-structural measures that 
are put in place to protect communities as much as possible. 
Civic  education, public awareness and training are necessary 
actions where professionals in engineering can develop robust 
approaches palatable to the public.
Action in these fi elds will increasingly depend on the active 
interaction between major stakeholders and engineers: gov-
Th e International Strategy for Disaster Reduction (ISDR) 
represents a global drive, sponsored by the United Nations, 
aimed at building  disaster resilient communities. Th e ISDR 
promotes  disaster reduction as an integral component of 
 sustainable development. It is an international framework 
in which countries, institutions and individuals can coop-
erate, and is coordinated within the United Nations by an 
Inter-Agency Secretariat located in Geneva. A network of 
UN agencies, inter-governmental groups, and non-govern-
mental or civil  society organizations are teamed together 
as part of the ISDR. Th e engineering component in the 
activities of many of these entities represents a critical ele-
ment.
UNESCO promotes  disaster risk reduction through 
activities in  education, science, culture and communica-
tion. Indeed,  disaster reduction forms an integral part of 
UNESCO’s engineering programme. Th e engineering and 
technology component of the organization’s programme 
and its Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission 
(IOC) capitalize on advances made in the science and 
technology of natural hazards, and have a direct bearing 
on  disaster reduction plans. Th e purposes of UNESCO in 
the fi eld of  disaster reduction are:
to promote a better scientifi c understanding of natural  ■
hazards and of their intensity;
to help set up reliable observatory and early warning  ■
networks and systems;
to encourage the establishment of rational landuse  ■
plans;
to promote the adoption of suitable building design; ■
to contribute to the protection of educational buildings  ■
and cultural monuments;
to strengthen environmental protection for the  ■
prevention of natural  disasters;
to enhance preparedness and public awareness through  ■
information and  education;
to foster post- ■  disaster investigation. 
UNESCO is committed to encouraging and facilitating  dis-
aster prevention action through networking and strength-
ening of regional and international coordination systems, 
direct partnership with countries, fi eld implementation of 
operational projects, preservation and dissemination of 
data. Networks of researchers, engineers and social scien-
tists must be set up and undertaken to promote a combi-
nation of indigenous technology with advances in science 
and technology and to develop area-specifi c technological 
solutions.
Figure 2: Pre- disaster risk, reduction phase
Development and ongoing 
risk reduction
Disaster prevention and 
 sustainable development
Ti
m
e
Risk and vulnerability 
assessment
Risk reduction
Disaster preparadness
Reconstruction
Impact
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   274 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
275
ernments, the private sector and the diff erent components of 
civil  society including scientists, educators, parliamentarians, 
media, local authorities, youth, women’s organizations and 
other non-governmental organizations. Th e global challenge 
of  disaster reduction is a signifi cant engagement on the part 
of engineers and  technicians in an integrated approach to risk 
management. Enhancing cooperation among all these major 
groups will be imperative.
Above all, scientifi c and technological solutions to the com-
plex problems of  disasters must be rooted in social realities, in 
the fullest sense of the term. Without science and technology, 
and their blending with traditional modes of protection, there 
can be no world safe from  disasters.
Engineering in 6.1.10  emergencies
Andrew Lamb
Introduction
Th e medical profession has played a role in responding to wars 
since long before Henri Dunant inverted the red and white of 
the Swiss fl ag and established the Red Cross movement. Th e 
engineering profession, on the other hand, has long been asso-
ciated with the prosecution of wars. Its technologies – weap-
ons, armaments and defences – have been pivotal to military 
capabilities throughout history, as it is today. It is only really 
since the end of the colonial era following the Second World 
War that engineers have in signifi cant numbers used technolo-
gies to respond to  disasters and confl icts with a humanitarian 
motivation; saving lives through the provision of water, shelter, 
transport,  communications and information services. It is an 
important but still emerging fi eld.
Recent lessons
Th e human tragedies of recent  disasters has re-emphasized the 
life-saving eff ects of engineering endeavour. Th e response to 
the devastating earthquake in Haiti earlier this year has drawn 
upon the skills of civil, structural, mechanical, electronic, elec-
trical and software engineers to begin to address the challenge 
of nothing less than 200,000 fatalities, one million left home-
less and a destroyed capital city. Th e calls to ‘build back better’ 
were immediate. Th e earthquake in Chile soon after quickly 
showed the world the diff erence that development makes – 
that a more developed  infrastructure and built environment 
means that people are much less vulnerable to natural  disaster 
(though the geological and geographic circumstances were 
diff erent).
China’s response to the devastating earthquake in Sichuan 
province highlighted the crucial role of military engineers in 
 disaster relief, which has a long and proud history. Th e risk 
of the collapse of major dams, which would have caused fur-
ther substantial suff ering and damage, was averted through 
cooperation eff orts and high-level engineering expertise. Hur-
ricane Katrina in the USA demonstrated the horrifying eff ects 
that neglect of major engineering  infrastructure can have in 
the face of natural hazards, particularly in a  society that has 
become dependent on advanced, and hence at times fragile, 
technologies. Th e destruction of New Orleans was in some 
ways the driver for a much greater focus on urban  disasters (or 
 disasters in the engineered environment). Th e Indian Ocean 
Tsunami of 2004 was a catastrophe on a global scale, and very 
quickly led to a focus on  emergency shelter and transitional 
shelter in which engineers now play an important role in tak-
ing forward.
In 2007 alone, fl ooding aff ected 200 million people in China111, 
displaced thirty million in India112, Bangladesh, Nepal and Bhu-
tan, one million in Mexico113, 500,000 in Darfur in Sudan114, 
300,000 in North Korea115, 125,000 in the UK116 (with the heavi-
est rains since records began), 40,000 in South Africa117  and 
thousands in Australia (the worst fl ooding for forty years)118. 
In all, about 1.5 billion people were aff ected by fl oods that 
year. Flooding, as with earthquakes, very quickly demands 
the services of engineers to redesign fl ood defences, rebuild 
bridges and roads, restore power and  communications, make 
safe the water supply and inform future planning (such as 
through the use of national fl ood maps made using satellite 
data). Earthquakes destroy the  infrastructure on which our 
lives depend, whereas fl oods overwhelm that  infrastructure. 
Engineers are learning lessons very quickly as the patterns of 
 disasters change.
Preparedness
Disaster hazards, such as extreme weather events, are increas-
ing in periodicity and intensity. As more and more people live 
in densely packed cities or are forced to live on the environ-
mental margins, the vulnerability of populations towards  dis-
aster is also increasing. Technological  disasters such as train 
crashes and building collapses are the fi fth biggest killer, fol-
lowing disease, famine, confl ict and natural hazards.119 Earth-
quakes destroy  infrastructure, but they do not necessarily 
destroy life – it is the collapsing buildings that kill.
111 China – http://www.alertnet.org/db/blogs/36072/2007/06/23-140102-1.htm
112 www.news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/south_asia/6941029.stm & www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
2007_South_Asian_fl oods
113 www.abc.net.au/news/stories/2007/11/02/2080710.htm?section=world
114 www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/L06723272.htm
115 www.reliefweb.int/rw/rwb.nsf/db900SID/SJHG-7649NF?OpenDocument&RSS20=18-P
116 ‘Floods’ special feature in New Civil Engineer 31st January 2008.
117 www.earthobservatory.nasa.gov/NaturalHazards/view.php?id=18817
118 www.bbc.co.uk/weather/world/news/30062007news.shtml
119 World Disaster Report 2004.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   275 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
276
All this means that more is needed from engineers as profes-
sionals. Some engineers, with the right skills and experience, are 
certainly needed in  disaster response to help save lives. But all 
engineers have an important role in reducing both the hazards 
people face and their vulnerability to those hazards; they can 
help with  disaster preparedness. With a greater understand-
ing of climatic changes, engineers can design more resilient 
solutions or adapt existing  infrastructure. With more input 
into the early stages of planning and political decision making, 
engineers can help ensure that their work is destined only to 
help people, and they can also help people understand that 
technological solutions might not exist and that other changes 
are needed. With a greater emphasis on professional  stand-
ards, safety and good coordination across the design, build, 
operation and maintenance stages, engineers can reduce the 
harm of technological failures. With a professional and zero-
tolerance stance on corruption, particularly in construction, 
engineers can provide solutions that can be trusted to stand 
fi rm. Finally, as more than 95 per cent of personnel involved 
in  disaster relief organizations are local staff , engineers can 
improve technical  education and expertise in places where the 
humanitarian need is greatest and thus help build long-term 
capacity to cope.
Humanitarianism and Professionalization
There are strong parallels between the engineering and 
humanitarian communities. Engineering is a profession, and 
many engineers are professional in the true sense of the word; 
they are accountable to their peers and to the public for their 
actions. Th e humanitarian sector is trying to professionalize 
and is working to develop its own voluntary codes of con-
duct, codes of practice, fi eld guides and manuals, training and 
professional development courses, methods of coordination 
between actors and minimum operational  standards.120 Th ese 
are facilities that have long been established in the engineer-
ing profession. However, the humanitarian community does 
not yet have a formal professional institution of its own to 
spearhead similar eff orts as progress in this area often lies with 
voluntary and poorly-funded groupings of aid agencies. Th is 
is partly because the sector is so new and so international, 
with its resources being directed towards particular  disaster 
responses.
It is perhaps worth noting that there are a growing number of 
degree courses that teach engineering for  disaster relief, which 
is an important indicator of a maturing sector and of the 
demand from engineering students to prepare appropriately 
for getting involved. Th ere are more conferences on  disaster 
issues within the engineering community as well.121 
Th ere has been a massive growth in recent years in the mili-
tary contracting engineering companies to provide relief and 
deliver development projects. Th e wars in Afghanistan and 
Iraq, and the confl ict that followed them, appear to many in 
the humanitarian sector to have produced a new military-
industrial paradigm. Whilst this has had signifi cant achieve-
ments – with new and re-built water supplies, electricity grids, 
hospitals, oil refi neries, roads and other vital  infrastructure – it 
has given rise to deep concerns over  disaster capitalism122 and 
over the public understanding of humanitarianism. It is cer-
tainly recognized that the capabilities of engineering fi rms to 
deliver large-scale reconstruction and development projects 
are far greater than those of humanitarian organizations, but 
cases have come to light regarding the way in which contracts 
are awarded or staff  and stakeholders are treated that call into 
question the true motivation for such projects. In turn, this 
has meant that humanitarian agencies are, at the very least, 
hesitant to engage with the private sector in their  disaster 
relief work. It is a serious challenge to the engineering com-
munity, particularly given the potential positive impact that 
engineering companies could bring (as demonstrated by suc-
cessful reconstruction projects awarded to major engineering 
consultancies after the Indian Ocean Tsunami to help restore 
120 Examples include the Red Cross Code of Conduct, the Humanitarian Accountability 
Partnership, the Good Enough Guide, accredited RedR training courses, the Cluster 
system, and the SPHERE guidelines.
121 Examples include ‘Civil Engineering Disaster Mitigation Conference: Earthquake and 
Tsunami’ in June 2009, Istanbul (organized jointly by the World Council of Civil Engi-
neers, the European Council of Civil Engineers and the Turkish Chamber of Civil Engi-
neers) or ‘Engineering a Better World: Relief Operations and Construction’ in March 
2010 in London (organized jointly by the Institution of Civil Engineers and the Com-
monwealth Engineers Council).
122 See the proceedings of RedR UK’s 2009 Conference ‘Hard Realities and Future Necessi-
ties: Th e Role of the Private Sector in Humanitarian Eff orts’ and ‘Th e Shock Doctrine’ 
by Naomi Klein.
Th e Royal Institution of Char-
tered Surveyors commissioned 
a report from the Max Locke 
Centre, published in 2009, to 
help non-technical decision 
makers in humanitarian  emer-
gencies better understand the 
roles of diff erent built environ-
mental professionals. Called 
Th e Built Environment Professions in Disaster Risk Reduc-
tion and Response – A guide for humanitarian agencies*, 
it sets out the roles of architects, surveyors, planners and 
engineers across seven phases of  disaster management. 
Th e guide demonstrates the case for greater use of built 
environment professionals in the humanitarian sector, 
and emphasizes their importance in achieving a sustain-
able longer term recovery.
* Available from http://www.rics .org/site/scripts/download_info.
aspx?downloadID=829&fi leID=991
A guide about built environmental professionals
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   276 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
277
 infrastructure in Aceh).123 Astonishingly successful examples 
of private sector contributions have also emerged from the 
mobile phone, logistics and fi nance industries124 and even in 
engineering training following Hurricane Katrina.125
RedR
International  disaster relief organizations with particular 
expertise in engineering have emerged. Of these, the most well 
known in the engineering profession is the ‘Register of Engi-
neers for Disaster Relief’. RedR was established by an engineer 
who, whilst working in response to the Vietnamese Boat Peo-
ple’s Crisis in 1979, encountered serious problems in recruiting 
qualifi ed engineers to help in the humanitarian response. Th at 
register has now developed into an international family with 
offi  ces in the Australia , Canada, India, Malaysia,  New Zealand, 
South Africa  and the UK. Th e UK offi  ce has fi eld offi  ces in 
Sudan, Sri Lanka, Pakistan, Haiti and formerly in Kenya.
RedR organizations help agencies to recruit personnel, oper-
ate a peer-assessed membership scheme, produce guides (see 
Box) and knowledge services, deliver training courses on top-
ics such as humanitarianism, security, management and tech-
nical skills, answer technical questions from relief workers in 
the fi eld and so on. RedR has helped to build a community of 
trained engineers with expertise for  disaster relief, a commu-
nity which now reaches every major aid agency in the world. It 
has helped to defi ne the skills that an engineer needs in order 
to be eff ective in responding to  disaster situations (particularly 
in project management roles since most of those involved in 
 disaster relief are local staff ). RedR UK has applied an engineer-
ing methodology to humanitarian security issues and is now a 
leader in this important specialization, and it is developing its 
services in the health sector.
Th e engineering community has shown RedR a great deal of 
support. Companies have released their staff  to go on assign-
ments and sponsored their national organizations. Individual 
engineers have fundraised and donated to its cause. Engineer-
ing institutions have supported RedR through publicity, events 
and even offi  ce space. RedR’s engineers are given as case stud-
ies to help attract more young people to study engineering, 
because the diff erence they make in their work is so clearly 
visible. Being associated with RedR also helps companies to 
recruit graduate engineers since many have a strong appetite 
to get involved in relief work.
123 See ‘Royal Haskoning to rebuild tsunami-hit Aceh’ in UK Association of Consulting 
Engineers ‘Impact’ magazine July/August 2007 or the New Civil Engineer / Associa-
tion of Consulting Engineers Consultants of the Year 2010‘Outstanding Achievement 
Award’ given to WSP group for their work in Banda Aceh with the Canadian Red 
Cross.
124 See examples put forward by the World Economic Forum’s Disaster Resource Net-
work.
125 See article ‘A hurricane force skills drive for the US’ in New Civil Engineer 3rd July 2008.
RedR’s members have been described by some of the world’s 
leading engineers as true heroes of engineering.126 Th ey help 
to demonstrate how, time and again, good engineering saves 
lives, and how engineering can transform catastrophic situa-
tions to help people realize their own recovery and to restore 
dignity and peace.
Engineering in Emergencies is 
a vital publication for anyone 
working in the humanitarian 
community. Written by RedR, it 
is a very practical guide that cov-
ers topics from personal prepa-
rations for relief assignments, 
humanitarian principles, per-
sonal security, assessment and 
management, logistics, environmental health and sanita-
tion, water supply and equipment maintenance, vehicles, 
roads and airstrips, shelter and settlements and so on. It 
guides relief workers in the design, construction, opera-
tion and maintenance of solutions to meet the needs of 
those aff ected by  disaster, particularly those aff ected by 
complex  emergencies. Th is handbook, which is not freely 
available electronically and is quite heavy to transport, is 
so essential to humanitarian relief workers that bootleg 
copies quickly circulate in  disaster responses.
A guide for  disaster relief personnel
Appropriate technology6.1.11 
Tony Marjoram and Andrew Lamb
Interest in the idea and philosophy of ‘ appropriate technology’ 
increased in the 1960s, based partly on the Ghandian notion 
of smaller-scale self-suffi  ciency and on concern for the conse-
quences of industrialization for environmental sustainability 
and for the degradation that surrounded the ‘limits to growth’ 
debate in the 1960s and 1970s. Th e idea and philosophy of 
 appropriate technology – or  alternative technology127 as it was 
also referred to –  particularly in the West, relates to the use of 
smaller, lower cost, labour-intensive (rather than capital-inten-
sive), easily maintained and environmentally friendly technolo-
gies, preferably using locally available materials and skills in 
harmony with local needs and conditions, in both developing 
and developed countries. Th e key factor is that all technology 
126 An example includes Prof. Paul Jowitt’s Presidential Address in November 2009, Institu-
tion of Civil Engineers.
127 David Dickson. 1974. Alternative Technology and the Politics of Technical Change, 
 Fontana.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   277 14/09/10   15:34:57
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
278
should be appropriate to economic, social and cultural con-
texts, as it once was when most technology was developed 
locally or when most situations were fairly similar in smaller 
scale pre-industrial days. Problems arise when technology is 
transferred between diff erent economic, social and cultural 
contexts, even within the same country, but especially between 
the developed and industrial to less developed and more tradi-
tional situations. Th is is a relatively simple and straightforward 
expectation, and it is surprising that  appropriate technology 
was a hotly debated and contentious issue in the later 1960s and 
1970s in the discussion of development assistance and technol-
ogy transfer (though perhaps less surprising when one consid-
ers the dominant models of  economic development based on 
industrialization and import substitution of the time). Th ere 
was particular criticism of  appropriate technology in India for 
example, despite the Ghandian background.
Interest in  appropriate technology, or AT as it often became 
known, increased in the context of international development 
and overseas aid amid concern over the transfer of larger-scale 
technologies to developing countries and the associated prob-
lems of operation and maintenance. Increasing interest was 
also driven by the work of E. F. (Fritz) Schumacher, an econo-
mist who worked with John Maynard Keynes, and who was 
for twenty years the Chief Economic Advisor to the National 
Coal Board in the UK. Schumacher was a critic of neo-classical 
economics, which he saw as dehumanizing, and he advocated 
greater attention to the workplace, decentralization and more 
efficient resource use – facilitated by ‘intermediate’ tech-
nologies more suited to the needs of developing countries. 
To promote such technologies and approaches, Schumacher 
and colleagues created the Intermediate Technology Develop-
ment Group (ITDG) in 1966 (which became  Practical Action 
in 2005) and indicated the development of the ‘ appropriate 
technology movement’. Interest in appropriate/intermediate 
technology increased after 1973 – the year of the fi rst  energy 
crisis in which Schumacher’s book Small Is Beautiful: Economics 
As If People Mattered128 was published; a critique of Western 
economics that was described by Th e Times as one of the hun-
dred most infl uential books that helped develop the environ-
mental movement and create environmental economics.
Interest in  appropriate technology declined, together with 
support for international development in the later 1970s and 
1980s, with the rise to power of Margaret Th atcher and Ronald 
Reagan in the UK and US in 1979 and 1981 respectively, and 
the development of structural adjustment policies in the later 
1970s and 1980s based around loan conditionalities promoting 
market orientation and privatization. Despite this, interest in 
AT continued with ITDG and similar long-established organi-
zations around the world (some also have changed names 
and mandates). Th ese include the German Appropriate Tech-
128 E. F. Schumacher. 1973. Small Is Beautiful: Economics As If People Mattered. Blond & 
Briggs, London, p.288.
nology Exchange (GATE), Groupe de recherche et d’échanges 
technologiques (GRET, France), Swiss Centre for Development 
Cooperation in Technology and Management (SKAT) and Vol-
unteers in Technical Assistance (VITA, USA). Th ese have been 
joined by many newcomers including the Centre for Alterna-
tive Technology (CAT, UK),  Engineers Against Poverty (EAP, 
UK), Appropriate Technology Asia, Appropriate Technology 
Africa,  Programme for Appropriate Technology in Health 
(PATH, USA), Centre for Appropriate Technology (GrAT, Aus-
tria), Aprovecho (US), Centre for Appropriate Technology 
(Australia ), National Center for Appropriate Technology (US), 
Appropriate Technology Association (Th ailand), the Asian Alli-
ance of Appropriate Technology Practitioners (Approtech) and 
many more. In addition to this, some of the original magazines 
and journals still continue, including the journal Appropriate 
Technology (now published by Research Information, who took 
over from ITDG in 1999) and Appropriate Technology Source-
book (US). Th e magazine Undercurrents, did most to promote 
 alternative technology in the 1970s, but disappeared in 1984.
Indeed, although some of the original AT organizations, maga-
zines, people and practitioners are no longer with us, and 
although the name of Fritz Schumacher is unknown by many 
young people today, ‘Small is Beautiful’ is still a well known 
term. Th ey have been joined by a diversity of newer entities 
that, in the Internet age, help to make information about 
 appropriate technology more accessible than ever (the online 
reference www.appropedia.org for example). Furthermore, 
AT is of increasing contemporary relevance following the 
fi nancial/ economic crisis of 2007–2009 and the even greater 
contemporary challenges of  sustainable development,  climate 
change mitigation and adaptation. Th e continued relevance 
of  appropriate technology was illustrated in Small is Working: 
Technology for Poverty Reduction129, a video and publication 
developed by UNESCO, ITDG and the Television Fund for the 
Environment in 2003 to commemorate the thirtieth anniver-
sary of Small is Beautiful and the work of increasing numbers 
of  Engineers Without Borders groups around the world.
Appropriate technologies can include ‘high’ as well as ‘low’, 
and ‘soft’ as well as ‘hard’ technologies. White, solar-powered 
LED lights have helped facilitate the replacement of kerosene 
lamps, and mobile phones and associated software systems 
have enabled information and communication not dreamt of 
before the age of electronics. Th is is further illustrated in the 
use of intermediate technologies in urban development and 
construction in such areas as the use of pozzolanic cement 
extenders and substitutes (such as rice-husk ash), adobe, 
rammed earth and mud brick. Housing technologies have also 
been enhanced with better natural passive and active solar 
design and ventilation systems, including such ideas as Trombe 
walls. Urban and rural development will both depend on 
129 Small is Working: Technology for Poverty Reduction, video/VCD and 70-page booklet, 
UNESCO, ITDG and TVE, 2003.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   278 14/09/10   15:34:58
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
279
improved  transportation technologies and systems, and the 
use of zero emission vehicles. Th e  energy fi eld is perhaps the 
most synonymous with  appropriate technology, and includes 
photovoltaic solar panels, cogeneration and more effi  cient 
power storage, distribution and use, solar concentrators, solar 
absorbers and water heaters, wind- wave- and hydro-power, 
biofuels, biogas and biochar. 
At the same time,  water supply and sanitation is the most 
important area of  appropriate technology in terms of helping 
save nearly two million deaths per year from preventable water-
borne diseases and improving the lives of the over 900 million 
people who lack safe drinking water. Slow sand, porous ceramic 
fi lters and reverse osmosis facilitate this, as does chemical fl oc-
culation chlorine and ultraviolet disinfection, improved well 
construction techniques, pumping systems and toilet technolo-
gies. Appropriate technologies have enhanced food production 
with permaculture, improved irrigation, greenhouses and other 
techniques, and have reduced post-harvest loss with better food 
storage, preservation and processing. Food processing has also 
been enhanced with better shelling and milling machines, and 
the health risks of domestic cooking reduced with improved 
smokeless wood-burning stoves, solar cookers and related 
technologies. Few of the above appropriate technological 
 innovations would be possible without appropriate systems of 
microfi nance, and technology has also revolutionized the world 
of fi nance, including at the micro level with the use of such tech-
nologies such as mobile phones. 
One of the major new areas of  appropriate technology are 
‘high-tech’ such as information and communication technolo-
gies. Wind-up radios, mobile phones, the US$100 Laptop, net-
books and related projects, open-source software and Voice 
Over Internet Protocol systems – made possible by fibre-
optics, satellite  communications and other technologies – are 
revolutionizing the way we think and about  appropriate tech-
nology. Decentralized, distributed  infrastructure systems – in 
many ways similar to or inspired by topography of the Internet 
– are becoming increasingly important as the ‘traditional’ path 
of development responds to the need for change. Industrial-
ized countries are rediscovering forgotten technologies as they 
attempt to reduce their waste, emissions and environmental 
impact, and they are increasingly open to learning from tech-
nologies used in developing countries.
In many ways then, the concept of  appropriate technology 
is being re-understood for the challenges of the twenty-fi rst 
century, and the image of  appropriate technology is changing 
as well. Signifi cant issues remain, particularly around eff ective 
knowledge sharing, commercialization, scaling-up and aware-
ness. Th e next decade will see signifi cant developments in 
information platforms, business models and in  education – 
and will, in all likelihood, show once again that small is beauti-
ful and working.
Appropriate technology: 6.1.12 
case study on  building 
technologies
Solomon Mwangi
Introduction
Since the signing of the Comprehensive Peace Agreement 
(CPA) between the Government of Sudan and the Sudanese 
People Liberation Movement, only a few Sudanese refugees 
have returned home. Th e cause for this low return is due to a 
number of reasons, including:
Lack of  ■  infrastructures such as schools, hospitals and houses.
Unemployment or lack of economic activities to support  ■
normal livelihood.
Non-existence of a dynamic private sector/enterprise cul- ■
ture to open up business opportunities in most of the rural 
settings.
Insecurity threats and rumours of war in many areas despite  ■
the CPA having been in force for three years now.
Th e housing and general building construction 
challenges in Sudan
Th e traditional building materials in Sudan, similar to many 
other countries, comprise of poles with mud for walls and 
thatch grass for roofi ng. While these traditional materials are 
probably the most appropriate because of their good thermal 
properties and aff ordability, its lifespan is limited to a maxi-
mum of twelve years (mud is weathered by rains and wind 
over time and poles rot slowly or are eaten by termites). Th e 
structures are also less hygienic as they are easily infested by 
insects and rodents.
 Typical African hut with its 
mud and pole construction.© 
S. 
M
w
an
gi
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   279 14/09/10   15:34:58
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
280
Burnt bricks
Former colonial powers in Africa  introduced burnt brick tech-
nology for modern construction. Th is technology was largely 
adopted in many countries, but has gone on to cause deserti-
fi cation and deforestation, especially in areas where trees are 
used as the main fuel for fi ring the bricks. Sudan has been no 
exception as the burnt brick technology is widely adopted for 
public buildings and permanent construction. So, whilst burnt 
bricks are good for the construction of permanent structures, 
this technology has disadvantages:
Causes desertifi cation with one tree required to burn every  ■
1,000 bricks.
Bricks made traditionally are of irregular shape, needing  ■
more mortar in construction.
Brick makers suff er losses of 20 per cent to 50 per cent as  ■
bricks break when drying and burning.
Bricks are not in  ■  standard sizes as diff erent brick makers use 
diff erent moulds.
Construction with bricks takes longer in comparison to  ■
concrete blocks.
Production requires massive pits that are often left open,  ■
degrading the land.
Construction challenges in South Sudan
Construction work in South Sudan faces several practical chal-
lenges, including:
A lack of trained or skilled Sudanese construction work- ■
ers; major construction projects are undertaken by foreign 
companies.
A lack of basic building materials such as cement, sand and  ■
gravel, raising prices.
Large regions of South Sudan are fl at and susceptible to  ■
fl ooding in the heavy rains.
Th ese regions are largely made of a clay/silt soil, known as  ■
‘Black Cotton Soil’, which stretches to depths of more than 
fi ve metres and hence requires special, and expensive, con-
struction designs and techniques.
Deforestation is caused by excessive use of trees used to  ■
produce burnt bricks.
A lack of road  ■  infrastructure makes transport very expen-
sive and limits it to the dry seasons (in some areas, materials 
can only be delivered by cargo planes).
Th ese challenges make general building construction very – 
sometimes prohibitively – expensive and put decent housing 
out of the reach of ordinary Sudanese. 
Sustainable construction approach in South Sudan
Building construction in South Sudan requires innovative 
engineering solutions, with many regions requiring carefully 
tailored technologies. Challenges include:
Manufacturing cost-eff ective building materials from local  ■
soils, using environmentally friendly approaches, in areas 
where sand and gravel are non-existent.
Designing special foundations to be used in the unstable  ■
Black Cotton soil.
Training youth and former soldiers in construction skills to  ■
overcome skilled labour shortages (equipping them with 
vital skills, helping them participate in the reconstruction of 
South Sudan, and curbing emerging crime caused by unem-
ployment).
Introducing environmentally friendly technologies that will  ■
curtail further desertifi cation caused by cutting of local 
indigenous trees used for burning bricks.
Designing aff ordable buildings with good thermal insulat- ■
ing properties to protect against the hot temperatures of 
South Sudan.
Local organizations have been able to develop such solu-
tions. Stabilized soil blocks are made from soil mixed with a 
small amount of cement and are around 50 per cent cheaper 
than burnt bricks. By using cement to stabilize the soils and 
bind sand, no fi rewood is needed. Th eir production process 
requires only unskilled workers, rapidly creating employment. 
Special foundations have also been developed for construc-
tion in Black Cotton soil.
 A health centre built with 
Stabilised Soil Blocks in Upper 
Nile Sudan.
 A typical brick production site 
in Sudan. © 
S. 
M
w
an
gi
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   280 14/09/10   15:34:58
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
281
Maximizes the use of locally-available materials. ■
Requires locally-available equipment that does not depend on  ■
imported supplies of electricity or fuel to operate.
Draws on skills that are easy to learn and adopt at a community  ■
level.
Are environmental-friendly overall and will not damage the local  ■
environment.
Is used and maintained without external assistance. ■
Is safe and aff ordable. ■
Is not necessarily ‘low technology’ or ‘high technology’, but  ■
provides a capability.
Skills are easy to learn and adopt at village and community level ■
What is an Appropriate  Building Technology
Th e COMAC construction programme has primarily focused 
on immediate public buildings needs such as schools and hos-
pitals, working with NGOs and other development minded 
organizations in introducing Appropriate  Building Technology 
(ABT) for the reconstruction of Sudan. In so doing, COMAC 
believes ordinary people will gradually pick up and adopt the 
use of these technologies in their private projects.
By using this approach, COMAC has been able to achieve and 
demonstrate the following:
Introduced ABT such as Stabilized Soil Blocks (SSB) that are  ■
made from soil mixed with a small percentage of cement. 
Th e SSB technology is on average 50 per cent cheaper than 
burnt bricks.
Provided employment to the unemployed. An SSB produc- ■
tion plant employs six unskilled workers. Further employ-
ment is created for the unskilled Sudanese who are trained 
in construction, instead of importing a skilled labour force 
from neighboring Kenya or Uganda.
Improvized special foundations for construction in Black  ■
Cotton areas.
Helped conserve the environment by using environmentally  ■
friendly technologies. Th is has been achieved by replacing 
burnt bricks with cement used to stabilize soils and bind 
sand to make building blocks. Burnt bricks also create land 
degradation as massive pits are left open after making bricks 
while SSB are made on site using soils dug from trenches 
dug for foundations of the intended building.
Some of the Appropriate Building Technologies used 
in Sudan
COMAC has been promoting the use of three construction 
technologies in Sudan. Th ese are:
Stabilized soil blocks
Th is building material was developed in Colombia in the early 
1940s and introduced into East Africa  in the 1970s. Th e tech-
nology has benefi ted from developments that include:
Robust, manually operated equipment that requires little  ■
maintenance.
A common performance  ■  standard that conforms to inter-
national building  standards for materials approved for per-
manent construction (such as concrete blocks).
Wide application and adoption in Kenya, Malawi and  ■
Uganda.
Use of interlocking blocks to further reduce costs by reduc- ■
ing the need for mortar.
The blocks are made on site using soils dug from the  ■
trenches made for foundations.
Poles and Rammed Earth Technology
Poles and Rammed Earth Technology is an improvement on 
the traditional African construction comprising of poles and 
mud. In this modern technology, treated poles that protect 
them from termites and other insects are used as the struc-
tural framework of the building. The poles are spaced at 
maximum intervals of 1.5 metres, and then concreted to the 
ground. Barbed wire or hoop iron is then nailed horizontally 
between the poles at a spacing of 300 mm, helping anchor the 
rammed earth to the poles. 
Form work support is then used, temporarily fi xed on the 
poles both internally and externally, to support the wet mix of 
soil and cement used to stabilize it. On average, only 5 per cent 
of cement is used to stabilize and bond the stable soil type. 
 Th e wasted bricks during 
production.
 Black Cotton soil strata.
 Typical conditions of roads in 
South Sudan during the rains.
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   281 14/09/10   15:34:59
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
282
Layers of soil and cement, not exceeding 300 mm, are com-
pacted everyday and gradually the building is completed 
within ten days.
Sand and cement blocks
Sand is one of the building raw materials in abundant supply 
in Darfur and some other parts of Sudan. Regrettably, it has 
not been used for building construction while desertifi cation, 
caused by the use of burnt bricks, continues unabated.
COMAC undertook a Building Technologies Analysis in Darfur 
commissioned by Mercy Corps, an American NGO working in 
development projects in Darfur. Th e analysis revealed that the 
construction costs of a building would be reduced by 30 per 
cent with the introduction of solid sand/cement blocks, and 
50 per cent with hollow sand cement blocks.
Special foundations for Black Cotton soil areas
Construction in Black Cotton soil is a major challenge in South 
Sudan. When wet, the soil swells and when it dries it shrinks 
and cracks. Th ese movements can cause a building to crack 
unless special foundations are designed to withstand them. 
In Upper Nile and Jonglei States of Southern Sudan, Black Cot-
ton Soil covers several square kilometres of land, stretching to 
depths exceeding fi ve metres. Th e two states also faces a major 
challenge due to the unavailability of raw materials suitable for 
construction such as sand and gravel.
COMAC has been faced with these challenges when called 
upon to build hospitals or police posts in this region. In fac-
ing these challenges, COMAC has come up with a number of 
solutions, including:
Reinforced concrete foundations, with a ground beam sup- ■
ported by concrete columns.
Special Stabilized Soil Blocks made using special soil and  ■
cement mixes.
Laying a fl oating fl oor screed with cement/sand mortar,  ■
reinforced with chicken wire.
Accelerated dissemination of ABT’s in Sudan and other 
developing countries
Housing, a basic human need, and unemployment are two of 
the major problems faced by many developing countries. As if 
that is not bad enough, environmental degradation is a major 
phenomenon in developing countries.
In all these three compounded problems (housing, unem-
ployment and environmental degradation) one potential 
solution lies with the introduction, promotion and enforce-
ment of Appropriate Building Technologies (ABT’s), already 
mentioned. For this to happen and for the impact to be felt 
by the benefi ciaries, deliberate policies and decisions have to 
be made and enforced by policy and decision-makers in gov-
ernments, donor and development organizations directly or 
indirectly involved in development projects in the developing 
countries.
For this to happen in an accelerated way, donors, policy and 
decision-makers need to:
Support the use of these technologies by insisting that  ■
they be given preference in the projects they fund or sup-
port.
Support organizations and companies such as COMAC who  ■
promote these technologies by recommending their devel-
opmental construction approach be adopted by govern-
ments and development partners.
Support a monitoring program of assessing how these tech- ■
nologies perform over time.
 Th e Poles and Rammed Earth 
construction process.
 A completed building in 
South Sudan.
 A hand mould to make sand/
cement blocks.
 Reinforced ground beam 
foundation supported by columns 
in Black Cotton soil.
 Manually-operated block 
press. © 
S. 
M
w
an
gi
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
©
 S
. M
w
an
gi
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   282 14/09/10   15:35:00
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
283
Engineering 6.2  infrastructure
Water supply and sanitation6.2.1 
Kalanithy Vairavamoorthy and 
Damir Brdjanovic
Existing conditions 
Water supply
Th e problem of water scarcity in urban areas of developing 
countries is a major concern. It is estimated that by 2050, half 
of India’s population will be living in urban areas and will face 
acute water problems (Singh, 2000).130 It was reported in 2002 
that about 1.1 billion people were still using water from unim-
proved sources, and two thirds of these people live in Asia. 
Th e number of people without improved water sources in 
China alone is equal to the number of un-served in the whole 
of Africa ( UNICEF/ WHO, 2004).131 Th e quality of water that 
people receive is also questionable. In India, 85 per cent of the 
urban population has access to drinking water, but only 20 per 
cent of the available drinking water meets the health and qual-
ity  standards set by the World Health Organization (WHO) 
(Singh, 2000).
Th e daily water supply rate in developing countries is very low 
compared to the industrial world. In India, it ranges from 16 to 
300 litres per day, depending on the locality and the economic 
strata (Singh, 2000), whereas this fi gure ranges from 100 to 600 
litres per day in developed countries. Th e populations that 
are not served by a piped water supply receive even smaller 
quantities of water. In East Africa,  the daily supply rate of un-
piped water was nearly a third less than for piped users of low-
income communities (Th ompson et al., 2001). 132
Th e prevailing water stress in many developing countries is 
not only due to source limitations but other factors such as 
poor distribution effi  ciency through city networks and ine-
qualities in service provision between the rich and the poor 
(UN-HABITAT, 1999).133 One of the main reasons is the high 
rate of water loss from the distribution systems. Many studies 
show that water losses in cities of developing countries are at 
levels between 40–60 per cent of the water supplied (Arloso-
130 Singh, N. 2000. Tapping Traditional Systems of Resource Management, Habitat Debate, 
UNCHS, Vol.6, No.3.
131 UNICEF/ WHO. 2004. Meeting the MDG drinking water and sanitation target - A 
mid term assessment of progress. United Nations Children’s Fund and World Health 
Organization, p.36.
132 Th ompson, J., Porras, I. T., Tumwine, J. K., Mujwahuzi, M. R., Katui-Katua, M., Johnstone, 
N. and Wood, L. 2001. Drawers of Water II. International Institute for Environment and 
Development, London, UK.
133 UN-HABITAT. 1999. Managing Water for African cities - Developing a Strategy for 
Urban Water Demand Management, Background Paper No. 1, Expert Group Meeting 
UNEP & UN-HABITAT.
roff , 1999).134 In many cases the water loss indicators refl ect 
the ineffi  ciency of the management of the water supply sys-
tem. Any reduction in water losses requires coherent action to 
address not only the technical and operational issues but also 
the institutional, planning, fi nancial and administrative issues 
(WHO, 2000).135  
Th e design of water distribution systems in general has been 
based on the assumption of continuous supply. However, in 
most of the developing countries, the water supply system 
is not continuous but intermittent (Vairavamoorthy et al., 
2007).136 Th e Asian Development Bank has reported that, in 
2001, ten of the eighteen cities studied supplied water for less 
than 24 hours a day (ADB, 2004).137 Th e situation is similar 
in other regions of the world, for example in Latin America 
ten major cities receives rationed supplies (Choe and Varley, 
1997).138 Only 11 per cent of the consumers with a piped sup-
ply in Nigeria received water once in every two days in 1995. 
Intermittent supply leads to many problems including severe 
supply pressure losses and great inequities in the distribution 
of water. Another serious problem arising from intermittent 
supplies, which is generally ignored, is the associated high lev-
els of contamination. Th is occurs in networks where there are 
prolonged periods of interruption of supply due to negligible 
or zero pressures in the system (Vairavamoorthy and Mansoor, 
2006).139
Sanitation
Th e sanitation sector is often a lower priority compared to 
water supply. Th erefore it is not surprising that some 2.6 billion 
people, half of the developing world, live without improved 
sanitation. Sanitation coverage in developing countries (49 per 
cent) is half that of the developed world (98 per cent). In sub-
Saharan Africa  the coverage is a mere 36 per cent, and over half 
of this is without improved sanitation. Similarly, nearly 1.5 bil-
134 Arlosoroff , S. 1999. Water Demand Management. International Symposium on Effi  cient 
Water Use in Urban Areas, IECT-WHO, Kobe, Japan.
135 WHO. 2000. Global Water Supply and Sanitation Assessment Report, World Health 
Organization-United Nations. Children Fund, Geneva, Switzerland.
136 Vairavamoorthy, K., Gorantiwar, S.D., and Mohan, S. 2007. Intermittent water supply 
under water scarcity situations. Water International, Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 121–132.
137 ADB. 2004. Second Water Utilities Data Book Asian and Pacifi c Region. Asian Develop-
ment Bank (ADB). Manila, Philippines.
138 Choe, K., Varley, R., and Bilani, H. 1996. Coping with Intermittent Water Supply; Prob-
lems and Prospects, Environmental Health Project. Activity Report No. 26, USAID, 
USA.
139 Vairavamoorthy, K. and Mansoor, M.A.M. 2006. Demand management in developing 
countries. In: Butler, D., and Memon, F. A. (Eds.) Water Demand Management. IWA 
Publishing, London, UK. pp. 180–214.
 Stone arch construction.
©
 SA
IC
E
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   283 14/09/10   15:35:01
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
284
lion people in China and India live without access to improved 
sanitation services (WHO/UNICEF, 2006).140 Th e number of 
deaths attributable to poor sanitation and hygiene alone may 
be as high as 1.6 million a year. Statistics on wastewater treat-
ment revealed that almost 85 per cent of global wastewater is 
discharged without treatment leading to serious impacts on 
public health and the water receiving ecosystems.
In developing countries, rapid population growth and urbani-
zation is creating an added demand for housing and  infrastruc-
ture services including sanitation services. Providing sanitation 
services especially for the poor living outside the designated 
residential areas, like informal or illegal settlements, is a chal-
lenge. Th e World Bank estimates that almost 26 per cent of 
the global urban population – over 400 million people – lack 
access to the simplest form of sanitation (Khatri and Vairava-
moorthy, 2007).141
At the same time, the wastewater collection, stormwater 
drainage and solid waste collection services are inadequate 
in most of the developing countries. Th e systems are either 
poorly planned and designed or are operated without inad-
equate maintenance, which means that the existing services 
are often of poor quality. Most of the city wastes are dumped 
and discharged directly to the open environment. As a result, 
untreated urban wastes pollute surface as well as ground water 
sources. Th e situation is even worse in the area of low-income 
settlements. Septic tanks and feeder networks regularly dis-
charge effl  uent into street gutters, open streams or drainage 
canals. Th is creates unpleasant living conditions, public health 
risks and environmental damage (GHK, 2002).142
Th e numbers of urban dwellers are increasing and the urban 
areas are becoming overcrowded. Eff orts to improve basic 
sanitation have tended to focus on ambitious master plans 
that require large investments in trunk sewerage, stormwater 
drainage systems, centralized large-scale treatment and facili-
ties for solid waste collection and disposal. Some of these plans 
either fail to be implemented due to fi nancial and institutional 
constraints, or provide an inequitable service once imple-
mented. Consequently, the eff ort to solve the basic sanitation 
problems cannot keep up with the growing population in the 
developing world and new and innovative approaches are 
140 WHO/UNICEF. 2006. Meeting the MDG drinking water and sanitation target, Th e urban 
and rural challenge of the decade. World Health Organization and United Nations Chil-
dren’s Fund, p.41
141 Khatri, K., and Vairavamoorthy, K. 2007. Challenges for urban  water supply and sanita-
tion in the developing countries. Water for changing world: Enhancing local knowledge 
and capacity, (Symposium, 13–15 June), 50th anniversary, UNESCO-IHE Institute for 
Water Education, Delft.
142 GHK. 2002. Eff ective Strategic Planning for Urban Sanitation Service, Fundamentals of 
good Practice, pp. 23. Go to: http://www.ghkint.com/
needed that lead to sustainable solutions (Khatri and Vairava-
moorthy, 2007).143
Sustainability issues
With the achievement of the  Millennium Development Goals 
high on the international political agenda, particularly in 2005, 
signifi cant eff orts are currently being made to promote and 
apply institutional and management approaches conducive to 
the sustainability and optimization of  water supply and sanita-
tion services worldwide.
In general a water supply or sanitation service is considered 
sustainable when it (Brdjanovic and Gijzen 2005):144
is functioning and being used; ■
is able to deliver an appropriate level of benefi ts regarding  ■
quality, quantity, convenience, continuity and health to all;
continues to function over a prolonged period of time  ■
(which goes beyond the lifespan of the original equip-
ment);
has institutionalized management; ■
has operation, maintenance, administrative and replace- ■
ment costs covered locally;
can be satisfactorily operated and maintained at the local  ■
level with limited, but tailor-made, external support; and,
does not aff ect the environment negatively. ■
Furthermore, sustainable sanitation includes:
the practice in which an essential feature is proper contain- ■
ment allowing for sanitation and recycling;
closing of the nutrient and water loops; ■
the ecosystem approach; ■
the polluter pays principle; ■
protection of the downstream health and environment; ■
decentralization of the  ■  infrastructure;
143 Khatri, K., and Vairavamoorthy, K. 2007. Challenges for urban  water supply and sanita-
tion in the developing countries. Water for changing world: Enhancing local knowledge 
and capacity, (Symposium, 13–15 June), 50th anniversary, UNESCO-IHE Institute for 
Water Education, Delft.
144 Brdjanovic, D., Gijzen, H. 2005. Challenges in Achieving a Sustainable Water Supply and 
Sanitation Services for Small Islands: the Caribbean Perspective. In: Proceedings: Aqua 
2005, Cali, Colombia (31 Oct–4 Nov 2005).
 A young boy in 
Kathmandu, Nepal, waits to 
collect water with a plastic 
bottle.
©
 A
m
ee
r S
ha
he
ed
, E
W
B-
U
K
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   284 14/09/10   15:35:01
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
285
local management and fi nancing; ■
aff ordability; and, ■
equitable services for all. ■
One of the hardest lessons for the  water supply and sanita-
tion sector is that making the initial capital investment is often 
the easiest part of the job. It is often relatively easy to fi nd the 
resources (money, labour, materials and organization) for one 
big push to build something. It is, however, much more dif-
fi cult to maintain a truly sustainable system. 
Th e constraints identifi ed as contributing to or causing the fail-
ure of water supply, and especially sanitation services, include:
poor organizational structures in the responsible agency; ■
lack of spare parts; ■
inappropriate technology; ■
lack of trained staff ; ■
tied funding; ■
an absence of career opportunities; ■
insuffi  cient funds; ■
legal framework problems; ■
lack of motivation by sector personnel; ■
non-involvement of the users; ■
the low profi le of operation and maintenance in the sector  ■
in general;
inadequate tariff  and collection systems; and, ■
negative political interference.  ■
Global challenges
Cities all over the world are facing a range of dynamic glo-
bal and regional pressures, and diffi  culties in effi  ciently and 
transparently managing ever-scarcer water resources, deliver-
ing  water supply and sanitation services. Th ere are equal chal-
lenges on disposing of wastewater and minimizing negative 
impacts to the environment. In order to develop solutions to 
manage urban water more eff ectively, these global and regional 
pressures must be recognized and used to drive the design and 
management processes of urban water systems (Khatri and 
Vairavamoorthy, 2007).145 
Climate change ■  is predicted to cause signifi cant changes in 
precipitation and temperature patterns, aff ecting the avail-
ability of water and the eff ectiveness and required capacity 
of sanitation  infrastructure.
Population growth and urbanization ■  are enforcing rapid 
changes leading to a dramatic increase in high-quality water 
consumption. Frequently, this demand for water cannot 
be satisfi ed by the locally available water resources, while 
the discharge of insuffi  ciently treated wastewater increases 
costs for downstream users and has detrimental eff ects on 
the aquatic systems.
Existing  ■  infrastructure is ageing and deteriorating. It is 
a technological and fi nancial challenge to maintain and 
upgrade it in such a way that quality water can continue to 
be delivered to all sectors, and so wastewater can be ade-
quately collected and treated.
Climate change 
Th ere is little dispute that the Earth system is undergoing very 
rapid changes as a result of increased human activities. As a 
result of these changes it is generally accepted that we have 
begun to witness changes in the natural cycles at the global 
scale. Clearly these changes will severely impact the urban 
water cycle and how we manage it. Components of the urban 
water cycle, like water supply, wastewater treatment, and 
urban drainage are generally planned for life spans over several 
decades. Hence there is a need for us to pay attention to these 
changes in the context of how these systems will be designed 
and operated in the ‘city of the future’. 
Although the regional distribution is uncertain, precipitation 
is expected to increase in higher latitudes, particularly in win-
ter. Th is conclusion extends to the mid-latitudes in most of 
the General Circulation Model results. Potential evapotran-
spiration (ET) rises with air temperature. Consequently, even 
in areas with increased precipitation, higher ET rates may lead 
to reduced runoff , implying a possible reduction in renew-
able water supplies. More annual runoff  caused by increased 
precipitation is likely in the high latitudes. In contrast, some 
lower latitude basins may experience large reductions in runoff  
and increased water shortages as a result of a combination of 
increased evaporation and decreased precipitation. 
Th e frequency and severity of droughts could also increase in 
some areas as a result of a decrease in total rainfall, more fre-
145 Khatri, K., and Vairavamoorthy, K. 2007. Challenges for urban  water supply and sanita-
tion in the developing countries. Water for a changing world: Enhancing local knowl-
edge and capacity, (Symposium, 13–15 June), 50th anniversary, UNESCO-IHE Institute 
for Water Education, Delft.
 Waiting at the water well 
at Natwarghad, India.
©
 C
CB
Y 
- A
m
it 
D
av
e 
- R
eu
te
rs
, C
or
bi
s
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   285 14/09/10   15:35:02
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
286
quent dry spells, and higher ET. Flood frequencies are likely to 
increase in many areas, although the amount of increase for 
any given climate scenario is uncertain and impacts will vary 
among basins. 
Water quality problems may increase where there is less fl ow 
to dilute contaminants introduced from natural and human 
sources. Th e increase in water temperature will alter the rate 
of operation of bio-geo-chemical processes (degrading and 
cleaning) and lower the dissolved oxygen concentration of 
water. Similarly, the increased occurrence of higher runoff  will 
increases the load of pollutants and the overfl owing of sewers. 
Furthermore, increased fl ooding frequency with overfl ow of 
treated or untreated wastewater sewer systems will seriously 
aff ect the biotic life cycle and with a higher possibility of out-
breaks of waterborne diseases (such as cryptosporidium pres-
ence). Th e water quality matter may be more sensitive in lakes 
due to higher incidence of eutrophication process (Hellmuth 
and Kabat, 2002).146
Th e above impacts are in addition to the obvious impacts of 
increased risk of damage to stormwater  infrastructure and 
facilities (e.g. underground drains, levee banks, pump stations 
and so on) due to higher peak fl ows. Th ere are several other 
impacts, which we can only guess at the moment, such as an 
increased risk of pipe failure and collapse due to dry soil con-
ditions.
Climate change will aff ect diff erent cities in diff erent ways with 
some experiencing more frequent droughts and water short-
age while others will have more intense storm events with sub-
sequent fl ooding issues. Flexible and adaptable solutions are 
hence required to reduce the vulnerability of cities to these 
changes. 
Population growth and urbanization 
Population growth and urbanization will be one of the world’s 
most important challenges in the next few decades. Th e United 
Nations population prospects report (2006)147 illustrates the 
higher rate of population growth in urban areas in developing 
countries. In less developed countries, urban population will 
grow from 1.9 billion in 2000 to 3.9 billion in 2030, averaging 
2.3 per cent per year. On the other hand, in developed coun-
tries, the urban population is expected to increase from 0.9 
billion in 2000 to 1 billion in 2030, an overall growth rate of 1 
per cent (Brockerhoff , 2000).148
146 Hellmuth, M. and Kabat, P. 2002. Impacts. In: Appleton, B. (Ed.), Climate changes the 
water rules: How water managers can cope with today’s climate variability and tomor-
row’s  climate change. Dialogue on Water and Climate, Delft.
147 Available at: http://www.un.org/esa/population/unpop.htm (Accessed: 25 May 
2010). 
148 Brockerhoff , M. P. 2000. An Urbanizing World. Population Bulletin, A Publication of 
Population Reference Bureau, Vol.55, No.3, pp.1–45.
Th e numbers and sizes of cities, mostly in developing countries, are 
increasing due to the higher rate of urbanization. In 1950, New York 
City and Tokyo were the only two cities with a population of over 
ten million inhabitants. By 2015, it is expected that there will be 
twenty-three cities with a population over ten million. Of these, 
nineteen will be in developing countries. In 2000, there were twenty-
two cities with a population of between fi ve and ten million; 402 
cities with a population of one to fi ve million; and 433 cities in the 
0.5 to one million categories.
Almost 180,000 people are added to the world’s urban popu-
lation each day. It is estimated that there are almost a billion 
people in poverty in the world; of which over 750 million live 
in urban areas without adequate shelters and basic services 
(UN, 2006).149 Population growth and rapid urbanization will 
create a severe scarcity of water and will have a tremendous 
impact on the natural environment. In order to meet future 
water demand, cities will need to tap their water supply from 
sources situated far away from the urban area. Moreover, rapid 
increases in built-up areas disturbs the local hydrological cycle 
and environment by reducing the opportunity for natural 
infi ltration (because the absorbing land has been sealed, for 
example by road or car parks), producing rapid peak storm-
water fl ows.
Cities in developing countries are already faced with enormous 
backlogs in shelter,  infrastructure and services as they are con-
fronted by insuffi  cient water supply, deteriorating sanitation 
and environmental pollution. Larger populations will demand 
larger proportions of water while simultaneously decreasing 
the ability of ecosystems to provide more regular and cleaner 
supplies. 
Sustaining healthy environments in the urbanized world of the 
twenty-fi rst century represents a major challenge for human 
settlements, development and management. Again, fl exible 
and innovative solutions are needed to cope with sudden and 
substantial changes in water demand for people and their 
associated economic activities.
Deterioration of  infrastructure systems
In order for the urban water cycle to function eff ectively, it 
needs to be supported by appropriate  infrastructure in good 
working condition. Protecting the  infrastructure used to treat 
and transport water (including sources, treatment plants, and 
distribution systems) is an important step in ensuring the 
safety of drinking water. However, in most cities worldwide, 
there has been years of neglected maintenance to water stor-
age, treatment, and distribution systems. Poorly maintained 
water supply systems can generally be traced to insuffi  cient 
fi nancial resources and poor management. Th is deterioration 
149 Available at: http://www.un.org/esa/population/unpop.htm (Accessed: 25 May 
2010).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   286 14/09/10   15:35:02
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
287
in the water  infrastructure threatens the quality and reliability 
of all water services. 
In particular there has been little or no management and main-
tenance of underground  infrastructure. A large proportion of 
this  infrastructure is over one hundred years old, placing it at 
increased risk for leaks, blockages and malfunctions due to 
deterioration. For example, water mains break in hundreds of 
thousands of locations each year in the United States, leav-
ing water customers without a supply, or with a supply that is 
unsafe for consumption without special treatment (i.e. boiling 
or chlorination).
The escalating deterioration of water and sewer systems 
threatens our ability to provide safe drinking water and essen-
tial sanitation services for current and future generations. As 
the pipes crumble and leak, many cities are faced with an 
expensive water and sewer problem. Th e longer these prob-
lems go unresolved, the more serious they become, placing 
vital public assets at risk of further degradation and posing 
an unacceptable risk to human health and the environment, 
damaging public and private property, and impacting state 
and local economies.
Th e cost of rehabilitation of water  infrastructure systems is 
increasing substantially across the world due to their acceler-
ating deterioration. European cities are spending in the order 
of €5 billion per year on wastewater network rehabilitation. 
Th e United Kingdom has over 700,000 kilometres of mains 
supply and sewer pipes, and is implementing over 35,000 
maintenance works per month on these pipes. A 5 per cent 
reduction in costs there would save over £20 million (Vahala, 
2004).150 In the same way, many of the  infrastructure systems 
in Canada and the United States, worth trillions of dollars, 
are failing prematurely and are in need of costly repairs. Th e 
estimated capital needed for the rehabilitation of main urban 
water and sewer pipes, older than fi fty years and in fi fty largest 
cities of the USA, is more than US$700 billion (Yan & Vaira-
vamoothy, 2003).151 It will be increased signifi cantly over the 
coming decades due to the combined eff ect of  infrastructure 
ageing, urbanization and  climate change, and therefore plac-
ing a huge burden on future generations.
Th ese deterioration processes are more severe in developing 
countries, due to ageing of the systems, poor construction 
practices, little or no maintenance and rehabilitation activi-
ties, operation at higher capacity than designed for, and so on. 
Th ere is little knowledge about specifi c classes of asset deterio-
ration, the technical service life and insuffi  cient data to know 
150 Vahala, R. 2004. European Vision for Water Supply and Sanitation in 2030. Water Supply 
and Sanitation Technology Platform. 
151 Yan, J. M., and Vairavamoothy, K. 2003. Fuzzy Approach for the Pipe Condition Assess-
ment. Paper presented at the ASCE international conference on pipeline engineering 
and construction, July 13–16, Baltimore, Maryland, USA, 2, p.1817. 
the extent and/or value of their  infrastructure assets. Further-
more, there are no effi  cient decision support tools available 
to  infrastructure managers and decision-makers (Misiunas, 
2005).152
Infrastructure deterioration will impact public health, environ-
ment and institutions, including governments. Higher rates 
of the water leakage means higher water losses and higher 
chances of infi ltration and exfi ltration of water. Th is will raise 
the chances of drinking water contamination and the outbreak 
of waterborne diseases. Th e frequent breakdown of services, 
and therefore reduced water service quality and  standards, will 
aff ect the willingness of consumers to pay water bills.
Conclusion
Th ere is an urgent need for planned action to manage water 
resources eff ectively. Th e problems in urban areas of develop-
ing countries are of particular concern as still large sections 
of the community are living without a safe water supply and 
basic sanitation services. It has been widely acknowledged that 
in the past, several urban water interventions (particularly in 
developing countries) have failed and this has been in part due 
to little or no attention given to the institutional landscape 
within which these interventions are applied, and the lack of 
stakeholder involvement in the development and implemen-
tation of these interventions. 
Th e adequate provision of an urban  water supply and sani-
tation is likely to become more diffi  cult in the future due to 
several change pressures such as urbanization,  climate change 
and  infrastructure deterioration. Th e challenge is to develop 
appropriate technical and institutional responses to these 
pressures that radically change the way in which urban water 
systems are managed. Interventions must be considered over 
the entire urban water cycle, recognizing interactions between 
the various components of the urban water system. Th ere 
must also be a rethink of the way water is used and reused 
and the greater use of natural systems for treatment (that are 
likely to be more eff ective against emerging contaminants). 
Th e objective must be to develop urban water systems that 
are more robust and resilient against these uncertain future 
pressures. 
To achieve this, appropriate engineering  innovations and solu-
tions will need to be developed. However, to ensure maxi-
mum impact of these  innovations and solutions, they must 
be coupled with components of institutional development 
(through capacity-building activities), and greater stakeholder 
involvement, particularly with the engineers and the consum-
ers themselves. Clearly, only if these components are included 
in the solutions will the process be able to substantially con-
152 Misiunas, D. 2005. Failure Monitoring and Asset condition assessment in water supply 
systems. PhD Th esis, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   287 14/09/10   15:35:02
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
288
tribute to the reduction of vulnerability of cities, and to their 
capacity and preparedness to cope with global changes.
Environmental health6.2.2 
James R. Mihelcic
Engineering projects do not always produce their intended 
eff ects on people’s lives; the world is littered with broken down 
wells and unused latrines. In fact, it is estimated that as many 
as 60 per cent of the water systems in developing countries 
are non-operational (Davis and Brikké, 1995).153 Th ese projects 
may have been designed and constructed with the best of 
intentions, but non-technical considerations were not always 
taken into account. Often, community preferences and hab-
its were ignored and the community had only a token role in 
the decision-making process. In other situations, initial funds 
for construction were provided by outside agencies but no 
realistic plan for supporting operation and maintenance was 
implemented. Furthermore, the technology selected may not 
have been appropriate for political, cultural, economic or geo-
graphic reasons. In short, it could be argued that these projects 
focused on the technology rather than on the engineering, 
which would have to be considered in these issues.
Engineering practice in a development setting requires tech-
nical as well as non-technical skills, and it requires an under-
standing of the dynamic between  society, economy and the 
environment. It must also consider non-traditional principles 
of carrying capacity, equity and gender. Th ere also needs to be 
recognition and understanding of the complex, interdepend-
ent and dynamic systems that comprise  infrastructure that 
supports water, sanitation, waste disposal and air quality. Such 
systems also require an appreciation for the social systems, 
which receive the services. 
In the development setting, beneficiaries are often poor 
and reside in under-developed communities, and the word 
‘project’ encompasses more than the physical structure that is 
designed and constructed. It includes the social setting where 
the project is located as well as the people who will operate, 
manage and benefi t from the project. Successful development 
projects thus need be collectively cared for, viewed as a public 
asset, and managed for the common good (Ratner and Gutiér-
rez, 2004).154
153 Davis, J., and Brikké, F. 1995. Making your water supply work: Operation and mainte-
nance of small water supply systems. IRC International Water and Sanitation Centre, 
Th e Hague, Netherlands.
154 Ratner, B.D., and Gutiérrez, A. R. 2004. Reasserting community: Th e social challenge 
of wastewater management in Panajachel, Guatemala. Human Organization, Vol. 63, 
No.1, pp.47–56.
Applying a life cycle thinking approach can help assess the sus-
tainability of a project. Th e fi ve life stages of a water and sani-
tation project in a development setting are: needs assessment, 
conceptual designs and feasibility, design and action planning, 
implementation and operation, and maintenance. Further-
more, in the development setting, the pillars of sustainability 
are best viewed as fi ve aspects: socio-cultural respect, commu-
nity participation, political cohesion, economic sustainability 
and environmental sustainability (McConville and Mihelcic, 
2007).155
It is also important to not separate development from 
improvements in public health (consider that eight of the 
sixteen Millennium Development Goal targets are directly 
related to health). For example, almost one half of the risk 
that contributes to the environmental burden of disease in 
the world is associated with poor access to drinking water and 
sanitation. Much of the other half results from exposure to 
indoor and urban air pollution. In general terms, Risk = Hazard 
x Exposure.
In green chemistry, risk is minimized by reducing or eliminat-
ing the hazard through use of completely benign materials or 
chemicals so there is no need to control exposure (Mihelcic 
and Zimmerman, 2008). In contrast, when considering the risk 
associated with indoor air pollution from burning solid fuels 
for cooking and heating, reducing (or eliminating) the expo-
sure may be the preferred pathway to reduce (or eliminate) 
the risk even if the hazard remains high. Th is is because in this 
situation, the economic cost for a household to move up the 
 energy ladder and use a fuel source that reduces the hazard 
associated with fi ne particulate matter may not be economi-
cally feasible. 
Reducing risk in this situation can be accomplished through 
use of technologies such as more efficient cook stoves or 
improved ventilation that reduces exposure. Changes in per-
sonal behaviour can also reduce exposure but are perhaps the 
most diffi  cult modifi cation to implement, especially when 
they involve a practice as commonplace as cooking, watching 
children, or heating a home. For example, having all non-cooks 
stay out of the cooking space during cooking appears to be a 
simple way of reducing exposure, but could be complicated 
because of the social aspect of conversation between cooks 
and non-cooks or the care-giving responsibilities of women 
(Mihelcic et al., 2008).
In terms of solid waste management, it is common for ‘scav-
engers’ – the ‘informal sector’ – to participate in solid waste 
management activities in developing countries. Scavenging 
can be viewed as a form of waste processing, similar to ‘hand 
155 McConville, J.R., and Mihelcic, J.R. 2007. Adapting life-cycle thinking tools to evaluate 
project sustainability in international water and sanitation development work. Envi-
ronmental Engineering Science, Vol.24, No.7, pp.937–948.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   288 14/09/10   15:35:02
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
289
and mechanical separation’ processing used in many parts of 
the world. However, in this case, it is critical that the engineer 
works with the scavenging community to ensure that their 
important contribution is maintained while recognizing the 
need to provide scavengers better access to immunizations, 
healthcare,  education and microenterprise activities (Mihelcic 
et al., 2008). 156
Engineered solutions also have a geographical context. For 
example, it may be that peri-urban residents better under-
stand the need for a project compared to their rural counter-
parts because of the increased pollution concentration related 
to the high population density. Benefi ciaries in rural and peri-
urban locations often determine the need for, and the process 
to, implement, a project that directly aff ects them. Th us, rural 
and peri-urban benefi ciaries may be involved in the majority 
of the project process. However, in urban situations the benefi -
ciaries take on the role of a customer by paying policy-makers 
and the private sector to meet their needs (Ahrens and Mihel-
cic, 2006).157
Geography is of course also related to climate. For exam-
ple, materials procurement is made more diffi  cult, not only 
because of unreliable  transportation and illness, but also from 
harsh weather, seasonal work and holiday calendars. Agricul-
ture follows a strict schedule, so construction projects must 
incorporate fl exibility to accommodate the seasonal calendar 
(Mihelcic and Zimmerman, 2008).158 Water availability may 
also be an important barrier to selecting a particular sanita-
tion technology (Fry et al., 2008).159
Lastly, many incommunicable diseases related to risk fac-
tors such as being overweight and physical inactivity can be 
improved by sustainable approaches to engineering. One 
example is for engineers to provide several mobility options 
to members of a community that wish to access work, goods, 
services and  education. Th is means the engineer needs to think 
beyond personal vehicle use and consider mobility through 
bicycling, walking, telecommuting or the use of shared public 
transit and a shared personal vehicle when planning a com-
munity.   
156 Mihelcic, J.R., L.M. Fry, E.A. Myre, L.D. Phillips and B.D. Barkdoll. 2008. Field Guide in 
Environmental Engineering for Development Workers: Water, Sanitation, Indoor Air, 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) Press, Reston, VA.
157 Ahrens, B.T., and Mihelcic, J.R. 2006. Making Wastewater Construction Projects Sus-
tainable in Urban, Rural, and Peri-Urban Areas. Journal of Engineering for Sustainable 
Development: Energy, Environment, Health, Vol.1, No.1, pp.13–32.
158 Mihelcic, J.R., and  J.B. Zimmerman. 2008. Environmental Engineering: Fundamentals, 
Sustainability, Design, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
159 Fry, L. M., J.R. Mihelcic and D.W. Watkins. 2008. Water and Nonwater-related Chal-
lenges of Achieving Global Sanitation Coverage, Environmental Science & Technology, 
Vol.42, No.12, pp.4298–4304.
Energy6.2.3 
Jorge Spitalnik , Peter Greenwood 
and Darrel Danyluk
Th e world will have to bring about a better quality of life to 
substantial numbers of people by providing access to aff ord-
able  energy and, at the same time, it will need to mitigate 
and adapt to  climate change. Eff ective and feasible choices 
of  energy source,  energy technology, and end-user effi  ciency 
will make a major contribution to addressing this challenge. 
Th ese choices will have to be made in a transparent and pro-
fessional manner. Several branches of engineering will play 
key roles even in the assessment and decision phases of this 
process.
Two billion people are without access to aff ordable and clean 
 energy services and as many again are without reliable access. 
Yet, access to  energy is key to achieving all of the  Millennium 
Development Goals. To meet basic human needs, it will be 
necessary to provide  energy for all through access to reliable 
and aff ordable  energy services, giving particular attention to 
the urban and rural poor.
Climate change is recognized as a global  sustainable develop-
ment challenge with strong social, economic and environmen-
tal dimensions. Climate change is attributed to anthropogenic 
sources – excessive greenhouse gas emissions from human 
 energy production and consumption.
It is widely acknowledged that existing solutions are not yet 
suffi  cient for meeting the world’s growing  energy needs in a 
sustainable manner. Th ough  energy technologies are rapidly 
developing, much work and  innovation are still needed to 
bring about substantial changes in  energy for heating,  trans-
portation and electricity as well as in  energy effi  ciency, con-
servation and behaviour. It is essential to change unsustainable 
patterns of consumption and this will require diffi  cult cultural 
adjustment in some countries.  
Determining the technological, economic and environmental 
feasibility of an  energy option is one of the chief roles asked of 
the engineering profession. Engineers are actively involved in 
the development and implementation of technologies used 
to generate  energy; indeed, engineers design, build, operate, 
maintain and decommission the  energy systems of the world. 
Sustainable  energy policies need to conform to realistic and 
factual conditions; scientifi cally sound and thoroughly engi-
neered solutions are the only way to address the issues of 
 energy sustainability.
Issues
To meet basic human needs and facilitate achievement of the 
 Millennium Development Goals, it will be necessary to provide 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   289 14/09/10   15:35:02
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
290
 energy for all and access to reliable and aff ordable  energy serv-
ices, giving particular attention to the rural and urban poor.
Energy is crucial for  sustainable development. A sophisticated 
 energy mix that employs mature and feasible technologies 
will be needed in most countries. Ambitious but acceptable 
limits for greenhouse gas emissions must be managed, call-
ing for ever-greater  international cooperation. Priority should 
be given to exploring carbon sequestration schemes for fossil 
fuel utilization, ensuring the highest state-of-the-art  standards 
of safety and non-proliferation for nuclear  energy,  innova-
tion for higher effi  ciencies of  renewable energies, designing 
compromises for agricultural land usage and population dis-
placement for hydropower and developing technologies for 
 energy effi  ciency and conservation. Decisions on the use of a 
given technology that could contribute to sustainable  energy 
development require a thorough analysis of technological and 
economic feasibility; the technology of a proposed solution 
should be available at the time the need for it becomes appar-
ent and the  energy it provides should be aff ordable for the 
majority of the population. 
Th ere exists a relationship between quality of life and per cap-
ita consumption of  energy. Indeed, the Human Development 
Index shows a close link between increasing quality of life in a 
given country and an increase in  energy use per capita. In gen-
eral, a high quality of life is currently achieved with a per capita 
consumption of 100 billion to 150 billion joules of  energy. If 
the countries currently exceeding this level could decrease 
their  energy consumption to within this range, their quality of 
life would be maintained and global resources would be better 
preserved and utilized, particularly among countries at diff er-
ent stages of development.
Signifi cant diff erences exist between developed and develop-
ing countries, and  energy policies must be very context-spe-
cifi c; they do not translate from one country to another. Th ere 
is no universal solution for making sustainable  energy available 
globally, but developing countries can learn from the lessons 
of developed countries. Th e optimal  energy mix for any coun-
try will depend on, among others, its available natural resource 
base, population distribution, predicted growth of  energy 
demand and its engineering and economic capacity. Energy 
solutions for developed countries are not always adequate in 
developing countries because, for example, developing coun-
tries often see much higher annual growth rates in demand. 
In developed countries, growth in demand is more stable, at 
around 1 per cent to 2 per cent per year, than in developing 
countries where it can reach about 4 per cent to 5 per cent. 
Add to this the phenomenon of strong urban migration and 
huge  energy needs are being further concentrated in emerging 
mega-cities. Electricity grids in some developed countries have 
experienced major national and international failures due to a 
lack of capacity and investment; even ‘stable’ rates of  energy 
demand can cause instabilities in  energy supply.
Predictions of  energy consumption in developed and develop-
ing countries show that, in a short space of time, demand for 
primary  energy in developing countries will overtake that of 
developed countries. Sooner or later this may cause supply 
disturbances to developed countries, since much of the  energy 
they are exploiting in developing countries will be taken out of 
the export market to satisfy local demand.
Biofuels (separate from biogas, biomass and so on) have 
been developing in many countries, usually as fuel additives, 
to increase  energy security, reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
and stimulate rural development. However, economic, social 
and environmental issues limit the extent to which these goals 
can be met with current biofuel technologies; there are serious 
concerns about whether they do in fact reduce greenhouse 
gases overall as well as the eff ect they are having on landuse, 
biodiversity and food prices. First generation biofuels, such as 
bioethanol and biodiesel, are only economically competitive 
with fossil fuels in the most effi  cient agricultural production 
markets and under favourable market conditions of high oil 
prices and low feedstock prices. One of the potential new 
risks for drylands is growing biofuel crops using unsustain-
able cultivation practices, leading to accelerated soil erosion 
and desertifi cation. Growing biofuel crops – using sustain-
able cultivation practices – on semi-arid and sub-humid lands 
unsuitable for food production would not compete with food 
production and could help rehabilitate those lands. A shift 
towards cellulose-based second generation biofuels, using 
wood and grassy crops, would off er greater net reductions 
emissions and use less land, but technical breakthroughs are 
required. Th e potential for second generation biofuels that are 
economically, environmentally and socially sustainable need 
to be thoroughly researched, involving modern agricultural 
engineering tools.
Challenges
Th e main challenges the world is going to face in the near 
future are centred on the explosion of  energy demand, mainly 
in developing countries, and on the constraints imposed by 
 climate change on greenhouse gases emissions that will need 
to be drastically abated.
Given that fossil fuels will continue to play a dominant role in 
the  energy mix in the decades to come, the development and 
use of advanced and cleaner fossil fuel technologies should be 
increased. Hybrid technologies that use both fossil fuels and 
other  energy sources may become more aff ordable and feasi-
ble on a larger scale.
Th ere is also considerable scope for improving  energy effi  -
ciency in households, transport and industry. Energy effi-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   290 14/09/10   15:35:02
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
291
ciency and economy is fundamental to reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions, and is increasingly important for the fi nancial 
economy with the cost of  energy rising around the world. 
Many  energy effi  cient technologies however require the use 
of more complex and uncommon systems and materials and 
have long pay-back times; these are important considerations 
before they can be viable for the population at large.
At present, the cost of  energy from renewable and sustainable 
sources is higher than the cost of  energy from non-renewable 
and unsustainable sources (although this is the subject of 
debate). Renewable sources (such as solar photovoltaic, wind 
and hydropower), even without the benefi t of economies of 
scale, are ideal for use in situations where the  energy demand 
is growing slowly or in places far from high-consumption cen-
tres. Engineering eff orts are currently needed to lower the cost 
of renewable generation and also to fi nd feasible technologies 
for  renewable  energy storage (such as hydrogen fuels cells) and 
distribution (such as distributed generation for small-scale 
renewable sources).
In the  transportation sector, actions for promoting cleaner 
fuels and vehicles must be complemented by policies to 
reduce the overall demand for personal vehicle use, particu-
larly by encouraging public transport. Modifying unsustain-
able  transportation  energy consumption patterns will require 
politically diffi  cult cultural adjustments.
Th ere is great urgency to design and implement measures for 
both mitigation and adaptation towards unavoidable  climate 
change eff ects, including upgrading  infrastructure to withstand 
the impacts of extreme weather events and ‘climate proofi ng’ of 
new projects. Development, deployment and diff usion of low-
carbon  energy technologies, together with  energy effi  ciency, 
 renewable  energy and cleaner and advanced technologies for 
 energy supply, will require intense engineering ingenuity.
Industrial development requires secure, sustainable  energy and 
this specifi cally applies to the economies of developing coun-
tries. Energy effi  ciency is to be considered indispensable to 
enhancing industrial development. For addressing the serious 
problem of urban air pollution as well as problems of  climate 
change, the use of cleaner  energy technologies and  renewable 
 energy will be essential. Ensuring industrial competitiveness 
requires building the required  infrastructure, including the 
 energy supply, transport availability, trained manpower and 
environmental regulatory systems. Special capacity-building 
eff orts will be required to provide engineering professionals 
with up-to-date knowledge on the diverse technologies for 
sustainable  energy generation.
Engineering and civil  society
Society and decision-makers must realize that analysis of the 
feasibility and the technological availability of  energy options 
is necessary in any technical and engineering issue. 
Th ere is no uniform treatment for solving globally sustainable 
 energy problems. Recognition of technical facts related to 
the development situation of diff erent countries is required 
to achieve realistic and sustainable  energy solutions. 
Energy options to solve problems of  sustainable develop-
ment cannot be selected on the basis of doctrine or ideology. 
Scientifi cally sound and thoroughly engineered solutions 
are the only way to address the problems of  energy sustain-
ability.
Th e engineering profession is continuously generating new 
knowledge and adapting to new challenges. Th e engineering 
profession is, every day, anticipating, planning and prepar-
ing for these challenges. However, better engagement is still 
needed with civil  society in general, industry and, in particular, 
all levels of government to respond to the  energy challenges 
facing humankind.
 Off shore wind turbines have enormous potential in many parts 
of the world.
©
 G
FD
L 
- W
ik
im
ed
ia
 - 
Ly
ca
on
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   291 14/09/10   15:35:02
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
292
Transportation6.2.4 
Tony Ridley
Transport is the movement of people and goods from mul-
tiple origins to multiple destinations by whatever means. It 
includes walking and cycling, shipping, pipelines and air, as well 
as wheeled transport. But addressing transport problems goes 
beyond considering the technology of transport.
All people desire access to people, activities and the resources 
necessary to lead a fulfi lled life; access that is aff ordable, safe, 
secure, comfortable and convenient. Furthermore, no one 
wants to be adversely aff ected by other people’s use of trans-
port. Transport systems could be much better, providing greater 
enjoyment and quality of life to more people, with less environ-
mental impact and far fewer deaths and injuries.
Hardy Cross was a great twentieth century American Professor 
of Civil Engineering and an engineering philosopher. Prof. Cross 
considered engineering to be part of a trilogy; pure  science, 
applied science and engineering (Cross, 1952).160 Th is trilogy is 
only part of a triad of trilogies into which engineering fi ts. Th e 
fi rst is pure science, applied science and engineering. Th e sec-
ond is economic theory, fi nance and engineering, and the third 
is social relations, industrial relations and engineering. Many 
engineering problems are as closely allied to social problems as 
they are to pure science. Th e limitations of academic classifi ca-
tions are notorious; the workaday world does not fi t into an 
academic department or into so-called fi elds of learning. We 
need to consider the whole person, and the whole community 
in which they live and work.
Th ose who work in engineering are likely to fi nd themselves 
in contact with almost every phase of human activity. Not 
only must engineers make important decisions about the 
mere mechanical outline of structures and machines, they 
are also confronted with the problems of human reactions to 
the environment and are constantly involved in problems of 
law, economics and sociology. Herein lies the challenge and 
the complexity of transport. Meanwhile, people and goods 
are travelling more, further and faster. Indeed, there is increas-
ing concern for ‘carbon miles’ created by the consumption of 
products from around the world. My father, for example, fi rst 
travelled from Northeast England to London in 1924, sailing 
to the Th ames as a passenger on a coal boat. I fi rst travelled to 
London, by car with my parents, at the age of 14. My young-
est son, Michael, had already travelled twice around the world 
by air by the time he was 12 years old when we lived in Hong 
Kong.
160 Cross, Hardy. 1952. Engineers and Ivory Towers. New York: Ayer.
Transport is therefore enormously complex. At any time in a 
transport network there is a balance between demand and 
supply, strongly infl uenced by price. Demand is infl uenced by a 
whole series of determinants: population, employment, land-
use patterns, wealth and so on. As demand rises asymptoti-
cally towards capacity the fl ow of movement slows down and, 
more importantly, reliability deteriorates rapidly.
Th e word ‘network’ is central. Th eoreticians carry out intricate 
mathematical calculations to describe the fl ow along a single 
traffi  c artery. Such calculations are further compounded when 
the moving vehicles do not have uniform behaviour character-
istics and the capacity of the artery is not an absolute number. 
Th is is certainly true of roads, but also applies to rail and air 
transport. In terms of effi  ciency, and customer satisfaction, 
there are great advantages in fi nding a balance in which satis-
fi ed demand (fl ow) at any point in a network is within capacity 
by a suffi  cient margin to avoid congestion and to enable reli-
able operation. Th e theory of networks is a branch of applied 
mathematics in its own right, showing enormous complexities 
even when the fl ow of traffi  c can be assumed to be uniform. 
It can be imagined what is involved when the demand char-
acteristics of people and goods are also taken into account, 
together with somewhat elastic measures of capacity and 
complex pricing mechanisms.
Governments must develop and implement transport strate-
gies, not least to provide the leadership and framework within 
which private companies, entrepreneurs, private funding and 
public authorities can deliver transport services, whatever 
they may be. Transport strategies, also, must be clear to the 
entire public whether motorist, pedestrian or passenger, and 
whether young or old; or those working in transport, whether 
as a developer, contractor, fi nancier, traffi  c engineer or retailer. 
It is vital to ensure that everyone understands that compro-
mises are necessary. Mobility without regard for environmen-
tal protection is no more satisfactory than environmental 
protection without regard to the contribution of transport to 
quality of life.
Electronic and information technology has the possibility 
to transform our use of transport systems, to save lives and 
money, and to protect the environment. Th e speed of vehicles 
could be regulated to ensure the safety of other road users. 
Such control would make a major contribution to the safety of 
pedestrians. Much is rightly said about the divide between the 
rich and the poor, but worldwide, one of the greatest divides 
is between those inside and outside of automobiles. Transport 
engineers need to strive to bring safety  standards on the roads 
towards what is achieved by public transport and air trans-
port. Doing so would provide a boost for walking and cycling. 
Also, manufacturers have made major investments that are 
now producing automobiles with much improved fuel con-
sumption and also reduced emissions, which is of particular 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   292 14/09/10   15:35:04
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
293
importance in urban areas as recent publicity about problems 
in developing countries, not least in Chinese cities, has been 
highlighted.
Actual and potential  innovations in transport 
technology 
Technology can greatly increase the capacity of roads. On main 
roads, convoy driving systems could be operated by automatic 
control over vehicle speed and direction. By these means we 
would signifi cantly increase the capacity of the road system. 
It is also becoming increasingly possible to manage demand 
for road transport by the use of road user pricing, such as has 
been developed for Singapore and London.
Technology is increasingly being used to inform bus passengers 
about waiting times, and to provide dial-a-ride systems. Th e 
use of navigation systems is becoming rapidly more common 
in freight distribution systems, to monitor vehicle position and 
delivery time prediction, and for route choice guidance. Tech-
nological development is also making it increasingly possible 
to introduce cashless ticketing systems for public transport.
One of the most important contributions of technology to 
transport is the rate of cost reduction of components. Th us, 
cost should not be the constraint that it is in many cases of 
 infrastructure building. 
Material science is developing rapidly. New materials open the 
possibility for lighter, stronger, safer structures. In transport, 
lightweight brings the benefi t of reduced  energy consumption 
and hence reduced emission of pollutants. Materials are also 
being developed that work at higher temperatures, allowing 
power systems to convert more of the available  energy into 
motion.
But materials must also be practical in use. Invention is not 
suffi  cient. History has many examples of failed technology, 
where performance gains were outweighed by maintenance or 
reliability problems. However there are a series of technology 
developments that hold out hope for all forms of transport, 
whether by road, rail, air or other means: self-monitoring mate-
rials by the inclusion of optical fi bres in bridge or other struc-
tures; self-repairing materials; intelligent materials that have 
been developed by examining how dolphins and sharks are 
able to eliminate eddies and encourage smooth low-drag lam-
inar fl ow; biodegradable materials; nano-fi bres; high-strength 
metal alloys; super-conducting materials; and bio-engineered 
materials that are likely to produce signifi cant advances for 
disabled people.
Manufacturers have made major investments that are now 
producing automobiles with much improved fuel consump-
tion and also with reduced emissions, as previously men-
tioned. 
Th e railway industry is working hard to maintain its reputa-
tion for environmental friendliness through pollution reduc-
tion and by regenerative braking, whereby the waste of  energy 
invested in vehicle motion with ordinary braking systems is 
able to recycle, and thus save  energy.
Th e  energy effi  ciency of large marine diesels and gas turbines 
can exceed 30 per cent. Further improvements could be 
achieved with combined-cycle systems that use the waste heat 
 Th e Shanghai Airport 
Maglev Train is the world’s 
fastest commercial train.
In transport, it is essential to have an understanding of the 
following propositions:
transport is essentially concerned with the movement  ■
of people and goods, rather than of vehicles; 
transport is now a major environmental issue;  ■
transport policy should be founded on a statement of  ■
social and economic policies ;
governments must develop, or ensure that others  ■
develop, strategic/corporate plans; 
congested and poorly coordinated transport systems  ■
are approaching a state of  emergency;
transport is, in general, too cheap;  ■
travel demand overall is increasing at a rate substantially  ■
faster than the capacity to absorb it; 
no major decisions on landuse should be taken without  ■
regard to the transport implications, and vice-versa;
urban areas provide much of a county’s wealth and the  ■
source of much of the growth of GDP; 
good transport is a necessary, but not sufficient,  ■
condition for urban development or regeneration; 
adequate access for freight is essential to the well-being  ■
of urban areas; 
the country, and in particular urban areas, must make  ■
the most of whatever transport  infrastructure exists at 
any one time; 
such physical  ■  infrastructure as is justifi ed should be put 
in place as expeditiously as possible; 
managerial efficiency and accountability requires  ■
transport provision by small rather than large units; 
and
transport should not be the preserve of either the  ■
public sector or the private sector alone.
©
 W
ik
im
ed
ia
 - 
Al
ex
 N
ee
dh
am
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   293 14/09/10   15:35:04
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
294
in the exhaust stream to power a steam turbine. In fast vessels, 
weight acts as a constraint. Reducing hull drag and increasing 
the effi  ciencies of propellers will make valuable contributions 
to  energy consumption. 
Aviation gas turbines can approach effi  ciencies of 40 per cent, 
and further improvements may come from raising operating 
temperatures through the use of ceramic components. Pro-
pulsive effi  ciencies of engines can be improved by using high 
bypass ratios with large diameter fans, and improvements in 
fuel consumption may be possible. Eliminating skin turbu-
lence can, in theory, reduce total aircraft drag by up to 40 per 
cent. Air pollution from gas turbine emissions could be further 
reduced by using low sulphur fuels and introducing catalysts 
within the combustion chamber.
Transport solutions must take a holistic approach to trans-
port problems in future. Debate about single solutions makes 
no contribution to the problems of transport, which is, by 
its very nature, systemic and must be integrated. For exam-
ple, there is far too much debate in many countries about 
road versus rail, or about demand restraint versus increasing 
capacity. Singapore perhaps provides a good example of the 
correct approach: urban railways, modern buses, demand 
management, eff ective transport interchanges, road build-
ing (including urban roads in tunnels) and landuse planning 
in partnership with transport planning. Transport develop-
ments will require good science and the full participation of 
politicians and industrialists. But, ultimately it is the engineer 
who will deliver progress.
Communications6.2.5 
Yixin Zhong
 Communication Engineering is about implementing tech-
nologies that support information sharing and information 
exchange, conveniently and globally. Information Engineering 
concerns systems that support data and communication serv-
ices, covering information collection, processing, storage and 
utilization, and so on. 
Th e integration of communication and information engineer-
ing has led to a new generation of  infrastructure and the emer-
gence of the ‘information  society’. Such  infrastructure can be 
seen as a huge and advanced platform for performing many 
of the required functions for intellectual activities, as outlined 
in Figure 1.
From this, we can begin to recognize the potential of com-
munication and information engineering to provide humans 
with technologies that may be as intelligent as human beings 
themselves. At present, however, the full value of communi-
cation and information engineering is yet to be realized and 
there remains signifi cant potential for discovery in this exciting 
area of engineering.
Th e capabilities that  communications and information engi-
neering currently provides us with includes almost anything 
related to the social and  economic development such as 
weather  forecasting, e-commerce, e-governance, healthcare, 
environmental monitoring and protection,  disaster warnings, 
quality control,  education and learning,  research activities, 
enhancement of sports, contributions to culture, community 
development, and so on. New communication and informa-
tion technologies have a particularly important role to play in 
situations where more traditional means of communication 
are impossible. A typical example of this might be found in 
a response to an  emergency situation, where the capability 
 Th e Tata Nano puts car 
ownership within reach of 
millions more in India.
Transport engineering can be described in terms of various charac-
teristics: capacity, cost, demand, regularity, reliability, safety and sup-
ply. Its customers have various characteristics: age, gender, wealth, 
car ownership, and there are a wide variety of types of freight to 
be moved. A signifi cant part of the skill and training of an engineer 
is having knowledge of engineering materials. Th e transport engi-
neer has to deal with perhaps the most diffi  cult material of all – the 
human being. Transport is conventionally, and perhaps unhappily, 
divided by mode: bus, rail, road, sea, air, and may also be described 
in terms of  infrastructure and equipment such as aircraft, bridges, 
automobiles, signalling, tunnels and trains.
Transport is about more than technology, but what about technol-
ogy? A great amount of engineering  research and development is 
focused on improving transport, and minimizing its impact on the 
environment, particularly the use of electronic and information 
technology, materials and  energy.
Transport engineering
©
 C
CB
YS
A 
- W
ik
im
ed
ia
 - 
N
ik
ku
l)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   294 14/09/10   15:35:05
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
295
provided by communication and information engineering 
reduced the loss of life; in Southern and Eastern China, a  dis-
aster situation emerged in early 2008 caused by an extremely 
heavy snowstorm where most forms of  transportation, such as 
railways, roads and air, were impossible, but mobile  communi-
cations were still eff ective.
 Communication and information engineering is now facing 
at least three grand challenges, involving technological, eco-
nomic and ethical issues:
First, the technology itself is not yet mature enough, and the 
applications and services it can provide are far from being intel-
ligent. Scientifi c  research to address this challenge, particularly 
in the fi elds of artifi cial intelligence and enhanced networks, is 
being conducted around the world.
Second, any technology may be viewed as a double-edged 
sword. Whilst providing many good capabilities to societies, 
technology can also introduce severe problems as it does not 
discriminate with respect to its use. Th e Internet provides typi-
cal examples as it acts as a convenient platform for both rapid 
information sharing, exchange and expression, and for crimi-
nal activities and abuses. To successfully address this challenge, 
not only must Internet technologies become practically more 
secure, but an eff ort must be made when considering the 
wider ethical issues surrounding the platform (for example, 
the work of the Internet Governance Forum).
Th e third grand challenge, and perhaps the most serious, is 
from an economic and ethical dimension. Th e successful capa-
bilities provided by communication and information engi-
neering have led many countries into a ‘knowledge  society’, 
reinforcing a high level of economic activity and a high  stand-
ard of living. Th e rest of the world, however, are agricultural or 
industrializing societies that cannot develop quickly enough, 
even to keep pace with the technology available. Th is diff er-
ence is referred to as the ‘Digital Divide’ or ‘Information Divide’ 
as well as the ‘Knowledge Divide’. Th e response to this chal-
lenge must go beyond simply transferring the technologies, 
or even the skills needed for such technologies, and economic 
and even cultural assistance is essential.
Asset, reliability and 6.2.6 
maintenance management
Yousef Ibrahim161
Maintenance and asset management is a multidisciplinary 
area that focuses on technical and administrative activities 
intended to ensure equipment or  infrastructure is kept in a 
good operational state. Most large corporations and org-
anizations are keen to enhance performance by investing in 
maintenance management, partly because a great deal can be 
achieved at limited cost.  Asset management and maintenance 
need to be viewed as revenue generating and productive 
activities, rather than costs to be borne. Maintenance should 
also be viewed as a signifi cant factor in enhancing the life cycle 
performance and productivity of equipment and  infrastruc-
ture. Enhanced asset management and maintenance practice 
and culture is particularly required in helping least developed 
countries to counter problems of key equipment and  infra-
structure downtime and disrepair.
Traditionally, maintenance has been treated as a running cost 
or cost overhead, in terms of cost of maintenance, rather than 
cost of lost production and lost reputation. A measure of the 
161 Th is material is abridged from the UNESCO Toolkit on Management of Maintenance 
by Yousef Ibrahim, Monash University, Melbourne,  Australia, UNESCO, 2006, with 
additional input by Tony Marjoram. 
Information
Processing
Knowledge
Formation
Strategy
Creation
Strategy
Transfering
Strategy
Execution
Problem &
Environment
Information
Transfering
Information
Acquisition
INFORMATION
 COMMUNICATION
INFORMATION
Information Strategy
Strategy
Information
Information
Knowledge
Knowledge
Information
ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
Figure 1: Th e integration of communication and information engineering
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   295 14/09/10   15:35:06
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
296
eff ectiveness of maintenance practice, linking performance to 
maintenance, is useful in advocacy for maintenance. Th is is the 
purpose of Life Cycle Cost (LCC) and Life Cycle Profi t (LCP) 
analysis. Terotechnology – the ‘science of maintenance’ from 
the Greek word terin meaning to guard or look after – links the 
specifi cation, design, production, installation, operation and 
maintenance of equipment to life cycle analysis, and fi nancial 
and economic factors to facilitate the more eff ective manage-
ment of maintenance.
Th e focus here is on the need for the enhancement of asset, 
reliability and maintenance management, and the promotion 
of a culture of maintenance. Th e importance of maintenance 
management in terms of economics as well as technology will 
be presented in an introduction to maintenance engineering, 
together with a historic review of the fi eld of ‘terotechnology’ 
– the science of looking after physical assets in the context 
of life cycle costs (LCC) that combines engineering, manage-
ment, economics and fi nance. Reference will also be made 
to maintenance policy, planning and strategy for action, and 
the relationship between terotechnology and management, 
design and accountancy, and the costs of providing mainte-
nance, compared to the costs of not providing maintenance – 
of downtime. Th e use of Reliability Analysis techniques is also 
discussed, as well as techniques of Total Productive Mainte-
nance (TPM) and maintenance performance indices, and their 
impact on maintenance practice. Th e presentation concludes 
with a discussion of benchmarking and best practice in main-
tenance performance.
Maintenance management
Since the Industrial Revolution, maintenance has evolved 
through four main phases:
First phase: up to the 1940s and the Second World War  ■
when there was less equipment that was less complex, often 
over-designed and more easily repairable by less qualifi ed 
staff  such  that downtime was less critical, with less need for 
systematic maintenance and a ‘if it ain’t broken then don’t 
fi x it’ approach.
Second phase: during and after the Second World War there  ■
was an increase in mechanization, complexity and cost of 
machines and equipment, which was less over-designed, 
requiring more trained and systematic maintenance. Down-
time became more critical and the cost of maintenance 
increased, as did the interest in preventive maintenance, 
maintenance planning and control systems to maximize 
asset performance and lifespan. 
Th ird phase: began in the 1970s with the increasing aware- ■
ness of the complexity of asset management and interest in 
life cycle costs and terotechnology, including specifi cations, 
design and reliability of equipment and  infrastructure.
Fourth phase: from the mid-1980s when a change in main- ■
tenance culture took place in response to the increasing 
complexity of assets and asset management, with increas-
ing expectations of better equipment and  infrastructure 
quality, reliability, lifespan, effi  ciency and safety, with lower 
environmental impact. New techniques such as Total Pro-
ductive Maintenance (TPM) and Reliability-Centred Main-
tenance (RCM) were developed, particularly in Japan (for 
example with the Toyota Production System), in response 
to expectations of quality, cost and reliability.
In the development of maintenance management, the following 
fi elds of interest and terminology quickly developed (some of which 
are familiar when one reads reports of crashes and catastrophic fail-
ures of equipment and  infrastructure):
Defi nitions of reliability and maintainability. ■
Concepts relating to failure and modes of failure. ■
Classifi cation of failure by cause. ■
Classifi cation of failure by suddenness. ■
Classifi cation of failure by degree. ■
Occurrence of failure. ■
Mean life. ■
Meant time to failure. ■
Mean time between failures. ■
Maintenance costs and the life cycle approach
The Life Cycle Cost and terotechnology concepts under-
pin modern maintenance management and operate on the 
premise that every product or project, from concept to com-
pletion, has associated and changing costs that can be ana-
lysed in real time and used as part of a powerful management 
decision-making technique. Apart from maintenance and 
management, the concept of LCC and terotechnology also 
underpins management decisions relating to design, produc-
tion, organizational performance and profi tability. 
In terms of maintenance economics, the costs of providing 
maintenance services consist of the direct costs of labour, 
materials/spares and overheads. Th e indirect costs relating 
to not providing maintenance services consist of downtime 
costs of unused labour, depreciation and other fi xed operating 
costs, lost production, contracts and reputation, which may 
be signifi cantly higher. One of the constraints facing mainte-
nance management in companies and organizations relates to 
budgetary allocations and planning. Th e main running costs 
relate to the operating budget, whereas the acquisition and 
maintenance of equipment and  infrastructure usually relate 
to the capital budget. In many situations the maintenance 
budget is regarded as a lesser priority, especially at times of 
economic downturn, even though this may be a false economy 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   296 14/09/10   15:35:06
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
297
in the longer term. Th is may be countered to some degree by 
the use of better cost reporting of maintenance and the use of 
‘Z Charts’ of maintenance cost information that compensate 
for annual fl uctuations.
In a case study of a typical sugar milling industry consisting of 
four mills in a developing country it is estimated that approxi-
mately 25 per cent of costs are attributable to maintenance-
related activities, mainly on labour costs. Th e company has no 
control over the price of sugar, so its ability to survive mainly 
depends on operational effi  ciency and the containment of cost, 
and fall particularly on the cost of maintenance. Maintenance 
activities in the four mills suff ered as a result of this neglect, 
with maintenance activities depending mainly on the skill and 
inventiveness of maintenance staff  at each mill; recalling to 
memory the ‘smell of an oily rag’ portrayals of the operation 
of ageing machines and technology in the fi lm world. In this 
case, a lack of management interest was refl ected in the lack of 
any systematic approach and absence of maintenance records. 
With an asset value of US$6 million, direct maintenance at the 
four mills cost around US$10 million per year. Indirect costs 
not only increased the costs of production, but also reduced 
total output due to wastage, and lead to lost income to the 
mills, the sugar cane farmers, industry, and export income and 
credibility. A planned and systematic approach to mainte-
nance could have considerably reduced these losses and costs, 
and at less overall cost.
In an interesting study on the culture of maintenance for 
 sustainable development in Tanzania, it was reported that 
the effi  cient and eff ective maintenance of production and 
 infrastructure facilities in Tanzania and similar economies is 
rooted in a broad-based social appreciation of the value of 
the facilities in question.162 Th ey also identifi ed a major chal-
lenge facing development in such economies as the need to 
instil, nurture, upgrade, enhance and maintain a set of social 
and cultural attitudes, beliefs and empowerment that attach 
value, signifi cance and importance of, and care for, public and 
private equipment and  infrastructure. Th is is seen as the key 
to effi  cient and eff ective maintenance, which in turn forms an 
essential condition for long-term competitiveness and  sustain-
able development.
Maintainability and reliability
While maintenance relates to the actions required to keep 
equipment and  infrastructure in an eff ective operational con-
dition, the maintainability of equipment and  infrastructure is 
defi ned by its ability to be maintained. Th e maintainability of 
equipment and  infrastructure is primarily a design factor, but 
importantly also relates to maintenance, operability and per-
formance, and also importantly to the human factor. Design 
162 Bavu, I. K., Sheya, M. S., Mlawa, H. M., and Kawambwa, S. J. 1997. Culture of Maintenance 
For Sustainable Development in Tanzania, Institute of Technology Management, Dar es 
Salaam, Tanzania.
factors for maintainability include design specifi cations and 
materials. Maintenance factors include the ease and regular-
ity of maintenance of the equipment required. Human factors 
include required skills, training and experience. Maintain-
ability relates to the costs of downtime and labour. Maintain-
ability requires planning in the context of design, human and 
system conditions and requirements. Important issues and 
challenges for engineering in international development relate 
to the maintainability of equipment and  infrastructure in dif-
fering conditions of climate, available skills and maintenance 
resources, and in turn relate to technological appropriateness 
and choice, and the modes of technology transfer.
Reliability relates to the ability and probability of success of 
equipment and  infrastructure to perform required functions 
under stated conditions and periods of time. Th e reliability of 
equipment relates to quality and is an important considera-
tion for maintenance management, in so far as it is expected 
that better quality items are more reliable and will need less 
maintenance; the question then being one of balance between 
cost and desired reliability. Apart from quality, factors aff ecting 
reliability include production methods, operation and mainte-
nance techniques. Reliability may be observed, assessed, extrap-
olated or predicted, and is the subject of mathematical analysis. 
Reliability-Centred Maintenance (RCM) was introduced in 
the late 1960s in the reliability-critical aviation industry, and 
has now become  standard practice in many other industries. 
RCM focuses on system functions, function failures and con-
sequences of failure, from which information is then used to 
determine appropriate maintenance tasks and procedures.
Th ere are several techniques used in reliability analysis, the 
most widely used being Failure Mode, Eff ects and Criticality 
Analysis (FMECA) and Fault Tree Analysis (FTA). FMECA is the 
most widely used technique and is based on hardware and 
 Th e Huguenot Tunnel 
under construction outside 
Cape Town.
©
 SA
IC
E
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   297 14/09/10   15:35:06
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
298
function failure analysis, both quantitative and non-quantita-
tive, with failure modes classifi ed according to the severity of 
eff ect. Fault Tree Analysis is a more basic form of troubleshoot-
ing to identify and localize faults in systems and equipment. 
Fault tree analyses are often presented as block diagrams and 
should be familiar with readers of motor car and consumer 
equipment manuals. Reliability is sometimes presented in 
terms of common modes of failure, material and non-material 
failure.
Improving maintenance management
Th e functions and activities of maintenance managers and 
engineers varies in companies, organizations and countries, 
in terms of economic, social and cultural conditions, cli-
mate, available skills and maintenance resources, and what 
is expected of maintenance management and engineering in 
terms of maintenance planning, organization, services and 
 standards. Total Productive Maintenance (TPM) is an opera-
tional philosophy and methodology to enhance and optimize 
maintenance performance and efficiency. The main goals 
are to eliminate breakdowns, quality defects and losses due 
to set-up and adjustment, idling and minor stoppages, start-
up and shutdown, reduced speed and capacity. Th e overall 
goal of TPM is to improve equipment and  infrastructure effi  -
ciency and eff ectiveness, to improve performance, products 
and reliability, reduce costs, and enhance teamwork and job 
 satisfaction.
Th e most important factors for the management of mainte-
nance include maintenance scheduling and planning and the 
development of key performance indicators (KPIs) to moni-
tor, evaluate and promote eff ective maintenance. KPIs need 
to have clear strategic objectives that are closely connected 
to core business or organizational goals, aimed at promoting 
success and to facilitate solutions to potential problems. KPIs, 
like maintenance, need to become part of a business or organi-
zational culture. Planning indicators are useful for monitor-
ing the effi  ciency of maintenance planning, and ‘Maintenance 
Ratios’ are a useful way to present maintenance costs com-
pared to other indicators such as the value of assets, sales and 
labour costs, or to compare the hours spent on maintenance 
with other hourly indicators.
A strategy of continuous improvement should be a corner-
stone of maintenance management, and monitoring, evalu-
ation and benchmarking are crucial factors in this activity. 
Benchmarking is the use of external reference for comparison 
to improve internal practice. KPIs are an important part of this 
process. Critical benchmarking factors include clear commu-
nication and understanding of staff  of the role and importance 
of benchmarking, the linking of maintenance to performance 
and productivity, participation in the benchmarking process 
and eff ective implementation of results and follow-up. Bench-
marking should obviously be between similar equipment, 
industries or  infrastructure, and make allowances for diff er-
ences. Steps in the benchmarking process include identifying 
what to benchmark, development of a benchmarking plan 
and choice of data to collect, choice of external references for 
comparison, collection of data, comparison of processes and 
recommendations for improvement, implementation of rec-
ommendations and recalibration of benchmarks.
Benchmarking is also useful to understand one’s own activity 
or organization and how it works, in comparison with similar 
activities and organizations, in developing and implementing 
improvements, monitoring and evaluating results. Effi  cien-
cies gained and savings made are signifi cant justifying and 
motivating factors for benchmarking and the importance of 
maintenance, and helps plant the seed of organizational and 
cultural change among staff  and management.  
Infrastructure development 6.2.7 
in developing countries 
Arvind K. Poothia
Th e development of  infrastructure required to support large 
populations in developing countries is lagging far behind the 
rate of urbanization. It is necessary to focus on integrated 
 infrastructure development, which in turn requires a capacity-
based approach to planning. Th e need is for the creation of 
modern  infrastructure systems for  energy, water, waste man-
agement, sanitation, drainage, transport and habitat in infor-
mal urban settlements in developing countries, while learning 
from the mistakes of developed countries in order to take a 
sustainable and aff ordable approach. 
Th e transformation of land to meet housing needs should be 
on the basis of anticipated growth patterns and environmen-
tal constraints, supported by enabled investment and tech-
nology choice. Th is requires the application of sustainable 
 Concrete bridge in serious 
need of maintenance.
©
 SA
IC
E
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   298 14/09/10   15:35:06
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
299
technologies and, often, changes in the governing regulations; 
 infrastructure development,  economic development and envi-
ronment are interdependent and, therefore, policies for  infra-
structure development need to be approached on the basis of 
all these considerations. Furthermore, the need for improving 
 infrastructure in developing countries calls for a new scientifi c 
approach and techno-economic regime for solutions that can 
be implemented in these resource-poor countries.
Th e following broad areas might be considered when working 
towards ensuring proper  infrastructure development in devel-
oping countries: 
Planning and policy-making: ■  Policies for integrated  infra-
structure development have to be formulated by govern-
ments. Environmental impacts on ecology and water 
supplies and the long-term eff ects need to be understood. 
Th ere is a need for multi- level planning to counter the ill-
eff ects of urban growth (such as regional imbalances and 
informal settlement growth, and so on). Th e urban local 
bodies need to be strengthened further so as to generate 
capability to stimulate new growth centres with suffi  cient 
employment opportunities, and to plan for the process of 
urbanization. Strong institutional mechanisms as well as 
sound strategies for resource mobilization and investment 
are needed.
Providing employment and services in rural areas: ■  Th ere 
is a need for generation of employment opportunities in 
the rural areas to eradicate poverty. Investments have to be 
made in agricultural as well as non -agricultural activities in 
rural areas in order to help address the inequalities between 
the rural and urban areas. Services that should be provided 
should prioritize water and sanitation, public transport, 
health centres, telecommunication facilities, improved 
access to governance structures, schools, vocational train-
ing centres, and economic facilitators such as cooperatives, 
local generation of distributed  energy, and so on. 
Transportation in urban areas: ■  Transportation is a key 
requirement for trade. Proper transport planning allows for 
the provision of an effi  cient and aff ordable transport system 
accessible by all communities, as well as pollution minimiza-
tion and  energy conservation. An integrated multi-modal 
transport system needs to be developed in many ‘mega-
cities’, along with other feeder transport services to rural 
areas. 
Technology intervention and knowledge networks: ■  The 
world is experiencing rapid technological  innovation and 
there is need for disseminating knowledge between coun-
tries. A mechanism for international joint observation of 
 infrastructure development would ensure the dissemina-
tion of knowledge and capabilities that allows lessons to be 
learned from projects around the world, and would raise 
awareness for the need for investment in  infrastructure for 
the needs of the interdependent, globalized economy.
Development of fi nancial  ■  infrastructure: To attract For-
eign Direct Investment (FDI) in the  infrastructure sector, a 
mechanism has to be evolved to help build confi dence in 
the durability of agreements entered into by governments, 
particularly since many major  infrastructure projects by 
international institutions are seen to have failed. National 
capital pools need to be created for fi nancing training and 
 education of local bodies and technical and fi nancial man-
agement, and to handle the diffi  cult issues of land tenure.
Th e World Federation of Engineering Organizations’ Commit-
tee on Engineering and the Environment ( WFEO-CEE) ena-
bles the global engineering profession to address the United 
Nations  Millennium Development Goals through the devel-
opment, application and enhanced understanding of sustain-
able engineering practices, the adaption of  infrastructure to 
the impacts of a changing climate, and through mitigating the 
risks of natural  disasters.
 6.2.8 Infrastructure Report Cards
Kevin Wall and Sam Amod
Infrastructure report cards: international practice
One of the earliest report cards on  infrastructure was pro-
duced in the United States of America in 1988 by their National 
Council on Public Works Improvement. Ten years later the 
American Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE) took over the reins 
and produced the fi rst Report Card on America’s Infrastructure. 
Since then, they have produced updates in 2001, 2003, and 
the most recent in 2005. Th e reports have gradually become 
more detailed and broader in scope so that now reports are 
produced by the State and, in some instances, by the county.
In 2006, fl owing from the 2005 report, ASCE produced an 
action plan appealing to Congress for such actions as estab-
lishing a National Commission on Infrastructure, increasing 
funding for specifi c improvements and, most notably, pro-
moting certain Acts that are presumably under consideration 
by the legislators. Th e ASCE initiative is well funded and is an 
integral part of the lobbying process that is so much a part 
of American public participation culture, as the following 
excerpt testifi es:
Congested highways, overfl owing sewers and corroding bridges 
are constant reminders of the looming crisis that jeopard-
izes our nation’s prosperity and our quality of life. With new 
grades for the fi rst time since 2001, our nation’s  infrastructure 
has shown little to no improvement since receiving a collective 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   299 14/09/10   15:35:06
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
300
D+ in 2001, with some areas sliding toward failing grades. 
Th e American Society of Civil Engineers’ 2005 Report Card for 
America’s Infrastructure assessed the same 12  infrastructure 
categories as in 2001, and added three new categories. 
In the United Kingdom, State of the Nation reports have been 
published annually since 2000. Th e Institution of Civil Engi-
neers (ICE) has also progressively elaborated their product 
to regional reports and they have made their grading more 
sophisticated by incorporating trends and sustainability 
aspects. In his launch of the 2006 Report, ICE President Gor-
don Masterton stated:
‘We need to start answering the questions posed in this 
report. How do we intend to reconcile rising demand for 
water with dwindling resources? Where is our electricity 
going to come from in the future? How can we stop our rub-
bish piling up on landfi ll sites? How do we tackle congestion 
on our roads and railways?
To accomplish this transformation would require changes to 
the law to simplify planning processes, and joined-up govern-
ment with the vision to see the necessity and economic 
benefi t of long-term  infrastructure improvements. And it 
would need the public to be made aware that improvement 
programmes, that could disrupt their daily lives, will reward 
them, their children and generations to come.’
Engineers Australia  produced a national Infrastructure Report 
Card in three categories in 1999 (roads, rail and water), and in 
2003 and 2005 increased this to seven categories. Th ey have 
also subsequently produced State and Territory report cards.
In these cases, the intention has been for engineering profes-
sionals to provide a public opinion on the condition of  infra-
structure in the manner of ‘expert witness’. Th e reception to 
these publications has invariably been sensationalist by the 
media, and the reaction from much of the public sector has 
usually ranged from critical to denial.
South Africa
 Kevin Wall and Sam Amod
Introduction
Late in 2006, the South African Institution of Civil Engineering 
(SAICE) released the fi rst ever report card of the state of engi-
neering  infrastructure in South Africa.  Th is report highlighted 
‘the observations of the professionals responsible for the plan-
ning, construction, operation and maintenance of our nation’s 
life-support system.’ It graded  infrastructure (water, sanitation, 
solid waste, roads, airports, ports, rail, electricity and hospitals 
and clinics) on a scale from A+ through E-.  Overall, it gave 
South Africa’s  infrastructure a D+ grade.
Th e report aimed to inform the public about the importance 
of  infrastructure in their daily social and economic intercourse 
by highlighting its current condition. Furthermore, many deci-
sion-makers are technical lay-people. Th e report would enable 
better informed decisions to be made, especially regarding 
maintenance management and planning for new expenditure.
Th e publication of this fi rst edition of the Infrastructure Report 
Card for South Africa  was, by any measure, very successful and 
exceeded all expectations. Indeed, the report card received 
media coverage that exceeded SAICE’s highest expectations. In 
addition, invitations were received from government depart-
ments and others for SAICE to engage with them in order to 
address issues raised in the report card. Th e exposure received 
by SAICE was the greatest it had received for many years, if not 
ever, all of it overwhelmingly positive. Th e credibility of the 
institution as a learned  society with the authority, indeed the 
duty, to comment broadly on engineering  infrastructure had 
been enhanced.
Infrastructure is a public asset. Well-maintained  infrastruc-
ture underpins quality of life and  economic development. All 
South Africans have a stake in its upkeep and operation, and 
all South Africans share in the expense of its construction and 
its ongoing maintenance. If maintenance is inadequate, social 
and economic growth in South Africa  will be impeded, and 
hence the  human development of the country will be reduced. 
Th e report and its subsequent versions are intended as an 
instrument to contribute to better-informed decisions for 
 infrastructure development and maintenance.  Th e purpose of 
the report card was to draw the attention of government, and 
of the public at large, to the importance of maintenance, and 
to factors underlying the state of repair of  infrastructure – fac-
tors such as skills and fi nance, for example.
Th e report has intentionally not commented on the legacy 
that gave South Africa  its imbalanced  infrastructure distribu-
tion. Since the advent of democracy in 1994, huge strides have 
been made by the government to correct this balance. Ambi-
tious plans have been made and implemented. Drinking water, 
sanitation,  energy and  transportation access have received 
focused attention, and – acting on its mandate – the govern-
ment is continuing to invest at a rapid pace in  infrastructure 
for disadvantaged communities.
Th e report has also not highlighted the stated intentions of 
many agencies to improve  infrastructure in the future. After 
decades of decline, construction and  infrastructure provision 
seem set for decades of growth, with construction forming the 
fastest growing sector of the economy. Construction also gen-
erates more jobs per rand spent than almost any other sector 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   300 14/09/10   15:35:06
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
301
of the economy. It is imperative that we do not continue to 
build only to permit decay. On the contrary, adequate budgets 
and maintenance management plans are required for existing 
and new additions to the  infrastructure asset base.
Th e answers to many issues posed in the report are neither 
simple nor easy. All the more reason for the public to be bet-
ter informed about the serious decisions that must be taken 
about our  infrastructure and, where appropriate, to change 
our behaviour.
Th e role of civil (and all) engineering professionals as creators 
and custodians of all aspects of  infrastructure has been placed 
at centre stage. Th e impact has been to raise the awareness of 
the public, parents, learners, educators and government to the 
urgency of the crisis (for example, in terms of the importance 
of the  education of engineering practitioners).
Whereas the state of South Africa’s public sector  infrastruc-
ture has for some while been under the spotlight, there is now 
broad recognition that SAICE has provided the fi rst national-
scale credible benchmark against which progress (or not) can 
in future years be measured. Th ere is broad consensus that the 
initiative should be sustained and extended, but that at the 
same time the independence of the benchmarking process 
should not be compromised. Th e new Infrastructure Report 
Card will entail an even more rigorous process, with greater 
consultation and fi ner defi nition of the process and particu-
larly of the grading.
Shortages
Two key themes run as a thread through all the grades:
the extreme shortage of engineering skills and the impact  ■
of this on planning, procurement, design, construction and 
care of  infrastructure; and
the lack of adequate funding for the maintenance of the  ■
existing asset base and the new assets that come on-stream 
each day. 
The consequences of inadequate maintenance are severe, 
aff ecting the quality of life and even the very lives of people, 
through outbreaks of waterborne disease, reduced safety on 
roads and rail, inconvenience and ineffi  cient commercial activ-
ity. Th e allocation of maintenance funding is often thought 
generous at 4 per cent of capital cost per annum. However, 
such allocation is rare. Moreover, it is simply not suffi  cient, 
especially when it is expected to cater for a maintenance debt 
that usually requires upgrading, repair or refurbishment. Roads 
maintenance that is delayed for one year could cost three to 
six times more when undertaken a year or so later.
South Africa  suff ers an acute skills shortage in the  infra-
structure sector. Just two illustrations should highlight how 
serious these shortages are, making clear the case for trans-
formation:
A recent survey by SAICE showed that more than one-third  ■
of all 231 local municipalities did not have a single civil engi-
neer,  technologist or  technician. Vacancies in local govern-
ment for engineering practitioners exceed 1,000, a fi gure 
which is not improving.
While the link between engineering  infrastructure and eco-
nomic growth may be clear, it is not always clear that a similar 
link exists with social health. It is obvious though that cleaner 
drinking water, proper sanitation, better shelter, access to trans-
port and electricity, all improve the quality of life. To millions 
in South Africa  quality may be equated with viability. Indeed, 
SAICE  research indicates that, in general, developing coun-
tries have more doctors than engineers, whereas the opposite 
is true in developed countries. Th e reason is obvious: proper 
 infrastructure prevents disease and sickness. It is concerning 
then that South Africa  has only half as many engineers as doc-
tors. By comparison, Australia, America, Western  Europe and 
even China or India have a similar number of engineers to doc-
tors, or more engineers than doctors. Furthermore, the ratio of 
population to engineer in South Africa  is of the order of 3,200 
to 1, twenty times less than in some of the countries just men-
tioned. Furthermore, the ratio amongst the white population 
is approximately 300 to 1 – similar to America and Western 
 Europe – while the ratio in the African population is in the 
order of 50,000 to 1, which is amongst the worst in Africa  and 
the world.
 Th e case for transformation cannot be clearer.  ■
Impact of the report card
Th e outcome was spectacularly successful. It was the fi rst ever 
publication of a consolidated report on the state of a broad 
range of  infrastructure in South Africa ( or Africa)  by a credible 
institution, drawing attention to its condition and importance 
by headlining issues in a manner understandable to techni-
cal, decision-making and lay persons. It provided the headline 
issues requiring attention and a benchmark for further moni-
toring. Whereas the state of South Africa’s public sector  infra-
structure has for some while been under the spotlight, there 
is now broad recognition that SAICE has provided the fi rst 
national-scale credible benchmark against which progress (or 
regress) can in future years be measured.
Th e primary objectives of informing the public and decision-
makers were achieved through the numerous live interviews 
and presentations, print, visual and audio media exposure and 
discussions with client and sector organizations. Presentations 
were made to government departments such as National 
©
 U
N
ES
CO
/D
. E
va
ns
 Mine, extract crystals, 
South  Africa.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   301 14/09/10   15:35:06
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
302
 Treasury and the Department of Public Enterprises, and also to 
the Transport Portfolio Committee of Parliament. Th e authors 
and the Institution have been inundated with invitations 
to workshops and presentations by all tiers of government, 
parastatal agencies and industry institutions. Th e exposure 
received by SAICE was the greatest it had received for many 
years, if not ever, all of it overwhelmingly positive. Th e cred-
ibility of the Institution as a learned  society with the authority, 
indeed the duty, to comment broadly on engineering  infra-
structure had been enhanced. Th ere is broad consensus that 
the initiative should be sustained and extended, but that at 
the same time the independence of the benchmarking process 
should not be compromised.
Th e role of civil (and all) engineering professionals as creators 
and custodians of all aspects of  infrastructure has been placed 
at centre stage. Th e impact has been to raise the awareness of 
the public, parents, learners, educators and government to the 
urgency of the crisis, e.g. in the  education of engineering prac-
titioners. However, in the midst of these positives, we need 
to critically analyse the shortcomings of the IRC2006 and its 
process. Th ese are combined with the aspirations for future 
IRCs and the specifi c extensions and improvements identifi ed.
Future report cards
Th e refi nements and further development outlined below are 
regarded as more ambitious than can perhaps be achieved in 
Hospitals and Clinics
Roads
Sanitation and 
Wastewater
Solid waste
Ports Airports
Electricity
Rail
Hospitals
National roads
Major urban areas
Major urban areas
Eskom’s bulk generation 
and transmission
Heavy haul freight
Eskom’s local distribution 
networks
General freight being retained
Municipal distribution 
networks in urban areas
Uneconomical general freight
Municipal distribution 
networks in al other areas
Passenger lines
ACSA-owned facilities
C
C
C-
C-
C+ B
C+
B
C+
C
C-
E
D+
D-
E
D
D-
D+
Clinics
All other roads
All other areas
All other areas
Th e report itself is freely available on the SAICE website (http://www.civils.org.za).
Water
Bulk  infrastructure
Major urban areas
All other areas
D+
C+
D-
Th e SAICE 2006 
Infrastructure 
Report Card for 
South frica
Figure 1: 2006 report card for South  Africa’s built environment  infrastructure
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   302 14/09/10   15:35:07
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
303
the next edition of the IRC. Given the response to the IRC2006, 
and the expectations that have been created, it is clear 
that future reports cannot simply present an update of the 
IRC2006. It is considered a given that the new IRC will entail 
an even more rigorous process, with greater consultation and 
fi ner defi nition of the process and particularly the grading.
Th e following options are being considered. Rather than being 
mutually exclusive, they may also be considered as progressive 
elaborations:
Update and refi ne: Infrastructure condition does not alter sig-
nifi cantly in the space of a year. Nonetheless, the fi rst report 
card was not fl awless and could do with a tweaking. So one 
option is to provide an interim report, incorporating a trend 
score (improvement, decline or unchanged grades since 
IRC2006) and possibly a sustainability score (the future ability 
of the asset to perform adequately with only routine mainte-
nance, i.e. a refurbishment/renewal index); SAICE could also 
extend the IRC to include all or some of: Education, Housing, 
ICT, Public Works assets (Justice, police, and so on).
Extend the South African IRC to provide a detailed analysis 
by South African province or region. Th ere have already been 
requests for assistance in compiling more regionally focused 
report cards. In addition, focus and comment on one or more 
of the following areas: rail and harbour facilities, Municipalities 
or just Metros. Undertake an economic analysis including a 
fi ner breakdown of the current areas, e.g. discuss backlogs and 
opportunity costs of doing or not doing specifi c maintenance 
or capital investments, benefi ts to  society of various choices, 
and so on.  
Extend the process to all Southern African countries, initially 
through the creation of a template that is populated through a 
desktop study, progressively elaborated into a nested scorecard 
for the region that permits examination of the  infrastructure 
of each country individually, or the aggregated  infrastructure 
of the region in a particular category, e.g. road transport, har-
bours,  energy, among others, or through an examination of 
natural or economic corridors.
Clearly, these are ambitious objectives and some, if under-
taken, go beyond the mandate of SAICE and will require exter-
nal authority and especially substantial funding. It should be 
noted that each of these options stem from engagement with 
stakeholders post-IRC2006. 
Conclusion
Th e impact of the Infrastructure Report Card for South Africa 
 2006 has been extremely positive.  Whereas the state of South 
Africa’s public sector  infrastructure has for some while been 
under the spotlight, there is now broad recognition that 
SAICE has provided the fi rst national-scale credible bench-
mark against which progress (or regress) can in future years 
be measured. 
Th ere is broad consensus that the initiative should be sus-
tained and extended, but that at the same time the inde-
pendence of the benchmarking process should not be 
compromised.
Th e future of the project must also consider embracing the 
participation of partners such as aid agencies, SAICE’s own 
partners such as statutory institutions, Voluntary Associa-
tions, the African Engineers Forum, the World Federation of 
Engineers Organization, UNESCO and others. SAICE will con-
tinue to convene the initiative through reasonable time com-
mitment as a volunteer organization. Opinion and assistance 
will be sought from SAICE volunteers, but this will clearly not 
be suffi  cient. Discretion will have to be exercised regarding 
compensation for contributions. 
USA
Alison Dickert
Th e report card for America’s  infrastructure is the signature 
public  education and advocacy tool for the American Society 
of Civil Engineers (ASCE). ASCE and its members are commit-
ted to protecting the health, safety and welfare of the public, 
and as such, are equally committed to improving the nation’s 
public  infrastructure. To achieve that goal, the report card 
depicts the condition and performance of the nation’s  infra-
structure in the familiar form of a school report card – assign-
ing letter grades based on physical condition and needed fi scal 
investments for improvement. Th e report card can be accessed 
online at http://www.asce.org/reportcard.
Th e report card is a clear and concise document that lays out 
the scope of the problem in terms the average person can 
understand. In a world with ever increasing media clutter, 
the universal symbol of schoolhouse grades cuts through and 
leave a lasting – and sobering – impression.
Since 1998, ASCE has issued three  infrastructure report cards 
and numerous status updates that depict the current state of 
the  infrastructure and provide potential solutions for improve-
ment. Th e report card receives widespread media coverage 
and has been cited in numerous academic studies. Th e nation’s 
political leaders also rely on the report card to provide them 
with clear information, which they can use as a guide for policy 
decisions. 
In 1988 when the report was fi rst released, the nation’s  infra-
structure earned a ‘C’, representing an average grade. Among 
the problems identifi ed within the report card, titled Fragile 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   303 14/09/10   15:35:07
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
304
Foundations: A report on America’s Public Works, were increas-
ing congestion, deferred maintenance and age of the system; 
the authors of the report worried that fi scal investment was 
inadequate to meet the current operations costs and future 
demands on the system.
Th e Need
Public opinion  research conducted in 1997 by ASCE revealed 
that while the general public reported a high degree of respect 
for engineers, they lacked a meaningful understanding of the 
relationship between engineering and day-to-day life. Moreo-
ver, they displayed little interest in learning more about engi-
neering. Th is  research did reveal strong interest in traffi  c, clean 
water, the environment and other engineering-dependent 
quality of life issues, coupled with a belief that engineers would 
be the most credible source for information and  education on 
those issues.
To respond to the public’s compelling desire for relevant infor-
mation, and to position civil engineers as credible sources for 
that information, ASCE decided to re-examine the  infrastruc-
ture report card on the tenth anniversary of its initial release.
ASCE found that in the decade since the Fragile Foundations 
report was released, the overall grade had dropped a whole 
letter grade to a ‘D’. Moreover, a failing grade was assigned 
to the nation’s public school  infrastructure, with near failing 
grades in crucial areas such as drinking water, roads and dams. 
Th e grades surprised even the authors, and generated wide-
spread public attention.
Report cards issued in 2001 and 2005, respectively, showed a 
slight upturn to a ‘D+’ in the overall grade before it sank back 
to a ‘D’. What is most telling, however, is the fact that the con-
cerns in the 1988 report are the same ones found subsequently, 
such as inadequate capacity and deferred maintenance. 
Th e inadequate condition of the nation’s  infrastructure con-
tinues to be a persistent problem. Just as making the needed 
improvements will be a long, expensive and labour-intensive 
task, convincing political leaders and the public that some-
thing must be done about it is equally challenging. ASCE plans 
to release a new version of the report card in March 2009. 
Given the twenty years of age, deferred maintenance and 
under investment since the fi rst report card in 1998, serious 
improvement is not anticipated.
Th e Process
To develop the report card, ASCE assembles an advisory panel 
of the nation’s leading civil engineers, analyses hundreds of 
studies, reports and other sources, and surveys thousands of 
engineers to determine what is happening in the fi eld. Th e 
advisory panel determines the scope of the inquiry and estab-
lishes a methodology for assigning grades. 
For the 2005 report card, grades were assigned on the basis 
of condition and capacity, and funding versus need, generally 
following a traditional grading scale (e.g. if 77 per cent of roads 
are in good condition or better, that would earn a grade of 
‘C’). Base grades were then reviewed by the advisory panel and 
adjusted, usually with a plus or minus but sometimes as much 
a full letter grade, to refl ect positive or negative trends or the 
critical consequences should a catastrophic failure occur. For 
example, the failure of a bridge or dam would have much more 
immediate and deadly consequences than a problem related 
to solid waste disposal.
Th e Benefi t
In public opinion  research conducted for ASCE in 2005, the 
public demonstrated signifi cant recognition of the crisis facing 
America’s  infrastructure, as well as an understanding of the 
role of both engineers and the public in defi ning and adopting 
solutions. Th ese fi ndings represented a marked change from 
those in 1997.
Th e report card allows civil engineers to speak with one voice 
for the profession, not singular business interests. Th e impar-
tiality and focus toward achieving a strategic goal for the bet-
terment of all make ASCE a powerful advocate. With such a 
strong reputation, ASCE and its report card are well-respected 
advisors to policymakers. 
Despite great accomplishments in highlighting the needs of 
America’s  infrastructure and advancing the profession of civil 
engineering, much still needs to be done. Th e report card has 
succeeded in convincing most people that something needs 
to be done, but it has yet to inspire the political leadership 
to eff ect real change. As ASCE begins its task of updating the 
report card for 2009, it will give particular focus to empower-
ing the average citizen to take up this cause and fi ght for a 
better system. 
During the last century, the United States saw unprecedented 
growth and prosperity, and at the same time experienced a 
corresponding build up of public  infrastructure. If the nation 
is to keep competing in the global economy, we must have the 
proper  infrastructure to do so. Th e 2009 Infrastructure Report 
Card must be the catalyst to pursue that goal.
Australia
 Leanne Hardwicke
Engineers Australia  (EA) undertakes public policy activities at 
a national and state and territory level with a view to contrib-
uting to the public debate on issues that are directly engineer-
ing related, impact on the engineering profession or are in the 
best interest of the community from the membership’s point 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   304 14/09/10   15:35:07
E N G I N E E R I N G  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T:   A P P L I C AT I O N S  A N D  I N F R A S T R U C T U R E
305
of view. One of the most successful public policy activities 
to date has been the production of a series of  Infrastructure 
Report Cards for Australia. 
In producing the report cards, EA aims to raise awareness that 
 infrastructure underpins the community’s quality of life and 
that poor  infrastructure impedes economic and social growth. 
EA also wants to generate debate on the quality and quantity 
of  infrastructure to meet  society’s needs, and encourage best 
practice based on total asset management principles, sustain-
ability and demand management.
In 2000, EA produced a basic report card on the  Australia’s 
 infrastructure to highlight problem areas. Th at was followed 
with a more extensive Australian Infrastructure Report Card 
in 2001, and then a detailed state-by-state assessment. New 
South Wales and Queensland  infrastructure report cards were 
published in 2003 and 2004 with the remaining state report 
cards completed in 2005. By weighting these results accord-
ing to state and territory economies, we compiled the 2005 
Australian Infrastructure Report Card, which provides an 
up-to-date strategic overview that can be used to assess the 
adequacy of particular classes of  Australia’s  infrastructure and 
determine priorities for maintenance and capital expenditure. 
Th e report cards do not cover all  infrastructure but focus 
on key sectors: roads (national, State and local), rail, potable 
water, wastewater, stormwater, irrigation, electricity, gas, ports 
and airports. Using ratings ranging from A (very good) to F 
(inadequate). Drawn from the fi ndings of the state and terri-
tory report cards, the Australian report card also made a series 
of recommendations to government. Th e most important of 
these was that the planning and provision of  infrastructure 
becoming a true partnership between the three spheres of 
government (including national, state and local), business and 
the community.
EA recommended that a ‘National Infrastructure Council’ be 
established to provide independent advice on policy, plan-
ning and delivery of  infrastructure in Australia. Th e Council 
would determine priorities for nationally signifi cant  infra-
structure on the basis of 20-year rolling asset and fi nancial 
programmes, and would determine which  infrastructure is 
best funded, constructed, maintained and operated by the 
public sector and which by the private sector. As an expert 
body, the National Infrastructure Council would be expected 
to provide advice on further reforms to regulation and taxa-
tion legislation; whole-of-life  infrastructure management and 
alternative funding sources. Critical to its eff ectiveness would 
be programmes to increase communication with the public 
and key stakeholders to encourage active participation in the 
 infrastructure debate. 
Th e report cards have been very successful in raising aware-
ness of  infrastructure issues. Each state and territory report 
card received signifi cant media attention, as did the 2005 
Australian report card. After the release of the report cards, 
many state and territory governments produced long-term 
 infrastructure plans and established advisory bodies or coor-
dination offi  ces.
At a national level, in 2007 the new government appointed a 
Minister of Infrastructure. In 2008, it formed a new statutory 
authority called ‘Infrastructure Australia’ to undertake a plan-
ning role for  infrastructure projects of national signifi cance. 
Th e role of this body closely mirrors Engineers  Australia’s rec-
ommendations. 
Infrastructure Australia  is a statutory advisory council with 
twelve members drawn from industry, government and local 
government. Infrastructure Australia  will: conduct audits to 
determine the adequacy, capacity and condition of nation-
ally signifi cant  infrastructure, including transport, water,  com-
munications and  energy; develop an  infrastructure priority list 
to guide billions of dollars of public and private investment; 
and provide advice to governments, investors and owners of 
 infrastructure on regulatory reforms that can improve the uti-
lization of Australian  infrastructure. Th e new government has 
also committed Aus$ 20 billion to a ‘Building Australia  Fund’, 
which will generate funds to build critical, nationally-signifi -
cant  infrastructure in the future.
Challenges for  Australia’s  infrastructure
Th e following provides an overview of  Australia’s  infrastruc-
ture, as detailed in our  infrastructure report cards. 
 Sydney Opera House.
© Arup
 Melbourne, hose for waste 
water.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
/M
. B
or
g
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   305 14/09/10   15:35:07
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
306
 Légende
Infrastructure 2001 2005 Comments
Roads C – D C- –  C+ National roads are only adequate, despite upgrade work on the eastern seaboard. State roads vary • 
greatly in quality and increased traffi  c is reducing local amenity.
Freight traffi  c and freight volumes in •  Australia are expected to increase, with the freight task 
expected to double in tonnage terms by 2020. Th erefore, action must be taken to review freight routes 
and improve inter-modal transfers.
Th e highly decentralised nature of •  Australia’s population means that the transport industry is pivotal 
to the eff ective functioning of the economy. 
Improvements to substandard sections of State roads and bridges are progressing at a slower rate • 
than desirable and local government  infrastructure  standards are falling behind (mainly in the rural 
areas).
Rail D- C- Th ere have been notable improvements, but widespread delays remain and there are uncertainties • 
with new investments.
Th ere is emerging congestion in many metropolitan rail networks. As well, an integrated transport • 
network is needed to connect regional activity centres, and to encourage the transfer of commuters 
from road to rail.
Improved •  infrastructure is required to support the transfer of inter-state freight from road to rail and 
rail access to ports should have an appropriate level of investment.
Ports B C+ Th e main concerns with ports are coordination with land and air transport systems and urban • 
encroachment, limiting the ability to expand. 
Channel deepening is required for some ports to meet future growth in the size of ships, but taking • 
into account environmental concerns. 
Airports B B Airports are heavily regulated for safety and security, which tends to mean that assets are in a good • 
condition. 
Future expansion will be needed to support increased passenger movements, taking into account • 
impacts.
Potable Water C B- Metropolitan •  Australia is spreading and much of the water  infrastructure in metropolitan  Australia is 
old. Catchment areas for water harvesting are limited. Th e barriers to providing new water solutions are 
generally not technical barriers, but rather political, environmental and social.  
Th e latest rating recognised increased investment in renewing pipe networks, improved treatment, • 
and reduced water losses from system leakage.
Spending on renewals is not keeping up with the rate of asset deterioration. Problems still exist with • 
excess water use and encroachment on catchments by urban areas.
Record droughts in recent times have highlighted the need for new sources of supply. Th e • 
magnitude of anticipated water effi  ciencies through demand management is ambitious and will require 
permanent community behavioural change.
Wastewater C- C+ Rehabilitation of existing •  infrastructure and improved treatment have resulted in reduced discharge 
of pollutants into waterways. But problems still exist.
Th e level of water re-use has been disappointing. However, there are increasing instances of local • 
government operating wastewater re-use schemes.
Many collection systems are old and suff ering from advanced deterioration. As many sewer mains • 
are operating at their capacity limits, and many of those systems are nearing the end of their useful 
service life.
Stormwater D C- Th e quality of stormwater •  infrastructure varies widely. Much stormwater  infrastructure is old and 
funds for maintenance, repairs and renewals are lacking.
Damage from cyclones and fl oods damage is expensive, with fl ood damage averaging over • 
Aus$300million per year.
Knowledge on the condition of many assets is limited.• 
Source: Engineers  Australia. Full report card available at http://www.engineersaustralia.org.au
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   306 14/09/10   15:35:08
Engineering Capacity: 7 
Education, Training and 
Mobility
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   307 14/09/10   15:35:08
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
308
Introduction
In general, the mission of engineers working in  education 
includes:
to disseminate technological knowledge; ■
to provide  ■  society with candidates for the engineering pro-
fession who are equipped to respond to the engineering 
and technological challenges now and in the future;
to increase the breadth and depth of the technological  ■
understanding of   society; and
to raise awareness of the advantages and disadvantages of  ■
technological progress.
Th is mission is presently the work of thousands of engineers all 
over the world through many diff erent forms and programmes 
of engineering  education starting from primary and secondary 
schools, through vocational or technical schools and colleges 
to institutes of technology, polytechnics, technical and non-
technical universities as well as specifi c educational and train-
ing projects within professional engineering and technology 
organizations. It is also important to recognize the contribu-
tion of engineers teaching mathematics, physics, economics, 
chemistry and other disciplines, to the wider benefi t of general 
 education and knowledge in  society.
Figure 1 shows the growth of science and engineering fi rst 
degrees at the end of the twentieth century. More recent 
estimates indicate further growth of engineering graduates in 
Asia, for example in China with 517,000 graduates and India 
with 450,000 graduates per year. In 2007, 46 per cent of Chi-
nese students graduated with engineering degrees while in the 
USA and  Europe the proportion was 5 per cent and 15 per 
cent respectively.
Engineers in 7.1  education
Wlodzimierz Miszalski
Figure 1: Total number of fi rst degree graduates 
from science and  engineering studies
Source: James J. Duderstadt, Engineering for a Changing World, Th e Millennium 
Project, University of Michigan.
One of the most serious internal issues and challenges facing 
engineering is the decline of interest and  enrolment of young 
people, especially women, in engineering in most countries 
around the world. Th is will have a serious impact on capacity 
in engineering, and on  poverty reduction,  sustainable develop-
ment and the other  Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) in 
developing countries. In view of the importance of engineering 
in development and the need for capacity and ongoing  capacity 
building for adequate numbers of engineers, this is a major con-
cern and challenge for engineering and the world. Th is seventh 
and last substantive chapter on engineering capacity focuses 
on engineering capacity,  education, training and mobility. Th e 
chapter begins with a section on discussion of engineering 
capacity, and includes an introduction to needs and numbers 
– the demand and supply of engineers, and a contribution on 
 technical  capacity building and the role of the World Federation 
of Engineering Organizations ( WFEO). Th ese are followed by two 
case-study contributions from Africa,  one on the role of  capacity 
building for sustainability, and the other on needs and numbers 
in civil engineering in South Africa – based on the pioneering 
work of Allyson Lawless and the South African Institution of Civil 
Engineers (SAICE). Th is section continues with contributions on 
 enrolment and capacity in Australia,  continuing engineering 
 education and professional development, and concludes with a 
contribution on  brain drain, gain, circulation and the diaspora of 
engineers. Th e following section focuses on the transformation 
of engineering  education – a process that many think will be 
necessary to make engineering more contemporary, understand-
able and attractive to young people. Th is includes contributions 
on  problem-based learning, sustainability and the engineering 
 curriculum in Australia, rapid  curriculum renewal, the evolution 
of environmental  education in engineering and  research in engi-
neering  education. A fi nal section on engineering  education for 
development includes case studies on university-based centres 
on engineering and technology for development in Australia, 
 Botswana and  Ghana. Th e chapter concludes with a discussion 
on engineering  accreditation,  standards and  mobility of engi-
neers, with particular reference to the  Washington Accord,  Engi-
neers Mobility Forum,  APEC Engineer and European perspective 
on the Eur Ing and  Bologna Accord.
450,000
400,000
350,000
300,000
250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
0
USA
Japan
China
S. Korea
Germany
UK
19
75
19
77
19
81
19
83
19
85
19
87
19
89
19
91
19
93
19
95
19
97
19
99
19
79
 Engineering  education 
begins with basic principles 
and hands-on experience.
©
 SA
IC
E
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   308 14/09/10   15:35:09
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
309
Th e need for a change in engineering  education
Although the total educational potential in the area of engi-
neering and technology at fi rst might seem suffi  cient to satisfy 
the growth in and spread of technology across the world, there 
are great inequalities in the distribution of those engineers. 
Th is means that there is not adequate capacity, particularly to 
meet the challenges of  sustainable development, global secu-
rity,  poverty reduction, environmental degradation,  disaster 
monitoring,  disaster response, and so on. Th e current  curric-
ula used for engineering  education, the international  stand-
ards that accredit them and the movements of engineering 
students, graduates and teachers between countries are not 
always equal either – and so the inequalities continue to grow. 
Th is is summarized in Figure 2.
Now, in the twenty-fi rst century, the demand is increasing from 
industry and elsewhere for engineers who are able to work any-
where in the world and who can work on global engineering 
projects and problems. Also, the educational potential seems 
to be suffi  cient to start thinking of new models of engineering 
 education with an international perspective. Th at potential 
can be found in: the number of academics and universities 
with international experience in engineering and engineering 
 education; the volume of knowledge and lessons learned from 
international engineering projects; the technologies available 
to facilitate international  education; and the growing experi-
ence with international students and the exchange of students 
and teachers. Such new models of  education would not only 
satisfy the requirements of transnational companies and inter-
national engineering projects, but also the need for engineers 
that can work on international projects focused on, for exam-
ple,  poverty reduction or  climate change mitigation; both 
require globally-thinking or globally-oriented engineers.
So recent years have brought new challenges for engineers 
working in the area of  education. Steps forward will require 
greater  international cooperation in technical expertise and 
particularly in issues of mobility,  innovation,  poverty reduc-
tion, management and  ethics. Th ese changing priorities in 
engineering practice will require corrections and perhaps 
more fundamental and painful transformations of educational 
programmes, the profi les of teaching faculty, and the organiza-
tional structures of institutions.
Key questions for engineering  education
In any discussion concerning the future personal and profes-
sional profi le of engineers, questions on their  education are 
raised, including:
What should the consecutive stages of  ■  education and train-
ing be for engineers?
Which institutions should participate (such as: universities  ■
and institutes of technology; public and private schools; 
national engineering associations; international engineering 
federations; companies and enterprises and their training or 
professional development schemes; the military; the chari-
ties and non-governmental organizations)?
What should the proportions of general and specialist tech- ■
nological knowledge be?
What should the proportions of technological and non- ■
technological knowledge be (including economics, man-
agement,  ethics, humanitarianism) for a modern engineer?
Th e World Federation of Engineering Organizations ( WFEO) has 
prioritized engineering  education as part of its work since it was 
founded. Th e  WFEO Committee on Education and Training ( WFEO-
CET) was established in 1970 and a Standing Committee on Educa-
tion and Training was created at its second general assembly the 
previous year.
 WFEO-CET has been engaged almost in all aspects of engineering 
 education such as:  accreditation of  engineering studies; professional 
 accreditation and practice; distance learning; management know-
ledge and skills; the needs of developing countries; future direc-
tions of engineering  education;  continuing engineering  education; 
engineering  education for mobility and  innovation, and so on. Th is 
is refl ected both in  WFEO-CET journal IDEAS, intended to express 
the most vital issues in engineering  education, professional practice 
and  accreditation. Every three years since 1998,  WFEO-CET has held 
a World Congress on Engineering Education. Its members have an 
active role in many other international organizations.
Website: www.wfeo.org
 WFEO-CET
Figure 2: Th e needs for international  education 
of engineers
• Globally thinking, globally oriented engineers.
•  Super advances large scale international engineering 
projects.
•  Relatively simple projects and enterprises facilitating and 
improving quality of human life in the poorest regions of 
the world.
NEW MODEL OF INTERNATIONAL 
 EDUCATION OF ENGINEERS
Increasing demand 
for engineers able 
to work all over 
the world and to 
deal with global 
engineering problems
•  Growing experience in 
international  education of 
engineers.
•  Lessons learned from 
international engineering 
projects.
•  Increasing international 
exchange of students and 
faculty.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   309 14/09/10   15:35:09
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
310
Which domains and disciplines of technological science should  ■
be taught at what level (levels such as: polytechnical  education; 
Bachelor degrees; Master degrees; doctorates; postgraduate 
 education; graduate training; distance learning; self improve-
ment)?
How to share the total  ■  education time (e.g. 4,000 to 4,200 hours) 
into the general domains of fundamental knowledge necessary 
for engineers (such as mathematics, physics, construction and 
practical work)?
How can ‘traditional’ areas of activity for engineers (such  ■
as mechanical, electrical, civil and structural) be adapted to 
the demands placed on modern engineers, particularly with 
respect to the traditional way that the engineering profession 
is organized and  education is accredited?
How are ‘new’ areas of activity (such as systems, nuclear, aero- ■
space, computing, information, environmental, medical, mecha-
tronics, robotics, acoustics, marine,  energy, logistics, security, 
management and others) being taught and represented?
Engineering capacity7.2 
Needs and numbers – and 7.2.1 
the need for better numbers
Tony Marjoram
How many engineers does a country need? How many engi-
neers does a country need to produce to keep up with this 
need? If a country produces more engineers – will that pro-
mote development? What types of engineer does a country 
need to produce, and at what levels? Are developed coun-
tries, such as the United States and  Europe, failing to produce 
enough engineers, compared to rapidly developing countries 
such as China and India? Do other developing and least devel-
oped countries have enough engineers, are they producing 
enough or losing too many to  brain drain to be able to pro-
mote development, reduce poverty and tackle major issues 
regarding  climate change mitigation and adaptation? What 
are the consequences of these questions for development 
around the world, and what are the implications for  education 
policy, for engineering  education at tertiary level, and for sci-
ence  education at secondary and primary school? And what 
do engineers, policy-makers, planners, aid donors and inter-
national agencies, and organizations such as UNESCO need 
to do about it? 
Th ese questions are being asked increasingly urgently by 
growing numbers of people in more and more countries, 
for diff erent background reasons. Th e problem in response 
is that these are also, in fact, rather complex questions, for 
which there are no simple or straightforward answers. Th is 
is partly, and perhaps surprisingly, because of a shortage of 
statistical data and indicators at national and international 
level with which to answer the questions and compare 
responses in many countries, both developed and develop-
ing. Many of the questions, are based on such widely broad-
cast estimates in the media, for example, that the United 
States only graduates 70,000 engineers a year, compared to 
India at 350,000 and China at 600,000. Th is is one reason why 
there is also so much reference to quantitative, qualitative 
and anecdotal evidence from universities, industry and pro-
fessional engineering organizations regarding the supposed 
shortage of engineers, now and into the future. Th is concern 
was refl ected in the production of the report, Rising above 
the gathering storm: energizing and employing America for a 
brighter economic future, by the National Academy of Engi-
neering in the US in 2007, and the following debate (inter-
estingly, the ‘gathering storm’ also alludes to the fi rst volume 
of Churchill’s Nobel Prize winning chronicle of the Second 
World War). 
Background realities
Th e above questions are complicated not only by the fact that 
there are diff erent fi elds, types and levels of engineers (e.g. civil, 
mechanical and  electrical engineering,  technicians and  tech-
nologists, academic, professional and consulting engineers, at 
degree, master’s or doctoral level), but also by diff ering needs 
for engineers in diff erent sectors, fi elds, types and levels at dif-
ferent times and diff erent places (countries and regions within 
them), as technologies and industries develop and decline. 
Th ere are also diff erent needs for engineers over time; for 
example, the increasing use of CAD software has made civil 
and structural engineers more productive, requiring less sup-
port staff . Engineering and technology are the drivers of incre-
mental and disruptive change in  society and in engineering, 
and the understanding, policy-making and planning of engi-
neering requires a knowledge of such transverse and longitudi-
nal changes over time. 
Th e above questions are further complicated by diff erent defi -
nitions and understandings of what an engineer is. In Germany, 
for example, there are around fi fty defi nitions of an engineer. 
In many countries the term ‘engineer’ is also used commonly 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   310 14/09/10   15:35:09
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
311
and in the media (by non-engineers) to refer to almost any-
body that does anything technical such that people referred to 
as  technicians and  technologists in some countries are defi ned 
as engineers in others. Th is is also the case in offi  cial statistics, 
where, for example, degrees of diff erent length (three or four 
years) may be similarly accredited, as may degrees in computer 
science and IT, which are not included as engineering degrees 
in some countries. Th is means that the United States, far from 
lagging behind India and China, may actually be producing 
more engineers than India, and also more than China on a 
per capita basis. On the other hand, this picture requires even 
further clarifi cation when the numbers of overseas students 
studying at developed country universities are considered; uni-
versity  education has become a big business in many OECD 
 countries.
Th e diff erent reasons underlying such reporting may include 
the desire in some countries to over-represent the number of 
engineers to promote national status and prestige, and attract 
investment, whereas the desire in others may be to downplay 
the numbers in the lobby for increased government support 
to engineering  education and  research, or maybe to justify 
the outsourcing of engineering services and related overseas 
investment. 
Structural changes and real diff erences
Despite this, structural rather than cyclical changes are tak-
ing place; government R&D funding in the United States and 
other developed countries is declining in real terms, R&D facil-
ities are downsizing, outsourcing and off shoring to cheaper 
locations – as refl ected in the declining publication of  research 
papers. Th ese changes may well have a discouraging eff ect on 
promoting the awareness of and recruitment of young peo-
ple into engineering, and may also be a factor leading to the 
perceived shortage of engineering in developed countries. As 
restructuring takes place, lower level skills are displaced, with 
an attendant need for re-skilling, although this is counterbal-
anced by the greater participation of young people in  educa-
tion in many developed countries. 
There are still significant differences, however, especially 
between higher and lower income countries. UNESCO data 
shows that developed, industrialized countries have between 
twenty and fi fty scientists and engineers per 10,000 popula-
tion, compared to around fi ve scientists and engineers on aver-
age for developing countries, down to one or less scientist or 
engineer for some poorer African countries.1 Th e low numbers 
of scientists and engineers also refl ects the low investment in 
R&D, the low numbers of  research papers published, the low 
level of  innovation and patents, and the high level of  brain 
drain from some countries. Th e engineering, science and tech-
nology capacity of many African countries has declined since 
1 For UNESCO data, see the website of the UNESCO Institute of Statistics, http://www.
uis.unesco.org/
their independence. Given the importance of engineering, sci-
ence and technology in development, this context will have 
serious consequences for the future of these countries.
For example
Governments and professional engineering bodies around the 
world have identifi ed and emphasized the actual and impend-
ing shortage of engineers as a national and international pri-
ority. In the UK for example, Engineering UK (formerly the 
Engineering and Technology Board or ETB), has emphasized in 
their 2009–2010 Annual Report2 that the UK has a shortage of 
engineers, is not producing enough engineers, and estimates 
that 600,000 new engineers will be needed over the next seven 
years to help build and maintain new and growing industries. 
While acknowledging that the UK is currently in balance in 
most areas, Engineering UK pointed to a particular shortage 
of  technicians and manufacturing engineers (the UK is the 
sixth largest manufacturing economy in the world) and an 
impending decline in the medium and longer term, as well as 
an increasing shortage of engineers in all areas as many engi-
neers approach retirement (30 per cent of engineering lectur-
ers and academics have retired in recent years) and a decline 
in birth rate, despite increasing numbers of young people in 
tertiary  education. Engineering UK identifi es a huge demand 
for mechanical, civil, medical and biochemical engineers in the 
 infrastructure, industry and health sectors, and an impend-
ing demand for engineers in (re)emerging industries associ-
ated with nuclear power,  renewable  energy and, particularly, 
 climate change mitigation and adaptation. Th e importance 
of attracting the interest of parents, careers advisors as well as 
young people themselves to raise the status of engineering was 
also emphasized, and the role of practical, project-based work 
at school and related out-of-school activities.
Other governments and professional engineering bodies that 
have identifi ed the shortage of engineers as a national priority 
include South Africa;  a target was set in 2008 of producing up 
to 2,500 engineers per year, as part of the (then) government’s 
Joint Initiative on Priority Skills Acquisition (JIPSA) launched in 
2006 to help address the skills shortages that were considered 
to be a key constraint to economic growth. Th e main plan was 
to develop roads, electricity, water and housing, to increase 
economic capacity for which a dramatically increased supply 
of engineers was required. Engineering graduations increased 
from 1,200 graduations per year in 2000 to 1,500 in 2008 (the 
numbers and needs issue is discussed by the author, Allyson 
Lawless, in this Report (section 7.2.4). To counter their short-
age of engineers, Morocco introduced a plan to train 10,000 
engineers per year in 2007, and the President of the Institute of 
Engineers Malaysia, Prof. Datuk Chuah Hean Teik, emphasized 
2 Available at: http://www.engineeringuk.com/viewitem.cfm?cit_id=382740 (Accessed: 
27 May 2010).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   311 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
312
in 2009 that the present 60,000 engineers in the country would 
need to be increased to 200,000 engineers by 2020.3
Th e greening of engineering
Engineering is one of the most important activities in the con-
text of  climate change mitigation and adaptation, and sustain-
able or green engineering is one of the major areas of need 
and growth for engineering.4 Many countries have already 
introduced policies and initiatives for  climate change mitiga-
tion and adaptation prior to the 2009 United Nations Climate 
Change Conference in Copenhagen, and together with the 
specifi c outcomes of COP15, this will be one of the greatest 
demands and challenges that engineering has ever faced. One 
of the fi rst challenges is to make sure that there are enough 
appropriately qualifi ed and experienced engineers to meet 
this demand; this will require the development of new courses, 
training materials and systems of  accreditation. Young people 
will hopefully be attracted to such courses, and this will help to 
raise overall awareness of the role and importance of engineer-
ing in development. Young people should also be encouraged 
to go into engineering, as engineering will be at the very centre 
of eff orts to build a carbon-free future.
In terms of mitigation and adaptation, the investment in tech-
nology and  infrastructure will be signifi cant, and with a likely 
doubling of coal use by 2030, the need for carbon capture and 
sequestration and related technologies will be on a scale of 
the petrochemical and fossil-fuel industry. Many countries are 
looking to (re)develop nuclear power generation, which will 
be equally challenging, as the nuclear industry has declined 
over the last decades and many new engineers will be required. 
Th e  renewable  energy sector has been developing over the 
last decade, and will need to develop further to keep up with 
demand. Th e same applies to the housing and  transportation 
sectors. Th e demand for engineers will increase dramatically. 
While increasing market demand will help attract young peo-
ple into engineering, it will take over fi ve years to develop 
courses to produce graduates, therefore urgent government 
action is required now to support course development and 
associated R&D and  innovation. Although investment in cur-
rent technology, rather than R&D for new technology, is the 
pressing issue, new technology will be required in the decades 
to come and governments need to invest now to encourage 
the development of R&D and industry in this direction; the 
next main wave of technological development. At the same 
time, developed country governments need to support the 
development of R&D and associated industries in develop-
ing countries, and to minimize  brain drain, which may help 
address developed country human resource needs, but will 
3 Prof. Datuk Chuah Hean Teik, President of the Institute of Engineers Malaysia, at the 
IEM 50th anniversary in 2009.
4 Morton, Oliver. Wanted: Green Engineers, Th e World in 2010, Th e Economist, Decem-
ber 2009.
make matters worse in developing countries, where increasing 
numbers of engineers will also be required.
Need for better numbers
Th e data and examples discussed above also indicate that 
 statistics and indicators for engineering are in serious need 
of refi ning and redefi ning. Th e data for engineering is col-
lected under guidelines developed particularly by the OECD 
 NESTI group (National Experts on Science and Technology 
Indicators), and is collected and analysed at such an over-
all level as to be of limited usefulness in answering many of 
the questions relating to engineering raised above. Th ese 
guidelines have been developed with particular reference to 
the situation in OECD  countries relating to R&D (the  Fra-
scati Manual),  innovation (the  Oslo Manual) and human 
resources (the  Canberra Manual). Other information is also 
used, for example, for  enrolment and graduation from  edu-
cation data (International Standard Classifi cation of Educa-
tion, ISCED) and labour force surveys (from the International 
Labour Organization, ILO).
The data, for example, combine ‘scientists and engineers’ 
without disaggregating into science and engineering or the 
various fi elds of science and engineering, and focus on R&D 
without specifying the division of  research and development 
and the respective roles of science and engineering. Data on 
patents, scientifi c publications and  innovation are presented 
without reference to the identity of their authors in science 
or engineering (and the fact that publishing papers is less of a 
career priority for engineers than for scientists), as well as what 
constitutes  innovation, who does it and where it takes place. 
While the origins of international trade in high-tech products 
in various fi elds of engineering should be more apparent, a 
clearer indication and attribution of this, and the origins and 
destinations of exports and imports, would also be most use-
ful in analysing issues related to the technological balance of 
payments.
Th ese present indicators are of limited use in analysing the 
need for, types and numbers of engineers required at national 
and international levels to promote development. Statistics 
and indicators need to be refi ned and in some cases redefi ned 
to allow better disaggregation between science and engineer-
ing and the various fields of engineering and engineering 
employment (e.g. industry, teaching or  research). Th is will 
facilitate a better understanding of the role of engineers in 
R&D, patenting, publishing and  innovation, the contribution 
of engineers and engineering to international trade and the 
role of engineering in development. It will also help dramati-
cally in providing data for policy-makers and planners.  
Considering the importance of engineering, science and tech-
nology in the knowledge  society and economy, it is surprising 
that better data is not available on these most important driv-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   312 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
313
ers of social and  economic development. If the data that exists 
can be disaggregated by gender, surely a better disaggregation 
into science and engineering, and various fi elds of science and 
engineering, should also be possible? Th e answer here is that 
policy-makers need to ask for such data and indicators; just 
as gender disaggregated data became available in response to 
requests from policy-makers. 
Another approach to the needs and numbers issue in engi-
neering is to look at the approach of other professions, such 
as doctors, lawyers and teachers, to the same issue. While the 
demand for lawyers is more variable and elastic around the 
world, and the demand for teachers more directly determined 
by school age populations, the need for doctors, physicians 
and associated senior health service professionals perhaps 
most closely approximates that of engineers. Th e numbers of 
doctors per capita is also similar to that for engineers – on 
average thirteen doctors per 10,000 people, in richer countries 
rising to over twenty, and in poorer countries falling to below 
fi ve per 10,000. Doctors and physicians are also more in the 
public eye, however, as improvements in health are linked to 
the supply, and shortage, of healthcare workers. Models have 
been developed to estimate the need, demand for and sup-
ply of doctors, and the identifi cation of potential shortages. It 
would be most useful to explore models and the  forecasting 
of the need and demand for and supply of doctors and physi-
cians with the view of developing and applying similar models 
to engineering so as to examine and improve the health of a 
nation’s technology and  infrastructure.
Technical capacity-building 7.2.2 
and  WFEO
Daniel Clinton and Russell Jones
Th e World Federation of Engineering Organizations, through 
its Committee on Capacity Building, is dedicated to assisting 
developing countries to engage eff ectively in the global market 
place via technical capacity-building.
In the pursuit of a more secure, stable and sustainable world, 
developing countries seek to enhance their human, institu-
tional and  infrastructure capacity. To do so they need a solid 
base of technologically-prepared people to eff ectively improve 
their economies and quality of life. Such a base will facilitate 
the infusion of development aid and provide a basis for busi-
ness partnerships and development by local entrepreneurs. 
In a coordinated approach, UNESCO and  WFEO are mount-
ing major eff orts at technical capacity-building in developing 
countries.
Economic development, and indeed  human development, can 
be stimulated by building the technical capacity of a work-
force through quality engineering  education programmes. A 
competent technical workforce can then provide several paths 
to  economic development: by addressing local and national 
technical needs; by developing small business start-ups and 
technically competent entrepreneurs; by the creation and 
attraction of technically-orientated companies that will invest; 
by eff ective utilization of foreign aid funds; and by providing a 
legacy of appropriate  infrastructure and technically compe-
tent people capable of operating and maintaining it.
Capacity-building can be defi ned as, ‘the building of human, 
institutional and  infrastructure capacity to help societies 
develop secure, stable and sustainable economies, govern-
ments and other institutions through mentoring, training, 
 education, physical projects, the infusion of financial and 
other resources and, most importantly, the motivation and 
inspiration of people to improve their lives.’
A simpler statement is that capacity-building in the develop-
ment context is the process of assisting people to develop the 
technical skills to address their own needs for improving the 
living  standards and prosperity of their own people and, from 
there, building a sustainable  society.  
Attempts to build capacity are most successful as a partnership 
when they are driven by the host nation working together with 
the supplier of assistance. Identifi cation of key stakeholders of 
the host nation who have vision and drive, but also connec-
tions to key decision-makers in central and local government 
are essential. Th ose stakeholders can assist in defi ning and pri-
oritizing the greatest needs, and means to achieve them. Th e 
resources of the supplier can then be used most eff ectively. 
Responding to the needs of the developing world requires a 
‘paradigm shift’ not only in governments, engineering asso-
ciations, and charitable foundations, but also in the academic 
and business worlds.
In the global economy of the twenty-fi rst century, engineers 
play a key role in overall  economic development for countries 
and regions. In the well-developed countries, the role of the 
engineer is well understood and utilized. In many developing 
countries, the available pool of engineering talent is below crit-
ical mass, often to the extent that even vital and basic needs, 
such as the need for clean  water supply and sanitation, are not 
being met.
Technical capacity-building eff orts should therefore aim to 
develop a suffi  cient pool of skilled engineers to bring about 
several desirable outcomes, including:
addressing the United Nations  ■  Millennium Development 
Goals including  poverty reduction, safe water and sanita-
tion, clean  energy and  transportation;
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   313 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
314
engaging eff ectively in the global economy through direct  ■
foreign investment, international trade,  mobility of engi-
neers and the fl ow of work to countries with cost-eff ective 
talent;
ensuring that international aid funds are utilized eff ectively  ■
and effi  ciently for initial project implementation, for long-
term operation and maintenance and for the development 
of capacity for future work; and
stimulation of job creation, through entrepreneurship and  ■
enterprise, including the creation of career paths to attract 
and inspire future engineers.
Capacity-building should be driven by the needs of the ben-
efi ciary; there are a number of approaches that yield eff ective 
results. Th ese include helping the key institutions: the private 
sector, universities and professional societies, to evolve. For 
externally funded  infrastructure projects, having a capacity-
building component explicitly included to train operators, 
maintenance staff  and the engineers involved in the design 
and construction phases, is highly desirable. Th e intent should 
be to leave the local engineering community capable of exe-
cuting similar projects entirely on their own, without the need 
for external assistance; the goal is to create the local capability, 
including  consulting engineering practices and design-build 
companies, which attract capable people to grow and develop 
the human, institutional and  infrastructure capacity within 
the country.
Refl ections on previous eff orts
In a detailed study of the results of foreign aid to developing coun-
tries over the past several decades, William Easterly concludes, in 
his book, Th e Elusive Quest for Growth (MIT Press, 2002):
Previous eff orts have tried to use foreign aid, investment in 
machines, fostering  education at the primary and second-
ary levels, controlling population growth, and giving loans 
and debt relief conditional on reforms to stimulate the eco-
nomic growth that would allow these countries to move 
toward self suffi  ciency… 
…all of these eff orts over the past few decades have failed to 
lead to the desired economic growth… 
…these massive and expensive eff orts have failed because 
they did not hit the fundamental human behavioural chord 
that ‘people respond to incentives’.
Having concluded that past eff orts at stimulating economic 
growth in developing countries have failed, Easterly outlines 
what he thinks would work. He argues that there are two areas 
that can likely lead to the desired economic growth in devel-
oping countries, and can lead them toward economic self suf-
fi ciency: 
the utilization of advanced technologies, and1. 
 2. education that leads to high skills in technological areas.
While emphasis on health and basic relief needs must con-
tinue, there is also a critical need to break the cycles of poverty 
through development of strong and competitive economies 
that can relate to world markets. Th e building of indigenous 
pools of people with quality educations in science, technol-
ogy and engineering can help lead to economic growth and 
healthy economies. 
What is needed
A large pool of high-quality, accredited engineering graduates 
is needed in developing countries. Th ere is a vital need for 
the creation of engineering jobs. Th is, however, is a chicken-
and-egg situation – which comes fi rst? Increased demand for 
engineers will result only when there is a suffi  cient pool of 
well-qualifi ed graduates to attract direct foreign investment, 
multinational corporation operations, off shore outsourcing 
from developed countries and entrepreneurial start-ups; but 
the jobs must be there in order to attract people into study-
ing engineering. Government offi  cials must therefore pursue 
eff ective  economic development and job generation strategies 
in parallel with making the needed investments to enhance 
the quality and quantity of engineering graduates – one can-
not go without the other.
At the 2004 meeting of the American Society of Civil 
Engineers, the South Korean delegation to the Capacity 
Building Forum presented the results of South Korea’s 
investment over the past three decades in the number 
and quality of engineering graduates. In 1970, South Korea 
had about 6,000 engineering graduates. In 1980, these 
were increased to 14,000. By 1990, the fi gure had jumped 
to about 80,000. When plotted against South Korea’s per 
capita GNP growth, the number of engineering graduates 
almost directly parallels the growth of the South Korean 
economy, off set by a few years. Th is data appears to show 
a direct cause and eff ect: investment in building a well-
qualifi ed and suffi  ciently large pool of engineers leads to 
 economic development.
In the case of India there has been a long-term eff ort to 
increase the numbers of engineering graduates and the 
quality of their  education. Whereas in the past, many of 
these graduates sought employment outside the country, 
now many are returning and newer graduates are staying 
to work in India in the software and design industries, 
often to high-tech cities where well-paying careers and 
extensive numbers of colleagues await them. Th e growing 
number of technically profi cient and well-educated spe-
cialists also has enabled India to become a prime location 
for the outsourcing technical support by the world’s lead-
ing technology fi rms.
In China, already a major economic power, the proportion 
of fi rst science and engineering degrees to all bachelor’s-
equivalent degrees was 59 per cent, as compared to about 
33 per cent in the US in 2001 (Source: Science and Engineer-
ing Indicators 2004, National Science Foundation, National 
Science Board).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   314 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
315
Engineering  education in developing countries should include 
signifi cant coverage of entrepreneurship – how to start, oper-
ate, and grow a small business. Engineering graduates should 
be equipped to take a path of creating jobs rather than seeking 
one, if they wish to do so.
Developing countries need mechanisms to apply  research and 
development results from local universities and companies 
for economic gain. Such mechanisms as incubators and small 
business development fi nancing are needed in the mix.
As technology-based economies grow in developing coun-
tries, one important source of top talent – in addition to new 
engineering graduates – is the return of previous emigrants 
from the diaspora. Several countries that are developing well 
have benefi ted from the return of former citizens who see new 
opportunities in their home countries, and bring back foreign 
experience and network contacts to the benefi t of their home 
countries.
Capacity-building for 7.2.3 
sustainability in Africa
 Dawie Botha
Introduction
Th e continent of Africa  has vast natural and human resources 
that remain largely underdeveloped and untapped due to a 
number of issues and challenges, including:
Large scale illiteracy, and a lack of skills and scientifi c and  ■
technological expertise due to a lack of  education and train-
ing.
Th e local political and social instability that plague many  ■
countries.
Th e environmental challenges prevalent in Africa  ■  including 
natural  disasters caused by both natural phenomena as well 
as human interventions.
Large-scale illness due to poor  ■  infrastructure and pandem-
ics including malaria and HIV/AIDS.
Globalization issues that often marginalize African coun- ■
tries due to economic policies driven by the more devel-
oped countries of the world and consequential exploitation 
of resources and raw materials. 
Ill-advised aid and donor programmes driven by more  ■
developed countries and international funding agencies and 
structures, which do not necessarily take the principles of 
aff ordability, sustainability,  appropriate technology, transfer 
of skills and lack of indigenous capacity into account.
Poor ability to network locally and internationally with peers  ■
due to limited capacity and funding resources, impacting 
negatively on sharing and developing good and best prac-
tice for local and indigenous purposes and leading to isola-
tion, an inability to keep up with technological progress and 
a decreasing ability to compete in world markets (which 
ultimately increases dependence on imported technology 
and goods).
A struggle to aim for and maintain high ethical  ■  standards 
and adhere to  anti-corruption principles in the face of 
imposed and implied ways to do business from a weak, 
negotiating position.
A lack of basic  ■  infrastructure to use as a platform for further 
development.
A widening gap in communication in spite of electronic  ■
advances (for example in Internet access and mobile tele-
phony) that is exacerbated by backlogs in services and 
growing populations.
Th e worldwide shortage of engineering and built environ- ■
ment skills has led to a skewed marketplace, which has led 
to ‘ brain drain’ and still attracts huge numbers of profession-
als away from their home countries in Africa  that educated 
Given the strong relation between creation of a 
critical mass of educated and skilled engineering 
and science graduates and economic and  social 
development, efforts should be made to build 
these capacities in developing countries. Th is is 
one of the conclusions reached by both UNESCO 
and the World Federation of Engineers ( WFEO). In 
keeping with its mission,  WFEO created its Stand-
ing Committee on Capacity Building at the  WFEO 
General Assembly in Tunis in 2003. Th e Committee 
focuses on several priority projects, including:
Engineering for the Americas: Th is project, being 
carried out in conjunction with the Organization 
of American States, is focused on developing plans 
for enhancing engineering  education and practice 
throughout Latin American and the Caribbean. 
Th e focus is on upgrading engineering  education 
and on its quality assurance for that  education. 
African Initiatives: Many of the societal, human 
and economic needs identifi ed in the  Millennium 
Development Goals and other similar descriptions 
of the situation in developing countries are present 
in sub-Saharan  Africa. Th e  WFEO Committee on 
Capacity Building (CCB) has developed programs 
to address a signifi cant subset of those needs, in 
areas of its expertise. Activities have included: 
engineering  education workshops; development 
of  accreditation systems; entrepreneurial training, 
particularly for women; stimulation of internship 
programs; electronic delivery of courses; formation 
of  Engineers Without Borders cells; and faculty and 
student exchanges.
South-South interactions: Th e CCB has collabo-
rated in promoting South-South interactions, 
including technology transfer among developing 
countries. For example, CCB has collaborated with 
the South African Institution of Civil Engineers 
to promote meetings of the African Engineering 
Forum, involving a dozen countries in Southern 
 Africa. Th e Institution of Professional Engineers 
 New Zealand, a member of the CCB is similarly 
working with a group of low population South 
Pacifi c island nations to address their needs.
 WFEO Standing Committee on Capacity Building 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   315 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
316
and trained them. Indeed, a vicious circle has developed, 
as weakened local engineering capacity ultimately leads to 
the need to import skills for projects, and few international 
projects pay any attention to skills transfer to locals.
Some donor countries or funding models employ ‘tied aid’  ■
where professional capacity and equipment and materials 
are prescribed by the donor – in many such cases little or 
no skills transfer takes place, and occasionally the receiving 
country is permanently tied to the donor country for main-
tenance and management of the asset.
Th e demands of the philosophy of sustainability can only be 
met if the principles of Sustainable Engineering are adhered 
to. Th is concept can be defi ned as striving for appropriate, 
aff ordable and sustainable engineering services and  infra-
structure within the local environment. This concept in 
turn demands the development and maintenance of indig-
enous scientifi c and technological skills and expertise sup-
ported and facilitated by the key stakeholders including 
government, private enterprise, academic and professional 
 structures.
Serious challenges face all the organizations attempting to 
tackle capacity-building. Th ere is for example a plethora of 
funding entities, each with their own preferences, rules and 
regulations, which in some cases make it diffi  cult to access 
funding effi  ciently and eff ectively. Th e problem is exacerbated 
by the fact that the smaller organizations, institutions and 
NGOs have limited capacity.
A number of issues became evident during the interaction that 
the Africa  Engineers Forum had since it developed its Protocol 
and actively started to engage with world bodies including the 
World Federation of Engineering Organizations, UNESCO, the 
Department for International Development UK, the African 
Development Bank, the World Bank and many others. Th ese 
include:
Th e vast diff erences in how the 1. developing world perceives 
and experiences capacity-building and what it means.
Th e vast diff erences in how the 2. developed world perceives 
and experiences capacity-building and what it means.
Th e vast diff erences in how the geographic regions per-3. 
ceives and experiences capacity-building and what it 
means.
Th e ‘over-supply’ of donor organizations and entities that 4. 
would like to do ‘good’. 
Th e substantial lack of integration of eff ort in terms of 5. 
capacity-building.
Th e measure of paternalism and turf protection evident 6. 
within and among funding entities.
Delivery on ideas for capacity-building vanishes as quickly 7. 
as the realities become evident and often ends up in talk-
ing about talks and talking in itself, which often seems to 
be the only outcome of hugely expensive get-togethers.
Th e initiators of ideas and the providers of resources like 8. 
funding are not always aware of one another, in addition 
there is often a mismatch of some sorts, misunderstand-
ings happen all the time and ultimately many, if not most 
of valuable programmes and initiatives remain on shelves 
or in fi les.
Even if funding becomes available for capacity-building, 9. 
substantial red tape, stop-start approaches and strings 
attached are the order of the day and, in some cases, pol-
icy changes torpedo viable and eff ective programmes. 
Th e principle of ‘teach a man to fi sh’ is by far not enough, 10. 
since longer term sustainability of that principle is more 
often than not, not taken into account. Th e principle 
should not only be to teach the man to fi sh, but how to 
make his own fi shing rod, how to market his fi sh, how to 
sustain fi sh numbers by embarking on aqua culture and 
so forth.
Many capacity-building programmes are based on what 11. 
volunteers can contribute, but volunteerism only goes so 
far as that which will be allowed by an employer, organi-
zation or individual. Th e lack of continuity of volunteer 
members of organizations and the lack of permanent 
administrative capacity to support capacity-building is a 
serious drawback to get programmes going and to keep 
them going.
Components of sustainable engineering
Th e twenty-six items of the Protocol of the Africa  Engineers 
Forum were expanded upon and explored to fi nd a common 
understanding of the various elements that may need atten-
tion in terms of what was defi ned as CAPACITY.
Th ese twenty-six items were categorized and grouped under 
four main headings: Individual, Institutional, Technical 
and Decision making. Two additional areas of crucial capacity 
were added, i.e. Business and Resources and Supplies. It must 
however be noted that the protocol does not address these 
areas of capacity since it is deemed to be outside the area 
in which professional societies operate. It was nevertheless 
agreed that these two pillars are integral elements to achieve 
and maintain sustainability in engineering.© U
N
ES
CO
/D
. R
og
er
 Water tank branch canal, 
Cape Verde.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   316 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
317
In 2007, the delegates from a number of Africa  Engineers 
Forum, signatories at the UNESCO International Policy Work-
shop Engineering for Poverty Eradication and the  Millennium 
Development Goals workshop in Johannesburg, identifi ed a 
number of burning issues and items that needed attention. 
Th ese burning issues were categorized according to the so-
called six pillars of sustainability, which was developed from 
the Africa  Engineers Protocol. The list is not meant to be 
a defi nitive number of issues but merely points to areas of 
need or which need attention, or areas in which capacity or 
capacity-building of some sorts was deemed to be necessary 
or appropriate. In some cases these issues may appear under 
more than one ‘pillar’ but that must be seen as an issue that 
needs addressing by various entities and in various categories 
of capacity sectors.
Individual
Continued Professional Development ■
Productivity enhancement to facilitate international com- ■
petition for investment
Brain drain and mobility factors ■
Institutional
Networks of excellence ■
Regional  ■  education and training institutions for engineer-
ing
Appropriate  ■  curricula for engineering
Internationally accredited and recognized  ■  education and 
training programmes and facilities for the development of 
engineering professionals
Internationally accredited and recognized professional reg- ■
istration systems
Research and development ■
Regional centres of excellence ■
Technical
Common engineering  ■  standards
Decision-making
Climate change ■
Recycling ■
Energy ■
Career guidance from early ages ■
Career guidance for postgraduates ■
Numbers and Needs –  ■  research in the fi eld of engineering as 
a tool for decision-making
Infrastructure Report cards as a tool for decision-making ■
Research and Development funding ■
Engineering terminology translated for decision-makers ■
Legislation for water ■
Th e need for anecdotes ■
Cross-cutting role of engineering ■
Free  ■  education at secondary level
Accountability and transparency ■
Compulsory registration for engineering professionals ■
Reliable statistics ■
Harmonized and standardized procurement and delivery  ■
processes
Preferential access to markets – creating a level playing  ■
fi eld
Engineering and HIV-AIDS ■
Th e Health Connection – the role of engineering in health  ■
and safety of communities
Good governance – organigrams and staff  structures for  ■
governments
Fit for purpose, aff ordable and appropriate  ■  infrastructure
Benchmarking levels as a foundation to assist with decision- ■
making
Th e contribution of labour based construction ■
Funding and policy regarding mathematics, science and  ■
technology teaching by government departments
Donors – criteria and justifi cation of projects ■
Understanding the TOTAL engineering team skills need –  ■
from labourer to engineer
Business
Mobilizing and facilitating the private sector in  ■  infrastruc-
ture
Private sector support and funding for mathematics, sci- ■
ence and technology teaching
Information and  ■  Communication Technology
Resources and supplies
Mathematics, science and technology teaching – tools for  ■
teachers and tools for learners
Costs of raw materials ■
Examples of capacity-building initiatives and 
programmes
Th e following Southern African programmes or initiatives are 
considered to be a sample of capacity-building tools and ini-
tiatives which cover a small portion of what would be needed 
in terms of addressing some areas where capacity for sustain-
able engineering is deemed crucial. Th ere are numerous other 
Individual Institutional Technical Decision 
making
Business Ressources 
& supplies
Figure 1: Th e six pillars of capacity for sustainable engineering
Sustainable engineering
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   317 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
318
programmes from across the world that would warrant men-
tion and many of those can be transplanted easily and imple-
mented with very little adaptation. Th ese examples prove an 
important point: eff ective and innovative capacity-building 
programmes exist and are off ered in many places. Th e chal-
lenge is to get these programmes rolled out in all developed as 
well as developing countries. Other examples include activities 
in career guidance, harmonization of procurement,  standards 
and guidelines.
Numbers & Needs – Addressing the imbalances in the Civil  ■
Engineering Profession in South Africa ( N&N1)
Th is  research study and suggested interventions is deemed 
to be world class and a world first. From the UNESCO 
Workshops on Poverty Alleviation it was agreed that this 
model should be replicated in every country in the world 
to facilitate decision-making regarding build environment 
professions. 
Numbers & Needs in local government – Addressing civil  ■
engineering – the critical profession for service delivery 
(N&N2)
Th is  research study and suggested interventions is a result 
of fi ndings during one of the programmes that was imple-
mented from the list of interventions in N&N1, commonly 
known as ENERGYS. Once more, the UNESCO Workshop 
delegates in Johannesburg in November 2007 agreed that 
this was another major contribution to the capacity-build-
ing environment.
ENERGYS  ■ – a case study in transferring of skills and accel-
erating experiential training for  technicians and  technolo-
gist students from universities of technology. Th e project 
involves mobilizing teams of retired senior engineers and 
students and deploying them to local authorities. In addi-
tion to the transfer of skills, teams unblocked many bottle-
necks, and enhanced capacity at local authorities around 
RSA.
Numberwise  ■ – programme to bring the poor numeracy 
skills of students entering  engineering studies up to accept-
able levels.
Tertiary Education  ■ – a case study about the challenges fac-
ing tertiary institutions in South Africa  and possibly other 
countries in the world.
Solutions suggested
In order to achieve eff ective and successful progress in capac-
ity-building related to  infrastructure, there are a number of 
important and crucial core components and it suggested that 
these issues be accepted and implemented. Th ese include: 
Round table integrated approaches to all elements. ■
Identifi cation of common or generic needs and classifi ca- ■
tion of areas of need.
A common database of funding agencies and donors and  ■
their requirements. 
A common database of training providers. ■
A common database of training materials or programmes  ■
that are available.
A common administrative support system which could be  ■
accessed for purposes of capacity-building needs.
Well-designed templates for plans of action, roll out guide- ■
lines, clear goals, responsibilities and deadlines. 
A networking mechanism to share ideas, get feedback on  ■
programmes and share information in general.
Credible and strong custodians of programmes. ■
Well-recognized and credible guarantors and non-mone- ■
tary sponsors and endorsers.
Harmonization of processes and programmes. ■
It is also important that:
A programme to strengthen engineering in Africa  ■  is devel-
oped as an urgent priority to address the problems of seri-
ous and increasing human and institutional capacity and 
resource shortages in engineering in Africa.  
A programme of human and institutional capacity-building  ■
is developed under the auspices of the Africa  Engineers 
Forum and the proposed International Engineering Pro-
gramme.
A programme of continuous professional development  ■
( CPD) is developed and offered in interested countries 
under the auspices of the Africa  Engineers Forum and the 
proposed International Engineering Programme.
Activities relating to advocacy, information and communi- ■
cation are developed under the auspices of the Africa  Engi-
neers Forum and the proposed International Engineering 
Programme.
Conclusion
Th e Policy Statement from the UNESCO workshop on poverty 
alleviation should be universally accepted as a step towards 
building engineering capacity in developing countries. Pro-
grammes to strengthen engineering in Africa  should be devel-
 Industry - Dzamandzar 
Sugar Factory, Madagascar.
©
 U
N
ES
CO
/D
. R
og
er
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   318 14/09/10   15:35:10
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
319
oped as an urgent priority to address the problems of serious 
and increasing human and institutional capacity and resource 
shortages in engineering in Africa.  To achieve this an Engineer-
ing Programme for Africa  and for other developing regions 
needs to be developed by UNESCO, in conjunction with Africa 
 Engineers Forum and other participating organizations as a 
priority activity of the proposed International Engineering 
Programme.
Needs and numbers in civil 7.2.4 
engineering in South Africa
 Allyson Lawless
Introduction
‘Scientists discover the world that exists; engineers create the 
world that never was’
Th eodore Von Karman, aerospace engineer
The economic well-being of any nation is dependent on 
growth, the availability of fi nance, policies conducive to sound 
development and capacity. It is essential that countries con-
stantly review economic scenarios and the associated develop-
ment required to maintain or improve the status quo. In much 
of the Western world, the engineering capacity to support 
growth has declined over the past twenty to thirty years 
posing a signifi cant threat to long-term sustainability. Out-
sourcing and privatization have further depleted engineering 
capacity in the public sector, hence it now falls to voluntary 
associations such as engineering institutions and associations 
to review supply and demand of engineering professions to 
ensure that adequate training and capacity development is 
taking place to support their nation’s well-being. 
In South Africa,  the accelerated development that is occurring 
has found the professions wanting in terms of capacity. Th is 
paper describes a comprehensive  research programme car-
ried out by the South African Institution of Civil Engineering 
(SAICE) that culminated in the publication of an authoritative 
book outlining all the interventions required to rebuild the 
skills base. 
Background
Th e World Summit on Sustainable Development held in Johan-
nesburg in 2002 focused world thinking on quality of life and 
the environment. Many of the goals have fallen to engineers to 
address. Th ese include halving the number of people without 
access to safe drinking water or basic sanitation; developing 
and manufacturing chemicals that are more environmentally 
friendly than at present; and implementing  poverty reduc-
tion strategies. Clearly the fi rst two are the domain of the 
civil engineer, and the third falls squarely on chemists and 
chemical engineers. Th e link between  poverty reduction and 
engineering is not so obvious. However, J. F. Kennedy off ered 
a clue when he said, ‘It is not wealth which makes good roads 
possible, but good roads which make wealth possible.’ Indeed, 
roads – again the domain of the civil engineer – off er access to 
 education and the job market and make it possible to trade. 
Job creation – the escape from poverty – is also dependent on 
the availability of  energy and machines, the domain of electri-
cal and mechanical engineers. 
Th us a sound engineering skills base is critical to the well-being 
of any nation. Engineers were centre stage during the pioneer-
ing era of John McAdam, Th omas Telford, the Stephensons and 
others in the nineteenth century who gave us surfaced roads, 
bridges, rail, water networks and waterborne sanitation. Even 
in the earlier part of the twentieth century, engineers held top 
public sector posts such as city engineer and director-general 
of  infrastructure departments. 
Sadly, in the latter part of the twentieth century the engineer-
ing profession found itself sidelined, playing second fi ddle to 
the growing management and fi nancial structures in most 
organizations. Engineering departments were not only side-
lined, but were at the mercy of non-technical support depart-
ments for funding and permission to institute developments, 
upgrades and even operations that are essential to ensure sus-
tainable services. 
As a result,  infrastructure development, in particular main-
tenance, has received inadequate attention. Furthermore, 
because the engineering profession had fallen from grace, 
fewer young people were inclined to study engineering. Th e 
result is that many countries are suff ering from engineering 
shortages and face massive upgrading bills to restore their 
unmaintained  infrastructure. 
Th e world is once again starting to realize that engineers are 
critical for successful  infrastructure service delivery, operations 
and maintenance. Th is at a time when much of the  infrastruc-
ture in developing economies is inadequate and much  infra-
structure in the developed world is starting to fail. As a result, 
headlines about the need for and the shortage of engineers are 
being seen with increasing frequency, and capacity constraints 
are being cited as the most signifi cant hindrance to develop-
ment. 
Th e challenges facing the post-1994 democratic government 
of South Africa  have been exacerbated by the enormous devel-
opment backlogs caused by the policy of apartheid, resulting 
in more than half the population having limited or no access 
to basic services. Th e country is thus now embarking on public 
sector  infrastructure development to the tune of some R500 
billion (US$80 billion) to ensure the desired 6 per cent growth 
required to stimulate job creation and alleviate poverty. Th e 
poverty relief cycle, shown in Figure 1, outlines the need for 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   319 14/09/10   15:35:11
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
320
bulk and economic  infrastructure to stimulate growth, and for 
improved domestic developments to address food security 
and  education and health facilities to build the workforce.
However, reference to the shortage of engineers is glibly glossed 
over without an understanding of what is actually meant. Can 
countries simply poach engineers from others? Is it a matter 
of placing bigger, better and more adverts in the employment 
pages or is it a global challenge? Should new engineering facul-
ties be opened? Or is there a systemic problem that must be 
addressed? Without detailed  research these questions cannot 
easily be answered.
A  research programme
In 2003, the South African Institution of Civil Engineering 
(SAICE) embarked on a comprehensive  research. Th e pro-
gramme determined the number, age, gender and racial 
profi les of all civil engineers,  technologists and  technicians 
in South Africa,  in a bid to understand the constraints and 
develop solutions to address this vexing challenge. It was found 
that some 15,000 civil engineers,  technologists and  technicians 
were practising in the country, distributed per sector.
In October 2005, Numbers and Needs: Addressing imbal-
ances in the civil engineering profession5 was published and 
articulated that bottlenecks existed in the profession from 
pre-school to post-retirement. Th e fi ndings and recommenda-
tions have been adopted by both private and public sector 
employers grappling with challenges of training, recruitment 
and retention and also by national government to guide policy 
development and set budgets for  education, employment and 
 infrastructure development. 
Findings
Demand
Shortages in both the private and public sector were identi-
fi ed. For example, in 1998 a study was carried out to determine 
the future demand for cement. Figure 3 shows the high- and 
low-road scenarios projected at the time. Th e red line shows 
the actual fi gures at the time the book went to press in Sep-
tember 2005, indicating the need to increase numbers similar 
to those employed during the previous boom. Having suff ered 
a 20-year decline in construction activities, many of those 
engineers and  technicians who were trained for the boom 
of the 1970s and early 1980s had left the industry and often 
the country. Th ose trained in that era, who were still in the 
industry, were of course the baby-boomers who have started 
to retire and will continue to do so in signifi cant numbers in 
the next fi ve to eight years. 
Supply
When analysing supply, many restrictions were identified. 
Weaknesses in the home environment, parental guidance and 
schooling were constraints to an adequate pool of learners 
entering tertiary institutions. In a bid to increase the number 
entering various institutions, entrance criteria were lowered, 
resulting in high dropout rates and in students taking much 
longer than the minimum period to complete their studies. 
Under-funding of tertiary institutions resulted in the appoint-
ment of fewer, and in some instances, inadequately qualifi ed or 
experienced lecturing staff  and inadequately equipped depart-
ments, and so on. Furthermore, the structure of the diploma 
course for  technicians required that students spend a year in 
industry before completing their fi nal semester(s). Industry, 
being so short of engineers, is reluctant to take on anyone with 
5 Lawless, A. 2005. Numbers and needs: addressing imbalances in the civil engineering 
profession. Midrand: SAICE.
Figure1: Escaping the poverty trap
Consulting
Miscellaneous
Mining
1%Parastatals and 
water boards
Local governments
11%
5%
3%
6%
6%
5%
12%
43%
5% 2%
Government: central 
and provincial
Academia and  research
Industrial 1%
Suppliers and 
manufacturers
Contracting – residential
Contracting – 
non-residential
Contracting – civil
Figure 2: Th e distribution of civil engineering professionals in South  Africa, 
April 2005
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   320 14/09/10   15:35:11
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
321
fewer than fi ve years’ experience, hence a catch-22 situation 
developed that prevents students from graduating. 
Figure 4 superimposes the graduation patterns over forty years 
on civil spending. With the huge increase in spending shown in 
Figure 3, it is clear that a commensurate increase in the number 
of graduates is required. Sadly, inadequate workplace training, 
hostility towards gender, affi  rmative action (the existing expe-
rienced group being white males) and poor starting salaries, 
recorded at the time the  research was carried out, resulted in 
poor attraction and retention at graduate level. 
Experienced technical staff  were found to be leaving the indus-
try for a host of reasons including frustration (see next sec-
tion), better prospects in other fi elds, or taking up lucrative 
international contracts. 
Drivers and inhibitors 
Drivers for  economic development, a key part of  human 
develop ment, are:
Growth ■
Availability of fi nance ■
Policies conducive to sound development ■
Favourable interest rates, exchange rates and low infl ation ■
Institutional capacity ■
Inhibitors would obviously be the opposite. As long as all these 
factors are favourable, the private sector will not be held back, 
and indeed the towering cranes that have graced the South 
African skyline in recent years bear witness to private sector 
activity. 
Although items 1 to 4 do not present signifi cant challenges 
in the public sector in present-day South Africa,  the same 
 
R-
bi
lli
on
2000 = 100
40
30
20
10
Construction 
work scenarios
1960 1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
Optimistic
Pessimistic
Reality
Figure 3:  Civil engineering spending and projected spending in South  Africa
500
400
300
200
100
0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
 Civil engineering graduations
Spending in civil construction
N
um
be
r o
f g
ra
du
at
es
C
iv
il 
sp
en
di
ng
 (R
-b
ill
io
n)
19
60
19
62
19
64
19
66
19
68
19
70
19
72
19
74
19
76
19
78
19
80
19
82
19
84
19
86
19
88
19
90
19
92
19
94
19
96
19
98
20
00
20
02
Figure 4:  Civil engineering spending versus civil engineering graduations 
in South  Africa
Immigrants
National diploma graduate
BSc/BEng graduate
In industry from 2004
Leaving the industry
Loss due to prematurate dead
Emigration
Early retirement
Retirement
Figure 5:  Th e ‘do nothing’ approach to skills development in civil 
engineering
22.500
20.000
17.000
15.000
12.500
10.000
7.500
5.000
2.500
0
-2.500
-5.000
-7.500
-10.000
-12.500
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   321 14/09/10   15:35:11
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
322
is not true of item 5 and the changing institutional environ-
ment. For example, central support departments (fi nance, 
human resources, and so on) were set up to assist technical 
staff . However, these support departments have taken over 
and developed myriads of rules, but off er no technical skills; 
instead of supporting delivery, they have become the cause 
of bottle necks as they tend to dictate how projects should 
be carried out. Professional skills and judgement are no longer 
valued or understood and technical staff  are forced to accept 
inappropriate solutions or inaction, which fl ies in the face of 
sound engineering principles. Th ere has thus been a slow but 
steady migration from the public sector to the private sector 
and beyond.
Recommendations 
Looking at Figure 5, if nothing is done to increase the number 
of civil engineering graduates coming into the industry, the 
net fi gure available to the nation in 2020 will hardly be diff er-
ent from the current inadequate number because the gains 
from tertiary institutions will be balanced against the losses 
arising from emigration; those leaving the industry, retirement 
and death. Clearly many initiatives are required to increase the 
capacity in the industry.
Career guidance 
Figure 6 shows that distribution of students studying towards 
a civil engineering diploma in 2005. Th e appalling distribu-
tion clearly needs to be addressed, as signifi cant potential 
is untapped, and few engineers are likely to want to work in 
remote rural areas unless they have been raised in those parts. 
Several national departments have now committed to sup-
port career guidance in remote areas to address these gaps.
Education
Having enticed students into tertiary  education, the dropout 
rate is very high. A change in current teaching at schools is 
clearly needed. Th e London Mathematical Society, in its docu-
ment Tackling the mathematics problem6 stated that: 
‘… recent changes in school mathematics … have greatly dis-
advantaged those who need to continue their mathematical 
training beyond school level ... [there is] a marked decline in 
analytical powers when faced with simple problems requiring 
more than one step…’
Th ey attributed this to the current school system approach 
where learners are led through set questions step-by-step 
rather than being taught the fundamental principles. After 
much campaigning the message has been heard. 
With eff ect from January 2008, the South African Department 
of Education has introduced a new high school mathematics 
6 London Mathematical Society 1995. Tackling the mathematics problem, p 42. Avail-
able at: http://www.lms.ac.uk/policy/tackling/node2.html (Accessed: 27 May 2010).
 curriculum which will ensure that signifi cantly more school 
leavers will have been exposed to rigorous mathematical train-
ing appropriate for engineering and other analytical tertiary 
courses. Th is represents a breakthrough for engineering  edu-
cation but realistically will only yield results for the profession 
many years from now. 
Having estimated the increased number of civil engineering 
graduates who are required to rebuild the skills base, it was 
suggested to the South African government that the total 
number of engineering graduates per annum from universi-
ties should be increased from 1,500 to 2,500 and that output 
should be improved in the universities of technology. It has 
been gratifying to see that these recommendations have also 
been taken seriously. As a result most tertiary institutions have 
received substantial contributions (totalling in excess of R0.5 
billion or US$80 million) towards expanding, updating and 
up-skilling their engineering departments. Enrolments have 
increased over the past two to three years, which augurs well 
for the recommended increase in graduates. During 2008, a 
further  research project was being carried out – as an exten-
sion to the fi rst – to assess the need for more lecturing staff , 
more academic development posts and so on, the outcome of 
which will hopefully further improve the academic environ-
ment and results. 
Repatriation
Th e private and public sector have embarked on major inter-
national campaigns such as the ‘Homecoming revolution’ to 
encourage those who have left to return home. Several organi-
zations have reported success with such projects. 
Redeployment
Possibly the quickest wins are achieved by redeploying those 
who have left the industry or retired. Th e former can generally 
be encouraged to return ‘if the price is right’. Salary surveys 
carried out at the time of the  research pointed to disparities 
in civil engineering salaries compared with those of other engi-
neering disciplines and particularly other professions. Salaries 
in the private sector have increased dramatically over the past 
three years, bringing many back, and the public sector is cur-
rently reviewing its levels, salary scales and the need to pay a 
premium for scarce skills. 
Th e retired category presents the most interesting opportuni-
ties for redeployment, but requires a particular approach. Few 
retired staff  actively scan employment columns for job oppor-
tunities. Many professionals keep up with technical  innova-
tions through their institutional magazines and other media, 
and have a strong desire to share their knowledge. Many retired 
engineers can be employed on a part-time or short-term con-
tract basis simply by emailing retired members in institutional 
databases to off er projects that appeal to their interests. 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   322 14/09/10   15:35:11
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
323
Workplace training
Few young people were found to be gaining adequate work-
place training, as there is a serious shortage of civil engineering 
staff  in the production age group (Figure 7).  
As a result, few who are currently employed have time to brief, 
supervise and check on trainees. Th is means that few young 
graduates can enter the fi eld and make progress. 
Since the retirement age was generally reduced during the 
quiet years, many retired engineers were found to be relatively 
young, fi t and ready for new challenges. A major project was 
therefore mounted to recruit retired engineers and pair them 
with two or three students and graduates in order to tackle 
the many projects for which there is inadequate capacity. Th is 
win-win model has enthusiastically been adopted and funded 
by the South African Government as a result of motivation 
emanating from the  research. Th is initiative is not only assist-
ing with the acceleration of service delivery but at the same 
time is contributing towards growing a new generation of 
engineering professionals. Box below highlights the enormous 
potential that exists using such a model. 
It was also recognized that structured workplace training was 
essential to prepare graduates for professional registration. In 
Figure 6:  Th e home towns of civil engineering students in 2005
0
1
2
3-5
>5
Game Reserves 
and DMAs
Centres with tertiary 
institutions off ering 
civil engineering
Students per 
municipality
Figure 7: Th e age distribution of civil engineering staff  in South  Africa 
in 2005
63
59
55
51
47
43
39
35
31
27
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
A
ge
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   323 14/09/10   15:35:11
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
324
line with modern-day, bottom-line conscious training trends, 
most graduates are given only suffi  cient training to be able to 
perform a specifi c task and earn income for their company. 
Th is does not allow for graduates to understand the whole 
project cycle as shown in Figure 8 and become competent 
professionals able to lead development or work independ-
ently. Not only is this a problem in terms of developing a new 
cadre of engineering professionals for the future, but it results 
in graduates becoming frustrated with the apparent lack of 
opportunities and a seemingly dead-end career. Consequently, 
early losses from the profession or excessive job-hopping with 
little professional progress are experienced. When challeng-
ing companies over this problem, they contend that today’s 
graduates ‘are not what they used to be’ and take much longer 
to train.
In response to this, structured workplace training guidelines 
are being developed, complete with psychometric and abilities 
testing to give companies guidance on the most appropriate 
manner in which to handle each graduate based on his or her 
progress to date. Th is phase is being packaged as the ‘candi-
date phase’ against which tax incentives or skills levies will be 
paid to employers who are prepared to commit to reintroduc-
ing the solid workplace training, which was in place during 
the boom of the 1970s and early 1980s. Th e ‘Case study’ box 
shows one of the fi rst local government teams being exposed 
to structured workplace training. 
Foreign capacity
Because the commencement date of many engineering 
projects had not been set, it was determined that if all the 
above initiatives were successful and projects were staggered, 
the country would have suffi  cient capacity to cope with its 
development challenges. If projects were brought forward or 
the number or size of projects increased substantially, it would 
be necessary to harness foreign skills, either on a short-term 
basis or through dedicated immigration programmes. 
Learning the tricks of the trade
Th e only way to become profi cient in the workplace is to gain prac-
tical experience under the guidance of a seasoned professional. 
According to Skinner,*  a learning theorist, the development of 
professional skills cannot be left to chance but requires compre-
hensive formal instruction, preferably on a one-on-one basis. Below, 
students and graduates paired with mentors hone their civil engi-
neering skills in the workplace.
Students and graduates assist with rural water 
schemes
The Zululand District Municipality is responsible for delivering 
water and sanitation services to just under one million people. It 
was found that technical staff  were insuffi  ciently experienced to 
carry the load, and required dedicated training on all phases of the 
project cycle. A widely experienced old-time engineer held weekly 
classes for thirteen junior civil engineering staff , setting each tasks 
for the following week on which to practice their new found skills. 
After eighteen months of intensive workplace training they were 
all au fait with survey, design, CAD, the call-for-tender process and 
were able to cut their teeth on the construction of major projects 
delivering water to thousands of people. Th is model has formed the 
foundation for the structured approach being developed for the 
industry as a whole.
* Skinner, B.F. 1953. Science and human behaviour. New York: Macmillan.
Case study
Harnessing retired capacity is not unique to South  Africa and 
should be considered by all countries experiencing skills shortages. 
Researching the use of retired staff  to bolster capacity, the Canadi-
ans* have identifi ed that older people fi nd it diffi  cult to slow down 
and missed being able to contribute. Interviewing South African 
retirees, there was a great desire to plough back the knowledge 
and expertise that they had accumulated in their many illustrious 
careers, and to share this with young people. Th e photo below cap-
tures the involvement of ‘Retired wisdom’ at a site meeting.
*  Available at: www.volunteer.ca/volunteer/pdf/OlderAdults-Eng.pdf
(Accessed: 27 May 2010). 
Retired wisdom
Engineering and 
re-engineering
Operations and 
maintenance
Construction
Develop 
new brief
Operating 
documentation / 
as builts
Commissioning
Construction
Fabrication
Tender
Quantitees
Detailing
Design
Drawing
Planning
Receive brief
Draw up 
tender
Adjudicate & 
award tender
De-
commissioning
Upgrade
Refurbish
Repair
Maintenance
Operation
Handover
Figure 8: Th e project cycle
©
 A
. L
aw
le
ss
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   324 14/09/10   15:35:14
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
325
As part of the Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acceleration 
(JIPSA) senior government offi  cials have been campaigning to 
gain access to the skills of retired professionals worldwide. Many 
countries have offered support in this regard, contributing 
towards travel costs and monthly payments of such profession-
als. From public sector appointments in municipalities and par-
astatals, such as the power utility, to supporting small emerging 
consulting practices, this extended capacity will further assist 
with expanding the workplace training initiatives so vital in nur-
turing the next generation of engineering professionals.
Reduce losses
Clearly the continued bleeding from the public sector needs 
to be addressed. Some degree of autonomy for engineering 
departments, a reduction in the volume of reporting, more 
effi  cient methods of measuring performance and collecting 
statistical data, and effi  cient support staff  are essential to allow 
engineers to get on with the business of engineering. Salary 
reviews, the working environment, incentives, and so on, have 
become essential issues for employers to consider. It is critical 
for the adequate management of service providers that the 
public sector rebuild a pool of proud civil servant engineer-
ing managers. Many such recommendations made in Numbers 
and Needs and its sequel, Numbers and Needs in Local Gov-
ernment (published in November 2007) are currently being 
adopted in the public sector.
Th e overall eff ect
Figure 9 shows the impact that the many initiatives will have on 
the number of civil engineering professionals in both the short 
and the long term. Th e long-term capacity will be derived from 
quality  education of an increased intake into tertiary institu-
tions and systematic workplace training under the mentorship 
of seasoned professionals. 
Th e short-term shortfall will be made up of repatriation, rede-
ployment and reducing losses, that is, aggressive attraction and 
retention strategies for those who already have the expertise. It 
was initially estimated that about 6,000 more civil engineering 
professionals were required to meet the challenges of devel-
opment to 2010. At the same time it was found that some 
6,000 had left the industry during the slowdown in develop-
ment, hence there is some degree of optimism that, provided 
employment policies and off ers are conducive to attracting 
staff  back, a signifi cant portion can be harnessed until such 
time as the young generation is groomed to take over. Without 
having carried out detailed  research, few if any changes would 
have taken place.
Conclusion
‘Unless you measure, you do not know where you are going 
or how you are going to get there’
Maria Ramos
To address any skills challenge, it is essential that every aspect 
of the supply and shortfall is measured and understood, strate-
gies are developed and supported, and capacity is rebuilt. As 
was so eloquently penned by the South African Minister of 
Science and Technology, Minister Mosibudi Mangena:
‘Science and technology are considered central to creating 
wealth and improving quality of life for all … the  Millennium 
Development Goals … can be better serviced by growing the 
engineering sector and by fighting the declining status of 
the fi eld.’
Increase immigration
International resources per project
Increased graduations due to coaching
Retired back temporarily as coaches
Th ose who have left industry back
Returning diaspora
Immigrants
National Diploma graduate
BSc/BEng graduate
In industry from 2004
Reduce leaving the industry
Loss due to premature dead
Reduce emigration
No early retirement 2006-2009
Reduce retirement for 5 years
22.500
20.000
17.000
15.000
12.500
10.000
7.500
5.000
2.500
0
-2.500
-5.000
-7.500
-10.000
-12.500
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020
Figure 9: Short-term and long-term skills development interventions
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   325 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
326
Without facts and fi gures at our fi ngertips the skills develop-
ment initiatives taking place in South Africa  would not have 
enjoyed the support they have from both the public and pri-
vate sector and decision-makers in national government, who 
are now intent on rebuilding the engineering skills base. 
Engineering bodies understand the skills challenge. It rests 
with them to quantify, qualify and lead the changes necessary 
to rebuild engineering capacity. Whilst such a suggestion may 
sound idealistic and perhaps impossible to achieve, in his book 
Th e Tipping Point Malcolm Gladwell7 suggests that only three 
catalysts are required to bring about change. Th ese change 
agents are:
A small group of passionate but infl uential people. ■
An important message or goal that sticks in people’s  ■
minds.
An environment that is ready for change. ■
Engineering bodies are passionate, the message is of para-
mount importance as the demand for growth, upgrading or 
expanding  infrastructure must go hand-in-hand with a growth 
in engineering skills, and the environment is ready as countries 
grapple with plans, which cannot be achieved without ade-
quate engineering skills. It is time for all engineering bodies to 
assume leadership roles and actively lobby at all levels for com-
mitment and support to rebuild the engineering skills base. 
Enrolment and capacity in 7.2.5 
Australia
 Peter Greenwood
For over a decade, Australia  has had problems interesting 
school students in maths and science subjects, and with fi nd-
ing teachers to teach them. Th e country has seen declining 
enrolments into engineering courses, with funding problems 
for courses and rising student fees due to government reluc-
tance to adequately fund universities. Employers have been 
reluctant to train engineers and have been unclear about what 
they need. A skills shortage was inevitable, exacerbated by an 
over-reliance on overseas recruits at a time when skills short-
ages were becoming a global problem. In Australia, govern-
ments, industry, educational institutions and the profession 
are now urgently pursuing solutions to avoid negative eco-
nomic impacts on resource and  infrastructure projects. 
7 Gladwell, M. 2006. Th e Tipping Point. London: Little Brown and Company. 
‘Th at means his [the new federal fi nance minister] other major focus 
will be on building the country’s productive capacity in the longer 
term ... includes tackling skills shortages, the  infrastructure bottle-
necks… the economic implications of dealing with  climate change.’
Australian, 15–16 December 2007
Schools
Despite a doubling of Year 12 high-school students between 
1980 and 1992, there has been almost no increase in science-
related subjects. Th e number of high-school students taking 
advanced mathematics fell from about 14 per cent in 1998 
to a low of under 12 per cent in 2002 and has struggled to 
increase. 
Th is has been attributed to similar declines in the numbers 
of trained science teachers and a view among students that 
science subjects are hard and university entry is still available 
with easier subjects. At the same time there has been no eff ec-
tive policy to increase the pool feeding SET (Science Engineer-
ing and Technology) university enrolments.
Th e science and engineering professions have to share this 
diminishing slice of the cake. Although it is Engineers Australia 
 (EA) policy to have engineering  curricula in schools, at this 
time it may be counter productive, particularly when fi nding 
teachers would be extremely diffi  cult. Similarly, the fact that 
Australia  graduates many more scientists than engineers from 
universities is a refl ection of government policy that is only 
changing slowly.
Government, scientists and the engineering profession need to 
work together to create a bigger cake. Based on the picture in 
other developed countries we need a better balance between 
science and engineering graduates, but we also need more of 
each. Th is aim should encourage cooperation.
Th e Federal Government signifi cantly funded Newcastle University 
to go national with its ‘Science and Engineering Challenge’. In 2004, 
several hundred thousand dollars were given to this highly regarded 
high-school competition. Students solve problems including bridge 
building, fl ight and sailing in a day of inter-school competition. Th e 
government followed this in 2005 with a grant of AU$300,000 for 
Engineers  Australia to further promote its successful EngQuest 
programme to interest primary school students in science and 
 engineering.
Th e Federal Government is now planning to allow high schools 
to provide for more technical studies, so that students want-
ing to be  technicians will leave school with useful skills. Th ere 
may be a spin-off  for university aspirants who will benefi t from 
funding for laboratory and workshop improvements.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   326 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
327
Another idea that will help student and teacher numbers to 
grow may be re-emerging, which is to teach early university 
subjects in schools in partnership with local universities, for 
undergraduate credits.
Engineering revs up a degree
‘Engineers  Australia and the Australian Technology Network signed 
a memorandum of understanding to work jointly on  curriculum 
reform and promotion of engineering careers to prospective students 
to address an estimated shortfall of 20,000 to 30,000 engineers.’
Australian Financial Review, 25 January 2008
Unis engineering a skills revolution
‘Australian Technology Network is responsible for 26% of the coun-
tries engineering graduates, will target high-school students as 
young as 14 as the nation’s next engineers in an eff ort to ease the 
skills shortage gripping the profession.’
Th e Australian, 30 January 2008
University enrolments
Over most of the last ten years about 5,000 engineers per year 
have graduated from Australian universities. Various estimates 
put the need for engineers at up to 30,000. In the same 10-year 
period, until recently,  enrolment for engineering  technologist 
and engineering offi  cer courses was not well regarded by stu-
dents or employers. So an inadequate supply of engineers was 
compounded by a similar problem for  technicians.
The previous federal government set aside 1,000 univer-
sity places for engineers in a move to counter the reduction 
of funding for university places. Th is seemed to be a shift in 
recognition of the importance of engineers to the economy 
(indeed, shortages were hitting  infrastructure projects aff ect-
ing major resource-export projects). Th e results of  engineering 
applications for 2008 are encouraging.
‘Th ey are between 5% and 16% (including the hard sciences in some 
cases) higher than 2007 in diff erent states. Across  Australia all uni-
versity applications are down more than 2%. One suggestion for the 
overall drop is that school leavers are getting highly paid jobs in the 
resources industries.’
Data from Boom in the Hard Sciences, Australian, 13 February 2008
A similar change to support for vocational  education and 
training also occurred with the creation of a number of ‘super’ 
technical colleges by the previous Federal Government. Th is 
reversal of earlier policy (preferring university to technical col-
lege as the preferred career path) has continued with the new 
Federal Government which is encouraging technical training 
in schools. Th e Federal Government now has a plan to cre-
ate 500,000 technical training places over the next four years. 
Some universities are also looking again at articulation from 
nearby technical colleges.
It is important for the profession to ensure that the govern-
ment truly understands the difference between technical 
and professional engineering places. Balanced initiatives are 
needed to overcome the engineering skills shortage.
Impact on capacity
Universities have good data on university enrolments and grad-
uation, which Engineers Australia  has used in recent publica-
tions. But estimating the need for engineers is diffi  cult because 
of the lack of available data. Th e lack of Australian Bureau of 
Statistics data on engineers is a particular problem. Some data 
is collected irregularly, rather than annually. Th e classifi cations 
used for engineers and allocation to sub-disciplines, as well as 
between professionals and  technicians, also leave doubt as to 
the accuracy of the conclusions.
A related problem is a lack of understanding of the meaning 
of the words ‘engineer’ and ‘engineering’ in Australia. Th ese 
words are not protected or defi ned in legislation in Australia  as 
they are in some other countries. Th is means that data errors 
occur due to the inclusion of many non-engineers. ‘Engineers’ 
are also sometimes classifi ed as ‘managers’.
Another barrier is that data are expensive to collect. Engineer-
ing data is only regarded as being valuable by those who under-
stand the links between the engineering workforce and the 
economy, construction and the operation of  infrastructure, 
mining, manufacturing and information technology projects.
Th e skills shortages have highlighted the need to have a clear 
government understanding of the trained engineering work-
force. Th is understanding must include the true extent of the 
work done by the engineering workforce and its key role in many 
sectors of the economy. Industry and the profession must accept 
some responsibility for the past. Th ey must now work with gov-
ernment to ensure we have appropriate data for the future.
Engineers Australia  has taken an interim step by doing surveys 
of both engineering companies and the engineering workforce. 
EA publishes annual data on company salaries and conditions, 
an engineering statistics handbook and has created a Skills 
Shortage Index. Th e continuing downward trend of the index 
for most engineering disciplines has been confi rmed by the 
latest data shown in the histogram below. Th e latest mining 
engineering data refl ects the dire position in resource-based 
industries (index at zero).
With these critical shortages it is not surprising that there are 
stories of undergraduates being attracted away from their 
courses early, technical teachers enticed from the lecture 
rooms and into industry and apprentices persuaded to cut © U
N
ES
CO
/L
. S
po
on
er
 ‘Learning to do’,  Australia.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   327 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
328
short their training. Augmenting the workforce in these ways 
may be justifi ed by the circumstances faced by companies.
But then, there is a worry about a growing cadre of under-
trained and under-qualifi ed people in the workforce due to 
a skills shortage that some say could last for fi ve to ten years. 
Similar pressure on continuing professional development 
must also be expected for the same reasons. With retirements, 
under-use of women engineers and lack of part-time work, 
shortages could last indefi nitely: ‘Another statistical matter 
aff ecting numbers in the engineering workforce is the need 
for re-defi nition of engineering work. Th ere is much debate 
around the world about the length of engineering fi rst degrees. 
Th ere is less evidence of the work employers want tomorrow’s 
graduates to do. Much of the debate seems rightly to be about 
avoiding wastage. Th is approach gains support at a time of 
shortage but does little for the debate on higher degrees, and 
mid-career training and development.’
Some further developments
Salaries of graduating engineers have compared favourably to 
other professions for many years. In later career however, engi-
neering salaries did not keep pace. Now salaries for mature 
engineers have risen signifi cantly. Graduate engineers have for 
some time been demanding non-monetary benefi ts such as a 
graduate development program. To retain staff , more and more 
employers have responded to staff  needs, even to the extent of 
buying overseas companies to keep overseas training ‘in house’.
Demand is strong for accelerated engineering degrees at the Univer-
sity of Southern  Australia and Western  Australia’s Murdoch Univer-
sity, where fi rst preference applications were up 80%.
Australian Financial Review, 18 January 2008
Students opt for fast track options
Another paradox of the skills shortage has been a greater 
employer eff ort to attract and keep women engineers. Even 
older and retired engineers who had been discarded or under-
valued are now enjoying a revival. As well as fi lling vacancies, 
this has the added benefi t of bringing back lost intellectual 
capital, a loss that has been ignored for so long.
Master Builders  Australia Chief Economist, Peter Jones, stated in a 
press release that construction work fell in the December quarter as 
the industry struggles to cope with capacity constraints, skills short-
ages and rising input prices … He said ‘state governments are plan-
ning their spending on  infrastructure and there is a solid pipeline of 
engineering construction work yet to be done.’
The Carrick Institute for learning and Teaching in Higher 
Education has just published the most recent report on this 
topic called Addressing the Supply and Quality of Engineer-
ing Graduates for the New Century, which is available at:
www.carrickinstitute.edu.au
Challenges
It is an old adage that less strategic planning gets done when 
business is booming – although at present the boom is being 
undermined by a lack of skilled workers.
However some immediate and some strategic decisions are 
still being made that aff ect the future.  Engineers Australia  has 
to discipline itself to do long-term as well as short-term plan-
ning. EA must also try to infl uence other stakeholders to make 
decisions in a global context with an eye on the future as well 
as the short-term.
Engineers Australia  has a role to play in ensuring coordination 
and cooperation between engineers, scientists, science teach-
ers, universities, employers and government.
Universities  Australia chief executive Glen Withers said the fl uctuat-
ing demand had highlighted the need for a new planning system to 
adequately anticipate changing professional, technical and skilled 
labour needs. ‘Th is is simply lacking at the moment’, he said.
Th e Australian, 13 February 2008
Introducing school students to science, engineering and 
technology is an ongoing challenge. During the global skills 
shortage, the profession worldwide must ensure engineering 
students complete courses sometime and that Continued Pro-
fessional Development is not totally ignored. Th e international 
debate about the length of fi rst-degree engineering courses 
must not be stifl ed by the skills shortage.
Skilled immigration and overseas graduates from Australian 
universities staying here contribute to the  brain drain from 
home countries, and have an infl uence on Australian univer-
160.0
140.0
120.0
100.0
80.0
60.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
All 
engineers
Mining Aeronautical Chemical Civil Electrical Electronic & 
Computer
Mechanical
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006
Engineering specialization
Engineering Skills Shortage index for  Australia
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   328 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
329
sity courses and numbers. Th is is a global matter with ethi-
cal as well as economic and regulatory aspects, and there is a 
need to engage policy-makers. Many of the activities discussed 
above are happening in other countries. But we can all learn 
from each other.  WFEO can encourage sharing of informa-
tion and participation by international stakeholders to resolve 
these challenges.
Continuing engineering 7.2.6 
 education and professional 
development
Mervyn Jones
Issues for engineering  education are posed by the challenges 
to be faced in the twenty-fi rst century.8 Refl ecting this in engi-
neering  education, a failure to give appropriate recognition to 
the whole-life learning needs of engineers has generated inap-
propriate pressures on initial engineering  education. An alter-
native viewpoint, which gives greater recognition to life-time 
educational needs, is advanced. A review is given of the various 
actors who play a role in Continuing Engineering Education 
(CEE). It is noted that the motives of these are varied and dif-
ferent. Th is makes the development of a coherent policy for 
the development of CEE diffi  cult to frame, let alone develop 
and implement. Th e importance of developing quality metrics 
for CEE is highlighted. 
Introduction 
It is clear from a review of the impressive engineering achieve-
ments of the twentieth century that these have transformed 
the way we live and that, one hundred years ago, so many of 
these developments that we now so often take for granted 
could have been but barely guessed. So often these develop-
ments were possible because the engineers of the time had 
a good grasp of the state of knowledge as existed at the time, 
understood the fundamental principles, and were able to 
analyse, challenge and, on sure foundation, were able to think 
beyond in a creative way. It is also clear that meeting the chal-
lenges of the twenty-fi rst century puts engineering (and sci-
ence) at the heart of solving the issues that confront mankind. 
Although engineering and science cannot alone solve these 
problems – as economic and political infl uences come into 
play – without the contributions made by engineers and sci-
entists, progress would be at a lamentable level. 
Engineers bring diverse skill sets to the workforce and have 
been critical to the success of many businesses, both large and 
small. However, there is a common cry of a lack of engineers 
with suitable skills. Th ere are potential solutions that might 
8 For more information: http://www.engineeringchallenges.org
change such shortages, but some will take time to have an 
impact. Th e world is changing rapidly; the size of the profes-
sional engineering staff  in many companies is declining and 
the potential for lifetime employment within a single com-
pany – very much a feature of the last century – has changed 
signifi cantly. Th is infl uences the company’s vision of long-term 
development of its engineers and hence more responsibility 
must rest with the individual engineer. Currently, Continuing 
Engineering Education structures do not necessarily recognize 
that in the future it may be the engineer paying his or her own 
way.
In producing this Report UNESCO is recognizing the crucial 
importance to global development of engineering, of the engi-
neering profession, and of the  education of engineers. One of 
the interesting comparisons that emerges from the National 
Academy of Engineering’s observations on the triumphs of 
the twentieth century and the challenges of the twenty-fi rst 
century is that the nature of the challenges for engineers are 
changing. Engineering has to be seen in a very much broader 
context in terms of its role and impact on  society, and engi-
neers need to have a very broad set of skills in addition to their 
engineering expertise.   
With the huge explosion of knowledge, engineers have been 
forced to become more specialized in their professional skills, 
which in turn forces judicious choices to be made in the top-
ics taught during an initial  education. Th e only way by which 
the tussle between breadth and depth can be reconciled is the 
recognition that a fi rst degree provides just an initial  educa-
tion and that Continuing Engineering Education (CEE) or Con-
tinuing Professional Development ( CPD) is essential. At the 
same time, today’s global competition and professional mobil-
ity has resulted in engineers spending less time with a single 
employee, and the responsibility for career development rests 
more with the individual engineer. 
At a national level concern is being expressed, at least in the 
UK9 and the USA,10 about the supply of professional engi-
neers with insuffi  cient student numbers studying engineer-
ing to meet current and anticipated needs. Much thought is 
being given to initial formation of engineers, for example, this 
is directed at issues involved with improving initial engineer-
ing formation.11 While undeniably important, a professional 
life is long in comparison to an initial  education and far less 
comparable attention is being devoted to issues associated 
with Continuing Engineering Education, although interesting 
studies have been reported (Bines and Watson, 1992; Burgess, 
9 Educating Engineers for the 21st Century. Report by Th e UK Royal Academy of Engineer-
ing June 2007, ISBN 1-903-496-35-7
10 Rising Above the Gathering Storm: Energizing and Employing America for a Brighter 
Economic Future. 2005. National Academy of Engineering Report, Washington, D.C.
11 Crawly, E, Malmqvist, J, Ostland, S, and Brodeur D. 2007. Rethinking Engineering Educa-
tion – Th e CDIO Approach. Springer, 2007. ISBN 978-0-387-38287-6
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   329 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
330
1997),12 13  a variety of factors are aff ecting engineering as a 
whole. Working practices are changing fast, industrial obso-
lescence can occur quickly whilst over and above manufactur-
ing is progressively becoming ‘globalized’, with demographic 
shifts in development and production. At the same time, while 
educational systems have become more open and diverse, the 
educational levels of populations frequently do not match the 
technical changes that are occurring. 
We should fi rst recognize that a student graduating with an 
engineering degree is far from being a fully fl edged profes-
sional. Important and essential foundations have been laid, 
but the journey has only just begun and in this context Con-
tinuing Professional Development has an important role.
Th e development of professional engineering skills 
In addition to essential technical skills, engineers are expected 
to have eff ective communication, business and managerial 
skills, team working and leadership abilities, ethical and envi-
ronmental awareness, and so on. To some extent the founda-
tion for all of these can and should be woven into the teaching 
 curriculum, but there are limits, exceeding which can be too 
much at the expense of technical skills, while at the same time 
being insuffi  cient to cover any of these to a suffi  cient depth. 
While being exhorted to include a wide range of important 
subjects in the engineering  curriculum, it should not be for-
gotten that the key attributes of an engineer, which fi rst and 
foremost should be refl ected in the educational process, is a 
sound understanding of a technical engineering discipline and 
an ability to analyse, solve problems and evolve innovative 
solutions in that discipline. 
Figure 1: Facets of engineering professional 
attributes
It is with little diffi  culty that a range of key ideal attributes of a 
professional engineer can be identifi ed. Th ese can be grouped 
into four diff erent and general categories, which are broadly 
categorized as ‘personal’, ‘technical’, ‘professional’ and ‘mana-
12 Bines, H., and Watson, D. (eds). 1992. Developing Professional Education, SRHE and 
Open University Press, Buckingham UK. ISBN 0-355-09710-3
13 Burgess, R. G. (Ed). 1997. Beyond the First Degree: Graduate Education, Lifelong Learning 
and Careers, SRHE and Open University Press, Buckingham UK. ISBN 0-355 19976-3
gerial’, as represented by the facets of a tetrahedron (Figure 
1). Although tempting, equal weight should not be put on 
these because the importance of each characteristic can vary 
with the individual, the position or during a career. However 
it is helpful in indicating that a broad range of competencies 
is required in an engineer (although the word competence 
should be used with care).14 Th ese attributes are developed fur-
ther in Figure 2.
Figure 2: Th e important attributes of a 
professional engineer 
Technical Ability to think mathematically, sound 
knowledge of appropriate basic science, good 
knowledge of a specifi c discipline, maintenance of 
current knowledge and practice.
Personal Ability and willingness to learn, appreciation 
of limits to knowledge, good communication skills, 
appreciation of international dimensions.
Professional Commitment to high  standards, 
appreciation of personal and ethical responsibilities, 
ability to handle uncertainty, ability to communicate 
eff ectively.
Managerial Ability to work in a team, appreciation of 
management concepts and issues, ability to lead and 
manage personal, fi nancial and technical resources.
Th ere is probably wide consensus on this list but when the  detail 
of what an engineer ‘should know’ at various stages in a career is 
examined, how this is to be developed and by what mechanism 
it should be funded this consensus starts to crumble.
Limits to Professional Engineering Development  
Th ere are limits to which higher educational establishments 
can contribute to  CPD appropriately and eff ectively. Univer-
sities may not necessarily be the most appropriate place for 
such developments but  CPD should not be viewed in isolation 
from initial  education. Th ere are moments in a career when it 
is more appropriate to introduce or develop specifi c skills than 
others. It is important to recognize this, to see the totality of the 
whole and to structure educational systems to refl ect this. To 
some extent this might be considered to be a very unfashion-
able view; today a comment heard frequently from employers 
is that young engineering recruits have had inadequate expe-
rience of working in teams and  communicating eff ectively, 
especially to those who have little familiarity with the work 
of the company or an understanding of how business works. 
Undoubtedly these are necessary and important attributes of 
engineers, but these must be seen within the wider context of 
the overall technical capabilities. Whereas such sentiments can 
14 Barnett, R. 1994. Th e Limits of Competence; Knowledge, Higher Education and Society, 
SRHE and Open University Press, Buckingham UK. ISBN 0-355-19341-7
Managerial
Technical
Pr
of
es
sio
na
l
Personal
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   330 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
331
Engineers 
Th e obsolescence of knowledge, and the limited ‘shelf-
life’ of a degree is a statement frequently made. While it 
is widely appreciated that knowledge is increasing and 
engineering practices and techniques are evolving, a fi rst 
degree is vitally important in laying the foundations. Th e 
emphasis of these foundations changes, but probably 
over a much slower time scale. However what is quite 
clear is that while engineering knowledge increases and 
practices change, an important part of initial formation 
is not only teaching young engineers the fundamentals, 
but also developing the capabilities to think, question 
and to express themselves as engineers. It is essential that 
the initial  education should be laying the foundations 
in this context, which should then on a regular basis be 
followed by CEE, to meet their more specialist needs. 
Unfortunately it is not always seen in this light. Th ere 
can be an element amongst individuals and companies 
that meeting the essential minimum is the target, hence 
if we are to raise the educational level of the profession 
it is vital to ensure that all mechanisms that encourage 
participation are explored and put in place. 
Employers 
Employers of engineers require a professional cadre 
that meet their business needs. For those that depend 
on engineers for their business it is essential that these 
engineers are ‘up-to-date’ with the latest techniques 
and practices, because it is this that will help maintain 
the engineering competence of the organization. But 
employers, be they private companies, governmental 
organizations or non-governmental organizations, all 
have budgets, a certain fraction of which needs to be 
allocated for  CPD for the engineers of the company. 
How much is allocated varies from sector to sector, 
from company to company and as a function of time. 
In addition, as  education is essentially a net expendi-
ture, which if budgets are tight can be reduced without 
immediate impact, this makes the continuing  educa-
tion of engineers subject to turbulence within the 
budget cycle. Th is contrasts with fi rst cycle  education 
where the individual does not immediately notice the 
eff ect of expenditure changes in the same way or to the 
same timescales. Th us what one might think idealisti-
cally as a company meeting its training needs and those 
of its engineers become dependent on the vicissitudes 
of the fi nancial position. Although fully understandable 
from an educational standpoint, this is unfortunate as 
ideally such development needs to continue irrespec-
tive of the economic position. It is ironic that the qual-
ity of the  education of the workforce, which is one of 
the issues that will help a company to re-orient or sur-
vive during periods of economic downturn, is one of 
the factors that an employer can easily forget. Another 
challenging feature of CEE is that during ‘boom’ times 
for a company there may be a reluctance to release staff  
because of the pressure on manpower to meet com-
mitments. Conversely during stringent times it might 
be claimed that staff  cannot be released because of 
pressure on budgets. Th ere are of course wider benefi ts 
to a company in terms of the development of its own 
contacts in the academic institution and a deepening 
or widening of its understanding of the institution’s 
activities. It is most likely that these are already appreci-
ated by the more enlightened or ‘blue chip’ companies, 
but these are not the only employers of engineers and it 
is with smaller companies that such benefi ts frequently 
need to be more strongly highlighted. 
Professional bodies 
Most countries have one or more professional bodies 
that represent engineers. Th eir activities can take dif-
ferent forms such as ensuring that there are  standards 
of professional competence, codes of conduct that are 
adhered to by members, representing the profession to 
government and working to advance the status of engi-
neers. Th is is just one facet of activities in addition to 
academic, information and publishing activities. Clearly 
it is in the interest of such professional bodies to ensure 
that professional  standards are high and evolving in 
order to maintain the standing of the profession. An 
important facet of this must be to ensure that the  edu-
cation and competence of the professionals it repre-
sents is high and continues to develop. Membership of 
a professional body usually requires specifi c admission 
 standards and in this context the body will often take 
a very positive stance to  CPD and CEE that can take 
diff erent forms, from encouraging the maintenance of 
 CPD logs to recording the educational and develop-
mental activities of individual members, or accrediting 
the suppliers of  CPD and CEE activities to its members 
(as is also done in medicine and law). Naturally, the role 
of professional bodies varies greatly between countries, 
but it is clear that they can have an important role in 
the development of CEE.
Universities 
Universities are very pluralistic organizations and the 
various parts can have very diff erent perceptions of 
CEE, which can manifest itself in various ways. Th e head 
of the institution may be supportive of the activity 
because in general it can seem to be appropriate and 
part of the institution’s mission, but its profi le will quite 
understandably be low, as more signifi cant and imme-
diate issues both of policy and strategy demand atten-
tion. Th e director of CEE programmes, while wanting to 
encourage the development CEE activities in universi-
ties, may fi nd it challenging to identify appropriately 
interested faculty, with responses varying from negligi-
ble to enthusiastic, sometimes with very specifi c objec-
tives. In addition not all faculty members appreciate 
how to teach eff ectively to professionals, as this can be 
very diff erent from undergraduate teaching. Depart-
mental and faculty Heads have to balance demands on 
staff  time, freedom of academic interest and income 
generation. Th ese diff erent perspectives, and some-
times confl icting priorities and visions for the activity, 
illustrate the challenges of generating a balanced and 
customer oriented portfolio of activities from within 
an academic establishment. Th ere are advantages from 
CEE activities in addition to obvious fi nancial ones, such 
as the stimulus they provide for extending professional 
contacts, developing opportunities for  research con-
tracts and consultancy, all in ways that otherwise might 
not have occurred. However, despite this, responses 
within the academic institution are not obvious. It is 
vital, especially in an engineering fi eld, that normal 
undergraduate and postgraduate teaching refl ects the 
best of current practices and CEE is one way by which 
to gain access to such knowledge. Links between CEE 
and graduate teaching activities and help integrate aca-
demic knowledge and professional requirements. 
Other providers 
Unlike the initial  education and formation of profes-
sional engineers, in which universities tend to have a 
monopoly, in  CPD and CEE this is not the case. Th ere 
are many other providers, often with special orienta-
tions such as for petroleum engineering, electronic cir-
cuit design and testing. In addition some professional 
institutions off er their own set of activities geared to 
members. In many of these instances the courses are 
presented by active faculty-based members, or retired 
industrially-based professionals, with specifi c expertise 
who thus are in a strong position to relate academic 
knowledge to their on own specifi c industrial experi-
ence. Th ere can be direct competition between private 
and public providers in what is off ered.   
* Jones, M. E. 2008. Continuing Engineering Education, Who Needs 
it? Proc. 11th WCCEE, Atlanta (May 2008).
Actors on the Continuing Engineering Education stage*
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   331 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
332
be fully appreciated as failings that detract from the optimum 
operation of the business and indicative of today’s competitive 
pressures, businesses which depend on engineers must fi rst 
fi nd and recruit competent engineers and show appropriate 
appreciation of their engineering skills.15
In an age of lean manufacturing and just-in-time assembly, 
some of the same ideas can infl uence educational thinking, 
especially when they off er the potential for effi  ciency improve-
ments. Th e economic imperative can make such pressures 
attractive, but this can confl ict with fi tness for purpose, which 
has forced all activities to function at increasingly leaner levels. 
Th is in its turn has led to employers looking to fi ll positions 
with people who potentially have a minimum ‘latency time’ 
before contributing profi tably to the operation of the busi-
ness. In the current era, ‘the knowledge economy’ – the eff ec-
tive utilization of  education – is essential, but at the same time 
we also need to recognize its broader context.  
Much debate continues about the nature, context and  curric-
ula of undergraduate engineering  education. Amongst other 
infl uences this is driven by the rapid expansion in knowledge 
and changes in practices, concerns about attracting students 
into the engineering profession and the changing requirements 
of employers. Unfortunately, these debates are frequently con-
ducted without reference to a wider concept that a fi rst degree 
should be just the start of a career-long  education process. 
However, there are also inherent uncertainties and instabilities 
associated with CEE, which it is all too easy to down play or 
overlook. Because the funding processes are diff erent, insuf-
fi cient thought is given to the whole lifetime learning process 
of the engineer and the implications this might have for initial 
formation, because the funding processes, are diff erent. No 
initial  education can equip an engineer for life yet there is a 
large discontinuity between initial and continuing  education, 
which does not serve the profession well. How a skill short-
age is identifi ed, how a professional learns and how companies 
support this process is insuffi  ciently studied and yet can reveal 
some interesting information.16 
In  Europe, what has become known as the ‘Th e Bologna Proc-
ess’, has energized a debate on the initial  education and for-
mation in the professions, with an emphasis on developing 
a harmonization of educational systems, thereby facilitating 
greater mobility, for example between bachelor and master 
degree programmes. In part, this process has been benefi cial 
in helping to deepen the understanding of the development 
of the core competencies expected of a professional engineer. 
15 Jones, M, E. 2003. Challenging Th e Education of Engineers for the Globalizing Economy, 
Proceedings of 31st Annual SEFI Conference, Global Engineer: Education and Training 
for Mobility, Porto Portugal, 7–10 September. A. Soeiro and C. Oliviera (eds.), ISBN 
972-752-063-4, pp.102–106.
16 Jones, M. E. 2004. Analog Design: Th e Development of Essential Professional Expertise, 
Proc. 9th WCCEE, Tokyo (May 2004), pp. 231–236.
Although it may be challenging to address the issues associ-
ated with harmonization in initial formation, this pales into 
insignifi cance when the necessity, form, structure and fi nan-
cial responsibility for  continuing engineering  education are 
considered. While the current rather ad hoc situation for Con-
tinuing Engineering Education has evolved gradually, it is also 
unlikely that there will be any quick solution to establishing a 
more structured approach to its delivery and receipt.
Enhancing quality 
In many countries there is a well regulated quality assur-
ance process for assessing the initial  education provided in 
universities, although the understanding and interpretation 
of the word often varies.17 Although these same institutions 
frequently provide CEE and  CPD they are only one of many 
providers, and the same quality assurance processes are not 
available. With this in mind, the EU and United States, via the 
Atlantis Programme, have funded a transatlantic programme 
called ‘Development of Accreditation in Engineering Training 
and Education’ (DAETE).18 Using the model of the European 
Foundation for Quality Management (EFQM), a method has 
been developed for establishing a set of quality metrics against 
which providers can be evaluated. Th is is now being adopted 
by the International Association for Continuing Engineering 
Education (IACEE) and, hopefully, as this approach starts to 
become more widely appreciated, a robust vehicle for quality 
monitoring and CEE provider  accreditation will be established, 
which will help contribute to improved  standards for CEE glo-
bally. 
Brain drain, gain, circulation 7.2.7 
and the diaspora
Jacques Gaillard
Th e movement of engineers and scientists throughout the 
world is as old as the practice of engineering and science. Th e 
contrast in opinions on the eff ects of international scientifi c 
migration (ISM, which includes engineering) derives from its 
character as a polymorphic phenomenon whose costs and 
benefi ts have been frequently mentioned but never thorough-
ly evaluated. Th e question is still open.
Th ere are several relatively recent phenomena that revived the 
debate on ISM perceived as a  brain drain by many countries, 
including developed countries in  Europe: the collapse of the 
communist system and the migration of Soviet and Eastern 
European professionals to other professions and countries; the 
large scale return of highly qualifi ed engineers and scientists to 
17 Goodlad, S. 1995. Th e Quest for Quality; Sixteen Forms of Heresy in Higher Education, 
SRHE and Open University Press, Buckingham UK. ISBN0-355-19350-1
18 EU-US Atlantis Programme 2006 Contract 200-4563/004-001
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   332 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
333
 
Barabados
Dominican Republic
Guyana
Trinidad and Tobago
Haïti
0 20 000 40 000 60 000 80 000 100 000 120 000 140 000
Figure 1: Highly skilled expatriates
0 50 000 100 000 150 000 200 000 250 000 300 000
 Ghana
Cameroon
Ivory Coast
Ethiopia
Madagascar
Kenya
Sudan
Tunisia
0 10 000 20 000 30 000 40 000 50 000 60 000 70 000 80 000 90 000
Burundi
Niger
Central African Republic
Gabon
Burkina Faso
Mali
Malawi
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Mauritius
Mozambique
Benin
Zambia
Tanzania
Angola
Senegal
Uganda
0 5 000 000 10 000 000 15 000 000 20 000 000 25 000 000 30 000 000
Philippines
China
India
High skilled expatriates High skilled local staff 
Small Caribbean
countries
Medium countries
in  Africa
Some smaller and
less populated African
Some highly populated
Asian countries
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   333 14/09/10   15:35:15
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
334
South East Asian countries and more recently China; and the 
fact that the countries aff ected by the  brain drain attempted 
to organize their engineering, science and technology (EST) 
diasporas into institutionalized networks, so as to facilitate the 
circulation of people and information and initiate collabora-
tive  research programmes between the national and expatriate 
scientifi c communities. Yet a number of developing countries 
remain typical examples of the recurring  brain drain problem.
One of the main diffi  culties is to measure migration. Due to 
the often unclear defi nitions – the fact that engineering, sci-
ence and technology is usually aggregated together despite the 
diversity of disciplines and levels – there is no mechanism for 
observing movement. Th is leaves us with unreliable and non-
standardized statistics. Th e fact that departures are recorded 
(to some extent) but returns are not, may in part explain cer-
tain overestimated fi gures for the  brain drain. 
Th e OECD  has contributed to creating a tool to measure migra-
tion: a database19 on migrants and expatriates constructed 
from information gathered in twenty-nine of the thirty OECD 
 countries.20 These data make it possible to identify highly 
qualifi ed migrants or emigration rates for highly educated 
persons by country of birth or origin. Th e emigration rate of 
highly educated persons by country of origin is calculated by 
dividing the highly educated expatriate population in a given 
country by the total highly educated native-born population 
of the same country. Highly educated persons are defi ned as 
persons with a tertiary level of  education (which includes in 
all disciplines, including engineering and science). Th is data-
base can be used to produce the total number of highly skilled 
expatriates and the percentage of highly skilled expatriates by 
country of birth (Dumont and Lemaître, 2005).21 Th e results 
show that the percentage of highly skilled expatriates is quite 
high in the small and medium countries of the Caribbean and 
Africa ( Figure 1). As might be expected, countries that suff er 
long civil wars (e.g. Haiti, Angola, Mozambique) and countries 
composed largely of migrant populations (e.g. Mauritius) are 
particularly aff ected by  brain drain. A recent study in Lebanon 
showed that at least half of Lebanese engineers and scientists 
lived outside the country (Gaillard, 2007).22 Th e bigger coun-
tries in Africa,  Asia and Latin America are, in absolute terms, 
severely aff ected by the emigration of their highly skilled per-
sonnel, though its relative importance may be less signifi cant. 
Th e OECD  data estimate indicates that India has more than 
one million highly skilled expatriates, but this represents less 
19 Th e construction of this database draws on the work of Baro and Lee (2000) and of 
Cohen and Soto (2001). 
20 Iceland is the only country that did not participate.
21 Dumont, Jean-Christophe and Lemaitre, Georges. 2005, Counting Immigrants and 
Expatriates in  OECD Countries: A New Perspective, Conference on Competing for Global 
Talent, Singapore Management University, Singapore, 13–14 January.
22 Gaillard, J. 2007. Evaluation of Scientifi c, Technology and Innovation Capabilities in Leba-
non. Report for ESTIME/European Commission (Rigas Arvanitis Coord.), 55 pages.
than 4 per cent (3.43 per cent) of its total highly skilled popula-
tion. Th e fi gure for China, with a total of more than 600,000, is 
less than 3 per cent (2.61 per cent) of its high skilled popula-
tion.
Can the EST diaspora help mitigate the  brain drain?
Against this backdrop, recent policy documents and political 
discourses assert that the hundreds of thousands of engineers 
and scientists expatriated from developing countries should 
no longer be seen as a bane but, on the contrary, may consti-
tute a boost for many of them. Th e idea is spreading rapidly in 
many developing countries and seems to be unanimously sup-
ported; that the ‘EST diaspora’ will make up for the shortcom-
ings and weaknesses of the national engineering and scientifi c 
communities. Th is idea, attractive as it may be, needs to be 
approached with caution.
People advocating the use of the diaspora see it as a way to 
mobilize the country’s emigrant engineers, scientists and  tech-
nologists all over the world to the benefi ts of their home coun-
tries thanks to improved access to engineering and scientifi c 
information and expertise through extensive social, technical 
and professional networks, increased training opportunities, 
and the development of collaborative projects between expatri-
ate and domestic engineers and scientists. Th e diaspora model 
is appealing to politicians and policy-makers since it appears 
to off er a low-cost, self-managing, effi  cient, easy solution. Th e 
option is also appealing to expatriates who feel motivated by an 
opportunity to contribute to the development of their coun-
try of origin from a foreign location, where they may want to 
remain without feeling guilty. Over the last decade, an increas-
ing number of countries have undertaken initiatives to create 
databases of expatriate engineers and scientists, and to mobilize, 
organize and reconnect their scientists abroad with the scien-
tifi c community at home. Yet, the sustainability and eff ective-
ness of this approach remains to be proved, and the fate of some 
important EST diasporas (e.g. Red CALDAS in Colombia, and 
the South African Network of Skills Abroad in South Africa) 
 already shows that the promise of the diaspora approach is 
more diffi  cult to achieve than some may imagine. Th ese impor-
tant institutionalized initiatives need to be evaluated.
Th e ‘diaspora model’ will never be a low-cost, self-suffi  cient 
answer to Africa’s engineering and scientifi c needs. To be suc-
cessful, a number of conditions need to be fulfi lled (Gaillard 
and Gaillard, 2003).23 Its eff ectiveness depends substantially 
on the internal dynamics of the home-based engineering and 
scientifi c communities. A network of expatriates is at best an 
extension of a national engineering and scientifi c community; 
it can never be a substitute. Eff orts should therefore, fi rst and 
foremost, focus on strengthening national engineering and 
scientific capacity particularly through training, recruiting 
23 Gaillard J. and A.M. Gaillard. 2003. Can the Scientifi c Diaspora Save African Science? 
SciDev Brain Drain Dossier. http://www.scidev.net
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   334 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
335
and retaining the next generation of scientists. Failing this, the 
diaspora model will be no more than a smart cloak that hides 
shabby clothes.
Industry Capacity Index7.2.8 
Peter Boswell
Th e  FIDIC National Industry Capacity Index
Strengthening private sector national consulting industries 
is essential for developing sustainable, knowledge-based job 
opportunities that generate wealth. Th e International Federa-
tion of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC) has identifi ed a lack of 
information at the national industry sector level on capabili-
ties, staff  and facilities, and the attendant lack of visibility, as 
a major factor impeding capacity-building. Th is lack has led 
to an unsatisfactory utilization of the industry’s capacity, and 
made it diffi  cult to identify where resources should be directed 
to promote capacity-building.
One approach for highlighting the needs was to develop a 
capacity benchmark for the national  consulting engineer-
ing industry sector. However, without careful design, bench-
marks may focus on inappropriate factors. Th e challenge was 
to identify a limited set of indicators that met the needs of 
a specifi c audience. In addition, indicators must be reliable, 
efficient and accurate, thus largely based on existing and 
 standard reporting practices and comparable between dif-
ferent countries.
 FIDIC believes that reliable benchmarking at the national 
industry sector level requires a systems approach that organ-
izes data and reporting in a coherent manner.
Th e benchmarking cube
 FIDIC’s system is based upon data provided to  FIDIC Mem-
ber Association fi rms in several countries. Th e system could 
be represented in terms of a simple cube. One axis comprises 
the ‘Data Level’, where relevant data for the various indicators 
takes two forms: 
Firm Level data: confi dential information provided by fi rms  ■
within a national industry sector to a national industry sec-
tor organization.
National Level data: publicly available information generally  ■
collected by government, or extracted from data reported 
at the national level by government and groupings of indus-
try sectors.
Th e system focused on two types of reports, namely national 
industry capacity and fi rm benchmarking. Consequently, a 
second axis for the cube represented the ‘Report Level’.
Th e third axis of the benchmarking system represented the 
various indicators, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Figure 1: Th e benchmarking cube
Th e tools commonly used by the national industry sector and 
by fi rms in a variety of business processes were then analysed 
to identify suitable indicators. Th ese tools included: a) com-
pany reports; b) registration systems for a fi rm’s capabilities; c) 
national fi rm benchmarking and industry surveys; d) calcula-
tions of fee scales. It was found that indicators could be organ-
ized into the four dimensions of the Balanced Scorecard:
Financial management ■
Human resources ■
Client relations ■
Business operations  ■
 FIDIC therefore proposed that for benchmarking capacity at 
the national industry sector level, indicators should be:
Distributed uniformly across the four Balanced Scorecard  ■
dimensions.
Designed to mainly report at the firm level and at the  ■
national industry sector level.
Generated by consolidating data from the fi rm level and by  ■
extracting data reported at the national industry sector level.
In order to ensure a balanced set of indicators, one, two or more 
indicators must be generated for each combination of Data 
Level and Report Level. Th e simplest is to start with a single indi-
cator for each combination, giving a total of sixteen indicators. 
Verifying that indicators are balanced
Th e best way to verify that the proposed capacity indicators 
were balanced was to compare them with indicators that 
Report 
level
Data level
National
Sector
Association
Indicator
National 
Sector
Association
Firm
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   335 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
336
focused on institutional capacity-building and an industry’s 
ability to relate to the national business environment. Th e 
most well-known were the Wealth of Nations Index indicators 
where there were fi fteen indicators in three categories:
Industry structure ■
Industry organization ■
National enabling environment ■
It could be shown that these fi fteen indicators were distributed 
uniformly across the proposed Balanced Scorecard report and 
data levels. All that was needed to complete the matrix were 
indicators for:
Human resources from national data, which is generally  ■
reported at the national level.
Business operations from firm data, which is generally  ■
reported at the national level.
Client relations from fi rm data, which is generally reported  ■
at the national level.
Th e various industry tools suggested that suitable indicators 
were:
Number of graduates per capita. ■
Association fee as percentage of member fi rm revenue. ■
Private client derived revenue as a percentage of total rev- ■
enue.
Th ere were now seventeen indicators. Gross Domestic Prod-
uct (GDP) should be removed since it was not normalized, 
giving a recommended set of sixteen indicators.
In addition to having ‘balanced’ indicators distributed 
across relevant dimensions, the indicators must a) incorpo-
rate both ‘leading’ (push) and ‘lagging’ (react) indicators; 
b) reflect aspects that were both internal and external to 
the national industry; and c) measure both short-term and 
long-term aspects. Without entering into detail, it could be 
shown that the proposed set of indictors met these require-
ments.
Data Level Indicators mainly reported to the Country Level
 Financial Client relations Business processes Learning and growth
About country GDP per capita Integrity Index Association uniqueness New industry graduates per 
total graduates 
About fi rms Percentage foreign revenue Distribution of association 
activities 
Association fee as %
of member fi rm revenue 
Staff  per fi rm 
 Indicators mainly reported to the Firm Level
About country Industry revenue as 
percentage  of GDP
Clarity of procurement Association budget Firm staff  per capita
About fi rms Member fi rm percentage of 
industry revenue 
Private client revenue as a 
percentage total revenue
percentage QBS
versus QCBS 
Staff  distribution in small 
versus large fi rms 
 FIDIC National Industry Capacity Index*
Country
Number of
indicators
with data
Index
Bangladesh 13 4.60
Poland 16 6.51
Viet Nam 13 6.79
Austria 16 7.37
Czech Republic 13 7.48
Japan 15 7.78
Hungary 15 7.96
Switzerland 14 8.04
Greece 13 8.08
China 15 8.45
Ireland 14 9.36
 New Zealand 13 9.38
Belgium 14 9.59
South  Africa 15 9.97
 Australia 15 10.09
Germany 12 10.27
Spain 16 10.43
Sweden 11 10.45
Denmark 16 10.72
Slovenia 14 10.94
UK 13 11.02
Canada 15 11.15
USA 13 11.39
Finland 15 11.73
Netherlands 16 12.44
Norway 15 12.90
* For more information: http://www.fi dic.org/annualsurvey (Accessed: 28 May 2010).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   336 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
337
Transformation of engineering 7.3  education
Problem-based Learning7.3.1 
Anette Kolmos, Mona Dahms and
Xiangyun Du
Is there a need for change?
Is there a need for change of engineering  education towards 
more student centred learning methods? Yes, would be the 
most common answer. However, if we start counting the 
number of institutions that have really changed to a new insti-
tutional model, these will only present a very low percentage 
of the total number of engineering  education institutions. 
Engineering  education is a foundation for the development of 
 society. Without technological  innovations, there will be no 
production of new goods, no economic growth and no  human 
development. Innovations are part of market mechanisms to 
establish new markets. Markets, as drivers, call for rapid devel-
opment of  innovations and thus for technological and scien-
tifi c knowledge. 
Th is creates a lot of challenges for engineering  education: 
Knowledge might be outdated within a few years, which  ■
create challenges for engineering  education all over the 
world. Knowledge about yesterday’s mobile phone might 
be outdated by tomorrow’s communication technology – 
and so there is a great deal more to teach both students 
and educators.
We know from  ■  research that  innovation is no longer based 
on individual knowledge but on collaborative knowledge 
(Sawyer, 2007).24 Th is is one of the conclusions arising from 
analysing  innovation processes. 
Another conclusion from the literature on  ■  innovation is that 
the collaborative knowledge construction is getting more 
and more complex. Partly because globalization calls for 
new ways of sharing the work between east and west and 
between south and north and thus involves intercultural 
understanding of international collaboration (Friedman, 
2005).25 Partly because complexity involves interdisciplinary 
knowledge constructions. 
Furthermore there is a huge challenge in making this  ■
fast technological development much more sustainable 
24 Sawyer, K. 2007. Group Genius – Th e Creative Power of Collaboration, Basic Books, New 
York.
25 Friedman, T. L. 2005. Th e World is Flat – A Brief History of the Globalized World in the 
Twenty-First Century, London: Allen Lane.
in volving issues such as environment and social respons-
ibility.
Th ere is a need for change if engineering  education is not 
addressing these elements. 
New skills
Th ese new challenges are integrated into the American ABET 
(Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology) criteria 
and the European EUR-ACE (European Accreditation Board 
for Engineering Education) criteria for  accreditation of engi-
neering  education. Both  accreditation institutions have for-
mulated requirements for skills that go far beyond technical 
knowledge. Some of the ABET criteria are: 
An ability to function on multi-disciplinary teams.  ■
An ability to identify and solve applied science problems.  ■
An understanding of professional and ethical responsibility.  ■
An ability to communicate eff ectively.  ■
Th e broad  ■  education necessary to understand the impact of 
solutions in a global and societal context. 
A recognition of the need for, and an ability to engage in  ■
life-long learning. 
A knowledge of contemporary issues.  ■
An ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern scien- ■
tifi c and technical tools necessary for professional practice. 
EUR-ACE defi nes a variation of transferable skills that cover 
more or less the same aspects as the professional skills, 
although there is more emphasis on the intercultural part 
(Kolmos, 2006).26 Embedded in these criteria might also be the 
requirement for complex knowledge constructions cross cul-
tures and disciplines and involving sustainable issues. However, 
these are not formulated in a transparent way. Th e awareness 
of complex knowledge and what this involves in a globalized 
world is slowly merging.  Engineering knowledge has always 
been system-based knowledge where engineers are working 
with the phenomena of black boxes in their design. Th e new 
challenge is not to work with the black boxes, but to do work 
within a collaborative intercultural and interdisciplinary team. 
26 Kolmos, Anette. 2006. Future Engineering Skills, Knowledge, and Identity. Engineering 
Science, Skills, and Bildung, Aalborg: Aalborg University Press, pp.165–185.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   337 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
338
PBL as an Innovative Approach
In the past decades, the trend away from traditional lecture-
centred to more student-centred learning has led to pedagogi-
cal  innovations with the employment of diverse approaches 
such as  ‘discovery learning’, ‘experiential learning’, ‘case based 
learning’, ‘active learning’, ‘inquiry-based learning’, ‘scenario 
based learning’ and so on. Among all these  innovations, Prob-
lem Based Learning (PBL) has been increasingly well recognized 
as an eff ective and effi  cient way of educational change in that 
it involves not only change of  curricula but, more importantly, 
the fundamental understanding of teaching and learning at a 
philosophical level.
Th e roots for PBL derive from diff erent resources that are based 
on a pragmatic approach of educational  innovation. Problem 
Based Learning is primarily an approach to learning where the 
 curricula are designed with the problem scenarios as central to 
student learning in each component of the  curriculum (Salvin-
Baden 2007).27 In late 1960s, McMaster University in Canada 
and Maastricht University in the Netherlands implemented 
one kind of PBL, which is based on the idea that students should 
work on case based problems in study groups but fulfi l assign-
ment and examination individually. Th is kind of practice was 
well proved to be eff ective in early  research work (Barrows and 
Tamblyn, 1980)28 and therefore became widely used in health 
science and medicine  education. Since the beginning of 1970s, 
problem-oriented and project-organized learning methods 
were employed in two newly established institutions (Roskilde 
University and Aalborg University (AAU)) in Denmark. Stu-
dents work in teams on common projects based on problems 
that were formulated by students together with teaching staff , 
and afterwards go through examinations as teams. 
Along with a widespread use of PBL, the concept becomes 
increasingly broadly defi ned. Th e abbreviation PBL can refer to 
‘Problem Based Learning’, ‘Project Based Learning’ or ‘Problem 
and Project Based Learning’. Th e practices of PBL diff er from 
institution to institution and from country to country. Th e 
scale of implementation also remains diverse, from a lecture 
level to an integrated part of the  curriculum, or as a complete 
 curriculum system.
Th e eff ect of PBL
It remains challenging to conduct comparative studies on stu-
dents’ learning between innovative environments such as PBL 
and the traditional lecture based learning environment due to 
the bias of developing tools and due to the practicality. Never-
27 Savin-Baden, M. 2007. Challenging Models and Perspectives of Problem-Based Learn-
ing. Management of Change: Implementation of Problem-Based and Project-Based 
 Learning in Engineering, E. de Graaff  and A. Kolmos, (eds.), SENSE Publisher, Rotterdam. 
pp. 9–30.
28 Barrows, H. and Tamblyn, R. 1980. Problem-Based Learning: An Approach to Medical 
Education, Springer, New York
theless, in the Danish context, diff erent evaluations have been 
conducted from the perspective of workplace.
National report from the Danish government board of job mar-
ket in 2002 (Kandidat, 2002)29 documents that 59 per cent of 
the private employers prefer candidates from AAU over those 
from other engineering universities because AAU graduates 
proved to have better skills in team work,  innovation, project 
management, and acquiring new knowledge. In 2004, a survey 
conducted by Danish Industry (Ingeriøren, 2004)30 among 125 
of the 500 engineering companies evaluated the performance 
of young engineers in their workplace. Th e results (Figure 1) 
show that graduates from AAU and from another traditional 
university have no signifi cant diff erences in professional know-
ledge and skills, however, AAU graduates have a visibly better 
performance in skills of project and people management, com-
munication,  innovation, knowledge of business and life.  
In the international context, the eff ectiveness of PBL has been 
documented from two perspectives: students’ learning and 
29 Kandidat – og Aftagerundersøgelsen 2002. Go to: http://www.cand.auc.dk or http://
www.ruc.dk/kandidat 
30 Aalborg – Kandidaters Tekniske Vidern er I Top, Ingeriøren, March 3, 2004
Based on the history of learning theories, and the pedagogic expe-
riences from the pioneer institutions that have implemented PBL 
since the late 1960s, learning principles of PBL can be summarized 
from three dimensions (Graaff  and Kolmos, 2003):
Th e learning approach as PBL means that learning is organized 
around problems and will be carried through in projects. It is a cen-
tral principle for the development of motivation. A problem makes 
up the starting point for the learning processes, places learning in 
context, and base learning on the learner’s experience. Th e fact that 
it is also project based means that it is a unique task involving more 
complex and situated problem analyses and problem-solving.
Th e contents approach concerns, especially, interdisciplinary learn-
ing, which may span across traditional subject-related boundaries 
and methods. Exemplary practice in the sense that learning out-
come is exemplary to the overall objectives and support the relation 
between theory and practice by the fact that the learning process 
involves an analytical approach using theory in the analysis of prob-
lems and problem-solving methods.
Th e collaborative approach is team-based learning. Th e team learn-
ing aspect underpins the learning process as a social act where learn-
ing takes place through dialogue and communication. Furthermore, 
the students are not only learning from each other, they also learn to 
share knowledge and organize the process of collaborative learning. 
Th e social approach also covers the concept of participant-directed 
learning, which indicates a collective ownership of the learning 
process and especially the formulation of the problem. 
Graaff , Erik de and Kolmos, Anette. 2003. Characteristics of Problem-Based Learn-
ing. International Journal of Engineering Education, Vol.17, No.5.
Dimensions of PBL
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   338 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
339
institutional development. Fullan (2005),31 one of the few 
authors who have developed concepts for change in  educa-
tion, emphasizes that the outcome has not only increased stu-
dent learning, but also organizational capacity. Firstly, positive 
eff ects of PBL on students learning have been identifi ed in the 
following aspects:
Promoting deep approaches of learning instead of surface  ■
approach (Biggs, 2003).32
Improving active learning (de Graaff  and Cowdroy, 1997;  ■
Du, 2006).33 34
Developing criticality of learners (Savin-Baden, 2003). ■ 35
Improving self-directed learning capability (Hmelo and Lin,  ■
2000; Du, 2006).36 37
31 Fullan, M. 2005. Leadership & sustainability: System Th inkers in Action, Th ousand Oaks: 
Corwin Press.
32 Biggs, J. 2003. Teaching for Quality Learning at University – What the Student Does, 
Buckingham: Open University Press, Th e Society for Research into Higher Education.
33 Graaff , E. de, and Cowdroy, R. 1997. Th eory and Practice of Educational Innovation: 
Introduction of Problem Based Learning in Architecture. International Journal of Engi-
neering Education. Vol 13, No.3, pp.166–174.
34 Du, X. Y. 2006. Bringing New Values in engineering  education – Gendered and Learning in 
PBL, PhD thesis submitted to Aalborg University, Denmark.  
35 Savin-Baden, M. 2003. Facilitating Problem-based Learning: Illuminating Perspectives. 
Th e Society for Research into Higher Education & Open University Press, Berkshire. 
36 Hmelo, C. and Lin, X. 2000. Becoming Self-directed Learners: Strategy Development in 
Problem-based Learning, Problem-based Learning – a Research Perspective on Learning 
Interactions, D. Evensen, and C. Hmelo, (eds.), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publica-
tions, London. pp. 227–250. 
37 Du, X. Y. 2006. Bringing New Values in engineering  education – Gendered and Learning in 
PBL, PhD thesis submitted to Aalborg University, Denmark.
Increasing the consideration of interdisciplinary knowledge  ■
and skills (Kjaersdam, 1994; de Graaff  and Kolmos, 2003).38
Developing management, collaboration and communica- ■
tion skills (Du and Kolmos, 2006).39
Developing professional identity and responsibility develop- ■
ment (Hmelo and Lin, 2000; Kolmos, 2006; Du, 2006).40 41 42
Improving the meaningfulness of learning (Savin-Baden,  ■
2000, Du, 2006).43  44
Secondly, at the institutional level, the shift to PBL will benefi t 
the university/departments in terms of: 
Decreasing drop-out rates and increasing rate of on-time  ■
completion of study.
38 Kjaersdam, F. 1994. Th e Aalborg Experiment – Tomorrow’s Engineering Education, 
European Journal of Engineering Education, Vol. 19, No.3.
39 Du, X.Y, and Kolmos, A. 2006. Process Competence in a Problem and Project Based 
Learning Environment, Proceedings of the 34th SEFI Annual Conference: Engineering 
Education and Active Students, July 2006, No. 34, Uppsala University.
40 Hmelo, C. and Lin, X. 2000. Becoming Self-directed Learners: Strategy Development in 
Problem-based Learning, Problem-based Learning – a Research Perspective on Learning 
Interactions, D. Evensen, and C. Hmelo, (eds.), Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publica-
tions, London. pp. 227–250. .
41 Kolmos, Anette. 2006. Future Engineering Skills, Knowledge, and Identity. Engineering 
Science, Skills, and Bildung, Aalborg: Aalborg University Press, pp. 165–185..
42 Du, X. Y. 2006. Bringing New Values in engineering  education – Gendered and Learning in 
PBL, PhD thesis submitted to Aalborg University, Denmark.  .
43 Savin-Baden, M. 2000. Problem-based Learning in Higher Education: Untold Stories. Th e 
Society for Research into Higher Education & Open University Press, Berkshire.
44 Du, X. Y. 2006. Bringing New Values in engineering  education – Gendered and Learning in 
PBL, PhD thesis submitted to Aalborg University, Denmark.  .
Figure 1: Graduate skills acquired in AAU compared to DTU
0% 20% 40% 60% 80% 100%
Technical University of Denmark (DTU) 
Aalborg University (AAU)
Project and people 
management 
Quality of engineering 
and technical skills
Contact and working 
relations to industry
Innovative and 
creative skills 
Knowledge of business-life 
and -economy
Overall quality 
of  education
Percentage of responders judging the candidates’ skills in the various disciplines as “good” or “very good”
Source: Nyhedsmagasinet IngeniØren, nr 13, 2004
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   339 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
340
Supporting development of new competencies for both  ■
teaching staff  and students.
Promoting a motivating and friendly learning environment.  ■
Accentuating institutional profi le (Kolmos and de Graaff ,  ■
2007).45 
Change towards PBL
Although PBL has been identifi ed as a positive solution to 
the requirements from the global  society, it cannot be imple-
mented quickly. Change is not an event, it is a long process 
of continuous activities and improvements and the initiative 
should be both top-down driven as well as bottom-up driven 
by staff  (Fullan, 2005; Scott, 2003).46 47 Kotter (1995)48 stresses 
the importance of urgency and the creation of visions. Th e 
problem might be that normally neither the managing group 
nor the academic staff  may experience any urgency. On the 
contrary, they feel confi dent and satisfi ed with existing teach-
ing practices, and they continue to teach the way they were 
taught. Only few staff members feel the need for change. 
External reasons are most often the trigger for any institutional 
change, however external factors such as a cut in resources 
or demand for new skills might not create any urgency for 
an institutional change. It might be easier to add  curriculum 
pieces in order to fulfi l the requirement instead of rethink-
ing the entire  curriculum. However, the requirement for new 
types of professional skills and skills in handling processes is 
global. Since engineers have a global workplace, education  has 
to address these new types of requirements involving students 
that create some of these experiences already through their 
education. 
PBL is one educational solution that has become widespread 
all over the world. By developing systems and organizations, it 
is possible to secure the implementation of PBL, which requires 
cooperation, project management, communication, problem 
identifi cation and solving, setting the objectives followed by 
teaching, learning, and assessment for these types of skills. Th is 
is one of the reasons that institutions want to change to Prob-
lem Based Learning, and also because of the improvement of 
the learning process by creating motivation and, hopefully, an 
improved retention rate and the establishment of institutional 
profi les for attracting more students.
45 Kolmos, A. and Graaff, E. de. 2007. Process of Changing to PBL, Management of 
Change: Implementation of Problem-Based and Project-Based Learning in Engineering,
E. de Graaff  and A. Kolmos, (eds.), SENSE Publisher, Rotterdam. pp. 31–44.
46 Fullan, M. 2005. Leadership & sustainability: System Th inkers in Action, Th ousand Oaks: 
Corwin Press..
47 Scott, Geoff . 2003. Eff ective Change Management in Higher Education. EDUCAUSE 
Review, Vol. 38, No. 6, (November/December).
48 Kotter, J. B. 1995. Why Transformation Eff orts Fail. Harvard Business Review, March–
April 1995, Vol. 73, No. 2, pp. 44–56.
In order to support the global change towards student centred  edu-
cation, a UNESCO Chair in Problem Based Learning (www.ucpbl.
net) is newly established at Aalborg University, Denmark. Th e Glo-
bal Network established by this UNESCO Chair in PBL intends to 
provide a worldwide platform for networking activities in various 
aspects of PBL including mutual exchange of experiences,  educa-
tion,  research, and capacity development through consultancy 
activities. Th e objective is to facilitate better access to and coopera-
tion within the PBL area at a global scale.
UNESCO Chair in PBL
Sustainability into the 7.3.2 
engineering  curriculum
Cheryl Desha and Charlie Hargroves
Th e state of engineering education  for  sustainable 
development
Higher education  institutions have made some progress 
towards Engineering Education for Sustainable Development 
(EESD). Th ere is however a ‘time lag dilemma’ facing engi-
neering educators, where the pace of traditional  curriculum 
renewal may not be suffi  cient to keep up with potential mar-
ket, regulatory and institutional shifts. 
Th e United Nations has defi ned Education for Sustainable 
Development (ESD) as encouraging ‘changes in behaviour that 
will create a more sustainable future in terms of environmental 
integrity, economic viability, and a just  society for present and 
future generations.’49 According to the World Federation of 
Engineering Organizations ( WFEO), for engineering this means 
playing, ‘an important role in planning and building projects 
that preserve natural resources, are cost-effi  cient and sup-
port human and natural environments.’50 Hence, engineering 
education  for  sustainable development (EESD) is a broad area 
covering technical, social and economic aspects. Th is has a sig-
nifi cant role to play in equipping engineering graduates with 
the knowledge and skills to address such twenty-fi rst century 
challenges.
A 2003 report by the US National Council for Science and the 
Environment noted that baseline information about the status 
of sustainability education  and practice in any nation is largely 
absent.51 However, as shown in Table 1, a number of surveys 
49 UN General Assembly. 2002. Proclamation of the Decade of Education of Sustain-
able Development (2005–2014) – 57th Session. Available at: http://www.desd.org/ 
(Accessed: 28 May 2010).
50 World Federation of Engineering Organizations’ Committee on Technology. 2002. 
Engineers and Sustainable Development,  WFEO, Germany.
51 Blockstein, D.E. and Greene, J. (eds.) 2003. Recommendations for Education for a Sus-
tainable and Secure Future, National Council for Science and the Environment (NCSE), 
Washington, DC.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   340 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
341
and studies undertaken over the past decade can be used as 
an indication of progress within engineering education. Th e 
evidence suggests that despite the increasing dialogue about 
EESD, there has not been a substantial shift to EESD in engi-
neering  curriculum in any country. 
Th e ‘Time Lag Dilemma’ facing engineering educators
Despite the historical trend of slow progress towards EESD, 
departments now face a ‘time lag dilemma’ where existing 
programmes and  curriculum renewal might not keep up 
with regulations, markets, and institutional requirements 
that are shifting as a result of emerging twenty-fi rst century 
challenges. Across government, business and  society, 
eff orts are underway to shift growth away from threatening 
environmental thresholds, such as  climate change, towards 
a path of  sustainable development. There is a growing 
appreciation of the complexity of environmental systems 
and how diffi  cult it is to align development goals with the 
requirements of these systems. Th is change in attitude and 
action is fi ltering through to the higher education  system, 
evident in a number of factors that are putting pressure on 
engineering departments to update  curriculum, such as: 
tightening legislation and regulations; increasing  accreditation 
requirements; shifting industry demands for graduates with 
Date Year Survey and Report Findings
1998 World Engineering Partnership for Sustainable development ( WFEO,  FIDIC, UATI)
Although a small number of responses only provides an indicative response, the authors reported that, ‘the survey does not 
indicate a strong or consistent approach to the environment and  sustainable development in engineering  education or that, on a 
country average, much more than 10 per cent of time in 10 per cent of courses is devoted to these aspects.’a
2000, 2001, 2002 International Survey: University of Surrey (UK) & University of Melbourne ( Australia)
Th e authors of the survey concluded that the level of knowledge was not satisfactory and that signifi cant knowledge gaps existed 
within the  curriculum, noting, ‘the fi nding that there is no diff erence in the level of knowledge between diff erent years of study is also 
of concern as it suggests that environmental and/or sustainability topics are not taught adequately on engineering programmes’.b
2006, 2008 Alliance for Global Sustainability (Chalmers University of Technology, Technical University of Delft and Technical University 
of Catalonia)
Th e Alliance concluded that a transition is underway in  Europe, but has not signifi cantly progressed: ‘To date, there is no European 
University that shows suffi  cient progress in EESD to be considered an inspiration.’ Th e authors concluded that, ‘European universities 
that wish to provide engineers with the skills in sustainability that industry requires and needs to remain globally competitive should 
not remain complacent.’c 
2007 Th e Natural Edge Project: Engineering Education for Energy Effi  ciency Survey
Th e authors proposed that if universities are embedding sustainability into engineering  education, then  energy effi  ciency 
 education is likely to be included, and would be a reasonable indicator of EESD. Th e authors concluded that, ‘the state of  education 
for  energy effi  ciency in Australian engineering  education is currently highly variable and ad hoc across universities and engineering 
disciplines … Th is aligns with the more general fi ndings of the European higher  education surveys.’d 
2007 UK’s Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE)
Th e Council produced a report on a strategic review of  sustainable development in Higher Education in England, concluding that, 
‘ sustainable development activity is very disparate in the higher  education institution (HEI) sector.’e
2008 Australian Learning and Teaching Council
Th e Council produced a report on Addressing the Supply and Quality of Engineering Graduates for the New Century, concluding 
that the content and methodology of many courses and programmes in engineering  education had not changed substantially 
over the last decade.f  
a  UNEP,  WFEO, WBCSD, ENPC. 1997. Engineering Education and Training for Sustainable Development, Report of the joint UNEP,  WFEO, WBCSD, ENPC Conference, Paris, France, 24–26 September 1997, Chapter 10: Appendices - IV  WFEO 
Survey, p. 42.
b  Azapagic, A., Perdan, S., and Shallcross, D. 2005. How much do engineering students know about  sustainable development? Th e fi ndings of an international survey and possible implications for the engineering  curriculum, European Journal 
of engineering Education, Vol. 30 No. 1, March 2005, pp. 1–19.
c  Th e Alliance for Global Sustainability. 2006. Th e Observatory: Status of Engineering Education for Sustainable Development in European Higher Education, 2006, EESD-Observatory, Technical University of Catalonia, Spain, p. 4, Available at: http://
www.upc.edu./eesd-observatory/ (Accessed: 28 May 2010).
d  Desha, C., Hargroves, K., Smith, M., Stasinopoulos, P., Stephens, R., and Hargroves, S. 2007. State of Education for Energy Effi  ciency in Australian Engineering Education - Summary of Questionnaire Results, Th e Natural Edge Project (TNEP), 
 Australia.
e  Policy Studies Institute, PA Consulting Group, and the University of Bath Centre for Research in Education and the Environment. 2008. HEFCE strategic review of  sustainable development in higher  education in England, Report to the HEFCE, 
January 2008, London.
f  King, R. 2008. Addressing the Supply and Quality of Engineering Graduates for the New Century, the Australian Learning and Teaching Council (formerly the Carrick Institute for Learning and Teaching in Higher Education), Sydney, pp.24–29.
Table 1: Summary of key international surveys and reports on engineering  education for  sustainable development
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   341 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
342
 sustainable development capabilities; and shifting demands of 
the students themselves.52
A 2009 issue of the International Journal of Sustainability in 
Higher Education highlighted the probability – within the con-
text of a competitive higher education  sector – that within 
15–20 years, engineering departments that have not under-
taken  curriculum renewal for EESD will no longer be viable. 53
Within this changing regulatory, market and institutional envi-
ronment, a department’s decision about the scale and pace of 
 curriculum renewal to EESD will signifi cantly aff ect their risk 
profi le. As the pressure builds, engineering deans may well be 
asking themselves:
How long will our current programme pass  ■  accreditation? 
How far are we prepared to go, to embed sustainability into  ■
engineering education  before these regulatory, market and 
institutional shifts occur?
How fast are we willing and able to proceed to make the  ■
transition to EESD?
52 Hargroves, K., and Desha, C. 2009. Drivers for Change: Rationale for Rapid Curriculum 
Renewal to Engineering Education for Sustainable Development, International Journal 
of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 10, Issue 1, Emerald Press. 
53 Desha, C., Hargroves, K., and Smith, M. 2009. Addressing the Time Lag Dilemma in 
Curriculum Renewal towards Engineering Education for Sustainable Development. 
International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education. Vol 10, No. 2, pp. 184-199. 
Emerald Press.
Figure 1 summarizes this ‘time lag dilemma’. 54 Th e timeline 
shows that the fi rst major calls for change within the higher 
education  system were approximately twenty years ago. 
Between 1987 and 2007, a small number of engineering educa-
tion  institutions undertook a process of  curriculum renewal 
to EESD in some form.55 In 2006–2007, there were a number 
of additional calls for action from the scientifi c community 
that added an ecological imperative to act within the next two 
decades, to avoid signifi cant ecosystem collapse.56 If scientists 
and their environmental predictions are right – and there is 
signifi cant evidence to demonstrate a high probability that 
they are – then this ecological imperative will cause signifi -
cant demand for graduates with the knowledge and skills to 
address such challenges, as well as causing demand for gradu-
ates without these skills to fall.
Within this operating environment, and with the renewed 
calls for action in the documents listed in Figure 1, engineering 
departments now face the question, ‘How far and how fast 
are we willing and able to proceed to make the transition to 
54 Desha, C., Hargroves, K., and Smith, M. 2009. Addressing the Time Lag Dilemma in 
Curriculum Renewal towards Engineering Education for Sustainable Development. 
International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education. Vol 10, No. 2., pp. 184-199. 
Emerald Press.
55 Holmberg, J., Svanström, M., Peet, D., Mulder, K., Ferrer-Balas, D. and Segalàs, J. 2008. 
Embedding Sustainability in Higher Education through Interaction with Lecturers: 
Case studies from three European Technical Universities, European Journal of Engineer-
ing Education, Vol. 33 No. 3, pp. 271–282.
56 Brown, L. 2007. Plan B 3.0: Mobilising to Save Civilization, W.W. Norton & Company, 
New York, Chapter 2, p. 27. Available at: http://www.earth-policy.org/Books/PB3/Con-
tents.htm (Accessed: 29 May 2010).
Figure 1: Options for undertaking  curriculum renewal towards Engineering Education for Sustainable 
Development
Source: Th e Natural Edge Project
1987 1997 2005-2009 2017 2027
Only a few universities 
responded to these 
calls for action
Ad hoc
SCR : Standard Curriculum Renewal RCR : Rapid Curriculum Renewal
Flagship Integration
RCR (~8 years)
RCR (~12years)
RCR (~15 years)
RCR (~20 years)
1987 Brundtland Commission Report
1987 World Declaration on Education
1992 Rio Earth Summit (Agenda 21)
2006 IPCC 4th Assessment 
2006 UK Stern Review
2007 An Inconvenient Truth
If engineering departments have not 
transitioned to EESD by 2027, they are 
unlikely to be viable.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   342 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
343
EESD?’ Figure 1 shows a number of options for higher educa-
tion  departments, including:
Th e Standard Curriculum Renewal (SCR) process where  ■
departments may choose to continue with the current 
pace of transition. Th is process might proceed over 15–20 
years, depending on how effi  cient the institution is as a 
business unit. A review of  curriculum renewal literature 
indicates a typical transition might begin with ad hoc  cur-
riculum renewal which is dependent on individual staff  
interests, followed by a period of fl agship course devel-
opment which follows market demand, then a gradual 
transition to full integration of sustainability within the 
 curriculum which addresses institutional requirements 
such as  accreditation.
A Rapid Curriculum Renewal (RCR) process where depart- ■
ments choose to undertake a transition to EESD, which 
might proceed over 8–12 years, again depending on the 
effi  ciency of the institution as a business unit. Ad hoc  cur-
riculum renewal is still advantageous initially, as it can help 
to build momentum. Flagship course development might 
be overlapped with fully integrating sustainability content 
within every course in a programme, to contract the pro-
cess. In a RCR process, the department is in control of the 
pace, rather than reacting to staff , market or institutional 
drivers.
Given that a number of market and institutional shifts are 
already underway evidenced by the media and EESD literature, 
it is likely that most institutions have already begun an SCR 
process, having undertaken some ad hoc initiatives around 
EESD. However, institutions choosing this 15–20 year  curricu-
lum renewal process face the risk that market and institutional 
changes might overtake their department’s  curriculum renewal 
progress before they complete the transition. For example, if a 
carbon trading scheme is initiated (this has been done in many 
countries and is set to be done in a number of others), then 
the large companies trading carbon will likely require related 
competencies in their existing and new position descriptions. 
If the cost of petrol rises signifi cantly over the next fi ve years, 
then  society will require rapid  innovation across all sectors to 
address the manufacture and supply of goods and services. 
Departments beginning with a Standard Curriculum Renewal 
process still have the option of switching to a Rapid Curricu-
lum Renewal process at a later date. However, this staggered 
approach may or may not be suffi  cient to keep up with the 
regulatory, market and institutional shifts. Staff  may still grow 
frustrated and move to institutions that are moving faster, or 
may be invited to other institutions. Market demand for gradu-
ates with sustainability capabilities may still outpace the ability 
to develop them, and institutional  accreditation requirements 
may outpace the ability to respond to them.
Th ose engineering departments who do not begin to address 
EESD now, discount altogether the possibility of completing a 
 standard  curriculum renewal process in time to address likely 
institutional, market and regulatory shifts. For these depart-
ments, the alternative window of waiting, then undertaking 
a rapid  curriculum renewal process, is probably 5–10 years. 
However, in taking this approach, the engineering department 
is even more at risk of falling too far behind shifting  accredita-
tion/ market/ and regulatory requirements. Th is also leaves 
the departments open to staff  being poached by other institu-
tions taking action.
Rapid Curriculum Renewal will help these departments to 
mitigate the potential risk to them, of not keeping up with 
market, regulatory and institutional shifts. Th ese departments 
will also maximize future benefi ts of being an industry leader, 
including market preference for their graduates, and a low 
 accreditation risk. However, departments taking a Rapid Cur-
riculum Renewal approach must be wary of being too far in 
front of market expectations, to ensure that their graduates 
remain employable and in demand through the transition.
Concluding comments
Evidence from engineering education  literature suggests that 
despite the increasing dialogue about EESD, there has not been 
a substantial shift to EESD in engineering  curriculum. Faced 
with increasing market, regulatory and institutional pressures, 
each engineering department is faced with the question, ‘How 
far and how fast are we willing and able to proceed to make 
the transition to EESD?’ By not answering, departments are 
implicitly deciding ‘not much’ and ‘not very fast’ and are there-
fore exposing themselves to risk. Th ose institutions that act 
in anticipation of future market, regulatory and institutional 
shifts will have a strong student recruitment position.
Rapid Curriculum Renewal7.3.3 
Cheryl Desha and Charlie Hargroves
A number of elements, outlined below, that are emerging 
in engineering education  literature can be used as tools for 
university engineering departments undertaking a Rapid Cur-
riculum Renewal (RCR) process. At the 2008 Delhi Sustainable 
Development Summit, Professor Jeff ery Sachs declared that in 
order to respond to the challenge of  climate change, ‘… what 
is needed is good arithmetic, and good engineering and good 
economics, all combined… We haven’t done the work on that 
yet. But that is the work that we need to do in the next two 
years in my view – to show a path’.57 Th ese statements, coming 
from a world renowned economist, author and special advi-
57 Go to: http://www.rajyasabha.nic.in/rsnew/publication_electronic/climate_
change_2008.pdf (Accessed: 28 May 2010).
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   343 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
344
sor to United Nations Secretary-General, eff ectively brought 
sustainable engineering onto the world’s centre stage and 
highlighted the point that there is no time to lose in bringing 
engineering and economics together. 
Th ese are strong statements, both on the timelines and the 
capacity of the engineering profession globally to meet the 
challenges of  climate change and  sustainable development. 
Th is level of urgency has been echoed by a number of recent 
scientifi c and economic bodies and networks who have called 
for short timelines for action to address the challenge of  cli-
mate change, including the Stern Review,58 the Intergovernmen-
tal Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 4th Assessment Report,59 
and the United Nations Environment Program (UNEP) 4th 
Global Environment Outlook Report.60 Th e consistent message 
across all of these reports is that signifi cant capacity-building 
across the professions is required, and that the need is urgent. 
Within higher education, engineering departments now face 
the ‘time lag dilemma’ discussed earlier, where answering the 
question ‘How far and how fast are we willing and able to pro-
ceed to make the transition to EESD?’ will signifi cantly aff ect 
their ability to succeed in the future.
Within the EESD literature and practice there are a number 
of ‘elements’ of rapid  curriculum renewal that are emerging 
which address the needs of a department undertaking a rapid 
 curriculum renewal process; each element appears to play an 
important role in achieving a rapid  curriculum renewal to 
EESD, and the omission of one or more elements may slow 
the transition and may also negatively impact on the quality 
of  curriculum renewal outcomes. Th e elements do not nec-
essarily need to be implemented in a linear manner, nor are 
they exclusive; one element may contain similar activities to 
another and elements may be repeated or reviewed at various 
stages in the transition. Th e elements are briefl y described in 
the following:
Awareness raising and developing a common 
understanding
Th is element recognizes that, fi rst and foremost, engineering 
educators need to be aware of the changing educational needs 
of graduating engineering students so that they might begin to 
consider their role in developing their required knowledge and 
skills. Developing a ‘common understanding’ does not mean 
that everyone in the department must agree on a common 
conception of sustainability. Rather, faculty members need to 
be aware of how EESD aff ects the department, and the depart-
ment’s perspective. As faculty reaches this level of understand-
ing, senior management can identify what capacity is available 
to deliver sustainability content within the programme off er-
58 Go to: http://www.sternreview.org.uk/
59 Go to: http://www.ipcc.ch/ 
60 Go to: http://www.unep.org/geo/geo4/media/ (Accessed: 29 May 2010).
ings, existing champions, leaders, and interest areas in the fac-
ulty.
Graduate attribute mapping 
Th e use of ‘graduate attributes’ (also referred to as ‘programme 
outcomes’ ‘learning outcomes’ and ‘graduate capabilities’) is 
gaining popularity internationally as a way for educational 
institutions to defi ne the kind of graduates their programmes 
seek to deliver. Such mapping quickly develops a shared under-
standing of a department’s aims and aspirations for graduates 
and of the programme’s graduate market niche (regionally, 
nationally and internationally); encourages refl ection on how 
courses and programmes can develop attributes to address 
 accreditation requirements; and focuses attention on how 
preferred graduate attributes are already being developed 
through  curriculum goals, learning objectives, assessment 
methods and learning activities. Once a list of attributes has 
been created, each attribute can then be traced or ‘mapped’ 
to show where it is being developed in a given programme of 
study. Th e resultant ‘graduate attribute map’ can then be used 
to review a programme (using an audit process).
Curriculum audit
An Engineering for Sustainable Development (E4SD) audit 
aims to provide a preliminary diagnosis and classifi cation of 
each course within the programme, to inform eff ective  cur-
riculum renewal eff orts across (breadth) and within (depth) 
the programme. Each course can be assessed with regard to: 
1) Fundamental Principles – how well the scope of the theory 
underpins application to contemporary and emerging applica-
tions and challenges; 2) Knowledge – how well the knowledge 
explains relevance and context and prepares students with an 
understanding of issues and processes; and 3) Application – 
how well the course demonstrates the relevance and imple-
mentation of principles and knowledge to contemporary 
and emerging applications and challenges. An E4SD audit is 
informed by relevant professional body  accreditation require-
ments on  sustainable development content, as well as key dec-
larations and global commitments by the relevant institutions 
and professional networks for the discipline area.
Course development and renewal 
Guidance is still lacking on how sustainability content require-
ments can be most eff ectively and effi  ciently addressed for a 
given programme. Questions still exist: should the department 
create a niche bachelor degree, or seek to integrate sustain-
ability content across the existing programme?; should the 
department be presenting sustainability content to students 
in single ‘fl agship courses’?; are fl agship courses suffi  cient for 
the department, to embed sustainability into the programme?; 
how does the department accelerate its  curriculum develop-
ment process? For each of these questions, careful planning 
from the outset is essential to determine the best approach 
for the department given the opportunities and risks for them © A
lly
so
n 
La
w
le
ss
 Capacity building.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   344 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
345
with niche degrees versus embedding content across the 
degree using a fl agship and/or integrated approach.
Outreach and bridging
Departments can use newly developed or renewed  curriculum 
to undertake recruitment and profi le raising initiatives. Exam-
ples include: off ering immediate capacity-building for industry 
and government to assist them with their existing employ-
ment (i.e. through bridging courses); collaborating with other 
higher education  institutions to share course off erings as an 
alternative delivery method for specialist courses on sustain-
ability topics; off ering high-school level bridging and collabo-
ration where departments can interact with potential future 
students in schools and in the local community (i.e. outreach); 
use of post-graduate  curriculum to address potential graduate 
attribute gaps for fi nal year students who may have missed out 
on developing sustainability related attributes in their earlier 
studies.
Campus integration
A whole-of-campus approach brings together the  curriculum 
renewal processes with campus initiatives. With many future 
leaders spending time on higher education  campuses, sus-
tainability eff orts on campus can off er signifi cant educational 
value. Students can gain experience with real projects that are 
of immediate interest and application to potential employ-
ers. In a professional environment where faculty may not have 
recent industry experience, on-campus initiatives can provide 
faculty with practical experience in their subject matter.
Concluding comments
In order to rapidly and systematically embed sustainability 
into engineering  curriculum across all disciplines, each depart-
ment needs to consider the merits of all of these strategies. 
In doing so, the process will directly address  accreditation 
requirements, student  enrolment and retention, reducing the 
department’s exposure to the time lag dilemma. It will likely 
be a combination of all strategies, suited to the institutional, 
geographic and cultural context.
Environmental education 7.3.4 
 in engineering
Cheryl Desha and Charlie Hargroves
Engineering has gradually evolved to include environmental 
education  in an engineer’s training. At the time of the Industrial 
Revolution, an engineer’s primary concern was the application 
of science fundamentals to engineering design (i.e. applied 
physics), for example with the mechanics of motion and com-
bustion, as well as increasing the productivity of processes. 
Th is style of engineering acknowledged the ‘environment’, but 
only in as much as it provided  energy, resources and physical 
constraints to construction, thus infl uencing design outcomes. 
Environmental education  then evolved over the following 200 
years, through what could be described as a number of ‘gen-
erations’ of engineering education, for example:
The first generation of ‘ad hoc’ environmental education 
 in the mid to latter half of the twentieth century stemmed 
from the concern that some design outcomes could adversely 
aff ect the environment (for example with air and water pol-
lution), following events such as the Bhopal chemical  disaster 
in 1984, and the nuclear accident in Chernobyl in 1986, along 
with the release of seminal publications such as Silent Spring in 
1961,61 Limits to Growth in 1972,62 and Our Common Future in 
1987.63 As engineering educators realized the need to address 
such issues within their courses or programmes, content was 
included within existing engineering degree programmes, but 
often only based on the interests and pursuits of individual 
academic staff . 
Th e second generation of ‘Flagship’ environmental education, 
from the 1980s to the end of the twentieth century, began to 
formalize such ad hoc activities, as engineering departments 
began to react to increasing staff  and community interest in 
the way engineering aff ects the environment. However, rather 
than integrating this set of knowledge and skills across and 
within the full set of engineering  curriculum, the topic was 
isolated and allocated a small component of the average engi-
neering  curriculum, and a specialist Environmental Engineer-
ing discipline and programme of study evolved to secure a 
place for most of the content and skills. It is conceivable that 
this placement of the topic in a separate discipline area was 
symptomatic of engineering education  at the time, where full 
integration of any new content was diffi  cult in a system that 
tended to accept and reward individual discipline eff orts (in 
terms of administration, budgets and  research funding) rather 
than integration. 
Th e third generation of ‘Integrated’ environmental education 
 is currently underway, as part of the transition towards engi-
neering education  for  sustainable development (EESD). Engi-
neering departments around the world are now beginning to 
understand that they must proactively integrate sustainability 
considerations into all engineering  curriculum as appropri-
ate, to address shifting regulatory, market, institutional, and 
graduate expectations. With this shift already underway, it 
is likely that within twenty years, all engineers will graduate 
with competencies in  sustainable development. Th is poses a 
unique challenge for Environmental Engineering to both sup-
61 Carson, R. 1962. Silent Spring, Houghton Miffl  in, Boston.
62 Meadows, D.H., Meadows, D.L., Randers, J. and Behrens, W. 1972. Limits to Growth: A 
Report for the Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of Mankind, Universe Books, 
New York.
63 World Commission on Environment and Development. 1987. Our Common Future, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   345 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
346
port other disciplines in capacity-building as well as seeking to 
evolve its own identity.  
‘It will be important for Environmental Engineering educators 
to examine their role in this emerging cultural transition - 
potentially increasing services to other engineering disciplines 
(i.e. on sustainability critical literacy skills), as well as focusing 
Environmental Engineering students on the bountiful niche 
opportunities that are presented in such a transition.’64
Within the higher education  system, the evolution of Environ-
mental Engineering will depend on such factors as:
the defi nition of environmental engineering as a separate  ■
and identifi able discipline (rather than a gathering of ‘green’ 
elements from other disciplines that happen to relate to, or 
impact more sharply on ‘the environment’);
the popularity of the environmental engineering pro- ■
grammes currently being offered (are student numbers 
increasing, steady or decreasing?), versus those that evolve 
with a new ‘earth systems engineering’ focus;
the existing and planned composition of staff  expertise (i.e.  ■
engineering/science training); and
the existing focus of the programmes off ered (for example  ■
on ‘end-of-pipe’ pollution monitoring and compliance, 
impact assessment, and remediation, or ‘front-end loaded’ 
design processes, and advanced environmental topics such 
as green chemistry and earth systems engineering, ecosys-
tem threshold assessment, and so on).
Subject to this set of situational constraints, the transition of 
an Environmental Engineering department may include stra-
tegic planning that encourages and facilitates practical oppor-
tunities to:
Play a strategic role in the institution’s ‘whole-of-engineer- ■
ing’ transition to EESD – for example through participating 
in sustainability committees, and ensuring that the foun-
dation environmental knowledge and skills are integrated 
across and within existing disciplines’ programmes.
Raise awareness among departmental staff about what  ■
Environmental Engineering is about – for example through 
offering lunchtime faculty seminars and guest lecturer 
opportunities on related environmental topics within other 
courses.
Assist other engineering disciplines to identify what  ■  cur-
ricula need to be renewed – for example by providing 
64 Macoun, T. 2005. Chairman’s Message, Sustainability in Engineering Education and 
Knowledge (SEEK), Vol. 1, February 2005. 
expertise and advice regarding impending and future 
 accreditation and industry expectations. Th is may include 
assisting with reviewing and mapping graduate attributes 
across programmes, and auditing existing  curricula.
Service other engineering discipline  ■  curricula within the 
institution, in ‘gap-fi lling existing programmes’ with envi-
ronmental courses/subjects (e.g. in critical concepts, lan-
guage, compliance requirements and sustainable design 
processes). 
Provide specialization options for the fi nal years of under- ■
graduate study – for example where students can major 
in environmental topics (i.e. ‘bachelor of civil engineering, 
with a major in advanced bio-remediation’).
Renew or develop specialized, leading-edge environmental  ■
Master degree programmes for postgraduate students and 
professional development with engineering bachelor quali-
fi cations – for example on carbon capture and storage, air 
quality, potable water generation and provision, wastewater 
treatment, soil and groundwater remediation, groundwater 
modeling, ISO 14000 and environmental policy develop-
ment. 
Renew the existing Bachelor programme(s) to advance the  ■
level of sophistication of the  standard ‘Environmental Engi-
neering’ bachelor degree – for example where graduates 
can take advantage of the improved level of sustainability 
knowledge and skills within other engineering discipline 
areas, off ering technical expertise and advice (i.e. in best 
practice front-of-pipe and end-of-pipe  innovations).
Th e reality is that as engineering education  makes the transi-
tion to EESD, core content of most courses will not change sig-
nifi cantly. Rather,  curriculum renewal will come from updating 
knowledge used to explain the theory, and in the application 
of theory and knowledge to practice through case studies and 
problem-solving. With regard to Environmental Engineering, 
the Australian College of Environmental Engineers suggests 
that the discipline has an opportunity to develop a deeper 
understanding of how the Earth’s ecosystems function and 
repair, and how manufactured and built systems might pro-
vide the  infrastructure support for ecosystem re-growth that 
actually repairs existing damage and rebuilds the Earth’s natu-
ral capital. With this in mind, environmental engineering edu-
cators are well placed to assist other disciplines to undertake 
programme updates, including core environmental science 
and some  sustainable development knowledge and skills, and 
to work with colleagues to contextualize this new material to 
their particular discipline. 
Th erefore, if the other disciplines continue to need expertise 
in incorporating the latest environmental knowledge into core 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   346 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
347
subjects along with the delivery of specifi c courses related to 
the environment, and if the other disciplines need the option 
of an environmental major in their discipline area, then there is 
perhaps considerable opportunity for growth within the Envi-
ronmental Engineering discipline. 
Th e United Nations International Decade of Education for 
Sustainable Development (2005–2014)65 provides a timely 
reminder that  society is expecting change across the profes-
sions. As part of this, Environmental Engineering faces a par-
ticularly challenging transition, as it both evolves and assists 
other disciplines. However, rather than being in a threatening 
predicament where the progress of other disciplines in this 
area may make environmental engineering redundant, there 
is a opportunity for the discipline to play a pivotal role, and 
in doing so redefine its niche. Perhaps the Environmental 
Engineering department or school of today will not exist in 
its current form in 10–15 years time. Rather it may evolve to 
provide signifi cant capacity-building services to other disci-
plines in addition to off ering programmes that provide a more 
integrated understanding of natural and manmade systems 
that work in harmony to increase natural, social and economic 
capital. 
Research in engineering 7.3.5 
education
 Erik de Graaff and Anette Kolmos
Introduction
Engineering is a practice-oriented profession. For a long time, 
the training of future engineers took was delivered in the 
workplace. After the establishment of engineering schools in 
the nineteenth century, the link to engineering practice always 
stayed important. Engineers were trained for professional 
practice, not for careers as scientists. Th is approach lasted the 
best part of the twentieth century.
After the Second World War, the proportion of the population 
that participated in higher education  increased substantially. 
Following the increase in the number of students, politi-
cians and administrators called for greater effi  ciency. Insti-
tutes became bigger and bigger. As a consequence, teaching 
and learning in higher education  has turned into a topic for 
 research and  innovation in its own right. Pedagogical centres 
were founded at universities in countries in Northwest  Europe 
to train teaching staff  and to support the improvement of 
education  with  research and development. 
65 UN General Assembly. 2002. Proclamation of the Decade of Education of Sustainable 
Development (2005–2014), 57th Session, UN General Assembly. Go to: www.desd.org/
Engineering education  has a particular place in higher educa-
tion. In the Netherlands for instance, the academic level of the 
Institute of Technology in Delft was recognized in 1905 yet it 
wasn’t until 1986 that it was offi  cially designated a university. 
Within higher engineering education, two diff erent types of 
schools can be recognized: the more theory-oriented pro-
grammes at universities and the more practice-oriented pro-
grammes at universities of applied sciences. Th is distinction 
is carried on in the form of theoretical and applied bachelor 
programmes in the bachelor-master structure adopted in the 
Bologna Process.
Th e emergence of  research and development centres for 
higher education  in  Europe
Th e increasing number of students participating in higher 
education  resulted in a general call for higher effi  ciency of the 
 curricula. Educational  research – aiming to fi gure out what ele-
ments contributed to effi  ciency and how it could be improved 
– was started at diff erent institutions. To fi nd out how to 
achieve this and to provide the necessary support, universities 
in the Netherlands, Germany and Scandinavian countries set 
up their own  research and development centres (Kolmos et 
al., 2001).66 Th e historical developments in the Netherlands are 
depicted in the section below as an example for the develop-
ments in other European countries. 
During the 1960s, universities in the Netherlands needed to 
adjust their teaching methods in order to deal with mass higher 
education  (Wiegersma, 1989).67 Innovation and improve-
ment soon became keywords in dealing with this issue. In a 
scientifi c environment it seems natural that  research plays a 
major part in order to establish a solid foundation for quality 
improvement. As it was put by a reporter at the end of the fi rst 
national convention on ‘Research of Higher Education’ in the 
Netherlands in 1966, ‘…what is needed is to establish contact 
between the people who are concerned with the teaching of 
science and those who are engaged with the science of teach-
ing’ (Vroeiijenstijn, 1981).68
At fi rst, this type of  research was mostly conducted by exter-
nal experts or by isolated individual researchers. Th e scientifi c 
background of these researchers has been interdisciplinary 
right from the start as they came from social science, humani-
ties, science and engineering. Most Dutch universities estab-
lished an Institute for Research of Higher Education (RWO 
66 Kolmos, A., Rump, Ingemarsson, I., Laloux, A., and Vinther, O. 2001. Organization of 
Staff  Development – Strategies and Experiences. European Journal of Engineering Edu-
cation, Vol. 26, No. 4. pp. 329–342.
67 Wiegersma, S. 1989. Innovatie van het hoger onderwijs [Innovation in Higher  educa-
tion]. Hoger onderwijsreeks. Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff .
68 Vroeijensteijn, A. (red.) 1981. Kwaliteitsverbetering Hoger Onderwijs [Improvement of 
quality in Higher Education]. Proceedings of the fourth national convention Research 
in Higher Education, December 1-180-1981. Eindhoven: Stichting Nationaal Con-
gres/1981.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   347 14/09/10   15:35:16
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
348
– Research van het Wetenschappelijke Onderwijs) during the 
1970s (van Kemenade, 1976).69 During the 1980s,  research on 
higher education  was fl ourishing. Th e budgets increased and 
the RWO institutes were allowed to recruit more and more 
researchers. Th e various educational centres joined forces in an 
informal network of Centres for Research on Higher Education 
(CRWO).70 A national network formed, including both general 
universities as well as universities of technology.
Th e CRWO network continued to organize study conferences 
(Bartelds et al., 1987).71 Also a Higher Education section was 
established as a thematic group operating within the national 
framework of educational researchers. By the time of the 
fourth national convention on Research in Higher Education 
in 1981  research institutes were established at or in close rela-
tion to most universities. 
In the years to come a problem surfaced that threatened 
the existence of the RWO institutes almost everywhere: the 
communication between the educational researchers, the 
administrators and the teaching staff  was often ineff ective. 
Th is may be explained in part because the researchers tended 
to become more and more involved in their own theories, 
and in part because the teachers did not apply the same 
sound scientifi c methods they used for their own professional 
fi eld to their teaching tasks (Van der Vleuten, 1997).72 As a 
consequence, the RWO institutes went through recurring 
cycles of growing and shrinking. Overlooking this process in 
hindsight, it can be observed that universities with a strong 
educational  research group (like for instance Maastricht 
69 Vroeijensteijn, A. (red.) 1981. Kwaliteitsverbetering Hoger Onderwijs [Improvement of 
quality in Higher Education]. Proceedings of the fourth national convention Research 
in Higher Education, December 1-180-1981. Eindhoven: Stichting Nationaal Con-
gres/1981.
70 For more information: http://www.crwo.nl
71 Bartelds, J,  K. Brants, W. Gerritsen van der Hoop, M. Hulshof and M. van der Weiden 
(eds.) 1987. Studiedag Contactgroep Research Wetenschappelijk Onderwijs [Study Con-
ference Contact Group Research Higher Education] Nijmegen/Utrecht: IOWO/VSNU.
72 Vleuten, C. P.M. van der. 1997. De intuïtie voorbij [Beyond intuition] Tijdschrift voor 
Hoger Onderwijs, 15.1. pp. 34-46.
University) invariably tend to get high ratings in polls that 
assessed satisfaction with the educational climate (De Graaff  
and Sjoer, 2006).73
Engineering education:  the role of SEFI
Th e researchers at the  research and development centres were 
social scientists applying their sociological, psychological and 
pedagogical  research methods to the fi eld of higher education. 
 They contributed to the development of the educational 
sciences discipline. However, the more sophisticated the 
 research became, the further they drifted away from the 
concerns of the teachers in the classroom. Teachers felt a 
need to share experience and to collaborate with others in the 
same position. Engineering is one of the fi elds were this desire 
resulted in the establishment of societies of professionals. 
Th e future of engineering education  research in  Europe
In  Europe higher education  is a national aff air. Th at means that 
the EU cannot take political initiatives at this level without 
the consent of all Member States. Th e Bologna Process is an 
example of a successful initiative. It has brought about many 
changes in the engineering education  in  Europe at a structural 
level adjusting programs to the length of Bachelor, Master and 
PhD studies (3+2+3 years), and this is an important step for-
ward for mobility and international degree programs.  
Th e emergence of the ‘knowledge  society’ entails fundamental 
changes in the processes of teaching and learning. Objectives 
are set to keep increasing the numbers of students in higher 
education  and, as a consequence, learning will have to be 
organized in a completely diff erent manner. Th e rapid develop-
ment of electronic learning technologies provides the means 
to deal eff ectively with large numbers of students. However, 
teachers in higher education  will have to re-learn their profes-
sion: instead of being experts teaching on their own special-
ism, they will have to learn to manage a learning process from a 
distance and to collaborate with other experts in the design of 
73 Graaff , E. de and Sjoer, E. 2006. Positioning Educational Consultancy and Research in 
Engineering Education. In: Proceedings of the 34th SEFI Annual Conference, Uppsala: 
Uppsala University, pp. 98–101.
Th e main engineering  education organizations in  Europe 
are the ‘European Society for Engineering Education’ (SEFI) 
and the ‘International Society of Engineering Education’ 
(IGIP). Both were founded during the 1970s.
SEFI promotes cooperation between higher engineering 
 education institutions and other scientifi c and interna-
tional bodies on issues of  research and development in 
engineering  education. For instance, it participates in Euro-
pean network projects such as the SOCRATES Th ematic 
Network ‘Teaching and Research in Engineering Education 
in  Europe’ (TREE). SEFI is also engaged in policy devel-
opment regarding engineering  education, and publish-
ing statements regarding issues like the Bologna Process 
(Graaff  and Borri, 2006).* Focusing on the importance of 
sustaining ideals and claims with scientifi c  research, a new 
SEFI working group on engineering  education  research was 
established in 2008. 
By creating networks allowing people all over  Europe to 
learn from each other in working groups and to share 
insights at conferences and seminars, both SEFI and IGIP 
have contributed signifi cantly to the development and 
 research of engineering  education. As participants are 
mostly staff from the engineering schools, the level of 
 research has been mostly practice-oriented case studies 
and  curriculum development projects. Th e European Jour-
nal of Engineering Education (EJEE) – the offi  cial Scientifi c 
Journal of SEFI – is the platform for contributions with a 
wider scope.
* Graaff , E de, and Borri, C. 2006. Research and Innovation of 
Engineering Education in  Europe the contribution of SEFI. In: 
Proceedings of the 2006 JSEE Annual Conference, pp. 12–17.
Th e role of SEFI
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   348 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
349
Engineering education 7.4  for development
International Development 7.4.1 
Technologies Centre, 
Australia
 Donald Mansell and Don Stewart
Development Studies for Engineers and Technologists
Th e concept of development technologies
Th e International Technologies Centre within the Faculty of 
Engineering in the University of Melbourne started its life 
as ‘Th e Appropriate Technology Section’ in 1978. Th e term 
‘Appropriate Technology’ was then in vogue, as the extensive 
range of UNIDO74 monographs shows. Although such active 
groups use a variety of ways to contribute to the ‘good 
work’,75 76 in every instance one of the motivations was the 
 conviction that some technologies in use were inappropriate 
to their users or to the environments where the users lived.
Th e conviction that technologies needed to be created and 
refi ned to make them concord with their environments (cli-
matic, economic, social, cultural and so on) was not a new 
phenomenon in the 1970s. Many decades earlier, Mahatma 
Gandhi invested much eff ort in support of traditional craft 
technologies because he appreciated the threat to them from 
more industrialized manufacture. He saw industrialization as 
a threat to Indian culture. Perhaps the Chartists in eighteenth 
and nineteenth century Britain would have considered him 
to be a kindred spirit; they foresaw the huge impact of indus-
trialization on a  society that had depended for centuries on 
production from a cottage industry base.
74 UNIDO. 1978. Monographs on Appropriate Industrial Technology (MAIT), Vienna.
75 Schumacher, E .F. 1979. Education for Good Work, Cape, London. .
76 Such groups included Intermediate Technology Development Group (ITDG) in Lon-
don and in-country Technology Consultancy Centres such as those in  Botswana, 
 Ghana, the Philippines and Zimbabwe.
Th e economist, E. F. Schumacher used his skills as an economist, 
and his wartime period in exile in Britain, to refl ect on such 
matters. He argued that in order to maximize the national 
benefit from technological development it was essential 
to design technology with attention to the capital cost per 
workplace it would create. Th is was an economic and social 
constraint on technological development that could not be 
found in any reputable engineering textbook or  curriculum.
It is not by chance that the explosion of interest in ‘Appropri-
ate Technology’ coincided with the end of the Second World 
War, the retreat of colonialism and the growth in international 
 communications (both physical transport and  telecommuni-
cations). Th e end of the war left colonial powers weakened 
and nationalists emboldened creating a curious anomalous 
situation in many less developed countries. The anomaly 
arose from the fact that the colonial country had inevitably 
become the most accessible role model – which had been 
imprinted on the educated nationalist elite – and yet the elite 
faced the task of fostering national ambitions that, the likes of 
Schumacher pointed out, were non-feasible if those colonial 
models were used.
Australia  was, in many respects, one of those developing coun-
tries. Its economy had been developed to depend on the capi-
tal wealth of Britain, and its products had evolved to serve the 
British market. Th e Australian population was well educated 
in the language and values of the British economy and  society. 
Its orderly political, economic and social environment derived 
from its colonial past. In a word, it had been developed to 
make it a dependent component of the British economy.
Australian universities were similarly heavily infl uenced by an 
invaluable but paternalistic infusion of models of British terti-
ary educational institutions77 imported by senior academics 
77 Th e discussion thus far has referred repeatedly to ‘nations’; this is a convenience in 
writing, but in fact there are sometimes such variations within a particular nation 
a learning environment that stimulates student’s self-directed 
learning processes.
Research on engineering education  should play a major part 
in these developments. Research on engineering education 
 is necessary to establish the extent to which general didactic 
principles and theories can be applied in the context of learn-
ing in order to become an engineer, and to support the devel-
opment of new theoretical concepts for the understanding of 
new learning paradigms and techniques. 
Further reading 
Clark, B.R. 1995. Places of Inquiry. Research and Advanced Education 
in Modern Universities. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Vroeijensteijn, A. (red.) (1981) Kwaliteitsverbetering Hoger 
Onderwijs [Improvement of quality in Higher Education]. 
Proceedings of the fourth national convention Research in 
Higher Education, December 1-180-1981. Eindhoven: Stichting 
Nationaal Congres/1981.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   349 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
350
of British origin. Tertiary education  is in fact just one of the 
technologies on which  human development depends, and it 
can be situation-relevant or not, as the case may be.
Th e fi rst response of the University of Melbourne
Th e number of foreign students in the Faculty of Engineer-
ing at the University of Melbourne, both undergraduate and 
postgraduate, grew rapidly in the decades following the Sec-
ond World War, thanks to such programmes as British Com-
monwealth Scholarships, the Colombo Plan and so on. Th e 
homogeneity of the student body started to break down and 
academic staff  faced new problems in communicating with 
students and in helping them to learn. Th e diffi  culties were 
most evident in the issues of fl uency or facility in the use of 
the English language. Th at became the focus for informal dis-
cussions within the Faculty but they soon broadened to ques-
tion the nature of the education  that the students should be 
entitled to receive. 
By 198078 it had been decided to try to provide a graduate 
education  for engineering academics from the less developed 
countries, with a prominent part of the  curriculum covering 
development issues. Successful completion of the programme 
would be recognized with the award of a Master’s degree. 
Th e thinking behind designing the new course to make it of 
value to academics was that (a) there must eventually be a 
home-town advantage in providing the push for technological 
change through the relevant professions in situ rather than in 
a foreign country, and (b) the most eff ective multiplier eff ect 
could be obtained by educating the educators. Th is structure 
built on the long-standing graduate coursework programmes 
already off ered in civil engineering and in environmental engi-
neering at the university.
To provide a compact description of the  curriculum off ered 
through the Melbourne initiative one must start by saying that 
it comprises three components. One is a semester of Prelimi-
nary Studies in which students who need it may accommodate 
themselves to their new academic and cultural environments 
while, at the same time, undertaking studies at the relevant 
level in English for Academic Purposes, and enrolling in senior 
undergraduate subjects that complemented their prior under-
graduate work. Secondly, the next two semesters are devoted 
primarily to graduate coursework, which is itself divided into 
two parts. One is the core material covering development 
issues (which for several years included a subject on the prac-
tice of tertiary education). Th e other comprised elective sub-
jects in the candidate’s own discipline, or a related one, so that 
that the development of technologies needs to be regionalized in order to be optimal 
for the users. Similarly, variations between nations may be insignifi cant so that the 
relevant region is multi-national.  
78 Th e intellectual leadership in this concept and its development was provided by Pro-
fessor A.J.Francis, a former Dean of the Faculty of Engineering, later a UNESCO consult-
ant in Turkey and then founding Director of the new IDTC. 
they return home with a background in studies beyond the 
level at which they will teach undergraduate students. Th irdly, 
the fi nal semester is devoted to an investigational or  research 
project assessed by submission of a ‘minor thesis’. Th is last seg-
ment fosters the values of enquiry, analysis, synthesis and tech-
nical writing, which are the stock-in-trade of all academics.
For the fi rst several years this programme was supported by 
the Australian Government aid agency (now called AusAID) 
through cost-recovery fees and through assistance in student 
recruitment by AusAID staff  in Australian diplomatic offi  ces. 
Candidates came principally from Asia and Africa,  although 
there were experienced Australian engineers who saw an 
opportunity to develop their own interests in the material in 
the programme, and to do it in a disciplined environment with 
formal recognition through graduation. Th ere were approxi-
mately 200 graduates in the fi rst decade.
Changes inevitably occurred. An early, purely internal change 
was to accommodate candidates whose primary need was 
professional upgrading through advanced coursework rather 
than preparation for an academic career. Th is took the form of 
a Graduate Diploma programme in which  enrolment was cut 
back to two semesters by reducing the investigational project 
to the equivalent of one coursework subject (or 1/8 of the 
two-semester  enrolment).
A substantial change was triggered by a fairly radical review of 
government relations with the universities in Australia. On the 
face of it the national government withdrew from involvement 
within universities at the detailed level, which had been the 
practice in such programmes as the ‘Long Australian Devel-
opment Assistance Courses’ typified by the Development 
Technologies Programme in Melbourne. Unsurprisingly, this 
was replaced by a remarkably heavy bureaucratic system to 
maintain government accountability. At the micro-level of a 
particular programme such as IDTC, the consequence of that 
change in the university-government relationship was that the 
promotion of the programme broadened and applicants came 
from a greater variety of professions, not necessarily academic. 
Enrolment numbers grew – of course – but the proportion 
with an interest in education  as a topic of study inevitably 
declined.
Th e next change was internal to the Faculty of Engineering – 
where programmes and centres were merged – which chose to 
place its whole Environmental Engineering Master’s Program 
within what had now become the International Development 
Technologies Centre (IDTC). Th e name was later abbreviated 
to International Technologies Centre (but retaining the acro-
nym which had gained some currency internationally). In some 
respects this was benefi cial to IDTC in that the number of stu-
dents in its care increased, as did the diversity of coursework 
and project work (including a very well-developed project 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   350 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
351
Subsequent Responses
Twenty years after the start of IDTC a combination of 
external and internal pressures created a receptive envi-
ronment within the University for a re-examination of its 
image and modus operandi. Th e fi rst of these sources of 
pressure has already been alluded to – a change in Aus-
tralian Federal Government policy on funding mecha-
nisms for tertiary  education, forcing the institutions to 
spend more  energy and resources on expanding non-gov-
ernment funding income. Th e following statement in the 
University of Melbourne Strategic Plan in 1997 states:
‘With fewer than 2,000 overseas fee-paying students, the 
University is signifi cantly under-enrolled in such programs 
compared with other major universities in  Australia. Irre-
spective of fi nancial considerations, such a low level of 
international enrolments is not consistent with the Univer-
sity’s internationalization agenda. A substantial increase in 
overseas fee-based programs also off ers the best imme-
diate strategy for managing the emerging funding gap, 
which the University faces over the next fi ve years.’
Such a statement makes it impossible to deny the evident 
fi nancial imperative behind a changing attitude towards 
foreign students, but elsewhere in the same document 
the academic imperative was articulated, clearly identify-
ing its competitive element:
‘The world’s leading universities of the twenty-first 
century will be fi rst and foremost international institu-
tions. Such universities will recruit and retain academic 
and general staff of the highest quality from around 
the world, attract national and international students 
of exceptional ability, promote high levels of staff  and 
student interaction with other leading universities, irre-
spective of location, and maintain  curricula that are valid 
and relevant internationally. … Th e international posi-
tioning, recognition and engagement that such universi-
ties secure will be the ultimate test of their international 
quality and competitiveness.’
Th is represents a clear shift in motivation from the purely 
academic concerns that drove the Faculty of Engineering 
to invent a graduate programme to better fi t foreign stu-
dents for foreign engineering practice, but the underlying 
direction of change in academic work was the same – 
to review and revise what was off ered to students, both 
domestic and foreign.
An initiative that should be mentioned here is the crea-
tion of ‘Universitas 21’ – a cooperating group of universi-
ties from the UK, US, Canada, China, Japan, Hong Kong, 
Singapore,  New Zealand and  Australia, with key involve-
ment of the University of Melbourne, and described as:
‘a small, well-organized, rationally-structured and highly 
eff ective network of comprehensive,  research intensive 
universities, capable of achieving the kind of practical 
outcomes that none of the individual members would 
be able to achieve independently or through traditional 
bilateral alliances.  Off ering its members operational links 
around the world, the network functions as a loosely-
coupled system through which international competitors 
may derive substantial benefi ts from organised targeted 
collaboration.’
Th is Network, if it proves to be durable, is expected to 
provide for seamless student and staff  mobility between 
the institutions, and greater cooperation and quality 
control in all aspects of university work.
Another source of pressure for change is the remark-
able degree of internationalization of the major cities of 
 Australia. Th e associated multi-culturalism is nowhere 
more evident than in the staff  and student bodies in the 
University of Melbourne. Multi-lingual students come 
from both domestic families, refl ecting the impact of 
migration, and from foreign students. Many classes are 
now more than 50 per cent multilingual, and the fi g-
ure of 2,000 overseas fee-paying students mentioned in 
the earlier quotation is now an historic curiosity. Th us 
the concern in 1977 for the quality of the  education of 
a minority of international engineering students whose 
future lay outside the culture, which coloured the under-
graduate  curriculum, and the extra-mural life of each stu-
dent, has now expanded into a much broader concern 
for true internationalization of all aspects of the Univer-
sity’s functions. Th e Faculties, which were prompt in join-
ing Architecture, Agriculture/Forestry, and Engineering 
in taking specifi c steps to direct some of their energies 
towards foreign cooperation, include Economics, Medi-
cine and Law.
Initiatives springing from the work of IDTC
An interesting example of the valuable outcomes of 
the commitment to internationalization that IDTC rep-
resents is an informal meeting between the Director of 
IDTC and Professor Krissanapong Kirtikara in King Mon-
gkut’s Institute of Technology in Th ailand. At that meet-
ing, the idea conceived was the collaboration to extend 
the well established networking with engineering aca-
demics at the King Mongkut Institute of Technology in 
Th ailand (through the medium of the UNESCO Regional 
Network on Appropriate Technology) by arranging an 
exchange of students.
Th e Th ai university preferred to off er the exchange to 
graduate students enrolled for Master degrees, many 
of whom were potential academics. The Melbourne 
students were to come from the senior undergraduate 
classes in the various engineering departments. Each uni-
versity undertook to provide supervision of the students 
from the sister Faculty and to assist with accommoda-
tion. Each exchange was for four weeks in each direc-
tion; each student made an oral presentation on their 
individual project to the staff  and students of the host 
university before fl ying home.
Good relations within the Th ai university community 
meant that other Th ai academic friends of IDTC shared 
the load in Th ailand, and IDTC took advantage of the 
opportunity to involve some engineers from Australian 
industry in the supervision of Th ai visitors. Th e language 
issue was acknowledged, but the only practicable solu-
tion was to use existing Th ai graduate students in Mel-
bourne to provide pre-departure preparation in Th ai 
culture and basic Th ai language to the selected Australian 
students. Th e Th ai students always had suffi  cient English 
fl uency to cope adequately. Th e exchanges took place 
during the respective semester breaks in the middle of 
the calendar year. After the fi rst trial year there were 
about twelve students from each institution each year. 
Th e eff ort was made to achieve a gender balance, with 
as many academic departments represented as was rea-
sonably possible, consistent with the quality of the stu-
dent being the principal basis for selection. Some of the 
Australian students used the project work in Th ailand 
as a component of their fi nal honours  research project 
in Melbourne. Well over 200 students were given this 
opportunity and the contribution to their educational 
experience should not be underestimated.* As time went 
on more Th ai universities became involved, including 
Chulalongkorn, Naureswan and Chiang Mai.
Another notable feature of the programme was the 
opportunity for a number of Melbourne students to 
work at the King’s Project sites in northern Th ailand. 
Th ese were food processing factories set up so that farm-
ers, who had been weaned off  opium production, had 
a secure market for their fruit and vegetable produce. 
Th is was a unique experience for these students who 
found themselves in a remote rural location, but yet had 
to achieve a project outcome to satisfy the demands of 
their fi nal year project at Melbourne.
* Ref: Kirtikara,K. and Mansell,D.S. (1995) ‘International 
Cooperation in Engineering Student Work on Exchange’, vol. 2, 
Fourth International Symposium on the Role of Universities in 
Developing Areas, incorporating the 1995 UNESCO Regional 
Seminar on Technology for Development, Melbourne, 11-14 July.
Example IDTC initiative – working with Th ailand
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   351 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
352
folio heavily oriented to those countries with a great need to 
develop their irrigation  infrastructure), which could be man-
aged consistently through the Centre. However, development 
(insofar as it relates to developing countries) was no longer 
the only focus.
A similar change was another Faculty move to translate the 
Centre for International Irrigation Training and Research 
(CIITR) into IDTC. Th e eff ects were somewhat complementary 
to the absorption of the Environmental Engineering Program 
because CIITR had a small cohort of students but a very well 
developed project folio heavily oriented to those countries 
with a great need to develop their irrigation  infrastructure.
Th e two semesters of coursework encouraged the academic 
departments to develop new graduate subjects; the conven-
tional civil engineering subjects were thus joined by course-
work in such disciplines as Environmental Engineering, 
Irrigation Management, Energy Studies, Facilities Manage-
ment and Project Management. Th is diversity of discipline in 
the elective part of the Master and Graduate Diploma pro-
grammes was brought together around the core of Develop-
ment Technologies and by the recruitment of academic staff  
from countries outside Australia. 
Academic programmes of this kind will always be subject to 
challenges, most of which are essentially healthy. Such pro-
grammes are perceived as being outside the mainstream. Th at 
requires the kind of self-appraisal and adaptability that is essen-
tial in any activity where there is competition for resources and 
for enrolling candidates. It is of paramount importance to work 
continuously to maintain the relevance of the programme to 
the ‘environment’ for which the academic service is provided. It 
is very easy for any academic unit to become introspective and 
self-satisfi ed, but particularly so when its raison d’etre is to be 
interested primarily in places that are remote from ‘home’.
 7.4.2 Botswana Technology Centre
Mokubung Mokubung
Th e  Botswana Government recognizes the need to address the 
United Nations  Millennium Development Goals (UN, 2000)79 
in order to tackle national development issues, especially the 
acceleration of  poverty reduction, employment creation and 
economic diversifi cation (Budget Speech, 2008).80 Poverty is 
still a challenge in  Botswana and therefore it remains a prior-
ity for Government to address (Budget Speech, 2009).81 Th e 
79 UN. 2000. UN  Millennium Development Goals. United Nations. Available at: http://
www.un.org/millenniumgoals/ (Accessed: 28 May 2010). 
80 Budget Speech, 2008,  Botswana Budget Speech of 2008. Available at: http://www.
sarpn.org.za/documents/d0002982/index.php (Accessed: 28 May 2010). 
81 Budget Speech, 2009,  Botswana Budget Speech of 2009. Available at: http://www.par-
liament.gov.bw/docs/documents/2009BudgetSpeech.pdf (Accessed: 28 May 2010).
In line with the comments from the university’s strategic 
plan of 1997, mentioned above, about recruiting more 
international students and building on the experience of 
IDTC, the Faculty made a decision to be proactive in this 
area and in 1998 recruited the then Director* of IDTC as 
Assistant Dean, International. Th e International Student 
Support Unit in the Faculty was set up in 1998. Th e Unit’s 
role was multi-faceted, and involved:
provision of academic and other support to overseas  ■
students both undergraduate and postgraduate, 
including Study Abroad and exchange; 
encouragement of international linkages for the  ■
Faculty;.
development of exchange programmes and other forms  ■
of international experience for Australian students in 
the Faculty:
promotion of the University’s Cultural Diversity Policy  ■
within the Faculty and its programmes;
development of opportunities for professional  ■
experience and industry interaction for overseas 
students;
support for the Faculty’s overseas recruitment  ■
operations; and
fostering of Faculty overseas alumni links. ■
Th is programme and can be seen to have three compo-
nents.
Firstly, overseas students in the Faculty should have an 
experience that not only is superior academically and pro-
fessionally, but is also pleasant and enriching from a social 
and cultural viewpoint. 
Secondly, the Australian students should be encouraged 
to develop an international viewpoint and, if possible, 
experience a diff erent cultural environment. At this point 
it is worth reporting that over 70 per cent of University 
of Melbourne Australian engineering students are com-
pleting double degrees, combining engineering with Arts, 
Commerce, Science or Law, so they are already exposed to 
diff erent professional cultures. Th ere is also a Diploma of 
Modern Languages at the university, which can be taken 
concurrently with another degree, so that engineering stu-
dents can complete their engineering degree and at the 
same time develop fl uency in another language.
Th irdly, and this is in many ways the most diffi  cult chal-
lenge, the academic staff  must be encouraged to develop 
international linkages for  research and other professional 
activities, to internationalize the  curriculum of the subjects 
they teach and to see the overseas students they teach 
or supervise for higher degrees as a valuable enriching 
resource who have a valid world view, even if it is diff erent 
from that of the lecturer.
Th ere are other outcomes but the above report illustrates 
what can be done. Th e importance of inclusion in tech-
nological  curricula of studies in national and community 
development and cross-cultural experience is commonly 
underestimated and therefore commonly not imple-
mented. Professional leaders should give some thought 
to the potential value of encouraging academic leaders 
to provide the balance in  education that is available if the 
concept of environment for professional practice is wid-
ened in this way.
* Associate Professor D. F. Stewart.
Example IDTC initiative – International Student Support
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   352 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
353
issue of widespread poverty in the African continent has been 
observed by UNESCO (2005)82 and, according to Daly (2002),83 
the  research system should fi nd solutions and exploit oppor-
tunities for  economic development. Th e  research institutes are 
recommended to devise strategies for  research and to develop 
the skills needed to identify, analyse and address these crucial 
specifi c problems (King, 2005; Hazell and Haddad, 2001).84 85 
Th e Government of  Botswana expects public  research insti-
tutes to participate and make a positive impact in national 
development. Th e  Botswana Technology Centre (BOTEC) is 
one of the public  research institutes that is expected to con-
tribute to the improvement of living  standards of the people 
of  Botswana.
BOTEC undertakes R&D in science, engineering and technol-
ogy, and its projects have mainly been in  renewable  energy, 
civil engineering and information  communications tech-
nologies. BOTEC was established in 1979 with the mandate 
to promote science and technology through R&D, the trans-
fer of technology, policy development, support to industry, 
economic analysis, and information and education  activities. 
Th ese eff orts are aimed at improving the quality of life of the 
citizens of  Botswana, and supporting the  economic develop-
ment of the country.
While other  research institutes are mandated to focus on 
agricultural production for food self-suffi  ciency, such as the 
Department of Agricultural Research, BOTEC concentrates on 
other technologies that are not necessarily food-related but 
provide a general uplift of living  standards. Th e projects below 
refer to solar  renewable  energy technologies, civil engineering 
and ICT.
Centralized photovoltaic power station
Th e centralized solar photovoltaic (PV) power station devel-
oped in 1998 was a demonstration pilot project to showcase 
its feasibility in a remote rural village that is not connected to 
the national electricity grid. Th e solar powered station has the 
capacity to produce 5.7 kilowatts of electric power to provide 
electricity (220V AC) in the village clinic, primary school, street 
lights and households.  Th e engineering element of this power 
station involved the applied  research to adapt the photovoltaic 
system to  Botswana conditions and to produce clean  energy. 
82 UNESCO. 2005. UNESCO Science Report:  Africa, authored by Jacques Gaillard, 
Mohamed Hassan and Roland Waast in collaboration with Daniel Schaff er. UNESCO, 
Paris, France. Available at: www.iocd.org/PDF/unesco_sci_report05.pdf (Accessed: 28 
May 2010).
83 Daly, John, A. 2002. Building Science and Technology Capacity in Developing Countries, 
Sustainable Development International, February 2002. 
84 King, K. 2005. Th e Commission for  Africa: a changing landscape for higher  education 
and capacity development in  Africa? Centre of African Studies, University of Edin-
burgh. Available at: www.nuffi  c.nl/pdf/os/em/king.pdf (Accessed: 28 May 2010).
85 Hazell, P., and Haddad, L. 2001. Agricultural Research and Poverty Reduction, paper for 
the International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, USA, August 2001. Avail-
able at: http://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:fpr:2020dp:34
Specifi cally, the objectives for the design of the pilot PV power 
station project and electricity cabling to residential houses in 
the village of Motshegaletau were to design a centralized pho-
tovoltaic power system that would be capable of adequately 
generating (220V AC) power that could be used for basic elec-
tricity needs by the local community as well as a number of 
institutional households and facilities. Th e basic and essential 
electricity needs to be provided include:
Basic lighting for households and other establishments. ■
Electric power for household appliances such as radios as  ■
well as refrigerators and television sets, for those able to 
aff ord them.
Electric power for business and entertainment establish- ■
ments.
Electric power for essential government institutions such as  ■
schools and clinics.
Cold storage facility to be used as a mortuary. ■
In addition the PV power station would: 
Demonstrate and encourage  ■  energy conservation through 
the use of  energy effi  cient appliances without compromis-
ing on the quality of the service rendered, such as the use of 
 energy effi  cient lights.
Enhance the awareness and acceptance by the general pub- ■
lic as well as appeal to the government and local authori-
ties for the use of photovoltaic electric power systems as an 
alternative (where grid power is not viable).
Contribute towards an increased exploitation of the abun- ■
dant solar  energy and its subsequent environmental and 
socio-economic benefi ts to the nation.
Help BOTEC build local expertise in the area of the design  ■
of photovoltaic electric power systems for rural village elec-
trifi cation.
Enable the design team to determine comprehensively the  ■
performance of the PV power station (through a data moni-
toring and analysis process).
 PV power station pilot project.
© BOTEC Internal Technical Reports
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   353 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
354
Th e provision of electricity in a rural setting through the cen-
tralized power station successfully impacted on the living con-
ditions, especially as the school and local clinic were connected 
to an electricity supply and some businesses started to mush-
room due to the availability of power. Pupils are now able to 
study at school when it is dark and electronic teaching aids can 
now be used. Th e clinic mortuary is connected to the power 
supply, and the diesel generator that was previously used is 
now on standby. After monitoring the effi  cacy of this project, 
the  Botswana Government is now being approached to pro-
vide funding that will enable replication of similar projects in 
other remote rural settings.
Kgalagadi Sand Building Block project
Kgalagadi (also written as Kalahari) is the name of the tropical 
semi-arid desert that occupies about three-quarters of  Bot-
swana. Th e desert is composed of sandy soil, which is unsuit-
able for making conventional building blocks/bricks in the 
country. Kgalagadi sand is a very narrowly graded cohesion-
less soil, which alone is not immediately usable for brick pro-
duction (compared to the scarce sand from the dry rivers). Th e 
sand is generally fi ne and has high porosity and thus very diffi  -
cult to bond and make relatively strong bricks. Th e diffi  culty of 
making strong bricks results in non-durable houses for many 
of the poor people residing in villages in the Kgalagadi desert.
Th e objective of the Kgalagadi Sand Building Block project has 
thus been to render Kgalagadi Sand usable for the production 
of a fi t-for-purpose and cost-eff ective block/brick. Th e R&D 
component of this project involves the engineering of a build-
ing block of stipulated strength and durability using Kgalagadi 
sand as major raw material. Th e other important raw mate-
rials are calcrete and fl y ash. Calcrete resources are available 
below the sand level in  Botswana, and fl y ash is also abundant 
at the Morupule thermal coal power station. Th e dumped fl y 
ash from the power station poses an environmental hazard 
therefore its use in bricks would provide a much-needed solu-
tion for fl y ash disposal. Th e fl y ash can ultimately be packaged 
and sold to people to mix with Kgalagadi sand and calcrete 
to make a mortar that results in strong bricks and durable 
houses.
Preliminary tests produced the desired outcome of relatively 
strong building blocks. Th e resultant stabilized compressed 
earth block has successfully been taken through different 
stages of the curing regime and requisite tests have been 
completed. Th is project, mainly championed by BOTEC’s civil 
engineers, will move into the technology transfer stage where 
BOTEC will decide how to take the product or production 
knowledge to the people in order to improve the strength of 
the housing units.
Th e Kgalagadi Sand Building Block project is seen as a  research 
achievement in exploiting the immense desert sand resource 
that occupies three-quarters of the country. The project 
derives from the following socio-economic circumstances in 
 Botswana:
Th e need to facilitate construction of durable and aff ord- ■
able housing units.
Th e need to maximize local production of building materi- ■
als.
Th e need to reduce stress on the national road  ■  infrastruc-
ture due to bulk  transportation of massive loads of building 
materials or raw materials over long distances (for example, 
most of the river sand for making building blocks/bricks is 
transported from the eastern strip of  Botswana to towns in 
the western desert lands).
Th e need to ‘Ensure Environmental Sustainability’ (UN Mil- ■
lennium Development Goal No. 7) through the use of des-
ert sand.
Community User Information Systems – Kitsong Centres
Th e Community User Information System project was devel-
oped to address the interrelated problems of the lack of access 
to information and knowledge resources for rural people and 
the lack of aff ordable communication channels capable of 
reaching rural communities. Th e main objective of the pilot 
project was to develop a computer communication system 
that enables access to integrated email and online information 
for rural people in  Botswana, with emphasis on the online dis-
semination of locally generated, user friendly, relevant infor-
mation and knowledge resources. Th e aim was to provide 
cost-eff ective access to and dissemination of information and 
knowledge resources, subsequently saving hardcopy produc-
tions, mailing, transport and transaction costs. Moreover, the 
computer network aspired to become a forum of informa-
tion and knowledge exchange for local communities,  research 
centres and local business entities. It was also a contribution 
to  Botswana’s full entry into the information and knowledge 
 Sample brick walls using 
Kgalagadi sand.
© BOTEC Internal Technical Reports
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   354 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
355
age and a contribution towards the growth of a well-informed 
nation (as per  Botswana’s vision for the year 2016). 
Th e pilot project was then renamed Kitsong Centres (know-
ledge centres) to associate it with the empowerment of  society 
through knowledge. Th is pilot project was to act as a stimulus 
to information technology  research at BOTEC while serving 
as the channel through which various stakeholders would 
disseminate information on science, engineering, technologi-
cal and socio-economic issues. It endeavoured to empower 
citizens, with timely information and knowledge resources, 
and thus aid  Botswana’s socio- economic development. For 
example, BOTEC recognized the need to improve access to 
information and communication channels since that provi-
sion could greatly increase people’s decision-making in varied 
aspects, because they will be better informed or empowered, 
and that can also increase their participation in income gen-
erating ventures.
Kitsong Centres have been established in three villages: Huku-
ntsi (Kgalagadi North district), Letlhakeng (Kweneng West 
district) and Gumare (North West district). Th e three villages 
suff er relatively profound levels of poverty and have high pro-
portions of youth, women and children in their population. 
Th e Kitsong Centres project also involves training to help 
 users operate computers on their own. Th e project has so 
far attracted great interest in the communities with people 
who are better informed. Subject to the project’s success, the 
 Botswana Government intends to roll out the project in post 
offi  ce premises spread throughout the country so as to pro-
vide access to information to as many people as possible.
Solar Th ermal Testing Facility 
Th e BOTEC Solar Th ermal Test Facility was established to pro-
vide a world-class service in the testing of solar water heating 
systems in accordance with international  standards, and to 
enable  research on thermal technologies. Th e facility is one 
the three solar thermal testing facilities established so far in 
Africa,  with the others in Egypt and South Africa.  Th is facility is 
designed based on a model of the Florida Solar Energy Centre 
in the United States.
Research conducted prior to the commencement of this 
project found that most of the solar water heating systems 
imported and installed in  Botswana were unreliable, unsafe 
and of poor quality. Th is prompted BOTEC to also design and 
build a solar thermal testing facility for domestic solar water 
heating systems and other thermal products. In this way,  Bot-
swana would be saved from installing poor quality technolo-
gies as BOTEC will be able to improve the quality of solar water 
heating systems installed in the country. Th e main benefi ciar-
ies of this project are: the Government of  Botswana, includ-
ing all relevant ministries and departments and particularly 
the  Botswana Bureau of Standards; the solar industry; and the 
general public.
A systematic test programme for components of solar water 
heating systems is being established. Th is will generally include 
durability tests, performance tests, storage tests and full oper-
ational tests. Th e project is receiving stakeholder buy-in, and 
both the  Botswana Government and the  Botswana Bureau of 
Standards will make it mandatory that all solar water heaters 
be tested to  standard before installation.
Conclusion
Th e above projects information indicates the eff orts by  Bot-
swana Technology Centre to contribute to national develop-
ment. Th e projects are engineering-based and need high skills 
to produce quality technological output. It is commendable 
that BOTEC continues to train its researchers to improve their 
capability in the R&D initiatives. However, the researchers 
could gain greater knowledge by professional attachments and 
other forms of interactive learning. While BOTEC continues to 
train researchers it should also strive to retain them; the ‘ brain 
drain’ still remains an organizational challenge. Projects such 
as the ones mentioned above need continuity so that they can 
be accomplished within scheduled periods.
Similar to other African countries,  Botswana also experiences 
bouts of poverty, which are acknowledged by the Government. 
Th e fi ght against poverty and the improvement of living condi-
tions can be tackled through global partnership programmes. 
Th e  Millennium Development Goals recommend global partner-
ship to address developmental issues. Th is suggests that BOTEC 
should adopt a strategy of international collaborative  research 
to join hands with other partners to acquire the knowledge 
and skills necessary to advance  research. Collaborative  research 
could create a platform and magnet for sponsored  research. Th is 
 Solar Th ermal Test Facility.
© BOTEC Internal Technical Reports
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   355 14/09/10   15:35:17
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
356
is where international sponsors to developing countries could 
provide funding to BOTEC to replicate its  research results, such 
as the need to replicate photovoltaic power stations. Sponsor-
ship could also be advanced to undertake specifi c  research 
aimed at addressing varied development challenges.
BOTEC is a stage of revising its strategic direction and this 
will be done in view of national  research priorities, as well as 
the  Millennium Development Goals of the UN. Th e revision 
of  research strategy is always necessary for  research institutes 
because of the ever-changing landscape of science and tech-
nology. Whatever the focus areas are, they will be designed to 
address the development issues of  Botswana through science, 
engineering and technology  research. 
Technology Consultancy 7.4.3 
Centre,  Ghana
Peggy Oti-Boateng
Th e emergence of a grassroots Industrial Revolution
Th e Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology 
(KNUST) was established in 1954 to train science, technology 
and engineering graduates in response to the push by the fi rst 
President of  Ghana, Dr Kwame Nkruma, for industrial inde-
pendence. A number of departments in science, agriculture, 
architecture, pharmacy, arts and engineering were established 
to develop the needed human resource capacity to harness 
 Ghana’s natural resources for the  infrastructure, socio-eco-
nomic and industrial development of the country. Although 
these departments trained fi rst-class graduates, there was a 
missing link between industry, community and university. 
Research fi ndings were seen as not responding to national 
aspirations. Th is prompted the establishment of the Technol-
ogy Consultancy Centre (TCC) at the University to serve as 
a ‘one-stop–shop’ for responding to industry and entrepre-
neurs.
Th e Technology Consultancy Centre (TCC) was established in 
January 1972 on the recommendations of the Palmer-McRobie 
Committee, which was accepted by the University Council in 
1971 to foster a closer link between the community, indus-
try and the university. TCC was mandated to promote and 
transfer of technologies developed by the university for the 
solution of grave problems of science and technology in the 
country. Importantly, there was a provision for opportunities 
for academic staff  to undertake consultancy services.
With assistance from the Intermediate Technology Devel-
opment Group (ITDG, now  Practical Action) in the UK, the 
TCC was to serve as an interface between the  research and 
development activities taking place at the university and the 
entrepreneurial aspiration of the Ghanaian public. As a semi-
autonomous unit within the University, it had the mandate 
to collate and disseminate appropriate  research fi ndings and 
technological developments towards agricultural and indus-
trial grassroots development in  Ghana.
When the TCC opened its doors in 1972, it was soon realized 
that addressing the challenges of development in the infor-
mal sector and small-scale industries was more urgent than 
in promoting consultancy services to more affl  uent levels of 
the public and the private sector. It also become apparent that 
the university was more likely to make a sustainable impact 
on  Ghana’s industrial development though the promotion of 
a grassroots engineering manufacturing base, which would 
ultimately foster the growth of all the other productive sec-
tors of the economy. Finally, it is only through active grassroots 
involvement that the real context can be understood and the 
real problems identifi ed; it was soon realized, therefore, that 
consultancy services that were not based on such grassroots 
experience are of very limited value.
Incubation centres were developed for clients to grow their 
businesses, and clients were supplied with machines and 
machine tools on hire-purchase to improve productivity. 
Th rough these means, the TCC has, over the years, acquired a 
wealth of knowledge and experience needed to promote the 
small-scale industries programme, which later constituted 80 
per cent of its work.
TCC devoted much of its eff orts at the time to  appropriate 
technologies and small-scale industrial development, and it 
assisted in establishing and coordinating the management of 
a number of production units in the various university facul-
ties. Th is was, however, not done at the expense of fee-paying 
consultancy services, which earned good sums of money for 
senior members and their departments at the time.
Over the past thirty-six years, the Technology Consultancy 
Centre has successfully served as a catalyst for networking 
between its  research units, entrepreneurs and the commu-
nity. Th e TCC has also researched, developed and transferred 
a number of  appropriate technologies aimed at enterprise 
development, wealth creation and  poverty reduction.
One of its most successful stories is the development of the 
Intermediate Technology Transfer Unit (ITTU). Th e ITTU 
concept, which seeks to put the technical expertise avail-
able at the university on the doors steps of practitioners in 
the informal industrial area through a series of interventions, 
marked an important milestone for the Technology Consul-
tancy Centre in 1978. Th e success of the fi rst two ITTUs in 
Kumasi and Tamale led the Government of  Ghana to embark 
on the  Ghana Regional Appropriate Technology Industrial 
Service (GRATIS) project, with a mandate to establish ITTUs 
in the remaining eight regional capitals of  Ghana by 1990 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   356 14/09/10   15:35:18
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
357
funded by the European Union and Canadian International 
Development Agency. Th is concept has since been eff ectively 
disseminated throughout the country, leading to a resur-
gence of a strong informal industry. Not only was the ITTU 
concept hailed in  Ghana but also beyond its borders, attract-
ing many visitors from all over the world; African countries, 
realizing the crucial role of science and technology to  eco-
nomic development of the continent, worked on how best 
to advance this model.
Th e Suame ITTU was established within Suame Magazine, 
 Ghana’s largest informal industrial area (about 10 km from 
the KNUST Campus), which currently brings together an 
estimated 87,000 artisans engaged in auto-repair work, metal 
machining, sheet metal fabrication, foundry work, blacksmith-
ing, woodworking and so on. Th e aim was for the Suame ITTU 
to establish an eff ective presence among the artisans whereby 
new technologies can be perfected and transferred to those 
who needed them most. Th e ultimate goal was to promote a 
steady rise in the level of technology and to increase employ-
ment opportunities within the surrounding workshops. As the 
technology is transferred to the surrounding workshops, and 
the market demand is met, the ITTU turns to relevant new 
products developed at the university or elsewhere.
Challenges
Th e active role played by TCC in shaping the informal indus-
trial revolution of the country was faced with a myriad of chal-
lenges in the mid-1990s due to unprecedented government 
policy. In spite of the proliferation of the ITTU concept, the 
original idea of maintaining the TCC and its Suame ITTU at the 
centre of the network was not pursued. Th e establishment of 
GRATIS directly under the Ministry of Industries, Science and 
Technology in 1987 severed the academia-industry linkage, 
and GRATIS soon become autonomous and in competition 
with TCC. Not only did this new arrangement take away most 
of the national, bilateral and international funding of TCC, but 
also some of its valued human capital.
This dire situation has persisted to date with the gradual 
decline in the fi nancial capacity of TCC, resulting in run-down 
 infrastructure, dampened moral and isolation by university 
administration. Th e reduction in funding has not only limited 
TCC’s role in the enterprise development agenda of  Ghana 
but has also reduced its infl uence in advising government on 
science and technology for  innovation and socio- economic 
development. Central government’s reduced funding for uni-
versities and  research institutions has also forced the TCC to 
sever its administrative and fi nancial autonomy, as funding 
for university  research was drastically reduced to the point of 
non-existence.
Th e future
With the advent of globalization, productive enterprises that 
had evolved through TCC’s intervention collapsed in the face 
of stiff  competition. Th e TCC had recognized the seriousness of 
this new development and accepted the need for a continuous 
improvement of the technologies on which productive enter-
prises are based as its next big challenge in its drive towards 
the establishment of a vibrant grassroots industrial base.
Th e Technology Consultancy Centre is proposing a new sus-
tainable industrial development concept for  Ghana, which 
will emphasize the need to methodically nurture a few key 
small- to medium-scale enterprises in areas where the coun-
try possesses comparative advantages. Th e expectation is that, 
through relevant parallel complementary interventions and 
adequate government support, the selected enterprises can be 
turned into valuable national assets that will set in motion the 
development of other economic activities.
The proposed vehicle for achieving this objective is the 
 Technology Focal Point/Technology Park that the TCC has 
planned. It is believed that a policy of investing in a few 
deserving engineering entrepreneurs will ultimately lead to 
the attainment of the critical mass that will propel the  Ghana’s 
industrial take-off .
© UNESCO/Fernadez
 Road construction,  Ghana, 
1986.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   357 14/09/10   15:35:18
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
358
Engineering 7.5  accreditation,  standards and mobility
Mobility of engineers: the 7.5.1 
European experience
Jean Michel
Developing the international  mobility of engineers is a key 
issue. One can easily fi nd tracks of such a preocccupation in 
examining the archives of engineering institutions as well as 
of engineering schools.  A strengthening of the internation-
alization of engineering practices and engineering education 
 programmes can be observed in the last three to four dec-
ades. Th e trend is obvious within  Europe and many eff orts 
have been made in order to facilitate the  mobility of engineers 
and of engineering students, academics and researchers. Very 
recently, the Bologna Process, which aims to create a European 
Area in Higher Education, has brought a new phase of total 
re-organization of the higher engineering education  system in 
 Europe, whilst also introducing new ideas about competency 
recognition. Looking at the consequences of globalization on 
engineering education,  it is time to defi ne some measures for 
an intelligent adaptation of the engineering  curriculum and 
pedagogy to that new context.
Mobility is more and more becoming a key professional devel-
opment factor for any professional – whatever the domain 
– who wants to fi nd interesting work and secure good condi-
tions of employment. Mobility of manpower – of professional 
competences and resources (slower but no less important 
than the mobility of fi nancial resources) – is also crucial for 
any company or organization that has to compete in a global 
international market. But mobility can also generate problems 
that can be counterproductive for the global economy and for 
people if it does not take into account cultural roots or the 
need for a sustainable future.
From the 1960s to the 1980s, mobility was a concept largely 
promoted by company managers as well as by specialists 
working in the fields of  innovation and human resources 
development. Mobility seemed to be the miraculous solution 
for fi ghting the traditional trends towards conservatism. At 
that period, Toeffl  er (author of Future Shock) developed the 
idea that people should be encouraged and trained to change 
everything in their professional and personal lives, in a new 
international context off ering more and more interesting pos-
sibilities. Toeffl  er’s vision was largely right, but did not forsee 
the pace of change in  society. It is only now (the fi rst years of 
the twenty-fi rst century) that we are forced to consider mobil-
ity not only as a benefi t in a professional career, but really as 
an obligation. 
Change factors for the concept of mobility
Comparing two periods – even a period as close as the years 
1990–95 and the present period 2005–2010 – new change fac-
tors that have an impact on higher education  and on engineer-
ing education  can be determined:
globalization is considered as a new dimension of economy  ■
with the development of international markets for nearly 
everything (products, raw materials, resources, manpower, 
services, ideas) where companies and now universities are 
directly aff ected;
information and communication technologies (Internet,  ■
electronic documents, new media, new networks) are pen-
etrating many domains and they are changing habits, and 
education is of course immediately aff ected;
competence issues are considered as a way to move beyond  ■
traditional defi nitions of jobs and skills, where the outcomes 
of an educational process are becoming more important 
Mobility is often limited to the physical mobility, which refers to 
traveling, studying and working abroad. Of course, geographical 
mobility is the most obvious facet. However, it is important not to 
forget other dimensions of mobility:
Professional mobility: ■  How many times should engineers 
change their jobs in their life time? How many companies 
should engineers have experienced? How many projects should 
engineers have managed to be considered as good engineers?
Social mobility: ■  Involvments, responsibilities, representative 
activities in organizations and interactions with varied 
stakeholders in societies.
Cultural mobility: ■  Sharing views (or life) with people from other 
cultures for better understanding that the world is not based on 
a unique, linear thought.
Trans-disciplinary mobility: ■  Should engineers develop other 
skills other than pure scientifi c and technological ones?
Methodological mobility: ■  Problems can be solved through 
diff erent ways, with diff erent methods: how are engineers able to 
become fl exible in that domain? 
Technological mobility: ■  It is clear that tools are rapidly changing 
and they can become obstacles if one is not able to use them 
with some detachable distance.
Th ought mobility: ■  Mobility can be linked with mental fl exibility 
and thus, with  innovation. Mobility is a way to think one’s 
behaviour in given contexts; it allows adaptation to these contexts 
and facilitates cooperation, synergy and cross-fertilization.
What is mobility?
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   358 14/09/10   15:35:19
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
359
than the process or the outputs, and where evaluation and 
recognition of real competences are at the heart of many 
international debates.
 sustainability and  ■  sustainable development are central, 
especially when considering issues of  climate change and the 
needs of a growing population, where – in the evolution of 
engineering activities and education –  sustainability means 
thinking and acting with a long term view, within an inte-
grated multidisciplinary approach, and with a global analysis 
of impacts, interdependence and interconnectedness.
Emphasis might also be put on  ethics,  poverty reduction, the 
development of the biosciences and biotechnologies, the 
strengthening of legal constraints, and considerations of ter-
rorism and global security. All these change factors oblige engi-
neers and engineering educators to have another look at their 
profession, at their career and at their professional behaviour 
– and even in their roles as citizens.
In  Europe, specifi c issues can be mentioned, which have also 
led to more fl exibility and mobility: the enlargement of the 
European Union with the participation of countries from 
the Eastern Bloc; the single European currency; and the vari-
ous national policies that aff ect the evolution of global and 
harmonized perspectives. Note that for a long time ‘ Europe’ 
did not exist except as a juxtaposition of nations jealous of 
their autonomy. Everything was, and still remains, complex in 
 Europe due the huge diversity of policies and practices, which 
obviously aff ected higher education as well.
Looking at engineering education  more closely, the crucial 
issue of attracting students is an important change factor. Will 
 society have adequate engineers for the future? And what new 
ideas or resources are there to improve the recruitment of 
engineering students?
Th ere are other aspects of the Bologna Process that could be 
mentioned (competency evaluation and recognition; lifelong 
learning; the development of a European Research Area), but 
suffi  ce to say that it certainly forced governments, administra-
tions, academic institutions, professional bodies and employ-
ers to re-think and re-defi ne, together, their approaches in the 
fi eld of higher education.  It is an important step towards a 
more fl exible and legible education  system that off ers increased 
mobility of people. Th is European eff ort for convergence and 
harmonization is generating interest in other regions that are 
also working on reforms of their higher education  policies. Th e 
tools set up in the context of the Bologna Process could also 
be adapted and used in other continents, particularly in the 
fi eld of engineering education.
Th e Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées, founded in 
France in 1747, has archives from diff erent active periods 
of development and  innovation followed often by long 
periods of conservatism and stagnation. Th e vision of the 
‘managers’ of the institution during the more progressive 
periods is very interesting and most of their eff orts were 
put on key issues:
open, interactive learning approaches or methods  ■
(avoiding rigid traditional courses);
emphasis on the work of the students or young  ■
engineers (projects, site realizations);
making young people aware of a broad competitive  ■
environment (learning from the experience of others);
off ering some students the opportunity to travel abroad  ■
for periods of at least six months (this was developed 
since the last decades of the eighteenth century), with 
some ‘business intelligence’ work to complete;
creating tools for the dissemination of ideas and  ■
projects, pushing also the engineers to publish in some 
new specialized journals;
developing a strong experimental use of new  ■
information technologies (lithography, photography) 
for facilitating the transfer of knowledge among the 
engineering community;
strengthening the links with partner institutions, also  ■
with scientific and engineering academics and with 
companies;
promoting the learning of foreign languages and inviting  ■
foreign experts to deliver courses.
Th ese archives show a real and strong vision of what a 
‘mobile’ engineer might be, of what should be developed as 
‘mobile’ behaviours and competencies over a long period 
of time. Analysing the results of such policies (what the 
educated and trained engineers became and did for  soci-
ety), there are no apparent reasons to reject such progres-
sive ideas. However, these ideas were fought, even by some 
well-known scientists (for instance in France, by a group of 
‘positivist’ engineers during the period 1820–1850), and 
often these conservative trends imposed their law with 
some very rigid approaches of  education:
multiplication of specialized courses (the ‘content  ■
approach’ to  education);
compulsory courses, with control of the effective  ■
presence of the students;
poor evaluation methods (so that exams were easy to  ■
organize);
imposing the same programme on every student  ■
whatever their route or origin;
limiting the periods abroad for students (a lack of time  ■
for training them);
creation of rigid teaching materials. ■
More recently, after May 1968, a lot of new perspectives 
were opened. Th us in France (but also in many European 
countries as well as in the United States), many peda-
gogical  innovations were stimulated. The key words of 
the  innovations were ‘fl exibility’ and ‘mobility’. It became 
obvious that engineers (especially young engineers) should 
be prepared for a more open professional life. Continuing 
 education (lifelong  education) started to emerge as a key 
issue. Active learning methods were encouraged. Flexible 
courses were proposed with many choices among various 
possibilities. Joint courses or programmes were established 
and proposed to students. Some engineering schools 
started to propose double diplomas and integrated 
courses. And it became obvious that it was important to 
encourage young professionals to have experiences abroad 
to learn from diff erent cultural perspectives.
A history of mobility
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   359 14/09/10   15:35:19
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
360
 7.5.2 Washington Accord, 
 Engineers Mobility Forum, 
 APEC Engineer
Peter Greenwood
Th e International Engineering Alliance: 
Th ere is a clear case for  standards of competence for practi-
tioners in the engineering profession. Th e most important as 
far as national government is concerned is where regulation of 
engineering work is necessary for public safety, or to protect 
against the negative eff ects of the asymmetry of knowledge 
between service provider and client. Employers and clients 
need  standards to ensure that work is done competently, and 
so providers can be compared. Th e engineering practitioners 
themselves need to be able to demonstrate their competence 
for personal assessment reasons as well as for employment and 
statutory requirements.
Engineers are, more and more, working across national bor-
ders. Multi-national companies move staff  from location to 
location to provide skills or resources. Practitioners move 
themselves to gain experience and career progression. What-
ever the circumstances a practitioner’s professional standing is 
more valuable if it is recognized and transferable, particularly 
when the engineering work is regulated. And so it is increas-
ingly important to agree international professional regulation, 
 standards and recognition.
The International Engineering Alliance (IEA) has emerged 
from the close working relationship between the  Washington 
Accord – and the education  and mobility forums that grew 
from it – and the Asia-Pacifi c Economic Cooperation (APEC) 
Engineer Coordinating Committee.
Accreditation: the Washington, Sydney and Dublin 
Accords
Th e  Washington Accord began with a group of countries in 
1989 that agreed to have an  accreditation system for under-
graduate engineering degrees that was ‘substantially equiva-
lent’. Companion accords were also formed for accrediting 
engineering  technologists, in the Sydney Accord in 2001, and 
for accrediting engineering  technicians, in the Dublin Accord 
in 2002. Over the years, Accord members have been moving 
towards the  accreditation of courses based on ‘outputs’ rather 
than on ‘inputs’ (for example, skills developed rather than  cur-
riculum content). Th ey have also instituted a system of peer 
inspection of each other’s  accreditation processes.
Accreditation of engineering courses is aimed at ensuring con-
sistency across educational institutions. Th e mutual recogni-
tion of  Washington Accord signatories is intended to preserve 
consistency across national boundaries.
Several quality problems have arisen. For example, countries 
may have engineering work that does not need the attributes 
of a Washington, Sydney or Dublin Accord graduate. Th ese 
countries might choose an  accreditation system appropriate 
to their needs and accept that their lack of alignment with the 
National Ministers of Higher Education from various coun-
tries decided to build a new common policy, which started 
in 1998 with the Sorbonne Declaration and continued in 
1999 with the Bologna Declaration. Th e main goal of this 
common policy was to prepare for convergence, by 2010, 
towards a ‘European Higher Education Area’.
Th e political process has defi ned the goals, the trend line 
and placed emphasis on key general issues (compatibility, 
recognition, legibility), but has not defi ned everything in 
detail. Countries are to make appropriate decisions for the 
adoption of the agreed common schemes and it is up to 
the various stakeholders (universities, professional bodies) 
to establish the detailed programmes, processes and rules. 
Every two years, ministers meet in order to evaluate the 
progress and to take decisions for next steps.
Th e convergence towards a European Higher Education 
Area does not mean uniformity across that area. The 
importance of the diversity of systems and solutions is fully 
recognized and must not be destroyed by decisions that 
are too normative. Th e process is to defi ne and accept min-
imum  standards of common rules that make the diverse 
national systems more compatible.
Th e main component of the Bologna Process consists of 
setting up a unique scheme of articulated degrees in Higher 
Education: the ‘3-5-8’ scheme. A fi rst (Bachelor) degree 
after around three years of study would be followed by a 
two-year period for a second (Master) degree, and then a 
PhD could be obtained after three years of postgraduate 
study. Th e various countries are now trying to adapt their 
national systems into the common scheme (though, of 
course, with many diff erences in approach). For engineer-
ing  education, there are no serious diffi  culties except for 
the existence of two types of engineer: engineering  techni-
cians with a ‘short’  education, and engineers with a ‘long’ 
 education.
Besides the 3-5-8 scheme, the Bologna Process focuses on 
two other tools:
Th e ‘Diploma Supplement’ consists of a document that  ■
provides necessary details about the studies in a given 
country, in a given institution, so as to facilitate the 
mobility of people.
Th e ‘European Credit Transfer System’ (ECTS), which  ■
defi nes a set of common rules for the ‘measurement’ 
of educational modules in terms of length and load; 
each study course or programme should be designed 
as a set of modules, each of them corresponding to a 
certain number of ECTS credits. Th e system is a solution 
for facilitating the mobility of students during their 
studies.
Another important aspect of the Bologna Process consists 
of trying to harmonize quality assessment procedures in 
higher  education and also in defi ning common rules for the 
 accreditation of study programmes. However, the solution 
consisting of creating a single European body or agency for 
 accreditation was unanimously rejected. For engineering 
 education, eff orts were made over the last fi ve years to 
solve the problem with the creation of an observatory sys-
tem ‘OESOPE’ in 2000, and then a European  accreditation 
project ‘EUR-ACE’ in 2005.
Th e Bologna Process and its impact on engineering  education
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   360 14/09/10   15:35:19
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
361
three international benchmark  standards will limit the mobil-
ity of their graduates.
Countries with large numbers of educational institutions have 
a related problem in trying to accredit all their institutions to 
the same  standard. Some of these countries are considering a 
two-tier system, which produces graduates to practice nation-
ally, at a  standard slightly diff erent to the international bench-
mark  standard, and others who can practice internationally 
through their qualifi cation fully conforming to the interna-
tional benchmark. 
Mobility –  accreditation across boundaries: the EMF and 
ETMF
Th e  Engineers Mobility Forum (EMF) is based on the  Wash-
ington Accord degrees and was established in 1997. A similar 
mobility forum, the APEC  Engineers Mobility Forum, emerged 
shortly after in 2000. Th e Engineering Technologists Mobility 
Forum (ETMF) is based on the Sydney Accord and followed 
the formation of the EMF. Th e need for a forum for engineer-
ing  technicians has been being debated, but at present there 
is not enough support to proceed until international agree-
ments at the professional engineer and engineering  technolo-
gist level are working well.
Remote campuses, foreign universities and electronic delivery 
of engineering courses have raised  accreditation issues, which 
have resulted in rules for the  Washington Accord signatories 
that are aff ected.
 Washington Accord signatories are also looking at approaches 
in which a signatory might help a neighbouring country that 
is some way from establishing its own  accreditation system. At 
the request of the non-member country, the signatory would 
accredit a small number of courses in the non-member coun-
try and list them alongside its own accredited courses. A trial 
is under way in Southern Africa.
Th e accords and forums forming the IEA are by no means the 
only such organizations. A European  accreditation system is 
also rapidly emerging, which includes countries outside the 
European Union. Similarly there are possible arrangements 
under consideration in the Americas and Asia as well as in 
Southern Africa.
 Issues
Th ere are a number of issues facing any accord or forum such 
as how to:
Maintain Continuing Professional Development even when  ■
the engineering sector is facing shortages.
Encourage  ■  standards for unregulated engineers and facili-
tate their working internationally off ering or acquiring skills 
and experience.
Help developing countries establish appropriate  ■  standards 
and  accreditation systems.
Balance the need for regional and international practi- ■
tioners.
An engineer’s career development can be notionally divided into stages, as shown in the diagram. Stage 1 
is the  education phase leading to graduation with an accredited qualifi cation. Stage 2 follows graduation 
involving the formation of an engineering practitioner via training and experience; after being successfully 
assessed, the practitioner is declared capable of independent practice, the foundation of a career in engi-
neering. Stages 3 and 4 cover the remainder of a practitioner’s career (there are some examples of interna-
tional agreement on these stages but they are not yet widely adopted).
Th e EMF assessment identifi es engineers with a  Washington Accord degree who are suffi  ciently trained for 
independent professional practice, which can be reached within a few years of graduation. A post nominal, 
the International Professional Engineer (IntPE), was approved by the EMF in 2005 for use on completion of 
stage 2. Th e  APEC Engineer assessment accepts degrees from a number of jurisdictions including those of 
the  Washington Accord and requires seven years of postgraduate experience. Th ose jurisdictions that are 
members of both  APEC Engineer and EMF usually maintain only one register system meeting the require-
ments of both agreements.
Continuing Professional Development is critical in maintaining stage 2 competencies, but is also needed to 
facilitate career change or to prepare for more senior roles; indeed, it is a requirement of the mobility forums.
Stages of career development
Accredited Course
Graduate development 
programme or equivalent
Further training, 
experience and possibly 
additional or advanced 
course work
Knowledge transfer, 
mentoring
Stage 1
Graduate
Stage 2
Fully formed practitioner capable 
of independent practice, 
post nominal awarded 
Career foundation
Stage 3
Mid-career practitioner
Technical or management of technical 
or business areas, some leadership
Stage 3
Later career practitioner
Corporate governance, super 
projects, leadership in industry or 
the profession, advisor, invited roles
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   361 14/09/10   15:35:19
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
362
Country and organization  Washington Accord Sydney Accord Dublin Accord
 Australia — Engineers  Australia 1989 2001
Canada — CCPE 1989
Canada — CCTT 2001 2002
Ireland — Engineers Ireland 1989 2001 2002
 New Zealand 1989 2001 2006
United Kingdom — ECUK 1989 2001 2002
United States of America — ABET 1989 2007 2007
Hong Kong — HKIE 1995 2001
South  Africa — ECSA 1999 2001 2002
Japan — JABEE 2005
Singapore — IES 2006
Chinese Taipei/Taiwan — IEET 2007
Korea — ABEEK 2007
Germany — ASIIN 2003
Malaysia — BEM 2003
India — AICTE 2007
Russia — RAAE 2007
Sri Lanka — IESL 2007
NOTE: Jurisdictions holding provisional status are shown in italics
Country and organization EMF ETMF APEC
 Australia — Engineers  Australia 1997 2000
Canada — CCPE 1997 2000
Canada — CCTT 2001
Hong Kong — HKIE 1997 2001 2000
Ireland — Engineers Ireland 1997 2001
 New Zealand 1997 2001 2000
South  Africa — ECSA 1997 2001
United Kingdom — ECUK 1997 2001
United States of America — USCIEP 1997 2001
Japan — IPEJ 1999 2000
Malaysia — IEM 1999 2000
Korea — KPEA 2000 2000
Singapore — IES 2007 2005
Sri Lanka — IESL 2007
Bangladesh 2003
India — IEIndia 2003
Indonesia 2001
Philippines 2001
Th ailand 2003
Chinese Taipei/Taiwan 2005
NOTE: Provisional members are shown in italics
Summary Table: IEA membership showing when countries became signatories of the engineering 
accords (Source: IEA)
Summary Table: Mobility forum membership showing when countries joined the mobility forms 
(Source: IEA)
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   362 14/09/10   15:35:19
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
363
Broaden the focus to include middle and later career assis- ■
tance and recognition.
Encourage a whole-of-career approach to education,  ■  train-
ing and recognition.
Accommodate all accords and forums into a truly interna- ■
tional alliance with a single post-nominal for each category 
of practitioner.
Th e Eur Ing and 7.5.3  Bologna 
Accord
Willi Fuchs and Iring Wasser
Academic and professional  mobility of engineers in  Europe, 
and indeed worldwide, is becoming an ever-growing concern 
for the engineering community, as well as for policy-makers. 
It is an undisputed fact that future prosperity of societies and 
economies relies in no small part on the unrestricted mobil-
ity of its most productive workforce – the engineers of the 
twenty-fi rst century.
Th e engineering community in  Europe has reacted and recently 
renewed its commitment to foster academic and professional 
mobility on the continental scale. Among the most impor-
tant initiatives is the European Accredited Engineering Project 
(EUR-ACE). As a result of this project, a single European system 
for  accreditation of engineering education  has been estab-
lished. In 2005, the project partners have unanimously agreed 
on the EUR-ACE ‘Framework Standards for the Accreditation 
of Engineering Programmes’. Furthermore, a consensus with 
regard to the future organization and management of the EUR-
ACE  accreditation system has been reached. In 2006, the Euro-
pean Network for the Accreditation of Engineering Education 
(ENAEE) was founded. One of its most important partners is 
the European Federation of National Engineering Associations 
(FEANI), which has agreed in principle to accept the results of 
a EUR-ACE  accreditation as an academic prerequisite for the 
inclusion of engineering graduates in its register of European 
Professional Engineers (EUR-ING).
European  accreditation for academic and professional 
purposes
Accreditation of engineering education in  Europe serves 
important purposes for  society. In the framework of the Bolo-
gna Process, it is an essential prerequisite for the completion of 
the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) by the year 2010. 
Th e EHEA strives for a European knowledge  society charac-
terized by high mobility and by high-quality lifelong learning 
opportunities. Th is is to be accomplished by the promotion of 
easily comparable degrees, cyclical and permeable study struc-
tures, a European ‘Diploma Supplement’ and the European 
Credit Transfer System (ECTS), as well as the promotion of the 
European Dimension in Higher Education.
Within the narrower realm of the common European market, 
which depends on principles such as freedom of movement of 
workers, rights of establishment and freedom of services for 
its prosperity, another focus comes into play. Only recently, 
a new European Directive on the recognition of professional 
qualifi cations86 was passed in order to establish a clear, secure 
and fast system for the recognition of qualifi cations in the fi eld 
of the regulated professions and to ensure free movement. Th e 
European Union institutions and Member States were called 
upon to facilitate employment and the provision of services 
through wholesale consolidation of the existing regimes of 
professional recognition. In the sensitive area of engineering 
mobility and employment, there is a great need for validated 
procedures to recognise engineering degrees and professional 
qualifi cations of engineering graduates. Transnational coop-
eration in the fi eld of quality assurance and  accreditation has 
been one of the most promising avenues to achieve this goal 
and to fulfi lling the promises of the Lisbon Convention, which 
aspires to make  Europe the most advanced knowledge  society 
in the world.
Impediments for transnational recognition of 
engineering degrees in  Europe
Academic and professional mobility of engineering students 
and graduates in  Europe are facing manifold challenges. Th ere 
continues to be a considerable diversity of both engineering 
degrees in terms of duration, content and institutional back-
ground and consequently public knowledge about their qual-
ity is at times insuffi  cient especially across national borders.
Th is degree and institutional diversity is matched by a great 
variety of national quality assurance and  accreditation sys-
tems. Th ere are a number of initiatives under way on the Euro-
pean scale to foster transnational recognition of  accreditation 
results (such as the planned institutionalization of a European 
register of quality assurance agencies that follow a code of 
good practice and the European  standards and guidelines), 
but thus far transnational recognition needs to be bolstered. 
Precautions against fraudulent obtainment of degrees have 
been taken. Add to this the virulent problem of a growing non-
offi  cial higher education  sector and the phenomenon of trans-
national education  with a lack of regulatory codes, and the 
dimension of the challenge becomes obvious.
Furthermore, in some European countries the academic degree 
constitutes the automatic admission ticket to the national 
job market whereas in others additional prerequisites such as 
proof of a certain period of recognized training programmes 
or validated professional engineering experience are required. 
86 Directive 2005/36/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the recogni-
tion of professional qualifi cations, 2005-09-07.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   363 14/09/10   15:35:19
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
364
In some systems, these competences have to be furthermore 
validated in an individual test before admission to professional 
engineering registers is granted. Continuance of membership 
in engineering registers subsequently often requires proof of 
continuous professional development.
Acknowledging these and other challenges (e.g. language 
diversity in a multilingual European environment) the Euro-
pean engineering community has decided to take new impor-
tant steps to guarantee the high quality of its engineering 
education  and to foster transnational recognition of engineer-
ing degrees, thereby contributing to the establishment of the 
European Higher Education Area and to the advancement of 
professional mobility within and beyond  Europe.
Th e EUR-ACE Project
To address the aforementioned problems, the EUR-ACE 
project was offi  cially launched in September 2004. Supported 
by an European Commission Socrates and Tempus grant, the 
participating institutions in a two-year period successfully 
developed and tested a common  standard for the  accredita-
tion of engineering courses with the following goals:
to further improve the high quality of educational engineer- ■
ing programmes in  Europe;
to provide an appropriate ‘European label’ to accredited  ■
educational programmes in  Europe, thereby facilitating 
mutual recognition agreements;
to foster recognition by the competent authorities in accor- ■
dance with the European directives. An intensive network-
ing with the FEANI ‘EUR-ING’ index had been in the focus 
from the beginning.
In the course of the two-year project, the EUR-ACE partners 
comprehensively reviewed existing criteria and  standards for 
‘First Cycle Bachelor’ and ‘Second Cycle Master’ engineer-
ing degrees in  Europe, compiling a thorough background 
document entitled ‘Overview: Accreditation Procedures and 
Criteria for Engineering Programmes in  Europe’87. Given the 
contribution of all major stakeholders of Engineering Educa-
tion in  Europe, it was found that there has been, and continues 
to be a common European understanding of what an engi-
neer is supposed to know and be able to do. Accordingly, the 
EUR-ACE partners were able to reach a consensus concern-
ing outcome- standards for accredited Bachelor and Master 
engineering programmes. Th ey are valid for all branches of 
engineering. On the basis of six indicators (knowledge and 
understanding, engineering analysis, engineering design, inves-
tigations, engineering practice and transferable skills) the qual-
87 EUR-ACE. 2005. EUR-ACE Overview: Accreditation Procedures and Criteria for Engineer-
ing Programmes in  Europe, 2005-05-18.
ifi cations and competences of First Cycle and Second Cycle 
European graduates are described.88
In addition, the criteria and quality requirements for the 
 accreditation of engineering programmes have been defi ned 
 Europe-wide, considering the following items (needs, objec-
tives and outcomes, educational process, resources and part-
nerships, assessment of the educational process, management 
system). Any European engineering  accreditation agency, 
accrediting to this EUR-ACE  standard, will take these items as 
basis for its  accreditation practice. Finally, a consensus on vari-
ous aspects of programme  accreditation (e.g. composition of 
 accreditation team, duration and structure of the visit; verifi -
cation and validation of the report; decision on the  accredi-
tation; publication of the  accreditation results in a uniform 
European template) was reached.
88 EUR-ACE.2005. EUR-ACE Framework Standards for the Accreditation of Engineering Pro-
grammes including Template for Publication of Results, 2005-11-17.
Based on the successful cooperation in the framework of the EUR-
ACE project, the project partners pushed forward to formalize their 
long-standing cooperation by creating the ‘European Network for 
the Accreditation of Engineering Education’ (ENAEE) in February 
2006. According to the statutes of ENAEE*, membership is open to:
  ■ accreditation organizations for engineering programmes within 
the European Higher Education Area; 
all other organizations having the development of engineering  ■
 education  accreditation procedures among their main objectives 
as well as organizations whose mission is to foster the interests of 
the profession of engineers;
educational and training institutions and their associations; and ■
organizations representing engineering students. ■
ENAEE’s goals are to build confi dence in systems of  accreditation of 
engineering degree programmes within  Europe and to promote the 
implementation of  accreditation practice for engineering  education 
systems in  Europe. Th is also includes the use of the EUR-ACE  accred-
itation system in countries where no such system is in place at all, or 
where no  accreditation criteria for engineers have been developed. 
In November of 2006, ENAEE decided to authorise six engineering 
 accreditation agencies (operating in France, Germany, Great Brit-
ain, Ireland, Portugal and Russia) to use the EUR-ACE label, together 
with the respective national  accreditation label. By the end of 2007 
some 100 EUR-ACE labels have been delivered, which increased in 
2008 across  Europe. It is foreseen that, in few years time, the EUR-
ACE label for European Bachelor and Master programmes will have 
evolved into a quality mark both in  Europe and worldwide.
* ENAEE. 2006. Constitution Act and Statutes.
Th e founding of the European Network for the 
Accreditation of Engineering Education
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   364 14/09/10   15:35:19
E N G I N E E R I N G  C A PA C I T Y:  E D U C AT I O N ,  T R A I N I N G  A N D  M O B I L I T Y
365
Some further observations are vital: the EUR-ACE framework 
deals exclusively with the  accreditation of engineering pro-
grammes and is explicitly not concerned with the  accredita-
tion of  technologist or  technician programmes (short-cycle 
programmes). By the same token, it is not concerned with any 
form of institutional evaluations. Moreover, it does (at least 
thus far) not distinguish between branches (engineering disci-
plines or specializations).
Th e EUR-ACE  standards have been designed for the  accredita-
tion of educational programmes as a suitable ‘entry route to 
the engineering profession’. It is before that background that 
FEANI, as the representative body of more than 3.5 million 
engineers, has contributed to this project and has accepted 
EUR-ACE  accreditation as the basis for inclusion in their 
indexes for professional engineers. 
Overall, the EUR-ACE  standards appear fl exible enough to 
accommodate national and subject diff erences and to leave 
the door open to future developments so that the proposed 
 accreditation  standards will not become a straightjacket but 
rather an incentive to make improvements through incorpo-
rating best practice.
Vision for the future
Th e common vision for the future is a world class European 
 accreditation framework for engineering education to foster 
academic and professional mobility in the European Higher 
Education Area as well as the European labour market. It is 
furthermore hoped that the ENAEE and the EUR-ACE system 
will be closely connected to other international frameworks 
and mutual recognition agreements developed in the 
Americas, Asia and Africa. By  interlinking such endeavours, we 
will have an important capability to foster the international 
academic and professional  mobility of engineers that is so 
crucial for global development.
© ARUP
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   365 14/09/10   15:35:19
Afterword8 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   367 14/09/10   15:35:22
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
368
Given the role, scope and importance of engineering in social, 
economic and  human development, and the fact that engi-
neering and technology have essentially driven globalization, 
it is perhaps surprising that this is the fi rst international report 
on engineering. It may be that, as this Report has shown, the 
size of the subject is a reason that such a report has not been 
produced before, or perhaps because in the pervasiveness of 
engineering the need for such a report had not been perceived, 
and the diversity of fi elds and types of engineering can indeed 
be confusing. Perhaps it is also because engineering tends to 
be viewed as a national issue and activity as most engineers, 
with the exception of those at some of the larger engineer-
ing companies and organizations, work at sub-national level, 
and reports on engineering have focused on the national or 
fi eld-specifi c level. Th is is in comparison to science, which is 
generally perceived to be more international. Perceptions can 
be misleading however, because engineering knowledge, com-
panies, organizations, conferences and journals, as this Report 
has shown, all demonstrate that engineering is as international 
as science.
Origins of this Report
The idea for this report followed informal discussions in 
2005 with members of the World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations ( WFEO), the International Council of Acade-
mies of Engineering and Technological Sciences ( CAETS) and 
the International Federation of Consulting Engineers ( FIDIC). 
Th ese discussions underlined the interest and enthusiasm for 
such a report, and a concept paper and proposal to publish 
the Report was developed in 2006 and approved by the (then) 
Director-General of UNESCO, Koïchiro Matsuura, in Octo-
ber 2006. An editorial advisory board was established, and it 
was decided that the report should be as comprehensive as 
possible, despite the limited available human and fi nancial 
resources, with a focus on engineering issues, challenges and 
opportunities for development. Issues of interest included 
the ongoing concern with poverty and  sustainable develop-
ment, and emerging challenges, such as  climate change miti-
gation and adaptation, for which engineering – a term that 
derives from the word ‘ingenuity’ – will be a major part of any 
solution. A contents list was developed and agreed, together 
with a list of potential contributors. In view of the limited 
resources, it was also decided that it would be beyond the 
scope of the Report to collect any new international  statistics 
and indicators (which would be a priority for future work) 
but rather to try and draw out what already exists. Over 120 
contributors from distinguished and diverse backgrounds 
contributed to the Report giving a range of perspective, rich-
ness, depth and variety of approach that would otherwise 
not have been achieved.
Th e Report reviews of the role of engineering in human, social 
and  economic development, and covers a range of present, 
emerging and future issues and opportunities, including  pov-
erty reduction,  sustainable development,  climate change miti-
gation and adaptation. Th e Report presents the various fi elds 
of engineering, with a review of engineering around the world 
including regional and country perspectives. It also discusses, 
more generally, engineering issues, applications and  innova-
tion,  infrastructure, capacity-building, engineering education 
 and training. 
Th e global engineering challenge
Th e Report is a platform for the better understanding of engi-
neering, and the roles and responsibilities of engineers around 
the world. Th ese responsibilities include the diversity of areas 
in which engineers work – in building and construction, trans-
port,  communications,  energy, resource use and supply, and 
the high levels of personal responsibility engineers may face 
compared to other professions. As observed in the Report, 
doctors and physicians are generally responsible for individual 
patients, whereas engineers may be responsible for the health 
and safety of tens, hundreds or thousands of people. Th is 
Report has found that while developed countries have more 
engineers per capita than doctors, developing countries have 
even less engineers than their already limited numbers of doc-
tors. Whilst this is a complex comparison, it does emphasize 
the need for and importance of  infrastructure in human, social 
and  economic development. How is a nation going to develop 
without engineers?
Issues highlighted in the Report include the decreasing public 
awareness and understanding of engineering, and the declin-
ing interest and  enrolment of young people in engineering 
courses. Th is appears to be based largely on perceptions that 
engineering and engineering courses are boring and hard 
work, that jobs in engineering are not well paid given their 
responsibilities, and that engineering is part of the problem of 
environmental degradation and  climate change, rather than 
part of the solution. Th ese issues are not new, and show that 
an eff ort is required to promote the public perception, aware-
ness and understanding of engineering to make engineering 
education  more attractive and to emphasize that engineering 
is central to  climate change mitigation and adaptation. What 
is new is that, with this international report, these can now be 
seen as a global challenge for policy makers and for engineers 
themselves. Th is Report has gathered ideas from around the 
globe on how our societies might respond.
For example, the Report makes clear that these issues are 
also connected; young people are concerned about  sustain-
able development and  climate change, and are attracted to 
engineering when they can see that engineering will play a 
major role in making a diff erence. If the global community is 
to address the issues of global warming, to control and reduce 
greenhouse gas production and to limit temperature rise to 
the 2.0°C, as indicated and recommended by the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change, then  climate change mitiga-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   368 14/09/10   15:35:24
A F T E R W O R D
369
tion and adaptation will have to include a massive increase in 
investment in green, sustainable, environmental engineering 
and, of course, in the associated education,  training,  research 
and development, application and  innovation of technology. 
As regards perceptions that engineering is not well paid, con-
sidering the education  and training required, responsibilities 
and, in comparison with other professions, the investment in 
green technology and growth, which is linked to the increased 
investment in  infrastructure as part of economic stimulus 
packages around the world, engineering and the attractive-
ness of careers in engineering for young people should be 
promoted as well as better salaries and salary structures for 
engineers, compared to other professions. Th is includes bank-
ing and the fi nancial sector, for example, that has attracted 
many young engineers and now faces downward pressure on 
salaries and bonuses.
Regarding the public understanding of engineering, engineer-
ing, like science, consists of a diversity of fi elds and people 
using complex terminology, numbers and formulae. It is not 
surprising that it is diffi  cult to understand and communicate, 
especially by journalists and the media, with a preference for 
simple sound bites and scenarios. Engineers need to be better 
communicators, and the  communications media need journal-
ists who can provide a more informed approach to engineer-
ing, science and technology. Th is requires better information 
and training for engineers and journalists. Th e Report shows 
that the engineering community is beginning to understand 
how to achieve this.
Th e Report also shows that engineering education  can be 
made more attractive and eff ective through the use of activ-
ity- and  problem-based learning, which refl ects the problem-
based and problem-solving nature of engineering. Engineering 
theory needs to be presented alongside engineering practice 
in a just-in-time approach so that students can practice what 
they have just learned – such an approach has revolution-
ized production engineering, and needs to be applied in the 
education,  training and the ‘production’ of engineers. Th e 
combination of theory and practice was also what von Hum-
boldt advocated, rather than the need for theory to precede 
practice (for example, it is common that a fi rst year engineer-
ing course is fi lled with mathematics and diff erential equa-
tions, which is the main cause of young people’s comments 
that engineering is boring and hard work). New investment is 
needed in engineering education  around the world, and new 
approaches require rapid investments in  curriculum renewal 
and in the professional development of engineering educators. 
Th is Report shows that this is an educational, human and  eco-
nomic development imperative that requires an engineering 
and policy-level response. Th e success of and interest in  prob-
lem-based learning attests to the relevance and importance 
of such an approach, and it is interesting to note that medical 
schools, while not faced with a shortage of students as in engi-
neering, have adopted a patient-based learning approach in 
response to criticism that doctors are often too technical and 
©
 A
ru
p
 Memorial, London.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   369 14/09/10   15:35:24
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
370
out of touch with patients and their needs. If medicine can 
make such changes, so surely can engineering.
Need for better  statistics and indicators
Considering the importance of engineering, science and tech-
nology in the knowledge  society and economy, it is particu-
larly surprising that better data are not available on the most 
important drivers of social and  economic development. Inter-
national guidelines recommend the collection of  statistics and 
indicators for engineering in such a way as to be of limited use 
in understanding and answering many of the important ques-
tions relating to engineering. Data are collected on ‘scientists 
and engineers’, R&D, patents,  innovation, international trade 
in high-tech products and the publication of scientifi c papers, 
without disaggregation into science and engineering, or the 
various fields of science and engineering. Indicators need 
to be redefi ned and refi ned to allow better disaggregation 
between science and engineering, and between the various 
fi elds of engineering, to provide a better understanding of the 
role of engineering in  innovation and development, as well as 
a better analysis of the types and numbers of engineers that 
are needed. Th is would dramatically improve the information 
available to policy makers and planners. It would also improve 
the awareness of the public and of young people who may be 
interested in a career in engineering. Statisticians collect the 
data that they are asked to collect; engineers, policy makers, 
planners and the public need to ask for more useful data and 
indicators on engineering. 
Needs and activities, desired actions and outcomes
Th e issues of awareness, information, education,  application 
and  innovation of engineering represent the fi ve main mes-
sages and recommendations of this Report. Major issues and 
challenges include the need to promote and invest in the 
transformation of engineering education,  in human and insti-
tutional capacity-building (particularly in developing coun-
tries), and in applications and  innovation to address the UN 
 Millennium Development Goals, with particular reference to 
 poverty reduction, sustainability,  climate change mitigation 
and adaptation. Th is requires associated information,  statistics 
and indicators. In addition, there is increased emphasis needed 
on policy relating to engineering as part of economic recovery 
and regeneration, developing the low-carbon economy and 
the  infrastructure necessary for long-term solutions to sus-
tainable ‘green’ growth.
Th ere are associated needs to include reference and emphasis 
on the role and importance of engineering in development 
policy, planning and associated documents such as Poverty 
Reduction Strategy Papers, (PRSPs) and the United Nations 
Common Country Assessments (CCAs) and Development 
Assistance Frameworks (UNDAFs). Engineering is hardly men-
tioned in such documents, and it will be crucial to their suc-
cess to get engineering, technology and  innovation onto the 
development agenda. Th is is linked to the need for the devel-
opment of  engineering studies at school and university level so 
that the role of engineering in  society is better understood.
Activities to address these issues and challenges include:
the development, production and sharing of information  ■
and indicators;
policy advocacy with planning and advisory services; ■
the publication of learning and teaching materials that  ■
tackle future global challenges;
the development and transformation of  ■  curricula and peda-
gogy;
enhanced investment in continuing education  ■  and in dis-
tance and virtual learning. 
Th e development, transfer, exchange, application and  innova-
tion of knowledge also needs to be more eff ectively promoted 
through international networking, cooperation and partner-
ships, which are lacking in resources in the engineering sector. In 
addition to specifi c references to the role of engineering in  pov-
erty reduction,  sustainable development and  climate change 
mitigation and adaptation, in these contexts there also needs to 
be an emphasis on gender equity and empowerment of women 
and enhancing global partnerships for development. 
Th ese issues, challenges and opportunities for engineering were 
refl ected in the proposal for an International Engineering Pro-
gramme (proposed and approved at the UNESCO Executive 
Board and General Conference in October 2009), which is a 
response to calls regarding the need to strengthen engineering 
around the world, and at UNESCO to support this activity. Th e 
proposal was made by South Africa and  supported by thirty-
one Member States. In addition to the above, other key activities 
included the development of this UNESCO Report on engineer-
ing and an associated ‘International Engineering Award’. 
As the fi rst international report on engineering, and with such 
a large subject, many issues, challenges and opportunities 
for engineering in development have been raised. With the 
increasing need for a greener engineering and technology, if 
we are to counter  climate change, and the increasing impor-
tance of engineering in economic recovery and regeneration, 
it is to be hoped that these issues, challenges and opportuni-
ties will be explored as part of the increasing interest in engi-
neering at UNESCO, as refl ected in the call for an International 
Engineering Programme and in future editions of the UNESCO 
Engineering Report.
We will then be better able to address the issues, rise to the 
challenges and better use the opportunities to help engineer 
a better world.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   370 14/09/10   15:35:27
Appendices9 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   371 14/09/10   15:35:28
A P P E N D I C E S
373
Th e Natural Sciences began at UNESCO with a total staff  of 
twelve in 1946 and grew to seventy-eight staff  in 1960, and 
included the creation of a Division for Technological Sciences 
with a staff  of ten (of which four professional staff ); the admin-
istrative birth of engineering at UNESCO, although engineer-
ing interests had previously been included in the Applied 
Sciences. In 1963–64 the Regular programme budget was 
US$30,000, with Technical Assistance funds of US$270,000 
and UN Special Funds of US$3.35 million for Technological 
Research – it was reported that the ‘greatest concentration of 
resources’ was in the fi eld of technology, this was mainly due 
to the contribution from the ‘Special Fund’ for technological 
development in developing countries. Th e Natural Sciences 
Sector was established by 1965 and staff  had almost doubled 
to 150 with the creation of two new Departments: the Depart-
ment of the Advancement of Science and the Department of 
the Application of Science to Development (which included 
the Division of Engineering Studies, Research and Training as 
the main functional division with a staff  of ten). Th e Regular 
Programme budget for the Division of Engineering Studies, 
Research and Training in 1965–66 for the ‘Assessment of Tech-
nological Needs of Developing Countries’ was US$229,000. 
By 1970 the Natural Sciences Sector had 181 staff  with sev-
enty-one in the newly formed (in 1969) Department of Sci-
ence Teaching, Technological Education and Research, 
including thirty-six in the Division of Technological Education 
and Research (this Division was referred to as ‘TER’ after this 
time and was the largest Division in the Sector). Th is Division 
included Sections for the Promotion of Engineering, Science 
and Research (ten staff), Engineering Education (fourteen 
staff ) and the Training of Technicians (ten staff ). In 1975, the 
Sector had grown to 195 staff , with the creation of a divisional 
structure that included the Division of Technological Research 
and Higher Education – still the largest Division with thirty-six 
staff  in Sections of Research in the Engineering Sciences (ten 
staff ), Engineering Education (twelve staff ) and Education of 
Technologists and Higher Technicians (ten staff ). In 1971–72 
the Regular Programme budget for engineering and tech-
nology was US$502,000 rising in 1975–76 to US$2.64 millon, 
with UNDP funding of US$14.45 million and other support 
of US$1.58 million (a total of US$18.67 million). In 1979–80, 
the total budget for  research and training in the scientifi c and 
technological sciences was US$32.5 million split between sci-
ence and technology, but with a bias toward engineering. It is 
interesting to note here that the IT/informatics activity, which 
was then known as computer science and engineering, was 
developed in the basic and engineering sciences in the 1970s, 
prior to the Intergovernmental Conference on Strategies and 
Policies for Informatics in 1978 and the transfer of IT activity 
to the Communications, Information and Informatics Sector 
in 1980, and the creation of the Intergovernmental Informatics 
programme in 1984.
In 1981, the Natural Sciences Sector had a total of 204 staff . 
Th e Division of Technological Research and Higher Education, 
with nineteen staff , comprised Sections of Research in the 
Engineering Sciences, Engineering Education, with the newly 
created Sections of Energy Information Systems and Energy 
Development and Coordination. In 1982–83 the total budget 
for the Division of Technological Research and Higher Educa-
tion was US$27.11 million, and US$28.9 million in 1984–85; 
with a Regular Programme budget for  research, training and 
 international cooperation in technology and the engineer-
ing sciences of US$5.6 million, UN support of US$8.9 million 
and other funding of US$14.4 million. In 1984, the US and 
the UK (and Singapore) withdrew from UNESCO, leading to 
a 25 per cent budget cut and the pruning of the Division from 
four sections to three and some voluntary staff  retirements. 
Th e number of Natural Sciences Sector staff  peaked at 214 in 
1985, with twenty-four staff  in the Division of Technological 
Research and Higher Education. In 1986–87 the Regular Pro-
gramme budget for  research, training and  international coop-
eration in technology and the engineering sciences was US$4.6 
million, with UN support of US$9.5 million and other funding 
of US$15.4 million (total budget of US$29.4 million), declin-
ing in 1988–89 to US$4.1 million, with UN support of US$6.5 
million and other funding of US$9.1 million (total budget of 
US$19.8 million).
Th e Engineering and Technology Division was created in 1990. 
By 1991, the number of Science Sector staff  declined to 182, 
with the re-named Division of Engineering and Technology 
down from twenty-four to thirteen staff . At the same time, 
the environmental sciences continued to grow, especially 
the Division of Ecological Sciences and the Man and the Bio-
sphere Programme, which was created as an Intergovernmen-
tal Programme in 1971. Th is situation refl ected several factors: 
increasing concern regarding the environment in the 1980s, the 
development of the environmental and ecological sciences, and 
the establishment of the Operations Division of UNDP in the 
mid-1980s to implement programme activity directly – rather 
than through other UN agencies – leading to the decline and 
consequent disappearance of UNDP Special Funds (it is under-
stood that this change may partly have been a response to 
perceived bureaucratic constraints in UNESCO). For 1990–91, 
1992–93 and 1994–95 the Regular Programme budget for sci-
ence and technology for development was around US$10 mil-
lion, split between science,  engineering and technology, with 
an increasing bias towards the Basic Sciences. 
Engineering at UNESCO in facts and fi gures9.1 
©
 U
N
ES
CO
/N
. B
ur
ke
 Th e Symbolic Globe by Erik 
Reitzel, UNESCO HQ, Paris.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   373 14/09/10   15:35:29
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
374
In 1995, staff  numbers in the Science Sector had declined 
to 147, with all Divisions suff ering some decline, including 
the Divisions of Engineering and Technology with ten staff  
(four professional staff , including one professional engineer). 
By 2000 there had been some reorganization of the Sector 
with the creation of a Division for  Science Policy, refl ecting 
a further decline in Sector staff  numbers to 126, with most 
Divisions again losing staff , with the exception of the Divi-
sion of Water Sciences, which was growing as a priority area 
for UNESCO. Against this backdrop of declining budgets and 
staff , and on administrative grounds of the need to reduce 
the number of senior staff  positions, the Division of Engi-
neering and Technology and Division of Basic Sciences were 
merged into the Division of Basic and Engineering Sciences 
in 2002. By 2005, total Science Sector staff  remained at 126, 
with eighteen in the Basic and Engineering Sciences (eleven 
in the Basic Sciences and seven in the Engineering Sciences). 
Th e budget for 1996–97 was similar to that for 1994–95, with 
a slight budgetary increase for engineering to US$1.2 million, 
with roughly half this fi gure going to the development of new 
programme activities related to the World Solar Programme, 
1996–2005. Th e overall downward trend of budgetary sup-
port for engineering continued into 1998–99 and 2000–01, 
with most of the engineering programme budget being 
directed to the World Solar Programme and US$400,000 to 
engineering education. 
 In 2002–2003, following the merger into the Basic and 
Engineering Sciences and indications of limited success of 
the World Solar Programme, the engineering sciences and 
technology budget declined to US$1 million (compared to 
US$5.8 million for the Basic Sciences), with US$600,000 focused 
on the World Solar Programme and $400,000 on capacity-
building in engineering, with a similar budget for 2004–2005.
In 2006–07 and 2008–09, the Engineering Sciences section had 
a staff  of two and a budget of US$600,000.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   374 14/09/10   15:35:29
A P P E N D I C E S
375
Abdel Menhem Alameddine
Dr Abdel Menhem Alameddine is an electrical engineer and 
Professor in the Computer Engineering Department at the 
University of Balamand, Lebanon. He is a Vice President of the 
Committee of Education and Training of the World Federation 
of Engineering Organizations ( WFEO) and former Vice Presi-
dent of the Federation of Lebanese Engineers.
Sam Amod 
Sam (Salim) Amod Pr Eng PMP FSAICE is a civil engineer 
and the executive chairman of Development & Engineering 
Consultants (Pty) Ltd based in Johannesburg, South Africa. 
He  was the President of the South African Institution of Civil 
Engineering (SAICE) in 2006 and initiated and co-authored the 
fi rst  infrastructure report card for South Africa. 
 Felix Atume
Dr Felix Atume is a civil engineer and Principal Partner of AD 
Team Ltd, Highways and Transportation engineers. Dr Atume 
is Secretary General of the Federation of African Organisations 
of Engineers, member of the Anti-Corruption Standing Com-
mittee of the World Federation of Engineering Organisations, 
Registrar of the Council for the Regulation of Engineering in 
Nigeria, and a Senior Lecturer in Highways Engineering and 
Transportation with the Federal University of Technology, 
 Nigeria.  
Margaret Austin
Margaret Austin is a biologist and science educator from  New 
Zealand. Margaret was Minister of Research, Science and Tech-
nology, Arts and Culture, Internal Aff airs and Civil Defence from 
1989-90, during the reform of science policy and funding. She 
was also Chancellor of Lincoln University (1999-2005) and Vice-
President of the Royal Society of NZ, with responsibility for Sci-
ence Education and Technology, Public and  Communication.
Kamel Ayadi
Kamel Ayadi is a civil engineer and specialist in  ICTs. He was 
President of the World Federation of Engineering Organisations 
( WFEO) from 1996-97, Chairman of  WFEO’s Anti-Corruption 
Standing Committee and former President of the Tunisian 
Order of Engineers. He is a Member of the Tunisian Senate, 
former Secretary of State in the Tunisian Government, President 
of the Tunisian National Authority of Telecommunications Reg-
ulation, Head of the International Co-operation Department at 
the Waste Water Department (ONAS) and Director of Techni-
cal Co-operation. Kamel was co-chair of the founding editorial 
advisory board of the UNESCO Engineering Report.
François-Gérard Baron
Gérard Baron is a civil engineer, specialist in engineering edu-
cation,  member of the International Board, Conseil National 
des Ingénieurs et Scientifi ques de France (National Engineer-
ing Council of France) and former President of the European 
Council of Civil Engineers (ECCE).
Conrado E. Bauer
Conrado Bauer is a civil engineer and has worked as plan-
ner, director and constructor of civil works, and consultant 
(Ecotec Consultores SAC and Conintec SRL). He is a former 
President of  WFEO and UADI (Argentine Union of Engineers), 
and was the founder and fi rst President of the  WFEO Stand-
ing Committee on Engineering and Environment and member 
of Argentina National Academy of Engineering and the Pan-
American Academy of Engineering. Conrado is a former Dean 
of the School of Engineering at National University of La Plata 
(1964-66); Public Works & Services Minister for Argentina 
(1982-83). Conrado is presently working on strategic studies 
for development and member of the Central Executive Com-
mittee of UADI organizing the World Congress and Exhibition 
‘Engineering 2010-Argentina: Technology, Innovation and 
Production for Sustainable Development’ in Buenos Aires in 
October 2010.
Jim Birch
Dr Jim Birch is Head of International Recognition at the Engi-
neering Council of the UK and member of the Executive 
Board of FEANI. ECUK sets and maintains the internationally 
recognized  standards of competence and  ethics that govern 
the award and retention of the titles of Chartered Engineers 
(CEng), Incorporated Engineers (IEng), Engineering Techni-
cians (EngTech) and Information and  Communication Tech-
nology Technicians (ICTTech). 
Peggy Oti-Boateng
Dr Peggy Oti-Boateng is Director of the Technology Consul-
tancy Centre at the Kwam Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology, Kumasi,  Ghana. She is responsible for the Centre’s 
 research, development and  innovation of technologies for sus-
tainable livelihoods, socio- economic development and business 
incubation. Dr Oti-Boateng works in close collaboration with 
African Technology Policy Studies Network (ATPS), UNESCO, 
EU, OECD  and the World Bank on Science Technology and Inno-
vation for  poverty reduction and enterprise development. She 
has numerous publications and mentored young entrepreneurs 
in setting up their own business ventures. 
Biographies of Contributors9.2 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   375 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
376
Nelius Boshoff 
Nelius Boshoff  is a Senior Researcher at the Centre for Research 
on Science and Technology (CREST), Stellenbosch University, 
South Africa.  Over the past decade he has participated in a 
number of national and international  research programmes 
in S&T, aimed at mapping both the South African and African 
S&T landscape. 
Peter Boswell
Dr Peter Boswell is the  FIDIC General Manager and was born and 
educated in Kenya and received an MA and a PhD in materials 
engineering from Cambridge and MIT, respectively. He worked 
as a process engineer with Boeing and Ford in their develop-
ment centres in Seattle and Dearborn before becoming an Aus-
tralian mining industry Government Research Fellow attached 
to Mount Isa Mines and the University of Brisbane, Australia. 
David Botha
Eng David Botha, Pr Eng, FSAICE, MIMESA, is a Civil Engineer 
and the Executive Director and Head of Communications and 
Outreach of the South African Institution of Civil Engineer-
ing (SAICE). SAICE was one of the founder members of the 
African Engineers Forum, established in 1995, and hosts the 
Secretariat with David’s enthusiastic support.
John Boyd
John M Boyd, P Eng, PhD, is a graduate of the University of 
Toronto (B.A.Sc., Geological Engineering, 1966 and M.A.Sc., 
Structural Geology, 1967), the University of London (D.I.C., 
Structural Geology and Rock Mechanics, 1970) and the Impe-
rial College (Ph.D., Engineering and Rock Mechanics, 1976). 
John has been in the  consulting engineering business for 33 
years with Golder Associates. Fifteen of those years were in 
senior management roles including Vice-President, Operations 
and Chair of the Steering Committee of an HRDC program to 
encourage young people to study engineering at university.
Damir Brdjanovic
Damir Brdjanovic is a graduate engineer and started his pro-
fessional career in the water industry in 1988 in Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, where he was responsible for the design of drink-
ing water treatment plants and water supply systems. After 
several years working in the water and wastewater industry, 
he pursued an academic career jointly at Delft University of 
Technology and UNESCO-IHE, where he received his doctoral 
degree in 1998. After a further fi ve years of international work 
as a senior advisor for consultancy firm Royal Haskoning, 
Dr Brdjanovic rejoined UNESCO-IHE in 2002. 
George Bugliarello
Professor George Bugliarello is an engineer and educator with 
a diverse background including fl uid mechanics, computer 
languages, biomedical engineering and science policy. He has 
a Doctor of Science in engineering from MIT and has several 
honourary degrees and honours and is a former Chancellor 
and president (1973-1994) of Polytechnic University of New 
York, and in 1994 was awarded the New York City Mayor’s 
Award for Excellence in Science and Technology. He is founder 
and co-editor of Technology In Society, serves on the editorial 
board of several journals and has authored, co-authored and 
edited numerous books. Currently Foreign Secretary of the 
National Academy of Engineering and engaged in the interna-
tional program of the Academy.
Lars Bytoft
Dr Lars Bytoft is the President and Chairman of the Danish 
Society of Engineers and member of the Danish Mechanical 
Engineering Society and is President of FEANI. He has particu-
lar interests in engineering, technology,  climate change and 
global warming, and was active at the United Nations Climate 
Change Conference held in Copenhagen in December 2009 
(COP15).
Jean-Claude Charpentier
Professor Dr Ing Charpentier is a chemical engineer and  was 
the President of the European Federation of Chemical Engi-
neers from 2002-2005. He was the Director of the Ecole Nation-
ale des Industries Chimiques at Nancy (1983-1985), Scientifi c 
Director of the Department of Engineering Sciences of CNRS-
Paris (1985-1992), and Director of the Ecole Supérieure de 
Chimie Physique Electronique de Lyon (1992-2004). 
Tan Seng Chuan
Tan Seng Chuan graduated from National University of Sin-
gapore with a Bachelor’s degree in Civil Engineering, in 1983 
and obtained a Master of Science degree in Building Science 
from NUS in 1991. He is a registered Professional Engineer in 
Singapore, a Chartered Professional Engineer in Australia  and 
an ASEAN Chartered Professional Engineer. He is a Director 
of CH2M HILL Singapore Pte Ltd, and his experience includes 
environmental and  sustainable development,  energy conser-
vation, siting and licensing, project and contract management, 
water and wastewater treatment, power, chemical and petro-
chemical industries, the Mass Rapid Transit System, and other 
 infrastructure projects in the ASEAN and wider regions. 
Andrew Cleland
Dr Cleland is the Chief Executive of the Institution of Profes-
sional Engineers  New Zealand (IPENZ), the national profes-
sional body for engineers that is responsible for the statutory 
registration of chartered professional engineers. He is also hon-
ourary Professor of Food Engineering at Massey University, and 
has stimulated refrigeration-related  research in  New Zealand, 
with a focus on mathematical modeling of food refrigeration 
processes,  energy use in food processing and CFC substitution 
in refrigeration systems. Andrew has also promoted  innovation 
and technology transfer through short courses and the devel-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   376 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
377
opment of software for industry, and is supporting the devel-
opment of the South Pacifi c Engineers Association (SPEA).
Regina Clewlow
Regina Clewlow has a BS in Engineering and Computer Sci-
ence and MEng in Civil and Environmental Engineering, and is 
the Founding Executive Director of  Engineers for a Sustainable 
World (ESW) - dedicated to infusing sustainability into engi-
neering education  and practice. Regina is currently a  research 
assistant in the Partnership for Air Transportation Noise and 
Emissions Reduction (PARTNER) center at MIT, Energy Fel-
low at MIT Energy Initiative working on  research projects that 
address the challenges of growing global  energy consumption 
and  climate change impacts, PhD student in the Engineering 
Systems Division and Treasurer of the MIT Energy Club.
Daniel D Clinton, Jr.
Dan Clinton, Jr, PE, RPLS, FNSPE, FASCE, retired in 1997 from 
Lockwood, Andrews and Newman, an engineering and archi-
tectural consulting fi rm, as Senior Vice President, Director and 
Corporate Secretary. Dan was President of the National Society 
of Professional Engineers from 2001-2002, and served on the 
United States Council for International Engineering Practice 
(USCIEP), the Union de Pan American Associados de Ingenerios 
(UPADI) and the American Association of Engineering Socie-
ties (AAES). Currently he is North Vice President of UPADI, 
representing the United States, Mexico and Canada, and is 
President of the  WFEO Committee on Capacity Building. 
Jo da Silva
Jo da Silva FREng is a civil and structural engineer and Direc-
tor of the International Development team of Arup Group - 
the global design, technology and management consultancy, 
focusing on projects in sub-Saharan Africa and  Asia to reduce 
poverty and contribute to  sustainable development. She joined 
Arup after studying engineering at Cambridge University, and 
has combined a career at Arup, focused on building design, 
urban re-generation and  sustainable development, with active 
involvement in humanitarian relief and international devel-
opment, with particular expertise in shelter-housing, urban 
environments and  disaster risk reduction including  climate 
change adaptation, and is a member of RedR. She has worked 
on a variety of award-winning projects in the UK and overseas, 
including Chek Lap Kok Airport, Osaka Museum, National 
Portrait Gallery and the Royal Geographical Society.
Cláudio Amaury Dall’Acqua
Dr Claudio Dall’Acqua is a civil engineer and former President 
of UPADI - the Pan American Federation of Engineering Socie-
ties (2000 - 2008). Mr. Dall´Acqua has more than three decades 
of experience in the construction industry and engineering 
special services, and postgraduate qualifi cations in Business 
Administration and Engineering for Safety Work in Construc-
tion. Mr. Dall´Acqua combines an extensive background in 
engineering jobs and leadership in the Americas engineering 
community as the President of UPADI - representing more 
than 2.5 million engineers in 27 countries. Mr. Dall´Acqua 
has received several awards, medals and recognition diplomas 
of excellence during his professional career. Currently, he is a 
member of the Arbitration Chamber of Instituto de Engenharia 
in Sao Paulo, Brazil.
Mona Dahms
Mona Dahms is an electronics engineer with a background in 
international development and adult education,  and is also 
a specialist in gender issues in engineering, science and tech-
nology. She is an Associate Professor in the Department of 
Development and Planning at Aalborg University, Denmark, 
and has worked, consulted, volunteered and been an educator 
and trainer in several countries.
Darrel John Danyluk
Darrel J Danyluk, P.Eng, FEIC, FCSCE, MPAAE, is a civil engi-
neer and past president of Engineers Canada and the Associa-
tion of Professional Engineers, Geologists, and Geophysicists 
of Alberta. A corporate leader in engineering in Canada and 
abroad, he has spent his career working for the benefi t of the 
profession. A Vice President of the World Federation of Engi-
neering he chairs the Standing Committee on Engineering 
and the Environment and leads the initiative on adaptation of 
 infrastructure to the impacts of a changing climate.
Irenilza de Alencar Nääs
Irenilza de Alencar Nääs is an agricultural engineer and Profes-
sor at the Agricultural Engineering College, State University of 
Campinas, Brazil, and the fi rst woman to be elected president 
of the CIGR - the International Commission of Agricultural 
Engineering (2007-2008). She received her PhD in Agricul-
tural Engineering at Michigan State University in 1980 and is a 
former president of the Brazilian Society of Agricultural Engi-
neering and president of the Latin American and Caribbean 
Society of Agricultural Engineering. 
Erik de Graaff 
Erik de Graaff  a psychologist who majored in the psychology of 
work and organization and was fi rst involved in the develop-
ment of the problem-based  curricula of medicine and health 
sciences. He then moved to Delft University of Technology to 
support the process of educational  innovation at the Faculty 
of Architecture and then the Faculty of Technology Policy and 
Management. Dr de Graaf has contributed to the promotion 
of knowledge and understanding of higher engineering educa-
tion  through publications and through participation in profes-
sional organizations including SEFI and IGIP. In 2006 he was 
appointed as associate editor of the European Journal of Engi-
neering Education and since January 2008 has been Editor-in-
Chief of the EJEE. Dr de Graaf is also an extraordinary professor 
at Aalborg University.  
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   377 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
378
Cheryl Desha
Cheryl Desha graduated from Griffi  th University’s Environ-
mental Engineering degree program, receiving a University 
Medal and Environmental Engineering medal. She worked 
for  consulting engineering fi rm Arup for four years, in 2003 
became a lecturer in the School of Engineering at Griffi  th Uni-
versity and joined Th e Natural Edge Project (TNEP) in formal 
collaboration with Griffi  th University. Cheryl is the Education 
Director of Th e Natural Edge Project - a non-profi t partner-
ship on  research, education  and strategy for  innovation for 
sustainable prosperity hosted by Griffi  th University and the 
Australian National University. In 2005 Cheryl was Engineers 
Australia  Young Professional Engineer of the Year. She is cur-
rently undertaking her PhD on embedding sustainability into 
engineering education at Griffi  th.
Allison Dickert
Allison Dickert has a background in political science as a 
graduate of Virginia Commonwealth University and George 
Washington University. She is Manager of Issues Development, 
for the American Society of Civil Engineering, and leads the 
 research and development for ASCE’s Report Card for Ameri-
ca’s Infrastructure. 
Christelle Didier
Christelle Didier has a Doctorate in sociology, and is a lecturer 
and researcher in the Department of  ethics at the Catholic 
University of Lille. Christelle focuses on the professions and 
professional  ethics and is the co-author of one of the few text-
books in French on  ethics relating to future engineers. She is 
also a member of the Centre Maurice Halbwachs and collabo-
rates with the European Journal of Engineering Education.
Gary Downey 
Dr Downey is a mechanical engineer, cultural anthropologist, 
and scholar in interdisciplinary science and technology studies. 
He is Professor of Science and Technology Studies and an affi  li-
ated faculty member in the Departments of Engineering Edu-
cation and Sociology at Virginia Tech. Gary is the co-founder 
of the International Network for Engineering Studies – the fi rst 
international networks on  engineering studies, and co-editor 
of its journal Engineering Studies. His current  research explores 
the infl uences of popular concepts of progress on what counts 
as engineers and engineering knowledge in diff erent countries 
and he is also currently Boeing Company Senior Fellow in Engi-
neering Education at the National Academy of Engineering.
Xiangyun Du
Dr Xiangyun Du is an assistant professor at the Department 
of Development and Planning and associated UNESCO Chair 
in Problem Based Learning (UCPBL Chair) at Aalborg Univer-
sity, Denmark. She is a specialist and researcher on engineering 
education in Denmark and China – where she was involved in 
 research and teaching communication and language skills for 
engineering students. Her PhD is on gender and engineering 
education in a PBL setting in Denmark and her main  research 
interests include gender studies, intercultural learning, develop-
ment of social competencies, problem-based and project-organ-
ized learning in higher education in engineering education.
 Walter Erdelen
Walter Erdelen habilitated in Biogeography at the University of 
the Saarland, Germany, and has taught at universities and pub-
lic schools in Germany and abroad as well as published numer-
ous papers and books in the fi elds of environmental sciences, 
conservation biology, ecology, systematics and evolutionary 
biology. Apart from his academic experience, Prof. Erdelen has 
fulfi lled a number of advisory and evaluation tasks for national 
and international organizations, especially in relation to eco-
logical  research and conservation programmes in developing 
countries. Walter was Assistant Director-General for Natural 
Sciences of UNESCO from 2001 to July 2010, responsible for 
overall formulation, planning and coordination of UNESCO’s 
strategy and programmes in the natural sciences, and was co-
chair of the founding editorial advisory board of the UNESCO 
Engineering Report.
Wendy Faulkner
Dr Faulkner trained in biology and then  science and technol-
ogy policy studies, and joined the University of Edinburgh 
in 1988 to develop, run and teach on the University’s post-
graduate Programme in Science and Technology Studies. Her 
 research interests include gender and technology and public 
engagement in science, with increasing interest in engineering 
and technology, and associated gender issues including engi-
neering identity and the retention of women in engineering.
Monique Frize
Dr Frize is a biomedical engineer with a background in  electri-
cal engineering and expertise in medical instrumentation and 
decision-support systems. After extensive experience as a clini-
cal engineer, in 1989 she was appointed as the fi rst holder of the 
Women in Engineering Chair and professor of Electrical Engi-
neering at the University of New Brunswick. In 1997 Dr Frize was 
appointed Professor of Systems and Computer Engineering at 
Carleton University and Professor in the School of Information 
Technology and Engineering at the University of Ottawa. She 
was instrumental in establishing the International Network of 
Women Engineers and Scientists (INWES). Prof. Frize’s  research 
is on clinical decision-support systems, infrared medical imag-
ing, clinical engineering,  ethics, and women in engineering.
Willi Fuchs
Dr-Ing Willi Fuchs studied Mechanical Engineering at the Uni-
versity of Siegen where he obtained his degree as Dr-Ing in 
1986. He is Executive Director and Executive member of the 
Board of VDI, responsible for VDI publications and a member 
of several Supervisory Boards. From October 2005-2008 he 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   378 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
379
was President of the European Federation of National Engi-
neering Associations (FEANI) where he continues as honor-
ary president. His keen interests include promoting the role of 
engineering in  society and the international comparability of 
educational programmes in engineering, and addressing the 
shortage of engineers in Germany and internationally.
Jacques Gaillard
Dr Jacques Gaillard trained in agricultural engineer and has 
a doctorate in Science, Technology and Society (STS). He is 
a former Director of the Offi  ce of Policy and Coordination of 
the Department of Technical Cooperation at the International 
Atomic Agency (IAEA), and former Acting and Deputy Direc-
tor of the International Foundation for Science (IFS). Jacques 
is at present senior researcher of the  research unit ‘Knowledge 
and Development’ at the French Research Institute for Devel-
opment (IRD). He has published over 50 papers, fi ve books as 
author and edited six books in the STS fi eld. 
Patricia Galloway
Dr Pat Galloway is a licensed professional engineer (P.E.) in 14 
U.S States, in Manitoba, Canada and Australia, and a certifi ed 
Project Management Professional (P.M.P.). She is the Chief Exec-
utive Offi  cer (CEO) of Pegasus Global Holdings Inc, an interna-
tional management consulting fi rm. She is also the Vice Chair 
of the National Science Board, appointed by the President in 
2006 and Senate, confi rmed for a 6-year term. Pat was the fi rst 
women President of the American Society of Civil Engineers in 
152 years – serving as a role model to young girls and women 
to pave the way and shatter the glass ceiling in the engineering 
profession. 
P.S. Goel
Dr Prem Shanker Goel is the President of the Indian National 
Academy of Engineering (INAE), Dr Vikram Sarabhai Distin-
guished Professor at the Indian Space Research Centre (ISRO) 
and Chairman of the Recruitment and Assessment Centre of 
the Defence Research & Development Organization. He has 
a degree in Electrical Engineering, Master of Engineering and 
PhD in applied electronics and servomechanisms. After his ME 
in 1970 he joined the Satellite Systems Division, Space Science 
and Technology Centre (Now Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre) 
to work on satellite attitude control systems for satellite. In 
1972 he moved to Bangalore, as part of the Indian Scientifi c 
Satellite Project (ISSP, now ISRO) to work on spin control sys-
tems and remote sensing from spin stabilized satellites.
Barry J Grear
Barry Grear, AO, is an electrical engineer with a long experi-
ence in executive positions in state and federal government 
in Australia, relating particularly to  transportation systems, 
 disasters and the built environment, professional engineering 
requirements for graduates and practicing engineers. Barry has 
been active in  WFEO for more than a decade and was the Vice 
President from 2006-2008 and President from 20097-2009. He 
is a former President of Engineers Australia, was the inaugural 
Chair of the  APEC Engineer Coordinating Committee, Chair of 
the Australian Monitoring Committee for APEC (Asian Pacifi c 
Economic Cooperation) and the  Engineers Mobility Forum 
(EMF). Barry was also active with the Federation of Engineer-
ing Institutions of South East  Asia and the Pacifi c (FEISEAP, 
now Federation of Engineering Institutions of  Asia and the 
Pacifi c - FEIAP) and treasurer of RedR Australia  and secretary 
of RedR International (the main international engineering 
NGO working in  disaster relief).
Philip Greenish
Philip Greenish, CBE, has been Chief Executive Offi  cer of the 
Royal Academy of Engineering since 2003. He has a degree in 
Engineering Science from Durham University and a long career 
with the Royal Navy, where his fi nal appointment was as Rear 
Admiral, Chief of Staff (Support) to Commander-in-Chief 
Fleet. He is a trustee of the Daphne Jackson Trust and since 
2005 has been a council member of the Science and Technol-
ogy Facilities Council and its predecessor organization, the 
Council for the Central Laboratory of the Research Councils, 
and a member of the WISE Board (Women into Science and 
Engineering).
Peter Greenwood
Dr Peter Greenwood is an electrical power engineer, manager 
and company director. He has worked in the electrical sup-
ply industry,  research laboratories and universities in several 
countries. He is an engineering and management consultant, 
with interests in corporate governance, strategic planning, 
education  and training and  energy matters. Peter is a Princi-
pal of Australian Corporate Resources and a Past President of 
Engineers Australia. 
Yvonne Issié Gueye
Issié Gueye is a Power Engineer with an MSc in Industrial and 
Management Engineering. She was Chargée de Mission for the 
Director General of the Compagnie Ivoirienne d’Électricité in 
Côte d’Ivoire. Issié is also very active as the General Secretary of 
the Cercle Ivoirien des Femmes Ingénieurs et Scientifi ques (CIFI-
SATS) and Director of the International Network of Women 
Engineers and Scientists (INWES).
Leanne Hardwicke
Leanne Hardwicke is the Director of International and National 
Policy for Engineers Australia  and is active in the production 
of policy papers on such matters as  climate change,  energy 
and manufacturing and in submissions to Government, seeks 
to inform public and policy debate from a professional engi-
neering perspective. She has particular interests in engineering 
education,  accreditation and  curriculum development, and 
managed the production of the Engineers Australia  2005 Aus-
tralian Infrastructure Report Card.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   379 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
380
Karlson (Charlie) Hargroves 
Charlie Hargroves is a graduate civil and structural engineering 
completing a PhD in Sustainable Industry Policy. He is one of 
the co-founders and a Director of Th e Natural Edge Project 
(TNEP) – an interdisciplinary project focusing on  research and 
related cooperation in  sustainable development based in Aus-
tralia. Charlie and TNEP have developed a number of books on 
 sustainable development, including ‘Factor Five: Transforming 
the Global Economy through 80% Improvements in Resource 
Productivity’ published with Ernst Von Weizsäcker, updating 
the seminal ‘Factor Four’ of 1997, and a UNESCO toolkit of 
information and teaching material on ‘Engineering Sustainable 
Solutions’. He works closely with Hunter Lovins and Amory B. 
Lovins, Chairman and Chief Scientist of the Rocky Mountain 
Institute, and ‘Th e Natural Advantage of Nations’ project, and 
is an Associate Member of the Club of Rome. 
Rohani Hashim
Dr. Rohani Hashim is Secretary-General of the World Asso-
ciation of Industrial and Technological Research Organisations 
(WAITRO), based at the Environmental and Energy Technol-
ogy Centre of the Standard and Industrial Research Institute 
for Malaysia (SIRIM).
Sascha Hermann
Dipl-Ing Sascha Hermann leads the Technology Centre of VDI 
- the Association of German Engineers, a VDI company that 
supports new technologies and acts as consultant and fund 
administration unit for the German Ministry of Education and 
Research. Prior to this he was responsible for the division of 
‘Profession and Society’ at VDI. 
R M (Bob) Hodgson
Professor R M (Bob) Hodgson is Professor of Information 
Engineering and Director of the Massey University School of 
Engineering and Technology. He is currently the Chairman of 
the  New Zealand Council of Engineering Deans (NZCED), a 
Member of the IPENZ Standards and Accreditation Board, the 
IEEE Region IO Executive and is the current President of the 
Association of Engineering Education in South and East  Asia 
and the Pacifi c (AEESEAP). He has led the development of a 
number of engineering majors and is well known for his pio-
neering work in digital image processing systems.
Hans Jürgen Hoyer
Dr Hans Jürgen Hoyer is a psychologist and Director of Glo-
bal Strategies for American Society for Engineering Education 
(ASEE) and Secretary General of International Federation of 
Engineering Societies (IFEES). He is responsible for the over-
all management of the international programs and strategy of 
ASEE and IFEES, and works in close collaboration with volun-
teer leaders throughout the world.
Yousef Ibrahim
Associate Professor Yousef Ibrahim is an electrical and elec-
tronics engineer and the Founding Director of the Gippsland 
Regional Automation Centre (GRACe) established in 2005 at 
the School of Applied Sciences and Engineering at the Gipps-
land Campus of Monash University in Victoria, Australia. Dr 
Ibrahim was the initiator and founder of the mechatronics 
undergraduate program and established the Graduate Cer-
tifi cate in reliability Engineering and the Masters Program in 
Maintenance and Reliability Engineering at Monash Univer-
sity. His main  research activities are in the area of industrial 
automation and robotics, life cycle and asset management.
Azni Idris
Dr Azni Idris has a PhD in Environmental Engineering from 
the University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK, is a professor in 
Environmental Engineering and Head of the Department of 
Chemical and Environmental Engineering at University Putra 
Malaysia. He has more than 60 journals and 100 conference 
proceeding publications, and his  research interests include 
environmental and waste management including wastewater 
treatment. 
Yumio Ishii
Dr Yumio Ishii is a civil engineering consultant and chairman 
and CEO of CTI Engineering Co Ltd of Tokyo. Dr Ishii has 50 
years experience as a consulting engineer in the development 
of water-related  infrastructure, is the Chair of the Disaster Risk 
Management Task Force of the World Federation of Engineer-
ing Organizations and Past President of the Japan Society of 
Civil Engineers. 
Mervyn E. Jones
Dr Mervyn Jones has degrees in Physics, Materials Science 
and Electrical Engineering and 25 years  research experience in 
industry and university, working on magnetic, optoelectronic, 
silicon/germanium heterostructure device development. He 
is a Distinguished Research Fellow in the Optical and Semi-
conductor Devices Group in the Department of Electrical and 
Electronic Engineering at Imperial College, London. He was 
Director of the Centre for Professional Development at Impe-
rial, and director of a university spinout company involved 
in natural resource evaluation software. He is a Fellow of the 
Institute of Physics and was President of the International 
Association for Continuing Engineering Education (IACEE). 
Russel C. Jones
Dr Russ Jones is a consultant on international engineering 
education,  and was founding chair of the Standing Committee 
on Capacity Building of the World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations. Dr Jones was Advisor to the Khalifa University 
of Science, Technology and Research in Abu Dhabi, UAE, and 
also previously served as founding president of the Masdar 
Institute of Science and Technology in the UAE. His previ-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   380 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
381
ous career in higher education in the United States included 
faculty member at MIT, department chair at Ohio State Uni-
versity, Dean of Engineering at University of Massachusetts-
Amherst, academic Vice President at Boston University and 
President at University of Delaware. Dr Jones primary interests 
are international higher education  and human  capacity build-
ing through engineering education.
 Paul Jowitt
Professor Paul Jowitt is Professor of Civil Engineering Systems 
at Heriot-Watt University and Director of the Scottish Institute 
of Sustainable Technology – a joint venture between the inter-
national consultancy MWH and Heriot-Watt. He is President 
of the Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) and was Senior Vice 
President of ICE with particular responsibility for International 
Development Policy. Paul has a strong interest in the combina-
tion of systems engineering and sustainability, has taught and 
worked at higher education  institutions in Scotland, England 
and  New Zealand and his  research and consultancy experience 
encompasses water resources, risk management, sustainability 
strategies and applications for industry, government and other 
organizations. He is a former member of the Board of Scottish 
Water and established their Sustainable Development Advi-
sory Group. He is a Trustee of  Engineers Against Poverty and 
Editor-in-chief of the International Journal Civil Engineering 
and Environmental Systems.
Jan Kaczmarek
Professor Dr Ing Jan Kaczmarek has a long and distinguished 
career and was the founding father of  research and teaching 
on metals and materials processing at the University of Cracow 
and in Poland. He has been President of the Polish Committee 
on Science, Minister of Science, Higher Education and Tech-
nology, Secretary of the Polish Academy of Sciences, member 
of the Polish Academy of Engineering, and Rector of Cracow 
University of Technology.
Marlene Kanga 
Dr Marlene Kanga, B Tech, MSc, FIEAust, CPEng, is a Chemi-
cal Engineer specializing in Risk Engineering, a Chartered Pro-
fessional Engineer and Fellow of Engineers Australia. She is a 
National Vice President of Engineers Australia, Chair of the 
National Committee for Women in Engineering and Director 
of iOmniscient Pty Ltd - a leading developer and provider of 
a comprehensive suite of intelligent video-analytic software, 
featuring patented technology for security camera-based sur-
veillance systems.
Anette Kolmos
Dr Anette Kolmos is Professor in Engineering Education and 
Problem Based Learning, and Chairholder for UNESCO Chair 
in Problem Based Learning in Engineering Education at Aal-
borg University. Dr Kolmos has a PhD in “Gender, Technol-
ogy and Education” and over the last 20 years has conducted 
 research in change to PBL  curriculum, development of transfer-
able skills and faculty development. She holds the Chair of the 
SEFI working group on Engineering Education Research and is 
President of SEFI in 2010-11. Dr Kolmos is associate editor for 
European Journal of Engineering Education and has served as 
associate editor for Journal of Engineering Education. She has 
published more than 140 articles in various journals.
Sam Kundishora
Sam Kundishora is an electronics, information and  communica-
tions technology engineer and co-founder and Director of Global 
 infrastructure Anti-Corruption Centre (GIACC) in Zimbabwe. 
He is President of the African Engineers Forum, Vice Chairman of 
the Standing Committee on Information and  Communication of 
the World Federation of Engineering Organizations, a member 
of the World Council of Civil Engineer’s Executive Council, and 
Permanent Secretary for the Zimbabwe Ministry of Information 
and  Communication Technology. He was Vice President of the 
Federation of African Organisations of Engineers and a former 
President of the Zimbabwe Institution of Engineers, and has 
worked extensively in academia and industry. 
Andrew Lamb
Andrew Lamb has a degree in engineering from the Univer-
sity of Cambridge and became the Chief Executive of EWB-UK 
in December 2008 after being awarded a World of Diff erence 
grant from the Vodafone Foundation. Andrew became inter-
ested in engineering and international development following 
a talk in 2002 at a fl edging student club called  Engineers With-
out Borders, and got involved in fundraising. After graduating, 
Andrew worked with the University of Cambridge Offi  ce for 
Community Aff airs and co-founded the Humanitarian Centre. 
He worked for more than three years with  disaster relief organ-
ization RedR, including working at their offi  ce in Nairobi. He is 
the technical editor of the UNESCO Engineering Report and a 
Visiting Lecturer for the Engineering and Technology Board. 
Allyson Lawless
Allyson Lawless is a civil and structural engineer, Fellow of the 
Institute of Structural Engineering (UK) and Managing Direc-
tor, Allyson Lawless and Associates Pty Ltd. Exposed to the 
realities of South Africa,  Allyson has made a real connection 
between civil engineering and the people that she serves, work-
ing hard to bridge the challenges presented by existing gaps. In 
2000 she was the fi rst woman to be appointed President of the 
SA Institution of Civil Engineering in the then almost 100 year 
history of SAICE. Since then it has been her drive to make a dif-
ference from the highest levels in government to communities 
in need of  infrastructure. She worked at addressing imbalances 
in the civil engineering profession and in 2005 published the 
book Numbers and Needs in local government:  Civil engineer-
ing – the critical profession for service delivery – a wake up call 
to address the capacity crisis in SA civil engineering that has 
become a national reference guide on skills development.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   381 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
382
Leizer Lerner
Dr Leizer Lerner is a Professor of Civil Engineering at the Fed-
eral University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, and Director of the 
Brazilian Federation of Engineers Association (FEBRAE). He is 
also National Member of the World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations, and actively involved on the  WFEO Standing 
Committee on Education and Training,
Antje Lienert
Antje Lienert has an MA in Organisational Management and 
works for VDI, the Association of German Engineers. She is 
responsible for labour market questions in VDI section relating 
to engineering training and further training and the engineer-
ing profession and the labour market. Antje developed this 
VDI section as a competent service provider, especially with 
a view to fi gures and statistical information concerning the 
engineering labour market.
Simon Lovatt
Dr Simon J. Lovatt has a PhD in Biotechnology and is a profes-
sional engineer with background in food engineering  research, 
consultancy, technology and software product development, 
specializing in quantitative modelling, design, strategy devel-
opment, managing expert teams,  innovation strategy and 
implementation. He is the Science Strategist with AgResearch 
Ltd and chair of the Society of Chemical Engineers,  New Zea-
land.
Juan Lucena
Juan Lucena has a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical and 
Aeronautical Engineering from Rensselaer Polytechnic Insti-
tute (RPI), an MS and Ph.D. in Science and Technology Studies 
(STS) from Virginia Tech. He is an Associate Professor at the 
Liberal Arts and International Studies Division (LAIS) at the 
Colorado School of Mines (CSM). Over the last ten years he 
has researched how images of globalization shape engineering 
education,  engineering practices and designs, and published 
a recent cultural history of  policymaking for education  and 
human resources in science and engineering in his 2005 book, 
Defending the Nation: U.S. Policymaking to Create Scientists and 
Engineers from Sputnik to the ‘War Against Terrorism’.
Eriabu Lugujjo
Eriabu Lugujjo is professor and Head of the Department of 
Electrical Engineering at Makerere University, Uganda. He is 
the Vice- Chairperson of the Uganda National Commission 
for UNESCO, and has been a member of the UNESCO Execu-
tive Board. Prof. Lugujjo has particular interests in engineering 
education  and the application of engineering for social and 
 economic development. He was previously a physics teacher 
at Makerere College School and it is reported that in the 1980s 
that the popularity of his teaching and tuition at school and 
his home encouraged interest in engineering to the extent that 
several former students are now senior engineers in Uganda 
and owe success in their careers to him.
Takaaki Maekawa
Dr Takaaki Maekawa is an agricultural and environmental 
engineer, former Secretary General of the International Com-
mission of Agricultural Engineering (CIGR) and Professor 
Emeritus of the University of Tsukuba Graduate School of Life 
and Environmental Sciences and Research Institute of Tsukuba 
Bio-Tech (RITB). He is a member of the Science Council of 
Japan and was a member of the International Commission of 
Agricultural Biosystems Engineering of CIGR. Prof Maekawa’s 
specialized fi eld of interest is biomass conversion, and he is a 
specialist on the breakthrough technology to produce renew-
able jet and automobile fuels from algae, with support from 
the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST).
Donald S. Mansell
Dr Don Mansell is a civil and structural engineer and an Honor-
ary Professor at the University of Melbourne, Australia. He has 
a Master of Engineering Science and Doctorate in civil engi-
neering from the University of Swansea, Wales, and is a Fellow 
of the Society of Engineers of Papua New (FSPEPNG), Member 
of the American Society of Civil Engineers (MASCE) and Mem-
ber of the Institution of Engineers, Australia  (MIEAUST). Don 
was one of the founders of the International Development 
Technologies Centre at the University of Melbourne – one of 
the pioneering university departments focused on the role of 
engineering and technology in development.
Tony Marjoram
Dr Tony Marjoram, CPEng, FIEAust, AMIMechE, has a BSc 
in mechanical engineering, MSc in  science and technology 
policy and PhD in technology and development, and has over 
25 years experience in  engineering,  science and technology 
policy, planning and management for development. He has 
worked at the Universities of Melbourne, the South Pacifi c and 
Manchester and is responsible for the Engineering Sciences 
programme in the Division of Basic and Engineering Sciences 
at UNESCO, where he conceived and developed the award-
winning Daimler-UNESCO Mondialogo Engineering Award 
and this UNESCO Report. Dr Marjoram is a Visiting Fellow of 
the Manchester Institute of Innovation Research, member of 
the Advisory Board of the ‘Social, Technological and Environ-
mental Pathways to Sustainability’ Centre at the University of 
Sussex and was a member of the UN Millennium Project Task 
Force on Science, Technology and Innovation. 
Petter Matthews
Petter Matthews has a BA Development Studies and Politics 
and an MSc Social Policy and Planning in Developing Coun-
tries. He is a senior international development specialist with 
over twenty year’s experience and has been the Executive 
Director of  Engineers Against Poverty (EAP) since December 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   382 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
383
2002 and has led the development of the current programme 
of EAP. After working as a construction manager in the UK, 
Petter fi rst became involved in international development in 
1989, when he worked as a Project Manager for the Govern-
ment of Tuvalu. Since then he has worked for a number of 
NGOs and community based organizations in Africa and  Asia 
on issues related to the built environment. In his last position, 
he was the CEO of a Community Development Trust in South 
Africa.
 José Medem Sanjuan 
José Medem Sanjuan is a Past President of the World Council 
of Civil Engineers, Professor Emeritus of Civil Engineering at the 
Polytechnic University of Madrid, President of the Foundation 
of Aragón for the Promotion of Infrastructure, Vice-president 
of the Committee of International Aff airs of the Instituto de 
la Ingeniería de España, and a member of the World Federa-
tion of Engineering Organisations’ ( WFEO) Anti-Corruption 
Standing Committee.  He is Past President of  WFEO, the Euro-
pean Council of Civil Engineers, the European Federation of 
National Engineering Associations, and the German-Spanish 
Engineering Association.
Jean Michel
Professor Jean Michel is an information engineer, engineering 
educator and proponent of women in engineering, retired 
from Ecole Nationale des Ponts et Chaussées, and former Chair-
man of the World Federation of Engineering Organisations 
Standing Committee on Information and  Communication, 
Vice-President of  WFEO, founding Editor of the European 
Journal of Engineering Education and senior consultant in 
engineering education  and in information management. Jean 
was instrumental in establishing EJEE as a respected journal 
in the international engineering community. In 2007 Prof. 
Michel was selected as one of the fi ve top personalities that 
have marked the information management fi eld in France in 
the last 20 years.
James R. Mihelcic
Dr James R. Mihelcic is a Professor of Civil and Environmental 
Engineering at the University of South Florida where he directs 
the Master’s International Program that allows students to 
combine their graduate engineering education  and  research 
with service in the developing world in partnership with 
the U.S. Peace Corps. James’ teaching and  research interests 
include green engineering,  sustainable development, reform 
of engineering education,  and development issues related to 
water, sanitation and health.
Ian Miles
Professor Ian Miles graduated in psychology from the Univer-
sity of Manchester and is Professor of Technological Innova-
tion and Social Change, Manchester Business School (MBS) 
at the University of Manchester. After working at the  Science 
Policy Research Unit at Sussex University for eighteen years, 
Ian joined PREST (Policy Research in Engineering, Science and 
Technology) in 1990 and is a director of PREST - which has 
now become part of the Manchester Institute of Innovation 
Research within MBS. His particular interests include  foresight 
analysis and service  innovation.
Victor Miranda 
Victor Miranda is an electrical engineer with work experi-
ence in both electrical and  telecommunications engineering. 
He was President of the Association of Professional Engineers 
of Belize and Manager of Integrated Service and Line Plant at 
Belize Telemedia Limited.
Włodzimierz Miszalski
Professor Wlodzimierz Miszalski is computer and electronics 
engineer and Director of the Institute of Organization and 
Management in the Military University of Technology, War-
saw, Poland. Wlod is also a member of the State’s Accreditation 
Committee and was the Chair of the Standing Committee of 
Education and Training of the World Federation of Engineer-
ing Organizations and Chairman of the Committee on  Profes-
sional Development of the Polish Federation of Engineering 
Associations (PFEA).
Mokubung Mokubung
Dr Mokubung Mokubung has a background in economics and 
PhD in  science and technology policy, and is a principal econ-
omist at the  Botswana Technology Centre (BOTEC). BOTEC 
is a  research and technology organization established by the 
 Botswana Government in 1979, and supports the national 
development goals in the application of  research, science and 
technology  innovation, products and services for  economic 
development and improvement of the quality of life in  Bot-
swana in line with the Vision 2016 ideals and National Devel-
opment Plans. 
Jacques Moulot
Dr Moulot has a PhD in  electrical engineering, works for the 
UN Economic Commission for Africa and  was formerly Sen-
ior Programme Specialist for Science and Technology in the 
UNESCO Regional Offi  ce for Science and Technology in Africa 
( ROSTA), based in Nairobi. He has nearly 20 years experience 
in teaching,  research, project development and management 
and policy with the private sector, NGOs and policy makers. 
Before joining UNESCO he served as scientifi c aff airs offi  cer 
and  energy and  energy effi  ciency specialist at UNECA where 
his work involved advocacy and policy for  energy, science, 
technology,  innovation and development issues. He was the 
coordinator of the secretariat of UN-Energy/Africa and  focal 
point of UN-Energy, a UN interagency cluster in  energy in sup-
port of the African Union and its NEPAD programme.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   383 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
384
Johann Mouton
Professor Johann Mouton has a BA, MA and PhD in philoso-
phy (with a thesis on the philosophy of science), and is Direc-
tor of the Centre for Research on Science and Technology and 
Professor in the Department of Sociology and social Anthro-
pology at Stellenbosch University, South Africa.  Johann’s areas 
of specialization include philosophy and methodology of the 
social sciences;  research design and programme evaluation; 
 research management and  research  ethics;  research evaluation 
and science policy.
Solomon Mwangi
Dr Solomon Mwangi is a civil engineer and specialist in appro-
priate  building technologies (ABT). He has over 25 years 
experience developing, promoting and disseminating ABTs in 
developing countries, especially in Africa and  with particular 
reference to post-confl ict, post  disaster situations. Such tech-
nologies include stabilized soil blocks, rammed earth, micro-
concrete roofi ng tiles and ferro-cement technologies. ABTs 
are environmental friendly, create employment and are cost 
eff ective – and therefore most appropriate for applications in 
the developing world. Solomon is also the Managing Director 
of Comac Ltd - a Construction Company based in Nairobi.
Douglas Oakervee
Douglas Oakervee is one of the UK’s most distinguished civil 
engineers with broad international experience in the delivery 
of major projects, including overseeing construction of the 
new Hong Kong International Airport. Doug has been Presi-
dent of the Institution of Civil Engineers in the UK, and in 2008 
was awarded the prestigious ICE Gold Medal in recognition 
of over fi fty years outstanding contribution to the civil engi-
neering profession. He is Executive Chairman of Crossrail - the 
new high frequency, convenient and accessible railway for Lon-
don and the South East, and Chairman of  Engineers Against 
 Poverty.
Gossett Oliver
Professor Gossett Oliver has BSc, MSc and PhD degrees in 
mechanical engineering and is a Professor of Engineering and 
Vice President, School of Graduate Studies, Research and 
Entrepreneurship at the University of Technology, Jamaica 
(UTech). He has lectured in the UK and Nigeria before return-
ing to Jamaica to join the University of Technology, and holds 
the distinction of being the fi rst professor to be appointed 
from within the ranks of faculty at UTech. Professor Oliver is a 
recognized scholar and researcher committed to the promo-
tion of science and technology-based industry in Jamaica, and 
his innovative  research on wear systems, physical and welding 
metallurgy and advanced manufacturing processes includes 
the surface hardening of mild steel using Blue Mountain coff ee 
shells and enhancing the life of sugarcane rollers.
Dr R. K. Pachauri
Rajendra Kumar Pachauri has been the chair of the Intergov-
ernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) since 2002, and 
has also been Director General of Th e Energy and Resources 
Institute (TERI) in New Delhi and Chancellor of TERI Uni-
versity, Chairman of the governing council of the National 
Agro Foundation, Chairman of the board of Columbia Uni-
versity’s International Research Institute for Climate and 
Society and is Head of Yale University’s Climate and Energy 
Institute (YCEI). He has a degree in Mechanical and Electri-
cal Engineering and began his career in diesel locomotives, 
has an MS degree in Industrial Engineering and joint PhD in 
Industrial Engineering and Economics. He represented the 
IPCC when the IPCC was awarded a Nobel Peace Prize jointly 
with Al Gore in 2007.
Beverley Parkin
Beverley Parkin is a public aff airs and  communications special-
ist and the Director of Policy and Public Aff airs at the Royal 
Academy of Engineering, which works to promote excellence 
and increase understanding of engineering. She was previously 
Director of public aff airs and  communications for the Royal 
Pharmaceutical Society.
Stuart Parkinson
Dr Stuart Parkinson has a degree in physics and electronic 
engineering and PhD in mathematical modeling of global  cli-
mate change. Stuart was a researcher on climate and  energy 
policy, and environmental systems analysis at the Centre for 
Environmental Strategy (CES) at the University of Surrey, 
where he became an expert reviewer for the Intergovernmen-
tal Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and provided advice to 
UK negotiators to the UN  climate change convention. With 
an interest in the  ethics of science and technology, Stuart has 
worked for Friends of the Earth coordinating  research and 
policy work highlighting the link between environmental 
problems and social injustice, and became Executive Director 
of Scientists for Global Responsibility, a UK-based campaign 
organization, in 2003.
Waldimir Pirro e Longo
Waldimir Pirro e Longo is an engineering educator in Brazil 
and member of the Pan American Academy of Engineering. In 
honour of his dedication and his achievements in science and 
engineering he was awarded the Medal and Diploma of the 
Great Cross of the National Order of Scientifi c Merit from the 
Government of the Republic of Brazil.
Arvind K Poothia
Commander Poothia is an electronics and telecommunica-
tion engineer, with specialization in law and management, 
and retired Indian Naval Commander. He is presently the Sec-
retary and Director General of the Institution of Engineers, 
India, involved in the areas of  energy, environment and qual-
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   384 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
385
ity engineering, and former Chairman and Managing Director 
of a Government of India Shipyard, Hooghly Docks and Port 
Engineers Ltd.
Krishnamurthy Ramanathan
Dr Krishnamurthy Ramanathan has degrees in mechanical 
engineering, industrial engineering and management and is 
the Head of the Asia and Pacifi c Centre for Transfer of Tech-
nology (APCTT) of the United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for  Asia and the Pacifi c (ESCAP), based in New 
Delhi, India. He is responsible for planning and implementing 
mandated technology  capacity building programmes in the 
Asia-Pacifi c region. He is a Senior Member of the American 
Institute of Industrial Engineers and has professional interests 
in technology management, particularly international transfer 
of technology and management of  innovation. 
Tony Ridley
Professor Ridley, CBE, FREng, FICE, FCIT, has a PhD in  trans-
portation engineering and degrees in civil engineering and is 
Emeritus Professor of Transport Engineering in the Depart-
ment of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Imperial Col-
lege. He was a former Head of the department and Director of 
the University of London Centre for Transport Studies. Tony 
was responsible for the development of a number of urban rail 
systems, including board membership of London Transport, 
Chairman and Chief Executive of London Underground, Man-
aging Director of the Hong Kong Mass Transit Railway Cor-
poration, Director General of the Tyne and Wear Passenger 
Transport Executive and Managing Director of the Eurotunnel 
Project.
Badaoui Rouhban
Dr Badaoui Rouhban has degrees in  disaster and civil engineer-
ing and is Director of the Section for Disaster Reduction in the 
Natural Sciences Sector of UNESCO. Badaoui manages and 
coordinates international activities related to the scientifi c, 
engineering and educational aspects of natural  disaster studies 
and prevention, and is responsible for coordinating UNESCO’s 
contribution to the United Nations International Strategy for 
Disaster Reduction. He is also the UNESCO focal point for the 
United Nations International Strategy for Disaster Reduction.
William C. Salmon
Dr Bill Salmon is a graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology with advanced degrees in mechanical engineering, 
Master degree in management science and is a fellow at the 
MIT Sloan School of Management. Bill is the Secretary Treas-
urer of the International Council of Academies of Engineering 
& Technological Sciences ( CAETS) - an international non-gov-
ernmental assembly of national academies of engineering. He 
previously served as Executive Offi  cer of the National Academy 
of Engineering and was senior advisor for science and technol-
ogy to the Under Secretary for Security Assistance, Science, 
and Technology at the US State Department. Prior to that Bill 
was a practicing engineer, conducting engineering  research for 
the Dynatech Corporation of Cambridge, Massachusetts, and 
the Sloan Automotive Laboratory at MIT.
Andrew Scott
Andrew Scott has a background is in economics and 
has  worked extensively in the social sciences fi eld, focusing 
on concepts relating to science, technology and development, 
small enterprise development, the environment,  sustainable 
development,  climate change adaptation and the develop-
ment impacts of modern new technologies. He is the Director 
of Policy at  Practical Action, established in 1966 by Dr EF Schu-
macher and colleagues as ITDG (the Intermediate Technology 
Development Group) – one of the leading international NGOs 
committed to  poverty reduction, environmental conservation 
and technology choice.
Luiz Scavarda do Carmo
Professor Luiz Carlos Scavarda do Carmo has an  electrical 
engineering degree, MSc and PhD degrees in physics from the 
Pontifi cal Catholic University of Rio de Janeiro – PUC-Rio. He 
is Vice-President for Administrative Aff airs at PUC-Rio, and 
was formerly the Director for Development Projects and Dean 
of the PUC-Rio School of Sciences and Technology. He is also 
Full Professor in the Physics Department of PUC-Rio, a visiting 
scholar of the Politecnico of Bari and the University of Roma 
III, and was a visiting scholar of the Russian Science Academy. 
He was one of the main organizers of the World Engineers’ 
Convention, held in Brazilia in 2008.
David Singleton
David Singleton is a civil engineer, Director and Group Board 
member of Arup Group - the global design, technology and 
management consultancy, chairs the Global Infrastructure 
Business and leads the  Corporate Social Responsibility Portfo-
lio of Arup. He has particular experience in the strategic inte-
gration of professional resources, inception, evaluation and 
planning of major  infrastructure projects and sustainable busi-
ness development. David also has interests in  climate change 
adaptation and mitigation, focusing on the contribution from 
the built environment and poverty alleviation and the role of 
engineering in these areas. He is a member of advisory boards 
related to the built environment and sustainability leadership 
and has previously chaired a number of industry bodies and 
business associations in the built environment. 
Vladimir Sitsev
Dr Vladimir Sitsev is Secretary General of the Russian Union of 
Scientifi c and Engineering Associations (RUSEA) and a mem-
ber of the Executive Council the World Federation of Engineer-
ing Organizations ( WFEO). 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   385 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
386
Jorge Spitalnik
Jorge Spitalnik has degrees in mechanical and nuclear power 
engineering. He is a Vice-President of FEBRAE (the Brazilian 
Federation of Engineering Associations), UPADI (Pan Ameri-
can Union of Engineering Associations) and the World Fed-
eration of Engineering Organizations, and Chair of the  WFEO 
Standing Committee on Energy. Jorge was formerly Deputy 
Manager of Nuclear Technology and Safety Co-ordination 
for Eletronuclear and Superintendent at Nuclear Power Plant 
Engineering in Brazil, Executive Director of UPADI, National 
Director of UNDP/Brazil Project for Manpower Qualifi cation 
and Training, Director of the Nuclear Research Center Project 
at the University of Uruguay, Chair of the International Nuclear 
Societies Council and Chair of the International Nuclear Energy 
Academy.
Catherine Stansbury
Catherine Stansbury is a construction lawyer qualifi ed in both 
England and Hong Kong, and specializes in dispute resolution, 
bribery and fraud. She has a Masters degree from Oxford Uni-
versity and practiced as a lawyer from 1980 to 2002, and was 
involved in numerous major construction projects in China, 
Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand and Sri Lanka 
(including airport, road, bridge, power station, industrial, 
commercial and residential projects). She is a co-founder and 
Director of the Global Infrastructure Anti-Corruption Centre 
(GIACC). 
Neill Stansbury
Neill Stansbury is a lawyer who has worked for over 25 years in 
the international  infrastructure, construction and engineering 
sectors. Since 2002 Neil has worked full time on the develop-
ment and promotion of  anti-corruption measures in these 
sectors. He is co-founder and director of the Global Infrastruc-
ture Anti-Corruption Centre (GIACC), a member of the Stand-
ing Committee on Anti-corruption of the World Federation of 
Engineering Organization and co-founder and co-ordinator of 
the UK Anti-Corruption Forum.
Don Stewart
Professor Don Stewart is Principal Fellow in the Department of 
Civil and Environmental Engineering at the University of Mel-
bourne. Previously he held the posts of Assistant Dean of the 
Faculty of Engineering and Director of the International Devel-
opment Technologies Centre of the University of Melbourne, 
and was Head of the International House at the University. 
Don was one of the founders of the International Develop-
ment Technologies Centre at the University of Melbourne – 
one of the pioneering university departments focused on the 
role of engineering and technology in development.
Mario Telichevsky
Mario Telichevsky is a civil engineer and is the President of 
UADI, the Argentine Union of Associations of Engineers. He 
is also the President of the Central Executive Committee of 
the World Engineering Congress and Exhibition ‘Engineering 
2010-Argentina’ in Buenos Aires in October 2010.
Susan Th omas
Susan Th omas is an Associate Director of Arup in the UK, and 
is the lead researcher on urbanization for the Arup Drivers of 
Change  research-based publication. Th is was developed as a 
planning tool to help Arup and its clients identify and explore 
leading factors that will aff ect our world. Th e publication con-
sists of a series of cards based on themes including  energy, 
waste,  climate change, water, demographics, urbanization and 
poverty. 
Leiataua Tom Tinai
Leiataua Tom Tinai has a degree from the University of New 
South Wales and over 30 experience in civil and structural 
engineering. He is the Vice-President of the Institute of Profes-
sional Engineers in Samoa (IPES), a member of Engineers Aus-
tralia, is the CEO and co-owns Gordon and Associates – a civil 
and structural engineering consulting company in Samoa. Tom 
was also elected the inaugural President of the newly formed 
South Pacifi c Engineers Association or SPEA – established in 
March 2010 with membership from Tonga, Fiji, Vanuatu, Cook 
Islands, Papua New Guinea and Samoa, and strong support 
from  New Zealand and Australia. 
Kalanithy Vairavamoorthy
Professor Vairavamoorthy has a PhD in Environmental and 
Water Resources Engineering, an MSc in Environmental Engi-
neering and degree in Civil Engineering, and is a Chartered 
Engineer and Fellow of the Institution of Civil Engineers (UK). 
Prof. Vairavamoorthy holds the Chair of Water Engineering at 
the University of Birmingham in the UK, a Chair appointment 
at UNESCO-IHE (20%) and at the Technical University of Delft 
(zero-appointment) in the Water Management Group. Prof. 
Vairavamoorthy is the Scientifi c Director of SWITCH, an EU 
Integrated Project for Sustainable Urban Water Management, 
worth €25 million. SWITCH is one of the largest EU  research 
projects in the area of water.
Charles Vest
Charles “Chuck” Vest has BS, MS and PhD degrees in mechani-
cal engineering. He is the President of the National Academy 
of Engineering and was President of MIT from 1990 to 2004. 
Prior to his ascension to the MIT presidency, he served as the 
provost and professor of mechanical engineering at the Uni-
versity of Michigan. His interests include  science, technology 
and  innovation policy, building partnerships between univer-
sities, government and industry, and championing the impor-
tance of open communication and cooperation in science 
and engineering – the MIT OpenCourseWare initiative was 
launched during his tenure, and he co-founded the Alliance 
for Global Sustainability.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   386 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
387
Kevin Wall 
Dr Kevin Wall is a registered civil engineer and town planner, 
and is the manager of Urban Management and Infrastructure 
of the Council for Scientifi c and Industrial Research (CSIR) 
Built Environment in South Africa.  Kevin was the Assistant City 
Engineer responsible for the development of low-cost housing 
areas for the City of Cape Town, and CEO of a non-profi t hous-
ing development company. He is a member of South African 
Planning Institute and Past President of the South African 
Institution of Civil Engineering. Much of his recent work has 
been on policy and strategy formulation and implementation, 
support of service delivery by national government, and on 
eff ectiveness of government spending on  infrastructure.
Iring Wasser
Dr Iring Wasser is the Managing Director of the Accredita-
tion Agency for Degree Programs in Engineering, Informatic/
Computer Science, the Natural Sciences and Mathematics 
(ASIIN) in Germany, CEO of ASIIN Consult, Vice President of 
the European Network for the Accreditation for Engineering 
Education (ENAEE), Vice President of the European Network 
for the Accreditation of Informatics Education (EQANIE) and 
Chairman of the ‘EUR-ACE’ - label committee of ENAEE.
Ron Watermeyer
Ron Watermeyer is a civil and structural engineer and direc-
tor of Soderlund and Schutte, consulting civil and structural 
engineers. Ron has been at the forefront of many develop-
ment initiatives in South Africa  since the early 1990s includ-
ing building regulations, the classifi cation of sites, changing 
construction methods, technologies and practices to facilitate 
socio- economic development and the implementation of a 
construction procurement system. He has developed many 
South African National Standards and is currently developing 
ISO  standards for construction procurement. In 2009 he was 
awarded a Doctor of Engineering from the University of the 
Witwatersrand for his contributions over time to the delivery 
of  infrastructure. He is an associate of the Construction Indus-
try Development Board, a trustee of  Engineers Against Poverty 
and a past president of the South African Institution of Civil 
Engineering. 
Philippe Wauters
Philippe Wauters has BSc and MSc degrees in Electrical Engi-
neering and had a career with Siemens in various functions in 
Belgium and Germany. He has been the Secretary General of 
the European Federation of National Engineering Associations 
(FEANI) since 2000.
Andrew West
Dr Andrew West has a PhD in Microbial Ecology and has a 
career as a researcher and in science management, policy devel-
opment and strategic planning in  New Zealand. He played a 
major role in the Government’s science reforms, including the 
design and establishment of the Ministry of Research, Science 
and Technology and Foundation for Research, Science and 
Technology, Crown Research Institutes and the Crown Com-
pany Monitoring Advisory Unit. He is Chief Executive of AgRe-
search Ltd, former Convenor of the Ministerial Task Group on 
Crown Research Institutes (1991) and former fulltime Chair of 
the Tertiary Education Commission.
Gunnar Westholm
Gunnar Westholm graduated from the Stockholm School of 
Economics in business administration and economics and 
worked for more than 20 years for the OECD  in the Economic 
Analysis and Statistics Division-EASD (and its predecessors), 
Directorate for Science, Technology and Industry (DSTI), 
involved in most aspects of the development of internation-
ally comparable R&D and S&T  statistics and indicators and 
corresponding data collection, analysis, diff usion and policy 
reviews, conferences and training. After early retirement from 
the OECD,  Gunnar maintained close contact with OECD S &T 
indicators services and national experts and consulted to 
national authorities around the world, including Brunei, Swa-
ziland and Lesotho, in the preparation of STI plans, and con-
tributed to major UNESCO reports and conferences, including 
the preparation of an annex for the OECD  Frascati Manual on 
the measurement of R&D in developing countries.
John P Woodcock
Prof John P Woodcock has an MSc and MPhil in physics and 
mathematics, and a PhD on the physics of the circulation from 
Guy’s Hospital Medical School. Prof. Woodcock’s  research 
interests are in medical imaging and physics and the analysis 
of ultrasound Doppler shift data in normal and diseased arter-
ies and veins, and data from malignant tumours. John’s major 
contribution is to the study of the peripheral circulation using 
ultrasound Doppler-shift fl owmeters and ultrasound imaging, 
authoring the  standard work on blood fl ow measurement and 
co-authoring the fi rst monograph on Doppler ultrasound. He 
was Professor of Bioengineering at the Welsh National School 
of Medicine, researches at the Institute of Medical Engineering 
and Medical Physics of Cardiff  School of Engineering and is 
Clinical Director of the Department of Medical Physics and 
Bioengineering at the University Hospital of Wales.
Vladimir Yackovlev
Professor Vladimir Yackovlev has BSc, MSc and PhD degrees 
in civil engineering and is the Vice President of the National 
Academy of Engineering in Venezuela. Dr Yackovlev is a former 
President of the Pan American Academy of Engineering, Coor-
dinator of the Petróleos de Venezuela Educational Programs 
for Corporate Executives, head of the OAS Science and Tech-
nology Division and Professor of Civil Engineering at the Cen-
tral University, Caracas, Venezuela.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   387 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
388
Miguel Angel Yadarola 
Professor Miguel Yadarola graduated as a civil engineer at the 
National University of Cordoba, Argentina, and was Chair and 
Professor Department of Physics (UNC) for forty years, retiring 
as Consulting Professor of the University. He was also Plenary 
Professor University of Belgrano, Buenos Aires, member of the 
National Academy of Education and the Academy of Engineer-
ing Buenos Aires, President of the Pan American Academy of 
Engineering, Vice President of UPADI and Advisor to the Min-
istry of Education (Argentina) for Engineering Accreditation 
Standards, and has received several national and international 
awards. He was a member and chair of the  WFEO Committee 
on Education and Training, and twice National Member of the 
 WFEO Executive Committee. 
Yixin Zhong 
Dr Yixin Zhong is Professor in Information Engineering and 
Academic Committee Chairman of Beijing University of Posts 
and Telecommunications (BUPT) in Beijing, China. He also 
serves as President of Chinese Association for Artifi cial Intelli-
gence (CAAI), Chairman of CAST-UN Consultative Committee 
on IT (CCIT), Vice-President of World Federation of Engineer-
ing Organizations ( WFEO), Chairman of  WFEO Committee on 
Information and  Communication. He was Vice President of 
BUPT (1992-2001), President of Asia-Pacifi c Neural Network 
Assembly (2001-2002), Associate Editor for IEEE Transactions 
on Neural Networks (1993-2005). He has made many contri-
butions to Information Engineering and received a number of 
awards from government and the engineering profession.
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   388 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
389
Acronym Stands for
A&E Architecture and Engineering
AAAE Asian Association for Agricultural Engineering
AAEE American Academy of Environmental Engineers
AAESEE Association of Agricultural Engineering of South 
Eastern  Europe 
ABET Accreditation Board for Engineering and 
Technology (USA)
ABENGE Brazilian Association for the Teaching of 
Engineering
ACEA Association of Consulting Engineers Australia
 ACEC Association of Canadian Engineering Companies
AC Alternating Current
ACP African, Caribbean and Pacifi c Group of States
AEESEAP Association for Engineering Education in 
Southeast, East  Asia and the Pacifi c
AEESP Association of Environmental Engineering 
and Science Professors
AEF African Engineers Forum
ALIA Latin American and Caribbean Association 
of Agricultural Engineering
AMCOST African Ministerial Council on Science and 
Technology
ANIH National Academy of Engineering and the 
Habitat (Venezuela)
ANSTI African Network of Scientifi c and Technological 
Institutions
AOAD Arab Organization for Agricultural 
Development 
APCTT Asian and Pacifi c Centre for Transfer of 
Technology
APEC  Asia Pacifi c Economic Cooperation
APESMA Association of Professional Engineers, Scientists 
and Managers, Australia
 API Pan-American Academy of Engineering
ASABE American Society of Agricultural and Biological 
Engineers 
ASCE American Society of Civil Engineers
ASEAN Association of South East Asian Nations
ASEE American Society for Engineering Education
ASIBEI Ibero-American Association of Institutes of 
Engineering Education
AT Appropriate Technology
ATDA Appropriate Technology Development 
Association
ATPS African Technology Policy Studies Network
AU African Union
AUBES African Union of Biomedical Engineering and 
Sciences
BEST Board of European Students of Technology
BLS Bureau of Labour Statistic (USA)
BOTEC  Botswana Technology Centre
CACEE Chinese Association for Continuing Engineering 
Education
CAE Canadian Academy of Engineering 
CAE Chinese Academy of Engineering
 CAETS International Council of Academies of 
Engineering and Technological Sciences
Cariscience Network of Research and Development and 
Postgraduate Programmes in the Basic Sciences 
in the Caribbean
CAST Chinese Association of Science and Technology
CAST Conference on the Application of Science and 
Technology
CCMAU Crown Company Monitoring and Advisory Unit
CCT Centre for  Communication and Transport 
(Laos)
CDH Career of Doctorate Holders
CEC Commonwealth Engineers Council
CFC Consumption of Fixed Capital
CFES Canadian Federation of Engineering Students
CIGR International Commission of Agricultural 
Engineering
CIV College of Engineers Venezuela
CNEE Cartagena Network of Engineering Education
CNISF National Council of Engineers and Scientists of 
France
List of acronyms abbreviations9.3 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   389 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
390
CONDEFI Council of Deans of Engineering Faculties of 
Chile
CONFEDI Federal Council of Engineering Deans
COP15 Fifteenth Conference of the Parties to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change
CORE Corporate Responsibility Coalition
CREW Career Review of Engineering Women
CRI’s Crown Research Institute
CSEE Chinese Society for Engineering Education
CSR  Corporate Social Responsibility
CST Construction Sector Transparency
CWTS Centre for Science and Technologies Studies 
(Th e Netherlands)
DSIR Department of Scientifi c and Industrial 
Research ( New Zealand)
DST Department of Science and Technology 
(South Africa)
DVT German Association of Technical and Scientifi c 
Associations
E4SD Education for Sustainable Development
EA Engineers Australia
 EAAAE Euro-Asian Association of Agricultural Engineers
EAAP European Association for Animal Production
EAP  Engineers Against Poverty
EATPS Eastern Africa and  Southern Africa  Technology 
Policy Studies Network
EBOPS Extended Balance of Payments Services
ECOSOC Economic and Social Council 
ECSA Engineering Council of South Africa
EESD Engineering Education for Sustainable 
Development
EIC Engineering Institute of Canada
EIT Engineering Institute of Th ailand
EPAs Economic Partnership Agreements
ESPF Economic and Social Performance Framework
ESW  Engineers for a Sustainable World
ETB Engineering and Technology Board (UK) – 
now Engineering UK
EurAgEng European Society of Agricultural Engineers 
Euro-CASE European Council of Applied Sciences, 
Technologies and Engineering
EWB  Engineers Without Borders
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations
FATS Foreign Affi  liates Trade in Services
FCF Fixed Capital Formation
FDI Foreign Direct Investment
FEANI  European Federation of National Engineering 
Associations
FEBRAE Brazilian Federation of Engineering Associations
FEIAP Federation of Engineering Institutions of  Asia 
and the Pacifi c
FEISEAP Federation of Engineering Institutions of 
Southeast  Asia and the Pacifi c
FEPAC Federation of Pan American Engineering 
Consultants
FIACI Federation of Engineering Organizations
 FIDIC International Federation of Consulting Engineers
FIE Fiji Institution of Engineers
FMECA Failure Mode, Eff ects and Criticality Analysis
FRST Foundation of Research in Science and 
Technology
FTA Fault Tree Analysis
FTA Free Trade Agreements
G8 Group of 8 countries
G77 Group of 77 countries
GATS General Agreement on Trade in Services
GDP Gross Domestic Product
GEDC Global Engineering Deans Council
GERD Gross Expenditure on Research and 
Development
GFCF Gross Fixed Capital Formation
GHG Greenhouse Gas
GNP Gross National Product
GRI Government Research Institution
HEMIS Higher Education Management Information 
System (South Africa)
 HIPS Heavily Indebted Poor Countries
HRST Human Resources in Science and Technology
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   390 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
391
IAAMRH International Association of Agricultural 
Medicine and Rural Health
IACET International Association for Continuing 
Education and Training
ICC International Chamber of Commerce
ICE Institution of Civil Engineers (UK)
ICID International Commission on Irrigation and 
Drainage
ICSU International Council of Scientifi c Unions
ICT Information and  Communication Technology
IDP Internally Displaced Person/People
IDS Institute of Development Studies (University 
of Sussex, UK)
IEA International Engineering Agreements
IEAus Institute of Engineers Australia  (‘Engineers 
Australia’ )
IFEES International Federation of Engineering 
Education Societies
IFMBE International Federation for Medical and 
Biological Engineering Sciences in Medicine
IFTDA International Fund for the Technological 
Development of Africa
IGF  Internet Governance Forum
IGIP International Society for Engineering Education
IHL Institution of Higher Learning
IIT Indian Institute of Technology
ILO International Labour Organization
IME  Institution of Mechanical Engineers
IMF International Monetary Fund
INES International Network of Engineers and 
Scientists for Global Responsibility
INES International Network of Engineering Studies
INWES International Network for Women Engineers 
and Scientists
IP  Intellectual Property
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
IPEJ Institution of Professional Engineers Japan
IPENZ Institution of Professional Engineers  New 
Zealand
IPES Institution of Professional Engineers Samoa
ISCED International Standard Classifi cation of 
Education
ISCO International Standard Classifi cation of 
Occupation
ISDR International Strategy for Disaster Relief
ISEL Ibero-American Science and Technology 
Education Consortium
ISES International Solar Energy Society
ISHS International Society for Horticultural Science 
ISIC International Standard Classifi cation of 
Industrial Activities
ISM International Scientifi c Migration
ISO  International Organization for Standardization
ISTRO International Soil Tillage Research Organisation
IT Information Technology
IUFRO International Union of Forest Research 
Organizations
JABEE Japan Accreditation Board for Engineering 
Education
JEA Jordan Engineers Association
JIPSA Joint Initiative for Priority Skills Acquisition
JSCE Japan Society of Civil Engineers
JSEE Japan Society for Engineering Education
KPIs Key Performance Indicators
KSEE Korean Society of Engineering Education
KazSEE Kazakhstan Society of Engineering Education
LACCEI Latin American and Caribbean Consortium of 
Engineering Institutions
LCA Life Cycle Analysis
LCC Life Cycle Cost
LCF Life Cycle Profi t
LED Light-Emitting Diode
MAF Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries ( New 
Zealand)
MEXT Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science 
and Technology (Japan)
MINESPOLs Conference of Ministers of European Member 
States responsible for  Science Policy
MOSTI Ministry of Science and Technology and 
Innovation (Malaysia)
MSMEs Micro, Small and Medium Scale Enterprises
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   391 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
392
NAE National Academy of Engineering (USA)
NACE Statistical Classifi cation of Economic Activities 
in the European Community
NAICS American Industry Classifi cation System
NEPAD New Partnership for Africa’s  Development
NESTI National Experts on Science and Technology 
Indicators
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
NIBE Nigerian Institute for Biomedical Engineering
NIT National Institute of Technology (India)
NSF National Science Foundation (USA)
NSOF Non-Specifi c Output Funding
OECD  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development
OPS Open Pan Sulphitation
PFEA Polish Federation of Engineering Associations
PII Institution of Engineers Indonesia
PLA Participatory Learning and Action
PPP Purchasing Power Parity
PRA Participatory Rural Appraisal
PRSPs Poverty Reduction Strategy Papers
PTD Participatory Technology Development
PV Photovoltaic
R&D Research and Development
RAE Royal Academy of Engineering (UK)
RAEE Russian Association for Engineering Education
RCM Reliability Centred Maintenance
RCTT Regional Centre for Technology Transfer 
(Belarus)
Red-CienciA Network of Research and Development for 
Postgraduates in Science in Central America
Red-POP Network for the Popularization of Science 
and Technology in Latin American and the 
Caribbean
RedR Register of Engineers For Disaster Relief
RIA Russian Engineering Academy
RRA Rapid Rural Appraisal
RS&T Research in Science and Technology
RTS Russian Technical Society
S&T Science and Technology
SADC Southern African Development Community
SAICE South African Institution of Civil Engineering
SAPs Structural Adjustment Programmes
SCJ Science Council of Japan
SEASAE South and East African Society of Agricultural 
Engineering
SEFI European Society for Engineering Education
SET Science, Engineering and Technology
SIC Standard Industrial Classifi cation
SIDBI Small Industries Development Bank of India
SMEs Small and Medium Enterprises
SNA System of National Accounts
SOE’s State Owned Enterprises
SPEA South Pacifi c Engineers Association
SPEED Student Platform for Engineering Education 
Development
SPRU  Science Policy Research Unit (University of 
Sussex, UK)
STAC Science and Technology Advisory Committee
STEM Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics
STEMARN Science and Technology Management Arab 
Regional Network
STEP Science & Technology Expert Panel
STEPAN Science and Technology Policy Asian Network
TBSE Technology Bureau for Small Enterprises
TEDC Turkish Engineering Deans Council
TF10 Task Force Number Ten: Science, Technology 
and Innovation (UN Millennium Project)
TI Transparency International
TPM Total Productive Maintenance
UADI Argentine Union of Associations of Engineers
UIPE Uganda Institute of Professional Property
MDG Millennium Development Goal
UATI Union of International Technical Associations
UN United Nations
UN-CSD United Nations Commission of Sustainable 
Development
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   392 14/09/10   15:35:30
A P P E N D I C E S
393
UNCSTD United Nations Conference on Science and 
Technology for Development
UNCTAD United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development
UNDP United Nations Development Programme
UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme
UNESCAP United Nations Economic and Social 
Commission for  Asia and the Pacifi c
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientifi c and 
Cultural Organization
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development 
Organization
UNISIST United Nations Information System for 
Science and Technology
UNISPAR University-Industry-Science Partnership
UN-SNA United Nations Systems of National Accounts
UPADI Pan American Union of Engineering 
Organizations
USEA International Union of Scientifi c and 
Engineering Public Associations
VDE Association of Electrical, Electronic and 
Information Technologies
VDI Association of German Engineers
VITA Volunteers in Technical Assistance
VSNTO All Union Council of Scientifi c Engineering 
and Technical Societies (Russia)
WAITRO World Association of Industrial and 
Technological Research Organizations
WATPS Western Africa  Technology Policy Studies 
Network
WCCE World Council of Civil Engineers
 WFEO World Federation of Engineering Organizations
 WFEO-CAC World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
Committee on Anti-Corruption
 WFEO-CCB World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
Committee on Capacity Building
 WFEO-CE World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
Committee on Energy
 WFEO-CEE World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
Committee on Engineering and the 
Environment
 WFEO-CET World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
Committee on Education and Training
 WFEO-CIC World Federation of Engineering 
Organizations Committee on Information and 
 Communication
 WFEO-CT World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
Committee on Technology
 WFEO-CWE World Federation of Engineering Organizations 
Committee on Women in Engineering
WHO World Health Organization
WMO World Meteorological Organization
WOIP World Organization for Intellectual Property
WSSD World Summit for Sustainable Development
WTO World Trade Organization
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   393 14/09/10   15:35:30
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
394
Index9.4 
A
accreditation  20, 21, 24, 31, 34, 124, 126, 135, 
136, 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 206, 207, 219, 
220, 222, 228, 243, 259, 308, 309, 312, 315, 
332, 337, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 358, 
360, 361, 363, 364, 365, 379
Africa  3, 19, 20, 34, 35, 36, 40, 42, 47, 64, 70, 81, 
86, 87, 92, 93, 98, 99, 104, 105, 110, 111, 
116, 117, 126, 133, 134, 135, 137, 138, 142, 
150, 151, 152, 157, 158, 160, 161, 173, 175, 
181, 182, 184, 206, 208, 209, 210, 213, 214, 
217, 218, 229, 248, 256, 257, 258, 265, 267, 
275, 277, 278, 280, 281, 283, 300, 301, 302, 
303, 308, 311, 315, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320, 
321, 323, 324, 326, 333, 334, 336, 350, 353, 
355, 361, 362, 365, 370, 375, 376, 377, 381, 
383, 384, 387, 390, 391, 392, 393
Agricultural engineering  25, 132
alternative technology  277, 278
Americas and the Caribbean, engineering in  20, 
31, 136, 227, 308, 360, 361, 379
anti-corruption  19, 70, 163, 184, 192, 193, 194, 
195, 196, 315, 386
APEC Engineer (Asia-Pacifi c Economic 
Cooperation)  20, 31, 136, 227, 308, 360, 
361, 379
appropriate technology  20, 138, 154, 158, 162, 
216, 248, 257, 277, 278, 279, 315, 356
Arab states, engineering in the  19, 83, 89, 95, 
101, 107, 113, 206, 210, 218
Asia and the Pacifi c, engineering in  19, 34, 70, 84, 
90, 96, 102, 108, 114, 137, 146, 147, 149, 
206, 379, 380, 385, 389, 390, 393
asset management and maintenance  295
Australia, case study of engineering in  19, 20, 59, 
60, 61, 70, 75, 77, 78, 79, 82, 88, 94, 100, 
106, 112, 126, 132, 136, 148, 160, 161, 182, 
184, 200, 201, 202, 203, 206, 223, 224, 227, 
228, 229, 248, 258, 275, 277, 278, 295, 300, 
301, 304, 305, 306, 308, 326, 327, 328, 336, 
341, 349, 350, 351, 352, 362, 376, 378, 379, 
380, 381, 382, 386, 389, 390, 391
B
Bologna Accord  20, 33, 308, 363
Botswana, case study of engineering in  20, 86, 
92, 98, 104, 110, 116, 308, 349, 352, 353, 
354, 355, 356, 383, 389
brain drain  20, 207, 215, 222, 243, 308, 310, 311, 
312, 315, 328, 332, 334, 355
building technologies  20, 248, 279, 281, 384
business integrity  70, 196
C
CAETS (International Council of Academies of 
Engineering and Technological Sciences)  
1, 7, 9, 19, 64, 70, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 
240, 368, 385, 389
Canberra Manual (OECD)  70, 74, 75, 76, 79, 174, 
312
capacity building  134, 150, 248, 262, 265, 308, 
381, 385
chemical engineering  25, 128, 129, 131, 183, 209
civil engineering  25, 39, 66, 73, 124, 125, 209, 
321, 381
climate change  3, 5, 7, 8, 16, 17, 19, 20, 21, 26, 30, 
32, 34, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 43, 45, 47, 48, 
49, 50, 52, 54, 56, 59, 61, 62, 64, 71, 126, 
138, 139, 146, 147, 158, 162, 163, 166, 174, 
175, 207, 225, 226, 227, 231, 248, 250, 255, 
256, 258, 259, 260, 261, 262, 266, 267, 268, 
269, 270, 272, 278, 286, 287, 289, 290, 291, 
309, 310, 311, 312, 326, 341, 343, 344, 359, 
368, 370, 376, 377, 379, 384, 385, 386
codes and standards  176
communications  3, 20, 33, 38, 43, 54, 58, 63, 64, 
65, 71, 74, 128, 134, 138, 144, 150, 153, 159, 
162, 163, 199, 213, 226, 227, 228, 236, 237, 
238, 245, 248, 251, 275, 279, 294, 295, 305, 
317, 349, 353, 368, 369, 375, 381, 383, 384, 
388, 389, 391, 393
consulting engineering  8, 70, 140, 141, 142, 143, 
144, 193, 195, 196, 240, 241, 250, 314, 335, 
376, 378
continuing engineering education  20, 308, 309, 
332
cooperation. See international cooperation
corporate social responsibility  50, 385, 390
continuing professional development (CPD)  24, 
136, 146, 207, 318, 329, 330, 331, 332
curricula  32, 126, 128, 147, 152, 166, 169, 198, 
215, 219, 238, 239, 243, 260, 261, 309, 317, 
326, 332, 338, 346, 347, 351, 352, 370, 377
curriculum  20, 36, 148, 153, 162, 178, 187, 199, 
211, 218, 219, 222, 239, 243, 308, 322, 327, 
330, 338, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 
348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 358, 360, 369, 379, 
381
D
disaster  5, 20, 38, 43, 56, 127, 147, 160, 190, 207, 
225, 248, 255, 256, 258, 262, 272, 273, 274, 
275, 276, 277, 294, 295, 299, 309, 315, 345, 
377, 379, 381, 384, 385
E
economic crisis  3, 20, 21, 38, 51, 207, 225, 227, 
258, 272, 278
economic development  7, 9, 19, 28, 30, 32, 39, 
47, 58, 126, 131, 147, 152, 153, 173, 175, 
206, 212, 216, 218, 230, 236, 243, 245, 246, 
248, 255, 256, 259, 264, 265, 266, 278, 294, 
299, 300, 313, 314, 321, 353, 355, 357, 368, 
369, 370, 375, 382, 383, 387
education  3, 7, 16, 19, 20, 24, 25, 27, 28, 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 39, 40, 43, 44, 47, 49, 54, 
55, 56, 59, 62, 64, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 
76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 125, 126, 128, 129, 
131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 140, 
145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 151, 152, 153, 
159, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167, 168, 169, 
170, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 178, 180, 
191, 197, 198, 199, 200, 206, 207, 208, 211, 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   394 14/09/10   15:35:31
A P P E N D I C E S
395
212, 213, 214, 215, 217, 218, 219, 220, 221, 
222, 223, 224, 225, 227, 228, 229, 230, 231, 
232, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 243, 
251, 253, 255, 256, 259, 260, 261, 271, 272, 
274, 276, 279, 289, 294, 299, 301, 302, 303, 
304, 308, 309, 310, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 
317, 319, 320, 322, 325, 327, 329, 330, 331, 
332, 334, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 
344, 345, 346, 347, 348, 349, 350, 351, 352, 
353, 358, 359, 360, 361, 363, 364, 365, 368, 
369, 370, 374, 375, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 
382, 383
electrical engineering  73, 127, 128, 162, 213, 230, 
234, 310, 378, 383, 385
emergencies  20, 38, 62, 127, 207, 248, 255, 256, 
272, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 293, 294
Engineers Mobility Forum (EMF)  361, 379
employment statistics  79
energy  3, 5, 7, 8, 20, 28, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 38, 39, 
40, 41, 42, 44, 45, 46, 48, 49, 51, 54, 56, 57, 
58, 60, 61, 62, 64, 71, 72, 80, 125, 127, 128, 
129, 130, 132, 138, 139, 141, 149, 157, 159, 
161, 162, 166, 167, 171, 174, 176, 177, 189, 
192, 207, 211, 213, 222, 223, 226, 227, 228, 
231, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 241, 243, 246, 
248, 250, 255, 256, 258, 262, 263, 270, 271, 
272, 278, 279, 288, 289, 290, 291, 293, 294, 
298, 299, 300, 303, 305, 310, 311, 312, 313, 
319, 341, 345, 351, 353, 368, 376, 377, 379, 
383, 384, 386
engineering applications  7, 30, 36, 126, 128, 327
engineering ethics  184, 185, 186
engineering, science and technology policy  19, 
70, 382
engineering studies  19, 70, 81, 124, 167, 168, 170, 
185, 208, 218, 242, 308, 309, 318, 370, 378
Engineers Against Poverty  19, 34, 52, 70, 127, 
137, 164, 254, 278, 381, 382, 384, 387, 390
Engineers for a Sustainable World  19, 70, 137, 
166, 377, 390
engineers in government  175
engineers Mobility  20, 31, 136, 228, 308, 360, 
361, 379
Engineers Without Borders  19, 32, 34, 70, 127, 
137, 159, 160, 162, 163, 164, 228, 256, 260, 
261, 278, 315, 381, 390
enrolment  20, 54, 81, 174, 199, 206, 207, 215, 
218, 221, 243, 259, 260, 308, 312, 327, 345, 
350, 368
environmental engineering  26, 131, 189, 209
ethics  19, 24, 27, 43, 46, 65, 70, 124, 136, 152, 153, 
162, 184, 185, 186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 195, 
196, 226, 239, 240, 244, 259, 260, 309, 359, 
375, 378, 384
European Engineer (Eur Ing)  145
Europe, engineering in  19, 31, 33, 54, 78, 81, 82, 
83, 88, 89, 94, 95, 100, 101, 106, 107, 112, 
113, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 126, 132, 
135, 136, 144, 145, 146, 154, 172, 187, 206, 
210, 211, 217, 219, 220, 229, 237, 263, 301, 
308, 310, 332, 341, 347, 348, 358, 359, 363, 
364, 389
Eurostat indicators  70, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 
80, 81, 82, 88, 94, 100, 106, 112, 118, 119, 
120, 121, 122, 123
F
FIDIC (International Federation of Consulting 
Engineers)  1, 8, 9, 19, 20, 70, 137, 138, 140, 
141, 193, 195, 196, 228, 229, 248, 250, 335, 
336, 341, 368, 376, 390
forecasting  54, 55, 294, 313
foresight  19, 54, 55, 383
Frascati Manual (OECD)  70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 
79, 174, 312, 387
G
gender issues in engineering. See women and 
gender issues in engineering
Ghana, case study of engineering in  19, 20, 38, 
86, 92, 98, 104, 110, 116, 135, 206, 208, 209, 
216, 217, 308, 333, 349, 356, 357, 375
H
history of engineering  19, 30, 31, 135, 227
human development  16, 17, 19, 58, 163, 168, 
223, 231, 246, 252, 300, 313, 321, 337, 350, 
368
I
information and communication technologies 
(ICTs)  7, 33, 134, 138, 224, 232, 245, 375
indicators. See statistics and indicators
infrastructure  3, 7, 20, 21, 25, 26, 28, 30, 32, 39, 
40, 41, 42, 44, 46, 47, 48, 51, 52, 57, 58, 59, 
64, 66, 71, 125, 134, 135, 137, 138, 139, 140, 
141, 142, 151, 152, 153, 158, 159, 161, 165, 
168, 172, 175, 176, 177, 192, 193, 194, 200, 
206, 207, 208, 213, 215, 217, 218, 222, 223, 
224, 225, 226, 227, 228, 229, 231, 238, 239, 
241, 242, 243, 245, 248, 250, 251, 252, 253, 
254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 262, 263, 264, 265, 
272, 273, 275, 276, 277, 279, 280, 283, 284, 
285, 286, 287, 288, 291, 293, 294, 295, 296, 
297, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 
306, 311, 312, 313, 314, 315, 316, 317, 318, 
319, 320, 326, 327, 328, 346, 352, 354, 356, 
357, 368, 369, 370, 375, 376, 377, 380, 381, 
385, 386, 387
Infrastructure Report Cards  20, 248, 299, 305
innovation  5, 7, 8, 16, 17, 19, 20, 24, 25, 27, 30, 
31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45, 48, 51, 
52, 54, 55, 56, 63, 64, 67, 74, 77, 126, 130, 
133, 137, 146, 149, 150, 152, 153, 156, 158, 
163, 172, 173, 174, 175, 177, 180, 181, 207, 
208, 212, 213, 214, 216, 220, 221, 222, 224, 
227, 231, 235, 236, 237, 238, 241, 243, 244, 
245, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 264, 272, 
279, 287, 289, 290, 293, 299, 309, 311, 312, 
322, 337, 338, 343, 346, 347, 357, 358, 359, 
368, 369, 370, 375, 376, 377, 378, 382, 383, 
385, 386
international cooperation  19, 37, 70, 127, 132, 
207, 259, 290, 309, 373
M
mechanical engineering  26, 125, 126, 183, 209
medical engineering  19, 70, 134, 135
Millennium Development Goals (and 
internationally-agreed development 
goals)  3, 7, 20, 32, 34, 37, 39, 40, 42, 45, 50, 
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   395 14/09/10   15:35:31
E N G I N E E R I N G :  I S S U E S  C H A L L E N G E S  A N D  O P P O R T U N I T I E S  F O R  D E V E LO PM E N T
396
52, 54, 137, 139, 161, 163, 174, 187, 206, 
248, 250, 251, 255, 257, 259, 261, 264, 284, 
289, 299, 308, 313, 315, 317, 325, 352, 355, 
356, 370
mobility of engineers  20, 227, 240, 308, 314, 358, 
363, 365
N
New Zealand, case study of engineering in  19, 
70, 82, 88, 94, 100, 106, 112, 126, 148, 178, 
179, 180, 181, 184, 228, 229, 277, 315, 336, 
351, 362, 375, 376, 380, 381, 382, 386, 387, 
390, 391
O
OECD  32, 45, 51, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 
79, 80, 81, 82, 88, 94, 100, 106, 112, 118, 
119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 142, 153, 172, 174, 
181, 196, 211, 212, 263, 311, 312, 334, 375, 
387, 392
Oslo Manual (OECD)  75, 79, 174, 312
P
Pacifi c Islands, engineering in the  174
poverty reduction  8, 16, 17, 19, 20, 30, 32, 33, 34, 
35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 50, 51, 54, 154, 156, 158, 
162, 172, 174, 175, 206, 207, 213, 216, 231, 
248, 254, 256, 257, 259, 263, 265, 308, 309, 
313, 319, 352, 356, 359, 368, 370, 375, 385
Practical Action (formerly ITDG)  19, 70, 137, 
154, 157, 158, 278, 356, 385
problem-based learning  20, 32, 260, 308, 369
R
reform and transformation  260
renewable energy  3, 28, 32, 33, 35, 45, 46, 60, 61, 
64, 71, 127, 132, 149, 171, 207, 211, 223, 
258, 263, 290, 291, 311, 312, 353
research  20, 24, 27, 32, 34, 35, 41, 45, 47, 49, 54, 
58, 61, 63, 64, 66, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 78, 
124, 130, 132, 137, 143, 147, 149, 150, 152, 
153, 155, 156, 158, 166, 167, 168, 171, 172, 
173, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181, 182, 184, 
186, 196, 200, 207, 208, 211, 212, 214, 215, 
216, 218, 219, 221, 222, 223, 224, 226, 227, 
228, 235, 236, 237, 238, 239, 243, 244, 246, 
250, 255, 257, 259, 262, 265, 266, 268, 269, 
270, 294, 295, 301, 304, 308, 311, 312, 315, 
317, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 325, 331, 
334, 337, 338, 340, 345, 347, 348, 350, 351, 
352, 353, 354, 355, 356, 357, 369, 373, 375, 
376, 377, 378, 379, 380, 381, 382, 383, 384, 
385, 386, 387
research in engineering  20, 186, 308
research in engineering education  20, 308
S
science and technology policy  19, 32, 70, 71, 
76, 152, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 218, 378, 
382, 383
science policy  173, 374, 383, 391, 392
science, technology and innovation policy  386
social development  152, 165, 175, 255, 266, 315
social responsibility of engineers  30, 127
society  5, 7, 8, 19, 25, 30, 32, 33, 40, 43, 44, 45, 47, 
49, 50, 51, 52, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 71, 72, 124, 
125, 131, 133, 137, 138, 146, 152, 153, 162, 
163, 164, 165, 167, 168, 169, 177, 178, 185, 
186, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191, 192, 195, 211, 
213, 215, 217, 219, 220, 221, 224, 226, 231, 
235, 236, 239, 240, 241, 242, 245, 250, 252, 
254, 257, 260, 263, 264, 268, 269, 271, 274, 
275, 288, 291, 294, 295, 300, 302, 303, 305, 
308, 310, 312, 313, 329, 337, 340, 341, 343, 
347, 348, 349, 355, 358, 359, 363, 370, 379
standards  20, 27, 28, 34, 43, 47, 48, 51, 55, 57, 58, 
65, 66, 72, 75, 77, 124, 125, 134, 135, 138, 
139, 145, 147, 152, 156, 157, 167, 175, 176, 
177, 182, 185, 186, 189, 190, 191, 195, 200, 
206, 207, 213, 214, 216, 219, 221, 225, 228, 
229, 230, 236, 240, 245, 246, 248, 250, 251, 
255, 257, 258, 259, 261, 262, 263, 264, 265, 
266, 272, 276, 280, 281, 283, 287, 290, 292, 
295, 297, 298, 306, 308, 309, 313, 315, 317, 
318, 330, 331, 332, 335, 343, 346, 353, 355, 
358, 360, 361, 363, 364, 365, 375, 387
statistics and indicators  9, 16, 19, 70, 71, 74, 208, 
312, 368, 370, 387
sustainable development  3, 5, 8, 16, 17, 19, 20, 
28, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 45, 47, 48, 49, 
71, 124, 126, 138, 139, 146, 151, 152, 153, 
158, 164, 166, 168, 174, 186, 189, 190, 195, 
206, 207, 208, 212, 213, 223, 226, 231, 241, 
242, 248, 251, 252, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 
263, 264, 265, 274, 278, 289, 290, 291, 297, 
308, 309, 340, 341, 342, 344, 345, 346, 359, 
368, 370, 376, 377, 380, 383, 385
T
technical capacity building  308
technicians  3, 19, 27, 28, 33, 71, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 
124, 134, 135, 148, 168, 185, 207, 210, 212, 
213, 219, 232, 275, 301, 310, 311, 318, 320, 
326, 327, 360, 361, 365
technologists  19, 27, 28, 33, 66, 73, 147, 149, 181, 
207, 252, 301, 310, 311, 318, 320, 327, 334, 
360, 361, 365
telecommunications  31, 42, 44, 51, 57, 80, 126, 
127, 128, 179, 213, 220, 228, 241, 245, 349, 
383
transportation  5, 7, 20, 25, 38, 41, 56, 57, 58, 71, 
125, 134, 139, 166, 192, 207, 223, 226, 237, 
240, 246, 248, 255, 256, 258, 262, 270, 272, 
279, 289, 291, 295, 300, 312, 313, 354, 379, 
385
W
Washington Accord  20, 31, 126, 136, 147, 148, 
222, 227, 228, 229, 243, 308, 360, 361, 362
water supply and sanitation  38, 39, 127, 207, 
248, 255, 256, 279, 284, 285, 287, 313
WFEO (World Federation of Engineering 
Organisations)  1, 7, 9, 17, 18, 19, 20, 34, 
70, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 146, 147, 151, 
189, 228, 230, 244, 259, 299, 308, 309, 313, 
315, 329, 340, 341, 368, 375, 377, 379, 382, 
383, 385, 386, 388, 393
women and gender issues in engineering  19, 33, 
70, 138, 207
1035_ENGINEERING_INT .indd   396 14/09/10   15:35:31


