Latest Trends in Telecommunication Standards
Xavier Costa-Pérez, Andreas Festag, Hans-Joerg Kolbe, Juergen Quittek,
Stefan Schmid, Martin Stiemerling, Joerg Swetina, Hans van der Veen
NEC Laboratories Europe, Heidelberg, Germany
{surname}@neclab.eu
This article is an editorial note submitted to CCR. It has NOT been peer reviewed. The authors take full
responsibility for this article’s technical content. Comments can be posted through CCR Online.
ABSTRACT
Standardization organizations play a major role in the telecom-
munications industry to guarantee interoperability between
vendors and allow for a common ground where all players
can voice their opinion regarding the direction the industry
should follow. In this paper we review the current activities
in some of the most relevant standardization bodies in the
area of communication networks: 3GPP, IEEE 802.11, BBF,
IETF, ONF, ETSI ISG NFV, oneM2M and ETSI TC ITS.
Major innovations being developed in these bodies are sum-
marized describing the most disruptive directions taken and
expected to have a remarkable impact in future networks.
Finally, some trends common among different bodies are
identified covering different dimensions: i) core technology
enhancements, ii) inter-organizations cooperation for con-
vergence, iii) consideration of raising disruptive technical
concepts, and iv) expanding into emerging use cases aiming
at an increase of future market size.
Categories and Subject Descriptors
C.2 [Computer-Communication Networks]: Network
Architecture and Design
Keywords
3GPP, 802.11, BBF, IETF, ONF, NFV, oneM2M and ITS
1. INTRODUCTION
The convergence of communications, computing and me-
dia content is bringing technologies from different industries
together, pushing for the definition of common standards.
Successful standards allow a large number of players to in-
teroperate and innovate resulting in expanding commercial
business, faster technology progress and end users enjoying
wider choice range, richer functionality and lower costs.
In the telecommunications domain, given the complex-
ity of the systems, no single company can cover the en-
tire solution space. Naturally, in this domain standards
for interoperability are a must. Moreover, the increasing
system interdependencies are accelerating the collaboration
between standards development organizations (SDOs) due
to the fixed-mobile networks convergence trend. In parallel
to this, the explosive increase in end user network utiliza-
tion is rising the standards challenges bar, now required to
ensure a satisfactory and coherent user experience across
heterogeneous access networks.
In this paper we will review the trends in some of the most
relevant standardization bodies in the area of communica-
tion networks. Key innovations expected to have a major
impact in future networks will be highlighted. Specifically,
the following organizations will be covered:
• 3GPP The 3rd Generation Partnership Project for
cellular networks.
• IEEE 802.11 for wireless local area networks.
• BBF The Broadband Forum for wireline networks.
• IETF The Internet Engineering Task Force for the
Future Internet.
• ONF The Open Networking Foundation for Software-
Defined Networking (SDN).
• ETSI ISG NFV The industrial specification group
for Network Functions Virtualization (NFV).
• oneM2M for machine-to-machine communication.
• ETSI TC ITS for Intelligent Transportation Sys-
tems.
The set of bodies covered in this article is not to be un-
derstood as an exhaustive list, given the large number of
standardization organizations in the world, but as a repre-
sentative selection of the major ones in their respective areas
according to the perspective of the authors of the article.
2. 3GPP
The 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) [1] is nei-
ther an SDO nor a legal entity, but a collaborative project,
in existence since 1998, between six regional SDOs (ARIB,
ATIS, CCSA, ETSI, TTA, TTC), that has been developing
reports and specifications for cellular technologies including
3.9G (LTE) and 4G (LTE-Advanced). Since LTE-A is a
close evolution of LTE, the term LTE is commonly applied
to LTE-A also and will be used as such in the rest of the
paper.
The work in 3GPP is based on the concept of stages as
defined by ITU Recommendation I.130. Another important
tool is the ”Release” concept, which allows for a stable plat-
form for implementation and introduction of new features
in the marketplace.
Release 11 was frozen in September 2012, with a number
of exceptions still to be completed. For Release 12, Stage
1 was frozen in March 2013 with four exceptions. The plan
for the remainder of Rel-12 is as follows:
• Stage 2 freezing target: December 2013
• Stage 3 freezing target: June 2014
Plans for Release 13 will start to be discussed during 2013.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 64 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013
Figure 1: Illustration of 3GPP’s Architecture Evo-
lution. [Source: 3GPP, 2012]
Selected Work Items
3GPP continuously specifies enhancements and new solu-
tions to help operators to cope with the evolving needs of its
system and users. See Figure 1 for an illustration of 3GPP’s
architecture evolution. In the following a selection of work
items is presented which adress some of these key challenges
by defining new functionality planned to be incorporated in
future releases:
The 3GPPRAN Sharing Enhancements (RSE) Study
Item [3] of the System Architecture Working Group 1 (SA1)
is currently defining new scenarios of multiple operators
sharing network resources. The objective of the RSE Study
Item is to create potential requirements that complement ex-
isting 3GPP system capabilities for sharing common RAN
resources. The new scenarios aim to:
• Provide means to be able to verify that the shared
network elements provide allocated RAN resources ac-
cording to the sharing agreements and/or policies.
• Provide means for efficiently sharing common RAN re-
sources according to identified RAN sharing scenarios
(e.g. pooling of unallocated radio resources).
• Provide means to flexibly, dynamically and automat-
ically allocate RAN resources on-demand at smaller
timescales than the ones supported today.
The paradigm change represented by the 3GPP accep-
tance of automated means to allocate RAN resources dy-
namically and on-demand deserves special mention. This
enhanced functionality opens the door to new industry play-
ers as well as to an evolution of operators’ business models
which could potentiall have a deep impact in the industry
[4].
Proximity based services (ProSe): This study col-
lects use cases and creates a set of potential requirements
for operator network controlled discovery and communica-
tions between UEs that are in proximity, under continuous
network control, and are under 3GPP network coverage, for:
• Commercial/social use
• Network offloading
• Public Safety
• Integration of current infrastructure services, to assure
the consistency of the user experience including reach-
ability and mobility aspects
The communication path can be established directly be-
tween the UEs or routed via local eNB(s). UEs may also
use WLAN for communication. Additionally, the study item
will study use cases and identify potential requirements for
Public Safety, in case of absence of EUTRAN coverage.
Group communications over LTE (GCSE LTE) is
a key functionality of land mobile radio (LMR)/professional
mobile radio (PMR) and public safety systems. Sources of
input requirements are: NPSTC - an organization made
up of all the major public safety organizations in the US,
The Tetra + Critical Communications Association (TCCA)
which is considering LTE for critical communications and
the International Union of Railways (UIC) which is consid-
ering LTE as the basis of the future generation after GSM-R.
Regarding the integration of Single Sign-On (SSO)
frameworks within 3GPP networks, a work item (SSO int)
has been started which covers the following:
• Service requirements for integration of Identity Man-
agement and SSO frameworks, e.g. OpenID
• Service requirements for Operators to enable users to
access 3rd party services using Operator controlled
user credentials
• Service requirements associated with ensuring that the
intended user is making use of the associated SSO ca-
pability (including the case when the UE has been
stolen or lost)
User Plane Congestion Management: In order to
assist operators during traffic peak times, which cause user
plane congestion in the radio access and/or backhaul net-
work, 3GPP has started to evaluate novel mechanisms to
handle the traffic in a way that improves the overall quality
of experience for mobile users and/or allow the system to
admit more active users with an adequate level of service
quality. An important requirement for the management of
user plane congestion is that operators should be able to
flexibly control the mitigation measures through policies in
order to enable service differentiation.
Traffic offloading to WLAN networks: Although ba-
sic support to connect via WLAN based access networks
has been standardized many years ago, current standards
work strives to provide operators efficient control to offload
data traffic to WLANs. A central element in this frame-
work is the Access Network Discovery and Selection Func-
tion (ANDSF), a new control entity that allows operators
to provide (push or pull) access network discovery, selec-
tion and offloading policies to the mobile terminals. Rel-12
work focuses on the coordination of policies provided by the
WLAN access networks directly (e.g. via HotSpot 2.0) and
the ANDSF, and improves the granularity of the traffic of-
fload by supporting policies on the basis of IP flows. 3GPP
is also enhancing WLAN capable mobile terminals and the
network to support new traffic offload modes:
• Non-Seamless WLAN Offload triggers mobile termi-
nals to utilize the WLAN interface for data traffic,
once a WLAN access network is available. This al-
lows traffic offload to the the local WLAN network -
without any mobility support.
• Offload via Trusted WLAN Access Network allows op-
erators to authenticate the subscribers and to tunnel
the offloaded traffic back to the operator core network
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 65 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013
in order to offer subscribers also access to operator-
provided services (e.g. IMS) via the offload network,
and also to support Policy Control and Charging. The
focus of Rel-12 standards work in this area is on pro-
viding seamless mobility support and simultaneous ac-
cess to multiple Packet Data Networks.
Traffic offload to femtocells or small cells networks:
Support for traffic offload from macro cells to femtocells (i.e.
HNBs/HeNBs), in order to reduce macro-cellular network
load, has already been standardized in Rel-10. Ongoing
standards work further enable operators to offload Internet
traffic directly at the femtocells or at a local gateway in a
small cell network in order to reduce the traffic and process-
ing load on backhaul and core network links as well as on
network entities.
With respect to the Radio Access Network, a 3GPP
workshop was held in June 2012 [5] where the following re-
quirements were identified for Release 12 and beyond:
• Capacity increase to cope with traffic explosion
• Energy saving
• Cost efficiency
• Support for diverse application and traffic types
• Higher user experience/data rate
• Backhaul enhancement
In particular, a need for enhanced support for small cells
for LTE was emphasized. To achieve this, the following
technologies would be reviewed:
• Interference coordination / management
• Dynamic TDD
• Enhanced discovery / mobility
• Frequency separation between macro and small cells
with higher frequency band, e.g. 3.5 GHz band, for
the small cells
• Inter site Carrier Aggregation / macro cell assisted
small cells
• Wireless backhaul for small cell
Many players also expressed a clear interest in improving
LTE multi-antenna/site technologies, such as 3D MIMO,
beamforming, CoMP (Coordinated Multi-Point) and sup-
port for diverse data traffic types, such as control signalling
reduction.
After the workshop, the scenarios and requirements for
small cell enhancements were reviewed and approved in Tech-
nical Report TR 36.932 [6]. Subsequently two studies on
small cell enhancements were started, covering physical layer
aspects and higher layer aspects respectively. In parallel,
studies have been started on several other areas identified at
the workshop, such as energy saving, device-to-device prox-
imity services, and a 3D-channel model for elevation beam-
forming and FD-MIMO studies. In addition normative work
has also been started, on downlink-uplink interference man-
agement and traffic adaptation, heterogeneous network mo-
bility enhancements and inter-band and intra-band carrier
aggregation for a number of frequency bands.
3. IEEE 802.11
The IEEE 802.11 standards [7] have developed a mass
market, with an impressive penetration share in homes, of-
fices, hotspots and public areas. Nowadays, many devices
incorporate wireless LAN technology, e.g., laptops, tablets,
mobile phones and media players. With low-cost chipsets
and support for high data rates, 802.11 has become a uni-
versal solution for an ever increasing application space. As
a direct consequence of its high market penetration, several
amendments to the basic 802.11 standard have been devel-
oped in the past years, see e.g., [8, 9], and more are under de-
velopment. Their purpose is to fix technology issues and/or
add missing functionality according to forecasted market de-
mands. See Figure 2 for an illustration of the 802.11 ar-
chitecture. In the following we provide an overview of the
emerging 802.11 future standards driven by several active
Task Groups (TGs)[7]:
• TGm: This group provides maintenance of the IEEE
802.11 standard by rolling published amendments into
revisions of the 802.11 standard.
• TGac: Specifies enhancements to the 802.11 MAC
and PHY to support very high throughput (500-1000
Mbps) in the 5 GHz bands (Expected completion date
Nov. 2013). This specification is the natural substitute
of 802.11n and expected to become ubiquitous in the
future.
• TGad and TGaj: TGad defined standardized modi-
fications to both the 802.11 physical layers (PHY) and
the 802.11 Medium Access Control Layer (MAC) to
enable operation in the 60 GHz frequency band (typi-
cally 57-66 GHz) capable of very high throughput (≥
1 Gb/s). It also enables fast session transfer between
802.11 PHYs. The specification has been completed
and is expected to be published in early 2013. TGaj is
the chinese market specific effort for supporting very
high throughput in the China millimetre-wave bands
including the 59-64 GHz and 45 GHz frequency bands
to enable multi-Gbps throughput at low power.
• TGaf : An amendment that defines modifications to
both the 802.11 physical layers (PHY) and the 802.11
Medium Access Control Layer (MAC) to meet the legal
requirements for channel access and coexistence in the
TV White Space.
• TGah: An amendment that defines operation in Sub
1 GHz frequencies. Supports applications that benefit
from range extension, such as smart grids and M2M
services.
• TGai: An amendment that supports Fast Link Setup,
i.e., to reduce time to set up an association.
• TGaq: Defines mechanisms that assist in pre-association
discovery (PAD) of services by addressing the means
to advertise their existence and enable delivery of in-
formation that describes them.
Based on these activities two major trends can be iden-
tified within the IEEE 802.11 WG. First, most TGs work
on improving the mainstream standard performance.TGac,
TGad and TGaj are aimed at fulfilling the International
Telecommunication Union’s (ITU’s) requirements on pro-
posals for the IMT Advanced standard [10]. They target
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 66 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013
Figure 2: Illustration of the IEEE 802.11 architec-
ture. [Source: IEEE 802.11-2012 Std.]
greater than 1 Gb/s throughput, but while 802.11ac consid-
ers the traditional WLAN frequencies below 6GHz, 802.11ad
and 802.11aj apply to the millimetre-wave bands. In the
TGai and TGaq cases, the aim is to improve the 802.11 link
setup process to connect to APs and reduce the discovery
process overhead such that emerging use cases with an in-
creasing number of access points in range and/or higher user
mobility can be efficiently addressed (e.g., metro stations,
shopping malls).
The second major trend focuses on exploiting additional
frequency bands expected to be made available for 802.11.
Two options are considered in this case: white spaces (TGaf)
and sub 1GHz bands (TGah). The aim of these approaches
is, on the one hand, expand the range available for these
kind of networks and, on the other hand, entering into new
potential markets (e.g., smart meters).
Finally, future 802.11 task groups are usually proposed at
the WNG group. At the moment of writing this article one
Study Group has been formed which may eventually form
a new Task Group: General Link (GLK) which aims at
defining an 802.11 solution to enhance the ability of IEEE
802.11 media to provide internal connections as transit links
within IEEE Std 802.1Q bridged networks.
4. BROADBAND FORUM
The Broadband Forum (BBF) [11] is an industry consor-
tium that was established back in 1994 as the ADSL Fo-
rum. It was later re-named to DSL Forum and finally in
2009, during the merger with the IP/MPLS Forum, became
the BBF. As of today, it consists of approximately 180 ser-
vice providers, vendors, consultants, academic institutes and
test labs. The BBF sees its main tasks in engineering net-
work technology solutions to provide economical and effec-
tive broadband deployments, leveraging its CWPM (CPE
WAN Management Protocol) suite of remote-management
protocols/specifications, and using where possible other ex-
isting standards by profiling them. See Figure 3 for an il-
lustration of the BBF scope.
Having started with technical reports focusing on broad-
band access line technologies, the forum made a significant
step in widening its scope towards network architectures
with the release of the TR-59 and later TR-101 architec-
ture documents, providing a blueprint for building fixed line
broadband access networks ranging from customer premises
Figure 3: Illustration of the Broadband Forum
Scope. [Source: BBF, 2012]
towards the IP edge. Having merged with the IP/MPLS
Forum, the BBF is now able to provide an end-to-end scope
in broadband networks. In the case of home network man-
agement, the BBF made a significant step beyond profiling
standards, by defining its own TR-069 protocol suite and
data models for home network management. Still, the BBF
does not plan to define protocols unless a real gap exists.
The forum as of today is structured in multiple techni-
cal working groups dealing with home networks, end-to-end
architectures, the IP/MPLS and core, metallic transmission
technologies, fibre access and network management. Besides
that, a marketing group disseminates BBF’s work into the
industry and a service provider action council (SPAC) is in
place to drive the directions of the BBF’s work in order to
fulfill the needs of the network operators. Recently, a new
group SIMR (Service Innovation & Market Requirements)
was created to foster long-term planning of new projects.
In theBroadband Home working group, the BBF mainly
addresses the management of home networks to provide ser-
vices beyond simple network connectivity through the resi-
dential gateway (RG). The developed data models are purpose-
built for TR-69 CWMP and are based on requirements col-
lected in TR-124v3 (Functional Requirements for Broad-
band Residential Gateway Devices) for in-home networks.
Assured service delivery for multimedia services such as IPTV
is currently one of the key work items, with a focus towards
measuring performance inside the progressively more com-
plex home networks. Going beyond classical service provider
business, the BBF has started significant work, and is be-
coming one of the key players, in the machine-to-machine
communications (M2M) space. It is currently studying re-
quirements for device management proxies, defining appro-
priate data models to e.g. access sensors and actuators us-
ing various LAN technologies (Zwave, ZigBee, etc). A major
goal is to identify/define means to abstract a set of higher-
level control and signaling commands which are independent
of the devices’ access technology.
The End-to-End (E2E) working group addresses net-
work architectures with a strong focus on dealing with sub-
scribers and session handling, including the transition from
IPv4 to IPv6. The BBF has just finished work on a new net-
work architecture (TR-145) and has moved on to cover the
requirements inside the key network elements in this ecosys-
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 67 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013
tem. In the new architecture, the BBF describes a more
distributed subscriber edge node architecture, de-composing
the former BRAS (Broadband Remote Access Server) into
a BNG (Broadband Network Gateway) and a BSG (Broad-
band Service Gateway). This allows bringing Layer-3 and
MPLS functionality into the access networks.
An important milestone for the BBF was the establish-
ment of a strong collaboration with the 3GPP in the area
of fixed mobile convergence. After finally agreeing on
basic principles of policy control inside the BBF network
(TR-134), the BBF was able to define interworking princi-
ples to interconnect fixed and mobile networks (TR-203).
This provides coherent QoS and charging features for 3GPP
handsets when roaming into fixed line access networks, e.g.
as in the femto cell and WLAN access cases. Current work
items impact interworking and converged scenarios where
a 3GPP PCRF controls also the BBF network. In the
IP/MPLS and Core group, the main work item is on MPLS
for the mobile backhaul (TR-221). This document is being
further developed, now also taking into account evolving
backhaul architectures and transport for supporting small
cells deployments and considerations for applying energy
efficiency technologies. Additionally, IP/MPLS and Core
has published TR-223 on MPLS over Aggregated Interfaces
(MPLSoAI). Currently the working group is finalizing a set
of test suites for MPLS over ATM and MPLS and for Eth-
ernet services over MPLS, while at the same time is work-
ing towards further test suites for MPLS OAM. IP/MPLS
and Core working group are also working closely with MEF
on developing a technical specification for MPLS in Carrier
Ethernet Networks.
Both the Fibre Access Network group as well as the
Metallic Transmission group focus on testing procedures
and plans, certification and energy efficiency driven, e.g., by
the European code of conduct on Energy Consumption of
Broadband Equipment. Both groups interact very closely
with other SDO such as FSAN and the ITU. For GPON,
the BBF has recently launched a certification programme.
In the metallic access space, DSL vectoring is one of the
key topics. Bringing both access types, fibre and copper to-
gether, the BBF has started a big project on FTTdP (Fibre
to the distribution point). In FTTdP, fibre terminates di-
rectly in front of the houses while connectivity over the last
few meters is provided using existing copper lines. This new
technology impacts many BBF groups, including E2E.
Finally, the Operations and Network Management
group deals with managing nodes and CPE equipment in
access networks. The scope of this group includes perfor-
mance testing as well as providing a bridge to OSS/BSS fo-
cused SDO such as the TM Forum. To react more quickly,
or even proactively, according to new trends in the industry,
the newly set up SIMR group deals with new service re-
quirements and will provide business level requirements and
guidance to the focus of the other groups’ technical work.
The SIMR group is currently investigating requirements for
supporting cloud computing on the BBF architecture and is
studying SDN-based use cases for broadband networks.
5. INTERNET ENGINEERING TASK FORCE
The Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) [12] is an or-
ganization that develops standards for the Internet through
the participation of individual contributors in an open pro-
cess. The standards and also further informational docu-
ments are freely accessible on the Internet and so is also the
whole standards process. The probably most known and
used protocols out of the IETF are, for instance, HTTP/1.1 [13]
and the Multiprotocol Label Switching (MPLS) [14]. IETF
protocols are widely used in the public Internet and also
by other standards organizations. Readers interested in the
overall structure are referred to the IETF web page [12] for
detailed information. In the following some IETF selected
trends are introduced.
Probably the most used and known IETF protocol is the
Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) [13] which is
used to carry a variety of different applications on top of it,
for instance, HTML-based web pages. The current HTTP/1.1
specification is now 15 years old and the usage of HTTP has
dramatically changed from the delivery of pure text and pic-
ture web pages, over dynamically web pages to web-based
applications, such as, video conferencing in the browser (see
also later about RTCWEB in that respect). This is the
starting point of the HTTPbis working group [15] that works
on an update of the existing HTTP/1.1 specification to ad-
dress ambiguities as well as on a potential successor that
retains the semantics of HTTP/1.1 but with a different syn-
tax to overcome performance limitations.
IP-based voice and video real-time services are typically
run as hardware devices, e.g., the classical desk phone, or as
software application, e.g., a Voice over IP (VoIP) client on
your computer. However, there are several implementations
of these services in web browsers that implement voice call
or video chat services without requiring a separate software
application to be installed. This type of real-time appli-
cation is commonly called Real-Time Communication
in WEB-browsers (RTCWEB). The World Wide Web
Consortium (W3C) and the RTCWEB working group in the
IETF [16] are jointly developing standards to enable interop-
erable browser-to-browser voice and video calls. The W3C
is taking care of the browser-side required to enable such
a service, while the IETF is in charge of the real-time and
transport protocols being used between the browsers.
The topic of Software Defined Networking (SDN) is dis-
cussed in the IETF for a long time and eventually led to the
creation of a Software Defined Networking Research
Group (SDNRG) activity in the Internet Research Task
Force. The SDNRG explores the space of Software Defined
Networking in terms of programability of networks on all
layers, e.g., forwarding and control planes, changes in the
transport networks, service layers, and the orchestration of
all of these. In parallel, the IETF discusses the creation of
an Interface to the Internet Routing System (I2RS)
working group [17]. The proposed I2RS protocol should al-
low applications to access, install, delete, modify, or learn
about the routing state on classical IP routers. I2RS would
be another candidate for a so-called south-bound interface
between a network controller and a network element. An-
other candidate for such a south-bound interface is Open-
Flow 6, where it should be noted that Openflow access the
flow tables of switches, but not the routing tables.
6. OPEN NETWORKING FOUNDATION
The Open Networking Foundation (ONF) [18] is an indus-
try forum that develops standards for an architecture called
Software-Defined Networking (SDN). The basic principle of
SDN is the separation of control plane and data plane in
routers, switches, and similar devices. Conventionally, the
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 68 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013
fast packet forwarding (data path) and the high level routing
decisions (control path) occur on the same device. Open-
Flow separates these two functions. The data path por-
tion still resides on an OpenFlow switch, while high-level
routing decisions are moved to a separate OpenFlow con-
troller, typically running on a standard server. The Open-
Flow switch and controller communicate via the OpenFlow
protocol, which defines messages, such as packet-received,
send-packet-out, modify-forwarding-table, and get-statistics.
Potential impact of the OpenFlow can be two-fold. It
may change the common packaging of today’s routers where
packet forwarding functions are bundled with routing func-
tions in the same device. Even more importantly, it is tar-
geted at changing the way networks are deployed and oper-
ated. Having the control plane implemented in software on
standard servers enables a much higher innovation rate for
networks. Control functions can be deployed, updated, and
replaced by just managing software in a cloud computing
environment without touching or replacing hardware boxes
that are located where packet forwarding functionality is
needed.
The ONF develops standards needed for realizing this
SDN vision. It standardizes the OpenFlow protocol and
a protocol called OF-CONFIG for managing OpenFlow
capable switches. It creates documents dealing with design-
ing, testing, and operating SDN devices and networks. Be-
yond such guidelines, the ONF produces test specifications
for OpenFlow-capable equipment and specifies an OpenFlow
certification process, that will soon be available. The first
version 1.0 of the OpenFlow protocol was developed at
the Stanford University. Since version 1.1 the ONF is the
home of OpenFlow. After that, the ONF has published ver-
sions 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, and 1.3.1.With each protocol version the
OpenFlow functionality gets extended. The main improve-
ment of version 1.1 was support for MPLS labels. Version
1.2 added support for IPv6 and introduced a more flexible
packet matching and version 1.3 added support for traffic
shaping.
Current work focuses on the modularization and general-
ization of the OpenFlow protocol. Modularization will spec-
ify subsets of OpenFlow functions that can be included or
excluded from different implementations. It also provides a
cleaner way for adding proprietary extensions. The general-
ization will allow for better modeling of particular switch
hardware in the OpenFlow protocol. Version 1.0 is the
most commonly implemented version, oftenly implemented
with proprietary extensions covering features that have been
added to the standard in versions 1.1 and 1.2. Now, Ver-
sion 1.3.1 is expected to become again adopted by many
implementers.
The configuration protocol OF-CONFIG uses the IETF’s
NETCONF protocol for configuring OpenFlow switches, par-
ticularly before they connect to a controller via the Open-
Flow protocol. OF-CONFIG version 1.0 provided the basic
functions, version 1.1 added further capabilities, such as,
for example, configuration of tunnel endpoints. Next steps
in this area will be providing operations, administration and
management (OAM) functions for OpenFlow networks, such
as event notifications, link monitoring, path monitoring, and
topology detection.
7. ETSI ISG NFV
In autumn 2012 a group of telecom operators from Asia,
Europe, and the US announced a new Industrial Specifi-
cation Group (ISG) at the European Telecommunications
Standards Institute (ETSI). The focus of this new ISG is
on Network Functions Virtualization (NFV) [19].
The basic idea of NFV is implementing data plane net-
work functions on top of a virtualization platform consisting
of servers, switches, and storage, which could be located in
data centers, network nodes and end user premises. It is
assumed that all data plane network functions, such as e.g.
a firewall, a carrier-grade NAT, an SGSN/GGSN, a BRAS,
DPI and CDN functions can be virtualized on such a plat-
form.
Operators expect the following benefits from networks
having all data plane functions virtualized:
• Lower cost of equipment
• Improved scalability of network functions
• Reduced cost and power consumption through func-
tion consolidation and sharing of hardware resources
across different functions, services, and customer groups
• Fully remote (zero-touch) deployment of appliances
• Spatial function migration with no or very short ser-
vice interruption
• Shorter innovation cycles
• More open market for virtual appliances than today
for hardware-bound appliances
For achieving these goals, several technical challenges must
be overcome. The obvious first challenge is virtualizing im-
plementations of network functions and providing them with
remote deployment and configuration capabilities. Then,
scale-out and scale in support needs to be added. This can
be difficult for some functions, e.g., firewalls, that need split-
ting of traffic and load balancing when it is scaled up from
a single instance to multiple instances of virtual machines
that jointly implement a single network function. If virtu-
alized functions get relocated from their original location in
the network into a data center, the traffic handled by this
function needs to be re-directed to the instance of the func-
tion in the data center. For some virtualized functions it is
important to trace its location. OAM functions will need to
be extended for providing this new required functionality.
Solving the issues listed above adds a lot of complexity.
For handling it, an orchestration of virtualized functions it-
self and of traffic re-direction is needed.
Work in the new ETSI ISG is not intended to produce
many normative standards, but rather to analyze issues aris-
ing from the introduction of NFV and to give recommenda-
tions and guidelines for designing networks with virtualized
functions. In case the ISG identifies a concrete need for
new standards, e.g., a new protocol, the ISG intends to re-
quest an already established standards body to produce the
needed standard.
The ISG has been founded by operators only, but is open
to other organizations. The kick-off meeting in January 2013
was attended by participants from 52 different companies.
Initially, the ISG created four working groups (WGs) and
two expert groups (EGs) covering cross topics:
• Architecture of Virtualization Infrastructure WG
• Management & Orchestration WG
• Software Architecture WG
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 69 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013
Figure 4: Positioning of the oneM2M standard
• Reliability & Availability WG
• Performance & Portability EG
• Security EG
The ISG plans for a rather short lifetime of 18 months
and for completion of all work items already in 2014.
8. ONEM2M
Today many industries are addressing highly specialized
Machine-to-Machine (M2M) solutions that often need cus-
tomized hardware and software. Such specialized solutions
typically cause high costs, CAPEX as well as OPEX. Thus
there is a strong need to develop a horizontal common M2M
service layer standard that is supporting a large number of
industry verticals and which can foster the development of
a global M2M market.
The oneM2M Global Initiative [20] is a partnership
project, established mid 2012, in order to co-operate in the
production of globally applicable, access-independent M2M
Service Layer specifications related to M2M Solutions. The
common service layer is intended to be embedded within
various hardware and software components to ensure M2M
devices can communicate on a global scale. OneM2M had
been initiated by the seven global telecom SDOs: ARIB,
TTC (Japan); ATIS, TIA (USA); CCSA (China); ETSI (Eu-
rope); and TTA (Korea). Currently, about 220 participating
partners and members are registered. See Figure 4 for an
illustration of the oneM2M positioning.
The main objective of oneM2M is to develop one globally
agreed set of M2M specifications. For this, oneM2M plans
to consolidate current existing M2M service layer standards
activities. OneM2M collaborates with various SDOs and
industry fora in charge of developing vertical market aspects
of M2M applications. More specifically, oneM2M targets on
the following benefits to the M2M ecosystem:
• Boost M2M economies of scale and shorten time-to-
market
• Simplify development of applications
• Leverage a worldwide network for enhanced potential
of services and to expand business opportunities
• Reduce standardization overlap and confusion and pro-
vide ongoing standards support
9. COOPERATIVE ITS
Current directions in Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS)
target at making transport vehicles, in particular cars in
road traffic, cooperate by communication, in contrast to
’sensing’ their environment (e.g. by radar) as in today’s
vehicles. WLAN is particularly considered as a communica-
tion technology for vehicular environments since it enables
a direct and frequent data exchange among vehicles and
between vehicles and roadside infrastructure. To improve
road safety and traffic efficiency a dedicated spectrum in
the 5GHz band has been allocated in the US and Europe
for these applications.
An IEEE 802.11 variant for vehicular communication -
formerly known as amendment IEEE 802.11p, referred
to ’Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments’ (WAVE)
in the US and ’ITS G5’ in Europe - has been developed
and adopted for the US and European road safety systems.
WAVE and ITS-G5 cover the PHY and MAC layers and op-
erate in a dedicated spectrum at the 5.9 GHz frequency band
allocated for road safety-related applications: 75 MHz in 7
channel in the US; 30 MHz in 3 channels for ITS-G5A and
additional channels (G5B and G5C) in Europe. WAVE/ITS
G5 is very similar to the amendments known from IEEE
802.11a. In order to cope with the increase inter-symbol in-
terference in vehicular environments, they have halved the
OFDM timing parameters which result in the 10 MHz chan-
nels and half data rate compared to IEEE 802.11a. Further
extensions include the communication outside the context of
a BSS (OCB), which avoids time-consuming signaling pro-
cedures for direct and rapid data exchange.
In the US, IEEE has developed the 1609 series of stan-
dards, also referred to as Dedicated Short Range Com-
munication (DSRC) [21]. Core of the standard family
is the WAVE Short Message Protocol (WSMP) (Part 3 of
IEEE1609). WSMP is a network protocol that supports
single-hop communication and is optimized for a minimum
size of its packet header. Further parts of the standards de-
fine management activities in part 1, the security protocols
in part 2, and extensions to the physical channel access for
multi-channel operation defined in part 4. On top of the
WSMP, application messages are defined by the SAE 2735
standard. The Basic Safety Message (BSM) is a periodic
message that is carried in the payload of the WSM. Other
messages are for infrastructure communication (MAP for in-
tersection topology, SPAT for signal phase and timing) or
probe vehicle data.
In Europe, ETSI TC ITS [22] and CEN TC 278 de-
velop a series of standards for cooperative ITS [23]. See
Figure 5 for an illustration of the ETSI TC ITS scope. Re-
lying on ITS G5, an ad hoc network layer protocol for single-
hop and multi-hop communication, GeoNetworking (EN 302
636), utilizes geographical positions for communication: (i)
addressing of geographical areas in which a packet should
be distributed, more precisely to address nodes in an area
without using their node identifier and (ii) in the forward-
ing process in order to make the packet routing efficient and
scalable. Application message protocols (ETSI EN 302 637)
are the Cooperative Awareness Message (CAM) for periodic,
single hop messages and the Distributed Environmental No-
tification Message (DENM) for event-driven, multi-hop mes-
sages.
More standards are being developed by other standard-
ization development organizations (SDOs), such as ISO TC
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 70 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013
Figure 5: Illustration of ETSI TC ITS application
area scope. [Source: ETSI, 2012]
204, ITU ARIB, etc. In order to avoid duplicate regional
standards by different SDOs, efforts for harmonization of
standards, in particular between EU and US, are under-
taken. The standards are tested in major field trials to as-
sess the impact of cooperative ITS on safety and traffic effi-
ciency, such as the DRIVE C2X project in Europe and the
Safety Pilot in the US. Market introduction of the system
is expected in the next years by a regulatory decision of the
US DoT in 2013 for the US and based on a Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) signed by the vehicle manufacturers
in the Car-2-Car Communication Consortium, a European
industry consortium, after 2015.
10. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we reviewed the trends in some of the most
relevant standardization bodies in the area of telecommuni-
cation networks: 3GPP for cellular networks, IEEE 802.11
for wireless local area networks, BBF for wireline networks,
IETF for the Future Internet, ONF for software-defined net-
works, ETSI ISG NFV for network functions virtualization,
oneM2M for machine-to-machine communications and ETSI
TC ITS for intelligent transportation systems. Major inno-
vations being developed in these bodies have been summa-
rized describing the most disruptive directions taken and
expected to have a remarkable impact in future networks
roll-out.
In general, some key common trends have been identi-
fied, comprising several bodies within related networking
areas: i) given the forecasted mobile Internet traffic ex-
plosion, wireless technologies are spending most efforts in
dramatically increasing future peak data rates, ii) fixed and
mobile networks market convergence is closely followed by
the standardization organizations to guarantee a successful
interworking by establishing strong collaboration ties , iii)
new disruptive technological concepts as Software-Defined
Networking are seriously considered by the organizations
for future specifications and iv) emerging use cases such
as M2M and ITS, expected to increase the telecommuni-
cations market size, are being accomodated inside and/or
outside existing organizations as required by defining their
own specifications.
11. REFERENCES
[1] Third Generation Partnership Project (3GPP) at
http://www.3gpp.org/
[2] 3GPP Technical Specification Group Services and
System Aspects; Network Sharing; Architecture and
Functional Description. 3GPP TS 23.251, Sep. 2011.
[3] 3GPP System Architecture Working Group 1 (SA1):
RAN Sharing Enhancements Study Item at
http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/Specs/html-info/WiSpec–
540028.htm
[4] 3GPP System Architecture Working Group 1 (SA1),
Use case for On-demand Automated Capacity
Brokering, S1-124050, November, 2012.
[5] 3GPP TSG-RAN Workshop on Release 12 and onward,
Future Radio on 3GPP, June 2012.
[6] 3GPP Technical Specification Group Radio Access
Network; Scenarios and Requirements for Small Cell
Enhancements for E-UTRA. 3GPP TR 36.932, Dec.
2012.
[7] IEEE 802 Working Group 11 at
http://www.ieee802.org/11/
[8] G. Hiertz et al. The 802.11 Universe. IEEE
Communications Magazine, January 2010.
[9] X. Pérez-Costa and D. Camps Mur. IEEE 802.11e QoS
and Power Saving Features: Overview and Analysis of
Combined Performance. IEEE Wireless
Communications Magazine, August 2010.
[10] International Telecommunications Union (ITU),
Requirements Related to Technical Performance for
IMT-Advanced Radio Interface(s), Report M.2134,
November 2008.
[11] The Broadband Forum (BBF) at
http://www.broadband-forum.org/
[12] IETF main page at https://www.ietf.org/
[13] R. Fielding et al., Hypertext Transfer Protocol –
HTTP/1.1, RFC 2616,
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc2616/, June 1999.
[14] E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan, and R. Callon,
Multiprotocol Label Switching Architecture, RFC 3031,
https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc3031/, Jan. 2001.
[15] HTTPbis Working Group Charter at
https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/httpbis/charter/
[16] RTCWEB Working Group Charter at
https://datatracker.ietf.org/wg/rtcweb/charter/
[17] I2RS mailing list,
https://www.ietf.org/mailman/listinfo/i2rs
[18] The Open Network Foundation web page at
http://www.opennetworkingfoundation.org/
[19] ETSI ISG on Network Functions Virtualization (NFV),
http://portal.etsi.org/portal/server.pt/community/NFV/367
[20] The oneM2M Global Initiative at
http://www.onem2m.org/
[21] J. B. Kenney: Dedicated Short range Communications
(DSRC) Standards in the United States, Proceedings of
the IEEE , Vol. 99, No. 7, July 2011
[22] ETSI ITS website: http://www.etsi.org/technologies-
clusters/technologies/intelligent-transport
[23] S. Hess etal.: Towards Standards for Sustainable ITS
in Europe, 16th ITS World Congress and Exhibition,
Stockholm, Sweden, September 2009.
ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 71 Volume 43, Number 2, April 2013

