Confirming Pages
B.1
  Networks and 
 Telecommunications 
 B 
 Introduction 
 Change is everywhere in the information technology domain, but nowhere is 
change more evident and more dramatic than the realm of networks and tele-
communications. Most management information systems today rely on digital 
networks to communicate information in the form of data, graphics, video, and 
voice. Companies large and small from all over the world are using networks 
and the Internet to locate suppliers and buyers, to negotiate contracts with 
them, and to provide bigger, better, and faster services than ever before.  Tele-
communication systems enable the transmission of data over public or pri-
vate networks. A  network is a communications system created by linking two 
or more devices and establishing a standard methodology by which they can 
communicate. The world’s largest and most widely used network is the Internet. 
The Internet is a global “network of networks” that uses universal standards to 
connect millions of different networks around the world. Telecommunication 
systems and networks are traditionally complicated and historically inefficient. 
However, businesses can benefit from today’s network infrastructures that pro-
vide reliable global reach to employees and customers. 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   1 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
Appendix B  Networks and TelecommunicationsB.2
 Network Basics 
 Networks range from small two-computer networks to the biggest network of all, the 
Internet. A network provides two principle benefits: the ability to communicate and the 
ability to share. 
 Today’s corporate digital networks include a combination of local area networks, 
wide area networks, and metropolitan area networks. A  local area network (LAN) is 
designed to connect a group of computers in close proximity to each other such as in 
an office building, a school, or a home. A LAN is useful for sharing resources like files, 
printers, games, or other applications. A LAN in turn often connects to other LANs, and 
to the Internet or wide area networks. A  wide area network (WAN) spans a large geo-
graphic area, such as a state, province or country. WANs often connect multiple smaller 
networks, such as local area networks or metropolitan area networks. The world’s most 
popular WAN is the Internet. A  metropolitan area network (MAN) is a large computer 
network usually spanning a city.  Figure  B.1 highlights the three different types of net-
works, and  Figure B.2 illustrates each network type. 
 Direct data communication links between a company and its suppliers or custom-
ers, or both, have been successfully used to give the company a strategic advantage. The 
SABRE airline reservation system is a classic example of a strategic management infor-
mation system that depends upon communication provided through a network. SABRE 
Airline Solutions pioneered technological advances for the industry in areas such as 
revenue management, pricing, flight scheduling, cargo, flight operations, and crew 
scheduling. In addition, not only did SABRE help invent ecommerce for the travel indus-
try, the company holds claim to progressive solutions that defined—and continue to 
revolutionize—the travel and transportation marketplace. 
 A network typically includes four things (besides the computers themselves):
 1.  Protocol —a set of communication rules to make sure that everyone speaks the same 
language. 
 2.  Network interface card (NIC) —card that plugs into the back (or side) of your com-
puters and lets them send and receive messages from other computers. 
 3.  Cable —the medium to connect all of the computers together. 
 4.  Hub (switch or router) —hardware to perform traffic control. 
 We will continue to define many of these terms and concepts in the sections that 
follow. 
 Networks are differentiated by the following:
 ● Architecture—peer-to-peer, client/server. 
 ● Topology—bus, star, ring, hybrid, wireless. 
 ● Protocols—Ethernet, transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP). 
 ● Media—coaxial, twisted-pair, fiber-optic. 
LEARNING OUTCOMES
 B.1. Compare LANs, WANs, and MANs. 
 B.2. List and describe the four components that differentiate networks. 
 B.3. Compare the two types of network architectures. 
 B.4. Explain topology and the different types found in networks. 
 B.5. Describe TCP/IP along with its primary purpose. 
 B.6. Identify the different media types found in networks. 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   2 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
B.3Networks and Telecommunications  Appendix B
Network Types
Local area network (LAN) Designed to connect a group of computers in close 
proximity to each other such as in an office 
building, a school, or a home. A LAN is useful for 
sharing resources like files, printers, games, or other 
applications. A LAN in turn often connects to other 
LANs, and to the Internet or wide area networks.
Wide area network (WAN) Spans a large geographic area, such as a state, 
province, or country. WANs often connect multiple 
smaller networks, such as local area networks 
(LANs) or metropolitan area networks (MANs).
 Metropolitan area network (MAN) A large computer network usually spanning a city. 
Most colleges, universities, and large companies that 
span a campus use an infrastructure supported by a 
MAN.
figure B.1
Network Types
 figure B.2   LAN, WAN, and MAN 
Network Network
Local Area Network (LAN)
Example : City Library
Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
Example: University Campus
West Campus East Campus
MAN
Network
Wide Area Network (WAN)
Example: Internet
Sydney,  Australia London,  England
Network
Denver,  Colorado Boston,  Massachusetts
WAN
Network
Network
Network
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   3 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
Appendix B  Networks and TelecommunicationsB.4
 Architecture 
 The two primary types of network architectures are peer-to-peer networks and client/
server networks. 
 PEER-TO-PEER NETWORKS 
 A peer-to-peer network (P2P) is a computer network that relies on the computing power 
and bandwidth of the participants in the network rather than a centralized server, as illus-
trated in  Figure B.3 . Each networked computer can allow other computers to access its files 
and use connected printers while it is in use as a workstation without the aid of a server. 
 While Napster may be the most widely known example of a P2P implementation, it 
may also be one of the most narrowly focused since the Napster model takes advantage 
of only one of the many capabilities of P2P computing: file sharing. The technology has 
far broader capabilities, including the sharing of processing, memory, and storage, and 
the supporting of collaboration among vast numbers of distributed computers such as 
grid computing described in Chapter 5. Peer-to-peer computing enables immediate 
interaction among people and computer systems. 1 
 CLIENT/SERVER NETWORKS 
 A  client is a computer designed to request information from a server. A  server is a 
computer dedicated to providing information in response to requests. A  client/server 
network is a model for applications in which the bulk of the back-end processing, such 
as performing a physical search of a database, takes place on a server, while the front-
end processing, which involves communicating with the users, is handled by the clients 
(see  Figure B.4 ). A  network operating system (NOS) is the operating system that runs 
a network, steering information between computers and managing security and users. 
The client/server model has become one of the central ideas of network computing. 
Most business applications written today use the client/server model. 
 A fundamental part of client/server architecture is packet-switching.  Packet-
switching occurs when the sending computer divides a message into a number of effi-
ciently sized units of data called packets, each of which contains the address of the des-
tination computer. Each packet is sent on the network and intercepted by routers. A 
 router is an intelligent connecting device that examines each packet of data it receives 
and then decides which way to send it onward toward its destination. The packets arrive 
at their intended destination, although some may have actually traveled by different 
physical paths, and the receiving computer assembles the packets and delivers the mes-
sage to the appropriate application. 
Connection such
as Internet or Cables
 figure B.3 
 Peer-to-Peer Networks 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   4 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
B.5Networks and Telecommunications  Appendix B
 Topology 
 Networks are assembled according to certain rules. Cables, for example, have to be a 
certain length; each cable strand can support only a certain amount of network traffic. 
A  network topology refers to the geometric arrangement of the actual physical orga-
nization of the computers (and other network devices) in a network. Topologies vary 
depending on cost and functionality.  Figure B.5 highlights the five common topologies 
used in networks, and  Figure B.6 displays each topology. 
 Protocols 
 A  protocol is a standard that specifies the format of data as well as the rules to be fol-
lowed during transmission. Simply put, for one computer (or computer program) to talk 
to another computer (or computer program) they must both be talking the same lan-
guage, and this language is called a protocol. 
 A protocol is based on an agreed-upon and established standard, and this way all 
manufacturers of hardware and software that are using the protocol do so in a similar 
fashion to allow for interoperability.  Interoperability is the capability of two or more 
computer systems to share data and resources, even though they are made by different 
 figure B.4   Client/Server Network 
LAN/MAN/WANNetwork
LAN LAN
Network
Client
Client Server Client Server
Client Client Client Client Client
 figure B.5 
 Five Network Topologies 
Network Topologies
Bus All devices are connected to a central cable, called the bus or backbone. Bus
networks are relatively inexpensive and easy to install for small networks.
Star All devices are connected to a central device, called a hub. Star networks are 
relatively easy to install and manage, but bottlenecks can occur because all data 
must pass through a hub.
Ring All devices are connected to one another in the shape of a closed loop, so that 
each device is connected directly to two other devices, one on either side of it. 
Ring topologies are relatively expensive and difficult to install, but they offer high 
speed and can span large distances.
Hybrid Groups of star-configured workstations are connected to a linear bus backbone 
cable, combining the characteristics of the bus and star topologies.
Wireless Devices are connected by signals between access points and wireless transmitters 
within a limited range. 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   5 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
Appendix B  Networks and TelecommunicationsB.6
manufacturers. The most popular network protocols used are Ethernet and transmission 
control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP). 
 ETHERNET 
 Ethernet is a physical and data layer technology for LAN networking (see  Figure B.7 ). 
Ethernet is the most widely installed LAN access method, originally developed by Xerox 
and then developed further by Xerox, Digital Equipment Corporation, and Intel. When 
it first began to be widely deployed in the 1980s, Ethernet supported a maximum theo-
retical data transfer rate of 10 megabits per second (Mbps). More recently, Fast Ethernet 
has extended traditional Ethernet technology to 100 Mbps peak, and Gigabit Ethernet 
technology extends performance up to 1,000 Mbps. 
 Ethernet is one of the most popular LAN technologies for the following reasons:
 ● Is easy to implement, manage, and maintain. 
 ● Allows low-cost network implementations. 
 ● Provides extensive flexibility for network installation. 
 ● Guarantees interoperability of standards-compliant products, regardless of 
manufacturer. 2 
 TRANSMISSION CONTROL PROTOCOL/ 
INTERNET PROTOCOL 
 The most common telecommunication protocol is transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/IP), which was originally developed by the Department of 
Defense to connect a system of computer networks that became known as the Internet. 
 figure B.6   Network Topologies 
Ring Topology
Star Topology
Bus Topology Hybrid Topology
Wireless Topology
Access
Point
Access
Point
Wireless
LAN/WAN/MAN
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   6 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
B.7Networks and Telecommunications  Appendix B
 Transmission control protocol/Internet protocol (TCP/IP) provides the technical 
foundation for the public Internet as well as for large numbers of private networks. The 
key achievement of TCP/IP is its flexibility with respect to lower-level protocols. TCP/
IP uses a special transmission method that maximizes data transfer and automatically 
adjusts to slower devices and other delays encountered on a network. Although more 
than 100 protocols make up the entire TCP/IP protocol suite, the two most important of 
these are TCP and IP.  TCP provides transport functions, ensuring, among other things, 
that the amount of data received is the same as the amount transmitted.  IP provides the 
addressing and routing mechanism that acts as a postmaster.  Figure B.8 displays TCP/
IP’s four-layer reference model:
 ● Application layer—serves as the window for users and application processes to 
access network services. 
 ● Transport layer—handles end-to-end packet transportation. 
 figure B.7   Ethernet Protocols 
Ethernet
HR DepartmentSales Department
Department Server
Finance Department
Ethernet LAN Diagram
Printers
Router-Firewall
Internet
Applications
Transport TCP
FTP, SMTP, Telnet, HTTP, SNTP
IP
Ethernet, Token Ring, FDDI
Internet
Network Interface
 figure B.8   TCP/IP Four-Layer Reference Model 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   7 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
Appendix B  Networks and TelecommunicationsB.8
 ● Internet layer—formats the data into packets, adds a header containing the packet 
sequence and the address of the receiving device, and specifies the services required 
from the network. 
 ● Network interface layer—places data packets on the network for transmission. 3 
 For a computer to communicate with other computers and Web servers on the Inter-
net, it must have a unique numeric IP address. IP provides the addressing and routing 
mechanism that acts as a postmaster. An IP address is a unique 32-bit number that iden-
tifies the location of a computer on a network. It works like a street address—as a way to 
find out exactly where to deliver information. 
 When IP addressing first came out, everyone thought that there were plenty of 
addresses to cover any need. Theoretically, you could have 4,294,967,296 unique 
addresses. The actual number of available addresses is smaller (somewhere between 3.2 
and 3.3 billion) due to the way that the addresses are separated into classes, and some 
addresses are set aside for multicasting, testing, or other special uses. 4 
 With the explosion of the Internet and the increase in home networks and business 
networks, the number of available IP addresses is simply not enough. The obvious solu-
tion is to redesign the address format to allow for more possible addresses.  Internet 
protocol version 6 (IPv6) is the “next generation” protocol designed to replace the cur-
rent version Internet protocol, IP version 4 (IPv4). However, IPv6 will take several years 
to implement because it requires modification of the entire infrastructure of the Inter-
net. The main change brought by IPv6 is a much larger address space that allows greater 
flexibility in assigning addresses. IPv6 uses a 128-bit addressing scheme that produces 
3.4  ×  10 38 addresses. 5 
 The TCP/IP suite of applications includes five protocols—file transfer, simple mail 
transfer, telnet, hypertext transfer, and simple network management (see  Figures  B.9 
and  B.10 ). 6 
TCP/IP Applications
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) Allows files containing text, programs, graphics, numerical data, 
and so on to be downloaded off or uploaded onto a 
network.
 Simple Mail Transfer Protocol 
(SMTP)
TCP/IP’s own messaging system for email.
Telnet Protocol Provides terminal emulation that allows a personal computer or 
workstation to act as a terminal, or access device, for a server.
 Hypertext Transfer Protocol 
(HTTP)
Allows Web browsers and servers to send and receive Web 
pages.
 Simple Network Management
Protocol (SNMP)
Allows the management of networked nodes to be managed 
from a single point.
 figure B.9 
 TCP/IP Applications 
OSI Model
7. Application
6. Presentation
5. Session
4. Transport
3. Network
2. Data Link
1. Physical
 figure B.10 
 Open System Interconnection 
Model 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   8 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
B.9Networks and Telecommunications  Appendix B
 Media 
 Network transmission media refers to the various types of media used to carry the sig-
nal between computers. When information is sent across the network, it is converted into 
electrical signals. These signals are generated as electromagnetic waves (analog signal-
ing) or as a sequence of voltage pulses (digital signaling). To be sent from one location to 
another, a signal must travel along a physical path. The physical path that is used to carry 
a signal between a signal transmitter and a signal receiver is called the transmission 
media. The two types of transmission media are wire (guided) and wireless (unguided). 
 WIRE MEDIA 
 Wire media are transmission material manufactured so that signals will be confined 
to a narrow path and will behave predictably. The three most commonly used types of 
guided media are (see  Figure B.11 ):
 ● Twisted-pair cable 
 ● Coaxial cable 
 ● Fiber-optic cable 
 Twisted-Pair Cable  Twisted-pair cable refers to a type of cable composed of four 
(or more) copper wires twisted around each other within a plastic sheath. The wires are 
twisted to reduce outside electrical interference. Twisted-pair cables come in shielded 
and unshielded varieties. Shielded cables have a metal shield encasing the wires that 
acts as a ground for electromagnetic interference. Unshielded twisted-pair (UTP) is the 
most popular and is generally the best option for LAN networks. The quality of UTP may 
vary from telephone-grade wire to high-speed cable. The cable has four pairs of wires 
inside the jacket. Each pair is twisted with a different number of twists per inch to help 
eliminate interference from adjacent pairs and other electrical devices. The connectors 
(called RF-45) on twisted-pair cables resemble large telephone connectors. 7 
 Coaxial Cable  Coaxial cable is cable that can carry a wide range of frequencies with 
low signal loss. It consists of a metallic shield with a single wire placed along the center of a 
shield and isolated from the shield by an insulator. Coaxial cable is similar to that used for 
cable television. This type of cable is referred to as coaxial because it contains one copper 
wire (or physical data channel) that carries the signal and is surrounded by another con-
centric physical channel consisting of a wire mesh. The outer channel serves as a ground 
for electrical interference. Because of this grounding feature, several coaxial cables can be 
placed within a single conduit or sheath without significant loss of data integrity. 8 
 Fiber-Optic Cable  Fiber optic (or  optical fiber ) refers to the technology associ-
ated with the transmission of information as light impulses along a glass wire or fiber. 
Fiber-optic cable is the same type used by most telephone companies for long-distance 
service. Fiber-optic cable can transmit data over long distances with little loss in data 
integrity. In addition, because data are transferred as a pulse of light, fiber optical is not 
subject to interference. The light pulses travel through a glass wire or fiber encased in an 
insulating sheath. 9 
 Fiber optic’s increased maximum effective distance comes at a price. Optical fiber is 
more fragile than wire, difficult to split, and labor intensive to install. For these reasons, 
fiber optics is used primarily to transmit data over extended distances where the hard-
ware required to relay the data signal on less expensive media would exceed the cost of 
fiber-optic installation. It is also used where large amounts of data need to be transmit-
ted on a regular basis. 
 WIRELESS MEDIA 
 Wireless media are natural parts of the Earth’s environment that can be used as physi-
cal paths to carry electrical signals. The atmosphere and outer space are examples of 
wireless media that are commonly used to carry these signals. Today, technologies for 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   9 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
Appendix B  Networks and TelecommunicationsB.10
wireless data transmission include microwave transmission, communication satellites, 
(see  Figure B.12 ) mobile phones, personal digital assistants (PDAs), personal computers 
(e.g., laptops),  and mobile data networks. 
 Network signals are transmitted through all media as a type of waveform. When trans-
mitted through wire and cable, the signal is an electrical waveform. When transmitted 
through fiber-optic cable, the signal is a light wave, either visible or infrared light. When 
transmitted through the Earth’s atmosphere, the signal can take the form of waves in the 
radio spectrum, including microwaves, infrared, or visible light. 
 Client B.4 
 Client/server network B.4 
 Coaxial cable B.9 
 Ethernet B.6 
 Fiber optic (or optical fiber) B.9 
 Internet protocol version 6 
(IPv6) B.8 
 Interoperability B.5 
 Local area network (LAN) B.2 
 Metropolitan area network 
(MAN) B.2 
 Network B.1 
 Network operating system 
(NOS) B.4 
 Network topology B.5 
 Network transmission 
media B.9 
 Packet-switching B.4 
 Peer-to-peer (P2P) network B.4 
 Protocol B.5 
 Router B.4 
 Server B.4 
 Telecommunication system B.1 
 Transmission control protocol/
Internet protocol (TCP/
IP) B.7 
 Twisted-pair cable B.9 
 Wide area network (WAN) B.2 
 Wire media B.9 
 Wireless media B.9 
 Key Terms 
 figure B.11   Twisted-Pair, Coaxial Cable, and Fiber-Optic 
Twisted-Pair Cabling
(10Base-T)
Coaxial Cable
Fiber-Optic Cable
Protective outside cover
Jacket
Cladding
Glass fiber core
Protective outside cover
Copper/aluminum mesh
Insulator
Copper center conductorInner, single-wire cover
Copper wire
 figure B.12   Communication Satellite Example 
22,000 miles above
Earth 
Fixed Locations
Satellite Satellite
Portable Communications Vehicles
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   10 11/22/10   7:59 PM
Confirming Pages
B.11Networks and Telecommunications  Appendix B
 Apply Your Knowledge 
 1. Network Analysis 
 Global Manufacturing is considering a new technology application. The company wants to process 
orders in a central location and then assign production to different plants. Each plant will operate its 
own production scheduling and control system. Data on work in process and completed assemblies will 
be transmitted back to the central location that processes orders. At each plant, Global uses personal 
computers that perform routine tasks such as payroll and accounting. The production scheduling and 
control systems will be a package program running on a new computer dedicated to this application. 
 The MIS personnel at Global have retained you as a consultant to help with further analysis. What 
kind of network configuration seems most appropriate? How much bandwidth is needed? What data 
should be collected? Prepare a plan showing the information Global must develop to establish this 
network system. Should Global use a private network or can it accomplish its objectives through the 
Internet? 
 2. Secure Access 
 Organizations that have traditionally maintained private, closed systems have begun to look at the poten-
tial of the Internet as a ready-made network resource. The Internet is inexpensive and globally perva-
sive: Every phone jack is a potential connection. However, the Internet lacks security. What obstacles 
must organizations overcome to allow secure network connections? 
 3. Telecommunications Options 
 Research the telecommunications options that currently exist for you to link to the Internet from where 
you live. Prepare a list of criteria on which to compare the different technologies, such as price (is there 
tiered pricing depending on speed and amount you can download?), start-up cost (do you need to buy 
a special modem, or is there an installation fee), maximum data transfer rate, and so on. Compare your 
responses with several classmates, and then develop a summary of all telecommunications options that 
you identified, including the criteria and your group comparison based on the criteria. 
 4. Frying Your Brains? 
 Radio waves, microwaves, and infrared all belong to the electromagnetic radiation spectrum used. 
These terms reference ranges of radiation frequencies we use every day in our wireless networking 
environments. However, the very word  radiation strikes fear in many people. Cell towers have sprouted 
from fields all along highways. Tall rooftops harbor many more cell stations in cities. Millions of cell 
phone users place microwave transmitters/receivers next to their heads each time they make a call. 
With all this radiation zapping around, should we be concerned? Research the Internet to find out what 
the World Health Organization (WHO) has had to say about this. 
 5. Home Network Experience 
 If you maintain a home computer network (or have set one up in the past), create a document that 
describes the benefits that the network provides along with the difficulties that you have experienced. 
Include in your document a network topology, a detailed description of the type of network you have 
and the equipment you use. If you have no experience with home networking, interview someone who 
does, and write up his or her comments. Compare this with several classmates, and discuss the benefits 
and challenges. 
 6. The Internet Is Almost Full 
 IPv4 has given us a little more than 4 billion possible IP addresses. Although 4 billion may sound like a 
lot, the number of devices connecting to the Internet is exploding! Internet access is now built into smart 
phones, tablets, televisions, DVD players, video game consoles, utility meters, thermostats, appliances, 
and more. There is another problem—large masses of existing addresses were not allocated efficiently, 
and these cannot be easily reclaimed from the corporations, universities, and other organizations that 
initially received them. This means that we are running out of IP addresses. 
 Research the Internet to identify just when IPv6 will roll out. Who is leading the charge for IPv6 roll-
out? What are the main issues for deploying IPv6? Is it backward-compatible with IPv4? 
bal76825_appB_B1-B12.indd   11 11/22/10   7:59 PM

