  1 
 
 
 
 
 
Dental informatics: An emerging biomedical 
informatics discipline 
 
Titus Schleyer, DMD, PhD 
Assoc. Professor and Director, Center for Dental Informatics  
School of Dental Medicine  
University of Pittsburgh  
3501 Terrace Street  
Pittsburgh, PA 15261 
Phone: (412) 648-8886 
Fax: (412) 648-9960 
E-mail: titus@pitt.edu 
 
Corresponding author: same 
 
Address for reprints: same 
 
Support: The development of this manuscript was supported in part by NIDCR/NLM 
award 1R13DE014611-01. 
  2 
Abstract 
Biomedical informatics is a maturing discipline. During the last 40 years, it has 
developed into a research discipline of significant scale and scope. One of its 
subdisciplines, dental informatics, is beginning to emerge as its own entity. While there is 
a growing cadre of trained dental informaticians, dental faculty and administrators in 
general are not very familiar with dental informatics as an area of scientific inquiry. 
Many confuse informatics with information technology (IT), are unaware of its scientific 
methods and principles, and cannot relate dental informatics to biomedical informatics as 
a whole. This paper delineates informatics from information technology, and explains the 
types of scientific questions that dental and other informaticians typically engage in. 
Scientific investigation in informatics centers primarily on model formulation, system 
development, system implementation and the study of effects. Informatics draws its 
scientific methods mainly from information science, computer science, cognitive science 
and telecommunications. Dental informatics shares many types of research questions and 
methods with its parent discipline, biomedical informatics. However, there are 
indications that certain research questions in dental informatics require novel solutions 
that have not yet been developed in other informatics fields. 
Keywords 
Dental informatics, biomedical informatics, research methods, computers, information 
technology, dentistry 
  3 
INTRODUCTION 
The use of digital computers in biomedicine traces its origins closely to the seminal 
events that mark the beginning of the computer revolution. The world’s first 
electromechanical digital computer developed by Konrad Zuse in 1941, Mauchly’s and 
Eckert’s Electronic Numerical Integrator and Calculator (ENIAC) of 1946, the invention 
of the transistor at Bell Labs in 1948, and the development of electronic core memory by 
An Wang in 1949 laid many of the foundations of digital computing as we know it today 
(1). Concurrent with the development of computer hardware, information science, 
computer science and telecommunications evolved as the core research fields 
contributing to the computer revolution.  
 
From those early beginnings, medical problems and applications provided significant 
impetus and stimulus to the development of new principles in computer science and 
information science. For instance, early artificial intelligence systems were pioneered in 
attempts to solve medical problems (2;3). In the 1960s, “informatics” emerged as a 
distinct concept. A. Mikhailov at the Moscow State University first defined the term as 
the discipline that “studies the structure and general properties of scientific information 
and the laws of all processes of scientific communication” (1). The term “medical 
informatics” first appeared in France at the same time, and made its entry into the English 
literature in 1974. Twelve years later, “dental informatics” was first used in a MEDLINE-
indexed publication (4).   
 
Today, dental informatics is a small but growing discipline (5;6). Two NIDCR/NLM-
funded training programs have existed since 1997 (7;8), and the number of formally 
trained dental informaticians is slowly increasing. Several graduates of those training 
programs hold positions at dental schools and the NIH. Some dental journals have 
established sections for informatics, and, at this time, one journal dedicated exclusively to 
dental informatics (the Journal of Computerized Dentistry published by Quintessence 
Publishing Co., Inc.) exists. Dental informatics is represented by working groups and 
sections in several professional societies, such as the American Medical Informatics 
Association and the American Dental Education Association.  
 
Despite these developments, dental faculty and administrators in general are not very 
familiar with dental informatics as an area of scientific inquiry. Many confuse 
informatics with information technology (IT), are unaware of its scientific methods and 
principles, and cannot relate dental informatics to biomedical informatics as a whole. The 
purpose of this paper is to differentiate informatics from IT, explain the types of scientific 
questions that dental informaticians typically engage in, and discuss the research methods 
they use. A deeper understanding of dental informatics will help faculty and 
administrators understand how dental informatics can most effectively help their efforts, 
and how its methods can be exploited to elevate the state-of-the-art in education, research 
and patient care. The paper also presents a global view of biomedical informatics and its 
subdisciplines in order to allow readers to appreciate the context in which dental 
informatics functions.  
  4 
DENTAL INFORMATICS: A RESEARCH DISCIPLINE 
Despite the continuing debate about what exactly constitutes research in biomedical 
informatics (9-12), several authors (11;13) have proposed frameworks for defining such 
research. Friedman has described the tower of science in biomedical informatics (see Fig. 
1), which is somewhat paralleled by a more recent categorization into theory, abstraction 
and design by Maojo (11). 
 
Model formulation, at the lowest level of the tower, is primarily concerned with 
developing theories and abstractions in the biomedical domain. Such models are 
representations of the real world, and can describe objects, concepts or methods. For 
instance, the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), a key part of the MEDLINE database, 
represent objects and concepts, such as diseases and anatomical structures, that 
professionals in biomedicine deal with on a daily basis. Structured collections of terms 
and concepts such as MeSH are often referred to as taxonomies or ontologies. Problem-
solving methods and strategies operate on such terms and concepts. For instance, to 
diagnose diseases in dentistry, we first collect a large number of data, such as pocket 
depths, bleeding indices, restorations, carious lesions, and gingival and mucosal status.  
Then, we combine those signs and symptoms with our knowledge of dental disease in a 
complex problem-solving process to arrive at a diagnosis (2). Various methods to model 
such processes on the computer are available. Bayesian belief networks (14), for instance, 
statistically correlate the presence or absence of findings with the most likely 
corresponding diagnosis or diagnoses. Many other methods, such as neural networks and 
rule-based expert systems, for modeling problem-solving strategies exist. Musen (10) 
considers defining ontologies and problem-solving methods as core research activities in 
biomedical informatics.  
 
Once a model has been formulated, the next step is to develop a computing system that 
implements the model, and allows end users can interact with it. Conceiving and 
programming such systems is a complex task. For instance, translating all information in 
a dental patient record into a format usable on a computer screen has proven to be a 
daunting problem. Designing computer sys tems that integrate with the workflow and 
needs of clinicians is a challenge that has been attempted but not mastered. One may 
justifiably ask why almost every office worker in the U.S. uses Microsoft Word in their 
daily activities, but why only five percent of physicians use of computer-based patient 
records routinely (15). While the number of dentists using computers in their office is 
currently above 85% (16), the number of dentists using computer-based patient records 
(or paperless charts) is believed to be quite low. Maojo et al. (11) and others (9) offer 
some suggestions on why developing computer systems in biomedicine may be less 
tractable than in other domains. The complexity of the information, the fact that the 
human body is largely uncontrollable by humans, environmental issues, and cognitive, 
ethical and emotional aspects are factors that contribute to the difficulty of 
“computerizing” biomedicine.  
 
Once a system has been programmed, it must be installed. While most people would 
regard this step as a minor endeavor, reality tells a different story.  The literature is full of 
single descriptions of elegant and innovative systems that never made it beyond the pilot 
  5 
testing or initial evaluation stage.  For instance, none of the expert systems for 
endodontics, oral radiology, oral pathology and removable prosthodontics that White 
described in a comprehensive review in 1996 (17) are in general use in practice today. In 
order to implement computer systems is successfully, it is essential to understand the 
psychology and cultural traits of individuals, groups and organizations; the workflow; the 
organizational and systems infrastructure; and the available resources. A supporting 
research agenda in informatics focuses on people, organizational, and social issues (18), 
which are becoming more complex as both health care institutions and information 
technologies evolve. Many research methods and approaches in this area are borrowed 
from psychology, social science and anthropology. 
 
Evaluation occupies the top level of Friedman’s  tower. At this level, informaticians 
conduct formal studies to study the effects of implemented systems. Considering the 
potential outcomes of such systems on the health of individuals, groups and populations, 
evaluation is critical.  A rich literature and set of methods (19;20) has developed in this 
area. Research methods in evaluation are often borrowed from those of randomized 
clinical trials.  As such, evaluation studies often are most readily understood by scientists 
from other biomedical fields. 
 
This description of biomedical informatics as a research discipline highlights both 
differences as well as areas of overlap with information technology (6).  While 
informatics is a research discipline aimed at uncovering fundamental principles and 
methods relating to information and computers, information technology (IT) is primarily 
focused on the implementation, application and support of computer technology and 
telecommunications. IT support staff and informaticians are sometimes seen doing the 
same things, such as programming, installing software and providing assistance to users.  
However, the underlying motivation is fundamentally different. The activities of 
informaticians are typically framed by one or more research questions, while IT 
personnel are primarily interested in getting users productive with information 
technology in a specific situation. A lack of understanding of these subtle but 
fundamental distinctions often leads individuals to equate informatics with information 
technology (21). These differences, however, do not preclude close integration and 
cooperation between informatics and information technology. Many commentators see 
such a union as highly beneficial (22), because it allows researchers to test some of their 
theories in practice.  
 
Research questions in informatics tend to be complex and interdisciplinary. It is therefore 
natural that informatics borrows its research methods from a large number of scientific 
fields. In the next section, we discuss the sciences that underpin research in informatics, 
and provide examples of practical applications.   
SCIENTIFIC METHODS IN INFORMATICS 
The scientific methods in informatics come primarily from four research areas: computer 
science, information science, cognitive science and telecommunications. However, many 
other fields, such as social sciences, psychology, anthropology, linguistics, engineering, 
and mathematics also contribute to the scientific basis of informatics. Figure 2 illustrates 
  6 
how a domain area (such as dentistry) combines with one or more component sciences of 
informatics to develop solutions in dental practice, research and education.  
 
Information science (23) is the collection, classification, storage, retrieval, and 
dissemination of recorded knowledge treated both as a pure and as an applied science. 
Information science deals with information, regardless of the medium. While the origins 
of information science predate the advent of computers by almost 100 years, much of 
what is practiced as information science today would cease if not for the computer (24). 
Examples of how advances in information science assist us in our professional activities 
abound.  Large literature databases, such as MEDLINE could not function without 
controlled vocabularies, efficient databases and query interfaces. Information design 
principles (25-27) make complex information more easily understood and analyzed (28). 
Text data mining methods transcend the capabilities of human searchers, and allow us to 
formulate novel hypotheses (29).  
 
Computer science (30) is a discipline that involves the understanding and design of 
computers and computational processes. Here, the emphasis is not on information, but 
how it is represented, processed, manipulated and managed in computing systems. 
Computer science studies and develops data representations, algorithms, programming 
languages, operating systems and computational approaches (such as symbolic 
reasoning). One may assume that advances in computer science occur primarily outside 
of the biomedical informatics domain.  While this is largely true, the attempt to solve 
medical problems has resulted in some unique innovations in computer science.  For 
instance, biomedical informatics research has produced rule-based expert systems (3) and 
domain-specific programming languages (31). 
 
Cognitive science (32) is a research area that draws on several fields (such as psychology, 
artificial intelligence, linguistics, and philosophy) to develop theories of perception, 
thinking and learning. The central hypothesis of cognitive science is that thinking can 
best be understood in terms of representational structures in the mind and computational 
procedures that operate on those structures. Cognitive science relates to information 
science inasmuch we try to understand how information is represented in the human 
mind.  It also relates to computer science, inasmuch we try to simulate our mental 
processes in computing environments.  Biomedicine is replete with complex cognitive 
processes (such as diagnosis, treatment planning and evaluation). It is therefore no 
surprise that cognitive science represents a significant component of biomedical 
informatics research (33).  
 
Finally, telecommunications (34) is the science that deals with communication at a 
distance. Key research issues in telecommunications include how computers 
communicate with each other, how communication traffic is routed, how bandwidth is 
used most efficiently and how communication can be kept secure. Advances in 
telecommunications tend to occur primarily outside of biomedicine. However, sometimes 
biomedical problems provide important stimuli for telecommunications research. For 
instance, the need to transmit digital images efficiently resulted in new approaches to 
image compression and transmission (35). Another example is aggregating information 
  7 
from many different sources, such as information about the same patient from different 
healthcare providers. This (in this country) still hypothetical example requires innovative 
approaches in cataloging, labeling and transmitting patient-related information. 
 
The foundations of biomedical informatics do not rest exclusively on the four scientific 
areas we described. The social sciences and psychology help elucidate the human factor 
in designing and implementing systems, and can provide important clues for why some 
implementations succeed and others fail. Anthropology facilitates the understanding of 
the personal, cultural and contextual environment in health care settings.  Linguistics 
helps to codify and interpret the language of biomedicine, and makes important 
contributions in representation and analysis of the free text commonly used in research, 
education and patient care. Engineering provides global underpinnings for the design of 
systems and devices, regardless of whether they are hardware or software (36). 
 
Biomedical informatics borrows and/or derives its methods, techniques and theories from 
the sciences we have discussed, and vice versa. This methodological foundation is largely 
generic. For instance, ontologies are as useful in medicine as they are in geography, 
botany and philosophy. Neural networks may assist in diagnosing pathologies in 
radiographs, filtering malicious traffic on computer networks or detecting enemy targets 
for military strikes. Datamining techniques can help biomedical researchers find patient 
records with particular clinical events as well as sift historical texts for geographic and 
temporal information.  
 
Yet, the methods come alive for the practitioner, be it a researcher, clinician or educator, 
only in their practical application. As Fig. 3 illustrates, many methods are applicable 
across the continuum of applied informatics disciplines. At the most granular level, 
bioinformatics is concerned with elucidating molecular and cellular processes. Imaging 
informatics is primarily focused on the study of tissues and organs. For the broad domain 
of clinical informatics, the individual patient is at the center of interest. Lastly, public 
health informatics is focused on populations and society. It is important to note that the 
interaction between basic and applied research in informatics is a two-way street. 
Specific problems in the applied area often result in the development of new methods, 
and new methods may offer alternative approaches to solving existing practical problems. 
 
Figure 3 makes also clear that informatics is not equal to bioinformatics. Bioinformatics 
is simply informatics applied to the most granular level of science in biomedicine. While 
bioinformatics has received a tremendous boost through the ongoing decoding of the 
human genome, new insights into structure-function relationships, and the potential to 
prevent or combat diseases beginning at the molecular level, it should be acknowledged 
that neither the subject matter nor the scientific methods used are entirely novel. 
Bioinformatics applies well established informatics approaches, such as datamining, 
machine learning, statistics and artificial intelligence, to achieve its aims. New and/or 
refined methods can emerge from these applications. 
 
Over the years, many subspecializations of biomedical informatics have developed. 
Dental informatics, nursing informatics, pharmacology informatics, pathology 
  8 
informatics and oncology informatics are only a few of them. In the next section, we 
explore how dental informatics relates to its parent discipline. 
DENTAL INFORMATICS AND ITS RELATIONSHIP TO BIOMEDICAL 
INFORMATICS 
How exactly nursing informatics, dental informatics, pathology informatics and other 
disciplines are related to biomedical informatics is subject to an ongoing debate (37). On 
one hand, it is understandable that established professions such as dentistry and nursing 
would like to cla im informatics as part of their domain.  On the other hand, an excessive 
number of boundaries has the danger of balkanizing biomedical informatics as a whole. 
 
It is obvious that the spectrum of research questions ranging from the cellular and 
molecular level to public health is similar in most clinical disciplines. It is also intuitive 
that most informatics methods are more or less broadly applicable across this range of 
research questions.  The differences seem to cluster in the applied domain, where 
discipline-specific solutions are most needed.  To give a practical example, much energy, 
thought and effort has been expended on the development of computer-based patient 
records (38). Many innovations in computerizing medical records, however, have had 
little or no utility for dentistry. For instance, representational schemes and standards for 
clinical data, such as the SNOMED, the Reed Codes, the ICD and HL-7, typically don’t 
represent dental concepts and data very well. Since the representations are not the same, 
computer systems for inputting, storing, managing and analyzing information must 
necessarily differ.  Differences at the systems level, such as the practice setting (which in 
dentistry is heavily weighted towards the solo practitioner model), the distribution of 
generalists and specialists, and reimbursement schemes also tend to limit the 
transferability of theories, methods and applications from one setting to another. 
 
However, despite the fact that many practical problems require discipline-specific 
solutions, broad and interdisciplinary collaboration within the biomedical informatics 
community seems to one of the best ways to develop these solutions.  As inclusive and 
broad communities of researchers, such as the American Medical Informatics 
Association, continue to illustrate, enormous opportunities for cross-fertilization and 
collaboration across health disciplines exist. This spirit is also embodied in the 
philosophies of most biomedical informatics training programs (39-41) that train 
physicians, dentists, nurses, pharmacologists, computer scientists and individuals from 
many other disciplines with curricula that share a common core, but are adapted to the 
needs of specific disciplines. 
CONCLUSION 
The purpose of informatics is to solve practical problems for researchers, practitioners 
and educators. Before informatics can be helpful, however, its “customers” must 
understand exactly what informatics is and what it is not. Unfortunately, the confusion 
about the nature, differences and commonalities of informatics and IT has resulted in 
many misconceptions and false starts. To be truly useful, informatics must be understood 
as what it is: a research discipline aimed at uncovering generalizable principles. With a 
better understanding of its goals and methods, individuals in applied areas will be able to 
  9 
identify more easily how informatics could potentially help them in their own work. 
Conversely, informaticians must learn as much as possible about the research issues and 
problems in the applied areas, so they can target their work at the resolution of real, 
fundamental problems.  
  10 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author thanks Pat Anderson and Heiko Spallek for their helpful comments.
  11 
REFERENCES 
 
 (1)  Collen MF. A history of medical informatics in the United States. First ed. 
Washington, DC: American Medical Informatics Association, 1995. 
 (2)  Ledley RS, Lusted LB. Reasoning foundations of medical diagnosis. Science 
1959; 130:9-21. 
 (3)  Perry CA. Knowledge bases in medicine: a review. Bull Med Libr Assoc 1990; 
78(3):271-282. 
 (4)  Zimmerman JL, Ball MJ, Petroski SP. Computers in dentistry. Dent Clin North 
Am 1986; 30(4):739-43. 
 (5)  Schleyer T. How Should Dental Informatics Evolve? Journal of Dental Education 
1996; 60(3):291-295. 
 (6)  Schleyer T, Spallek H. Dental informatics. A cornerstone of dental practice. J Am 
Dent Assoc 2001; 132(5):605-13. 
 (7)  University of Pittsburgh Center for Dental Informatics. Dental informatics 
postgraduate program [Online].  2000. Available: 
http://di.dental.pitt.edu/programs/pg/.  
 (8)  Columbia University. Columbia University Biomedical Informatics [Online].  
2000. Available: http://www.dmi.columbia.edu/.  
 (9)  Shahar Y. Medical informatics: between science and engineering, between 
academia and industry. Methods Inf Med 2002; 41(1):8-11. 
 (10)  Musen MA. Medical informatics: searching for underlying components. Methods 
Inf Med 2002; 41(1):12-19. 
 (11)  Maojo V, Martin F, Crespo J, Billhardt H. Theory, abstraction and design in 
medical informatics. Methods Inf Med 2002; 41(1):44-50. 
 (12)  Patel VL, Kaufman DR. Science and practice: a case for medical informatics as a 
local science of design. J Am Med Inform Assoc 1998; 5(6):489-492. 
 (13)  Friedman CP. Where's the science in medical informatics? J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 1995; 2(1):65-7. 
 (14)  Montironi R, Whimster WF, Collan Y, Hamilton PW, Thompson D, Bartels PH. 
How to develop and use a Bayesian Belief Network. J Clin Pathol 1996; 
49(3):194-201. 
 (15)  Bates DW, Ebell M, Gotlieb E, Zapp J, Mullins HC. A proposal for electronic 
medical records in U.S. primary care. J Am Med Inform Assoc 2003; 10(1):1-10. 
  12 
 (16)  American Dental Association. 2000 Survey of Current Issues in Dentistry: 
Dentists' Computer Use.  2001. Chicago, IL, ADA 
 (17)  White SC. Decision-support systems in dentistry. J Dent Educ 1996; 60(1):47-63. 
 (18)  Kaplan B, Flatley Brennan P, Dowling AF, Friedman CP, Peel V. Toward an 
Informatics Research Agenda. JAMIA 2001; 8(3):235-241. 
 (19)  Friedman C, Wyatt J. Evaluation methods in medical informatics. New York: 
Springer, 1996. 
 (20)  Friedman CP, Elstein AS, Wolf FM, Murphy GC, Franz TM, Heckerling PS et al. 
Enhancement of clinicians' diagnostic reasoning by computer-based consultation: 
a multisite study of 2 systems. JAMA 1999; 282(19):1851-1856. 
 (21)  Musen M, van Bemmel JH. Challenges for Medical Informatics as an Academic 
Discipline. Methods Inf Med 2002; 41:1-3. 
 (22)  Frisse ME, Musen MA, Slack WV, Stead WW. How should we organize to do 
informatics? Report of the ACMI Debate at the 1997 AMIA Fall Symposium. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc 1998; 5(3):293-304. 
 (23)  Bose H. Information science: principles and practice. Sterling Publishers Private 
Ltd, 1993. 
 (24)  Kochen M. Principles of Information Retrieval. Los Angeles: Melville Pub. Co., 
1974. 
 (25)  Tufte ER. The visual display of quantitative information. 16 ed. Cheshire, 
Connecticut: Graphics Press, 1983. 
 (26)  Tufte ER. Envisioning information. Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press, 1990. 
 (27)  Tufte ER. Visual explanations : images and quantities, evidence and narrative. 
Cheshire, Connecticut: Graphics Press, 1997. 
 (28)  Powsner SM, Tufte ER. Graphical summary of patient status. Lancet 1994; 
344(8919):386-389. 
 (29)  Swanson DR, Smalheiser NR. An interactive system for finding complementary 
literatures: a stimulus to scientific discovery. Artificial Intelligence 1997; 97:183-
203. 
 (30)  Dale N, Lewis J. Computer science illuminated. Boston: Jones & Bartlett 
Publishers, 2002. 
 (31)  Bowie J, Barnett GO. MUMPS--an economical and efficient time-sharing system 
for information management. Comput Programs Biomed 1976; 6(1):11-22. 
  13 
 (32)  Thagard P. Mind: introduction to cognitive science. Boston: MIT Press, 1996. 
 (33)  Patel VL, Kaufman DR. Medical informatics and the science of cognition. J Am 
Med Inform Assoc 1998; 5(6):493-502. 
 (34)  Massey K, Baran S. Introduction to telecommunications. Columbus, OH: 
McGraw-Hill, 2000. 
 (35)  Chang P, Betancourt C, McCurtain B, Lionetti D. The Dynamic Transfer Syntax 
Canvas Viewer: A High Performance and Cost Effective Thin Client for 
Enterprise-wide Lossless Image Distribution, Collaboration and Integration. 85th 
Scientific Assembly and Annual Meeting, RSNA, Chicago, IL, 1999 .  
 (36)  Rindfleisch TC. (Bio)medical informatics in the next decade. J Am Med Inform 
Assoc 1998; 5(5):416-20. 
 (37)  Masys DR, Brennan PF, Ozbolt JG, Corn M, Shortliffe EH. Are medical 
informatics and nursing informatics distinct disciplines? The 1999 ACMI debate. 
J Am Med Inform Assoc 2000; 7(3):304-12. 
 (38)  Dick R, Steen E. The Computer-Based Patient Record. First ed. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press, 1991. 
 (39)  Shortliffe E, Johnson S. Medical informatics training and research at Columbia 
University. Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2002 2002;173-180. 
 (40)  Musen MA. Stanford Medical Informatics: uncommon research, common goals. 
MDComputing 1999;(January/February):47-50. 
 (41)  University of Pittsburgh Center for Biomedical Informatics. Center for 
Biomedical Informatics: The First Four Years.  2001. Pittsburgh, PA, University 
of Pittsburgh. 
  14 
Fig. 1: Tower of science in medical informatics formulated by Friedman (13)(reprinted 
with permission from Hanley&Belfus, Philadelphia, PA) 
 
 
 
 
 
Study 
of  
Effects 
System 
Installation 
System 
Development 
Model 
Formulation 
  15 
Fig. 2: Dental informatics combines two or more of its methodological foundations to 
address problems in practice, research and education. 
 
 
 
 
  16 
Fig. 3: Relationship of basic research in biomedical informatics to the spectrum of 
applications in biomedicine (39) (reprinted with permission from Schattauer Verlag, 
Stuttgart, Germany) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

