Insight Report
The Global Information 
Technology Report 2012
Living in a Hyperconnected World
Soumitra Dutta and Beñat Bilbao-Osorio, editors

Insight Report
The Global Information 
Technology Report 2012
Living in a Hyperconnected World
Soumitra Dutta, INSEAD
Beñat Bilbao-Osorio, World Economic Forum
Editors
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012 is 
a special project within the framework of the World 
Economic Forum’s Centre for Global Competitiveness and 
Performance and the Industry Partnership Programme 
for Information Technology and Telecommunications 
Industries. It is the result of a collaboration between the 
World Economic Forum and INSEAD.
Professor Klaus Schwab,
Executive Chairman, World Economic Forum
Robert Greenhill,
Chief Business Officer, World Economic Forum
EDITORS
Soumitra Dutta, Roland Berger Professor of Business and 
Technology, INSEAD
Beñat Bilbao-Osorio, Associate 
Director, Economist, Centre for Global 
Competitiveness and Performance, World 
Economic Forum
CENTRE FOR GLOBAL COMPETITIVENESS AND  
PERFORMANCE
Jennifer Blanke, Senior Director, Lead 
Economist, Head of the Centre for Global 
Competitiveness and Performance
Ciara Browne, Associate Director
Roberto Crotti, Junior Quantitative Economist
Margareta Drzeniek Hanouz, Director,  
Senior Economist
Thierry Geiger, Associate Director, Economist
Tania Gutknecht, Senior Community Associate
Caroline Ko, Junior Economist
Cecilia Serin, Team Coordinator
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND  
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRIES TEAM
Alan Marcus, Senior Director, Head 
of Information Technology and 
Telecommunications Industries Team
Michelle Barrett, Senior Community 
Associate, Information Technology Industry
Marc Boxser, Head of Partnerships, 
Information Technology Industry, Global 
Leadership Fellow 
Qin He, Partnership Development Manager, 
Telecommunications Industry
William Hoffman, Associate Director, Head of 
Telecommunications Industry
Danil Kerimi, Associate Director, Head of 
Information and Communication Technology 
– Government Community
Jessica Lewis, Senior Team Coordinator, 
Telecommunications Industry
Derek O’Halloran, Community Manager, 
Information Technology Industry, Global 
Leadership Fellow 
Alexandra Shaw, Team Coordinator, 
Information Technology Industry
World Economic Forum
Geneva
Copyright © 2012
by the World Economic Forum and INSEAD.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication can be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted,  
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,  
photocopying, or otherwise without the prior permission  
of the World Economic Forum.
ISBN-10: 92-95044-33-9
ISBN-13: 978-92-95044-33-3
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and 
made from fully managed and sustained forest sources.
Printed and bound in Switzerland by SRO-Kundig, 
Geneva.
Visit The Global Information Technology Report page at 
www.weforum.org/gitr
A special thank you to Hope Steele for her excellent editing 
work and Neil Weinberg for his superb graphic design and 
layout.
The terms country and nation as used in this Report do 
not in all cases refer to a territorial entity that is a state as 
understood by international law and practice. The terms 
cover well-defined, geographically self-contained economic 
areas that may not be states but for which statistical data 
are maintained on a separate and independent basis.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  iii 
Preface .............................................................................v
Robert Greenhill (World Economic Forum)
Foreword ........................................................................vii
Cesare Mainardi (Booz & Company)
Foreword .........................................................................ix
Sun Yafang (Huawei Technologies)
Executive Summary .......................................................xi
Soumitra Dutta (INSEAD) and Beñat Bilbao-Osorio  
(World Economic Forum)
The Networked Readiness Index Rankings ............xxiii
Part 1: The Current Networked Readiness 
Describing a Hyperconnected World
1.1 The Networked Readiness Index 2012: 
Benchmarking ICT Progress and  
Impacts for the Next Decade .................................3
Soumitra Dutta (INSEAD), and Beñat Bilbao-Osorio  
and Thierry Geiger (World Economic Forum)
1.2 The Convergence of Information  
and Communication Technologies  
Gains Momentum ................................................. 35
Ivan Huang, Roc Guo, Harry Xie, and Zhengxiang Wu  
(Huawei Technologies)
1.3 Emerging Issues for our 
Hyperconnected World .........................................47
Phillippa Biggs, with contributions by Toby Johnson,  
Youlia Lozanova, and Nancy Sundberg (ITU)
1.4 Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to  
Create a Sustainable Industry Model .................57
Scott Beardsley, Yavuz Demirci, Luis Enriquez,  
Mehmet Guvendi, Stagg Newman, Sergio Sandoval,  
Malin Strandell-Jansson, Oleg Timchenko, and Wim Torfs 
(McKinsey & Company)
1.5 Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet  
Access and Empowering Individuals ..................67
William Bold and William Davidson (Qualcomm)
1.6 Reaching the Third Billion:  
Arriving at Affordable Broadband to  
Stimulate Economic Transformation  
in Emerging Markets .............................................79
Chris S. Thomas and Frederico Carvalho  
(Intel Corporation)
1.7 Harnessing the Power of Big  
Data in Real Time through In-Memory  
Technology and Analytics ................................... 89
SAP AG
1.8 The Wisdom of the Cloud:  
Hyperconnectivity, Big Data, and  
Real-Time Analytics ..............................................97
Mikael Hagström and Neena Gill (SAS)
1.9 On the Value of Digital Traces for  
Commercial Strategy and Public  
Policy: Telecommunications Data as a  
Case Study ...........................................................105
Rob Claxton (British Telecommunications plc), Jon  
Reades (Center for Advanced Spatial Analysis, University 
College London), and Ben Anderson (Centre for Research 
in Economic Sociology and Innovation, University of Essex, 
Colchester)
1.10 The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity  
for Organizations and Societies ........................113
John Fredette, Revital Marom, Kurt Steinert, and  
Louis Witters (Alcatel-Lucent)
1.11 Maximizing the Impact of Digitization ..............121
Karim Sabbagh, Roman Friedrich, Bahjat El-Darwiche,  
Milind Singh, and Sandeep Ganediwalla (Booz & Company)  
and Raul Katz (Telecom Advisory Services LLC)
1.12 Trusting the Unknown: The Effects of  
Technology Use in Education ............................135
Francesc Pedró (UNESCO)
Part 2: Case Studies of Leveraging ICT for 
Competitiveness and Well-Being
2.1 Big Ambitions in a Rapidly Changing  
World: Azerbaijan ................................................149
Rasim Aliguliyev (Information Technology Institute,  
Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences) and Galib  
Gurbanov (Azerbaijan Internet Society)
2.2 The Making of a Digital Nation:  
Toward i-Mauritius ...............................................161
Krishna Oolun (Information & Communications  
Technologies Authority), Suraj Ramgolam (National  
Computer Board), and Vasenden Dorasami (Ministry of 
Information and Communication Technology)
Contents
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Part 3: Country/Economy Profiles
How to Read the Country/Economy Profiles ...................... 171
Index of Countries/Economies ........................................... 173
Country/Economy Profiles .................................................. 174
Part 4: Data Tables
How to Read the Data Tables ............................................ 319
Index of Data Tables .......................................................... 321
Data Tables ........................................................................ 323
Technical Notes and Sources ................................... 389
About the Authors ...................................................... 395
List of Partner Institutes ............................................ 405
Acknowledgments ......................................................413
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  v 
Over the past decade, the world has become increas-
ingly hyperconnected. We live in an environment where 
the Internet and its associated services are accessible 
and immediate, where people and businesses can com-
municate with each other instantly, and where machines 
are equally interconnected with each other. This hyper-
connectivity is deeply redefining relationships between 
individuals, consumers and enterprises, and citizens and 
governments; it is introducing new opportunities but also 
new challenges and risks in terms of individual rights and 
privacy, security, cybercrime, the flow of personal data, 
and access to information. As a result, our economies 
and societies will undergo fundamental transformations.
Mastering and leveraging these transformations to 
maximize the positive impacts and increase resilience 
against the risks that ICT can bring to the economy, 
society, environment, and healthcare are crucial for 
boosting economic competitiveness and well-being. The 
present edition of The Global Information Technology 
Report (GITR) analyzes in detail the main drivers and 
impacts of this ICT-enabled hyperconnected world and 
contributes to the work of the World Economic Forum’s 
recently launched Hyperconnected World Initiative, which 
establishes a holistic means of understanding the sys-
temic nature of change in a hyperconnected world.
The GITR series has been published by the World 
Economic Forum in partnership with INSEAD since 
2002, accompanying and monitoring ICT advances over 
the last decade as well as raising awareness of the im-
portance of ICT diffusion and usage for long-term com-
petitiveness and societal well-being. Through the lens of 
the Networked Readiness Index (NRI), the driving factors 
and impacts of networked readiness and ICT leveraging 
have been identified, highlighting the joint responsibility 
of all social actors—individuals, businesses, and govern-
ments. Over time, the series has become one of the 
most respected studies of its kind. It has been exten-
sively used by policymakers and relevant stakeholders 
as a unique tool to identify strengths on which to build 
and weaknesses that need to be addressed in national 
strategies for enhanced networked readiness.
The Global Information Technology Report 2012 
features the latest results of the NRI, offering an over-
view of the current state of ICT readiness in the world. 
This year’s coverage includes a record number of 142 
economies from both the developing and developed 
world, accounting for over 98 percent of global GDP. A 
number of essays and case studies on living in a hyper-
connected world as well as policy case studies on de-
veloping ICT are featured in the Report, together with a 
comprehensive data section—including detailed profiles 
for each economy covered and data tables with global 
rankings for the NRI’s 53 indicators.
We would like to convey our sincere gratitude to the 
industry and international organizations’ experts who 
contributed outstanding chapters exploring the drivers 
and impacts of living in hyperconnected world to this 
Report, as well as to policy analysts for providing their 
valuable insights in the policy case studies. We espe-
cially wish to thank the editors of the Report, Soumitra 
Dutta at INSEAD and Beñat Bilbao-Osorio at the World 
Economic Forum, for their leadership in this project, 
together with the other members of the GITR team: 
Roberto Crotti, Thierry Geiger, Danil Kerimi, and Derek 
O’Halloran. Appreciation also goes to Alan Marcus, Head 
of Information Technology and Telecommunications 
Industries, and Jennifer Blanke, Head of the Centre for 
Global Competitiveness and Performance, as well as 
her team: Ciara Browne, Margareta Drzeniek Hanouz, 
Tania Gutknecht, Caroline Ko, and Cecilia Serin. Last 
but not least, we would like to express our gratitude to 
our network of 150 Partner Institutes around the world 
and to all the business executives who participated in 
our Executive Opinion Survey. Without their valuable 
input, the production of this Report would not have been 
possible.
Preface
ROBERT GREENHILL
Chief Business Officer, World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  vii 
In 2001, when the World Economic Forum first published 
The Global Information and Technology Report (GITR), 
the dot-com bubble had just burst; there were fewer than 
20 million mobile phone users in all of Africa; and Apple 
Inc.’s product line was confined to Macintosh computers. 
That Report presented an optimistic view of the future, 
highlighting the transformational potential of information 
and communication technologies (ICT) in advancing the 
progress of global society and business. In the decade 
that followed, Booz & Company has witnessed firsthand 
the realization of that potential in its work with clients and 
communities worldwide and through its long-standing 
involvement with the GITR. Today there are more than 
500 million mobile phone subscribers in Africa, and 
Apple is the world’s largest company in market capital-
ization, producing iPhones, iPods, and iPads along with 
Mac computers. Despite the strides the sector has made 
since the technology bust in 2001, however, we believe 
we are only just beginning to feel the impact of digitiza-
tion—the mass adoption by consumers, businesses, and 
governments of smart and connected ICT.
Success in the digitization world—where competi-
tors from Shenzhen to Schengen can emerge seemingly 
overnight—requires policymakers and business leaders 
to go back to the drawing board to identify and build 
“right-to-win” capabilities in their spheres of influence. 
Digitization is more than a matter of access. Our recent 
research shows that digitization multiplies the impact of 
connectivity, creating substantial incremental value in 
terms not only of job creation and economic growth, but 
also of societal well-being and government transparency. 
Today, more than 70 percent of the world’s citizens live in 
societies that have just begun their digitization journeys. 
As the individuals and enterprises in these societies 
continue to progress in developing their own digitization 
capabilities, they will only increase and accelerate these 
economic and social benefits.
The primary beneficiaries will be those who adapt 
their legacy capabilities and assets and fully exploit the 
potential of these new ICT technologies. Policymakers, 
who for years focused on ensuring affordable access 
to networks, now need to adopt a broader ecosystem 
perspective to shape and implement their national digiti-
zation agendas. Enterprises across sectors need to reas-
sess the models that enable them to continue growing 
or even to stay in business, given the emergence of 
nimble digital competitors. Individuals need to reassess 
the skills they need to cultivate if they are to thrive in an 
environment of global labor pools and tenuous competi-
tive advantage.
At Booz & Company, we believe in the power and 
potential of digitization to help solve the economic and 
societal challenges of tomorrow. Digitization enables 
people with good ideas to efficiently and effectively con-
nect and learn from each other’s successes and failures 
in building scalable solutions and enduring capabilities. 
We are honored to contribute to The Global Information 
Technology Report 2012 and look forward to helping 
policymakers and business leaders realize the promise of 
ICT captured in these pages.
Foreword
CESARE MAINARDI
Chief Executive Officer, Booz & Company
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  ix 
The global economy has been turbulent during the last 
several years, and governments and enterprises are 
doing everything possible to inject momentum and effec-
tuate sustainable growth. Although we still face serious 
challenges as we step into 2012, the impact of informa-
tion and communication technologies (ICT) on each 
industry has become more far reaching as its transfor-
mational effects spread to several sectors of the econ-
omy and society via innovations, the emergence of new 
industries, and the advent of the era of hyperconnectiv-
ity. We are convinced that in this new era of hypercon-
nectivity, ICT will begin a bold new chapter and will be 
closely linked to continued economic growth worldwide. 
More importantly, ICT will significantly reduce geographic 
or other limitations, allowing people around the globe to 
communicate and share information and ideas freely. In 
this integrated and interwoven world, ICT will contribute 
greatly to a variety of fields such as medical care and 
environmental protection. ICT and relevant technological 
innovations will propel global economic growth further 
than ever before.
The convergence of information technology (IT) and 
communications technology (CT) will be an important 
part of these technological innovations. All countries 
have come to realize that an integrated ICT industry 
will enhance the competitiveness and creativity of their 
economies and fuel the sustainable growth of the global 
economy. Countries everywhere—from Europe, Africa, 
and Asia to the United States and China—have been 
unveiling their innovative strategies for the ICT industry. 
These strategies are intended to make the industry an 
“enabler” of future economic growth. Converged ICT 
technologies will bring dramatic changes to our lives.
For individuals, smart devices and cloud services 
will have far-reaching effects and become an essential 
part of daily life and work. Ubiquitous super-broadband 
will make almost everything faster and better while 
delivering an improved user experience. Subscribers will 
not have to wait to stream or download videos, pictures, 
or other data files from the network. The benefits will 
also make people’s lives much more convenient as ICT 
technologies are applied to building e-government mod-
els and improving e-commerce, e-learning, and online 
medical services, as well as other web-based intelligent 
services.
For enterprises, applying ICT technologies to their 
operations will significantly improve their operational 
efficiency. In an increasingly flat world, the potential 
customer base for many enterprises is extremely broad 
and the environments in which they operate are very 
complex. These enterprises will inevitably confront de-
clines in efficiency and increases in costs. Innovative ICT 
technologies can help solve these issues: cloud comput-
ing can reduce the costs for information-based enter-
prise operations, and the Internet of Things can deliver 
smarter management systems.
Following improvements in broadband, current IT 
systems are migrating from fairly independent platforms 
to collaboration across a wide range of arenas, and the 
standardization capabilities in the CT industry have the 
potential to improve interoperability in IT. The deepening 
convergence between IT and CT will therefore become 
a major trend and one of the main driving forces behind 
the rapid development of the ICT industry. That said, 
there are obstacles to this integration, including insuffi-
cient openness in the ICT industry; a lack of unified tech-
nical standards; and a lack of connection among cloud 
computing, telecommunications networks (the pipe), and 
smart devices. Overcoming these obstacles and unify-
ing ICT’s technical standards is a top priority if we are to 
improve interoperability within the industry.
Research has shown that the ICT industry contrib-
utes 25 percent of the European Union’s growth in GDP 
and 40 percent of its productivity growth. Within the ICT 
domain, considering the value of cloud computing alone, 
the aggregate sum is forecasted to exceed US$1 trillion 
in Europe by 2020. We have every reason to be excited 
and confident about the future of the ICT industry.
Huawei is honored to sponsor this Report. We 
believe that the valuable studies presented here will help 
accelerate convergence in the ICT industry and allow it 
to play a vital role in the growth of the global economy.
Foreword
SUN YAFANG
Chairwoman, Huawei Technologies
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  xi 
Last year, the Global Information Technology Report 
(GITR) series celebrated its 10th anniversary. The World 
Economic Forum, in collaboration with INSEAD, initially 
began this project to explore the impact of information 
and communication technologies (ICT) on productiv-
ity and development as a component of the Forum’s 
research on competitiveness. To this end, over the 
past decade the Networked Readiness Index (NRI) has 
been measuring the degree to which economies across 
the world leverage ICT for enhanced competitiveness. 
During this period, it has been helping policymakers and 
relevant stakeholders to track their economies’ strengths 
and weaknesses as well as their progress over time. In 
addition, it has identified best practices in networked 
readiness and designed roadmaps and strategies for es-
tablishing optimal ICT diffusion to boost competiveness.
Since 2002, the networked readiness framework 
has remained stable, aside from some minor adjust-
ments at the variable level to better reflect the dynamic 
trends in the technology landscape. This has allowed 
for meaningful comparisons across time and created a 
valuable database of technology metrics. However, the 
ICT industry has changed dramatically since 2002 and 
its effects are increasingly transforming our economies 
and societies.
More precisely, over the past decade, the world 
has become increasingly “hyperconnected.” We live in 
an environment where the Internet and its associated 
services are accessible and immediate, where people 
and businesses can communicate with each other 
instantly, and where machines are equally interconnected 
with each other. The exponential growth of mobile de-
vices, big data, and social media are all drivers of this 
process of hyperconnectivity. Consequently, we are 
beginning to see fundamental transformations in society. 
Hyperconnectivity is redefining relationships between 
individuals, consumers and enterprises, and citizens and 
the state. It is introducing new opportunities to increase 
productivity and well-being by redefining the way busi-
ness is done, generating new products and services, 
and improving the way public services are delivered. 
However, hyperconnectivity can also bring about new 
challenges and risks in terms of security, cybercrime, 
privacy, the flow of personal data, individual rights, and 
access to information.
Traditional organizations and industry infrastructures 
are also facing challenges as industries converge. This 
will inevitably have consequences for policy and regula-
tion because regulators will have to mediate the blur-
ring lines between sectors and industries, and will be 
obligated to oversee more facets of each interaction in 
a pervasive way. For example, in terms of security and 
surveillance, hyperconnectivity is transforming the way 
people, objects, and even animals are being monitored. 
Experts also predict it will have an impact on inventory, 
transport and fleet management, wireless payments, 
navigation tools, and so on. The impact of ICT on differ-
ent facets of life and work is growing.
In this context, the way we monitor, measure, and 
benchmark the deployment and impacts of ICT must 
evolve to take into account the rapid changes and 
consequences of living in a hyperconnected world. 
Reflecting on this imperative of adaptation, a compre-
hensive review process of the NRI framework has been 
undertaken, guided by a process of high-level consulta-
tions with academic experts, policymakers, and repre-
sentatives of the ICT industry. The results of this new 
framework are presented for the first time in this edition 
of the Report.
The Report series is the result of a long-standing 
partnership between the World Economic Forum (the 
Forum) and INSEAD, aimed at identifying, measuring, 
and benchmarking the drivers of national capacity to 
leverage ICT to boost competitiveness and well-being 
and their impacts. The Report is composed of four 
thematic parts. Part 1 describes the conceptual frame-
work and relates the findings of the NRI 2012. In addi-
tion, Part 1 features selected expert contributions on 
the general theme of hyperconnectivity. Part 2 includes 
two case studies showing the efforts that two countries, 
Azerbaijan and Mauritius, are making to develop ICT 
and fully leverage their potential benefits. Part 3 com-
prises detailed profiles for the 142 economies covered 
in this year’s Report, providing a thorough picture of 
each economy’s current networked readiness landscape 
and allowing for international comparisons of specific 
variables or components of the NRI. Part 4 includes 
data tables for each of the 53 variables composing the 
NRI, with rankings for the economies covered as well as 
Executive Summary
SOUMITRA DUTTA, INSEAD
BEÑAT BILBAO-OSORIO, World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
xii  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
technical notes and sources for the quantitative variables 
used.
PART 1: THE CURRENT NETWORKED READINESS 
DESCRIBING A HYPERCONNECTED WORLD
Part 1 presents the latest findings of the NRI, offering 
a comprehensive assessment of the present state of 
networked readiness in the world. A number of expert 
contributions that consider the drivers and impacts of 
hyperconnectivity on individuals, businesses, and gov-
ernments are included. These relate to (1) the conver-
gence of information technologies and communication 
technologies; (2) issues in a hyperconnected world, with 
a specific focus on the role of regulation; (3) network 
neutrality; (4) the increasing importance of mobile broad-
band to empower individuals; (5) the cost of broadband; 
(6) the role of in-memory technology and analytics to 
harness the power of big data; (7) the role of real-time 
analytics to make good sense of big data; (8) the value of 
digital traces for commercial strategy and public policy; 
(9) the promise and perils of hyperconnectivity for organi-
zations and societies; (10) maximizing the impact of digi-
tization; and (11) the effect of technology in education.
Insight from the NRI 2012 on the world’s networked 
readiness
Chapter 1.1, “The Networked Readiness Index 2012: 
Benchmarking ICT Progress and Impacts for the Next 
Decade” by Soumitra Dutta of INSEAD and Beñat 
Bilbao-Osorio and Thierry Geiger of the World Economic 
Forum, presents the latest findings of the NRI, putting 
them into a regional and income-group context while 
also looking at regional differences.
This year, echoing the rapid changes and conse-
quences of living in a hyperconnected world, the frame-
work we use to measure and benchmark networked 
readiness has evolved. Following a two-year review 
process that involved high-level consultations with aca-
demic experts, policymakers, and representatives of the 
ICT industry, the World Economic Forum, in partnership 
with INSEAD, has undertaken a review to ensure that the 
framework continues to remain relevant and at the fore-
front of measuring and benchmarking the role of ICT for 
competitiveness and well-being for the next decade.
The evolved framework is inspired by five underlying 
principles:
•	 Measuring the economic and social impacts of ICT 
is crucial.
•	 An enabling environment determines the capacity of 
an economy and society to benefit from the use of 
ICT.
•	 ICT readiness and usage remain key drivers and 
preconditions for obtaining any impacts.
•	 All factors interact and co-evolve within an ICT eco-
system.
•	 The framework should provide clear policy orienta-
tions and identify public-private partnership oppor-
tunities.
As a result, the framework gauges:
•	 the friendliness of a country’s market and regulatory 
framework in supporting high levels of ICT uptake;
•	 the degree of a society’s preparation to make good 
use of an affordable ICT infrastructure;
•	 the efforts of the main social agents—that is, indi-
viduals, business, and government—to increase their 
capacity to use ICT as well as their actual use of ICT 
in their day-to-day activities; and
•	 the broad economic and social impacts accruing 
from ICT and the transformation of a country toward 
an ICT- and technology-savvy economy and society.
As in previous editions, the NRI is composed of a 
mixture of quantitative data collected by international 
organizations—such as International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU), the United Nations, and the World Bank—
and survey data from the Executive Opinion Survey (the 
Survey), conducted annually by the Forum in each of the 
economies covered by the Report. The NRI 2012 cov-
ers a record number of 142 economies from both the 
developed and developing world, accounting for over 98 
percent of world GDP.
In terms of the result, the top 10 of the NRI is made 
up exclusively of advanced economies. That group 
is dominated by the Nordics, with Sweden, Finland, 
Denmark, and Norway featuring in the top 7, and Iceland 
coming in at a not-so-distant 15th place. All members 
of the top 10 are relatively close to each other, and they 
tend to do well across all pillars.
Sweden’s performance is remarkable in every 
aspect. The country leads four of the 10 pillars of the 
NRI, namely infrastructure and digital content, individual 
usage, business usage, and economic impacts; and 
appears in the top 10 of a further five, while in the last 
pillar, skills, it ranks a very solid 12th. Second to Sweden, 
Singapore leads the group of the Asian Tigers, ahead 
of Taiwan, China (11th), Korea, Rep. (12th), and Hong 
Kong SAR (13th), which stand at the doorway of the top 
10. Compared with Sweden, Singapore’s performance 
is nearly as impressive. The city state leads the political 
and regulatory environment pillar and the business and 
innovation environment pillar, and is among the top 10 of 
five more pillars. It tops the impact component, thanks 
to the 2nd and 3rd rank earned in the economic impacts 
pillar and social impacts pillar, respectively. 
At 8th place overall, the United States delivers a 
strong performance. The country boasts an environment 
that is generally conducive to leveraging ICT successfully. 
Yet the political and regulatory framework (21st) presents 
some impediments, including the poor functioning of 
the law-making institutions and regulation that remains 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  xiii 
burdensome in several aspects. The business and in-
novation environment is more propitious (8th). In terms of 
readiness, the country can rely on a very good (6th) and 
affordable (10th) ICT infrastructure.
Overall, Europe remains at the forefront of the ef-
forts to leverage ICT to transform its economy and 
society. Seven European counties are positioned in 
the top 10 of our rankings, with the Nordic countries, 
including Sweden at the very top, leading the way. 
Notwithstanding the overall strength of Europe as a 
whole, there are important disparities within the re-
gion. Four broadly defined groups of countries sharing 
different ICT development paths and facing different 
challenges to further leverage ICT can be identified: 
the Nordic countries, advanced economies of Western 
Europe, Southern Europe, and Central and Eastern 
Europe.
The Nordic countries are the most successful in the 
world at leveraging ICT. They have fully integrated ICT in 
their competitiveness strategies to boost innovation and 
ICT is present everywhere and in all areas of society, 
such as education and healthcare. In Western Europe, 
besides Switzerland (5th), the Netherlands (6th), and 
the United Kingdom (10th), five other advanced econo-
mies—Germany (16th), Austria (19th), Luxembourg (21st), 
Belgium (22nd), and France (23rd)—attain high positions, 
ranging from 16th to 23rd place. Overall, the countries 
exhibit fairly well developed conditions for ICT, but not to 
the extent of the Nordic countries. 
All four of the European Union’s southern coun-
tries—Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Greece—are still lagging 
behind in terms of ICT uptake and impacts vis-á-vis the 
rest of Western European economies. In general, despite 
acceptable levels of ICT infrastructure development, the 
traditional lag in poorly performing educational and inno-
vation systems does not allow these countries to benefit 
to the same extent in the potential economic impacts 
accruing from ICT. 
Central and Eastern Europe presents a mixed pic-
ture in terms of ICT development and uptake. While 
some large countries in Central Europe share similar 
characteristics, others confront specific challenges that 
influence their capacity to take advantage of the potential 
of ICT. The Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, the Slovak 
Republic, and to a lesser extent, Romania and Bulgaria 
(in 42nd, 43rd, 49th, 64th, 67th, and 70th place, respec-
tively) have managed to develop their ICT infrastructures 
fairly well, although the high costs of accessing it—es-
pecially in the Czech Republic and Slovak Republic 
(93rd and 104th, respectively)—affects the actual uptake 
capacity of large shares of the population.
Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, and Azerbaijan 
are the best performers among the Commonwealth 
of Independent States (CIS), achieving 55th, 56th, and 
61st position, respectively. All three countries count on 
affordable access to ICT infrastructure, although the 
development of this infrastructure is superior in the case 
of the Russian Federation (40th, compared with 71st 
and 72nd for Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan). However, the 
vision and commitment of the government to boost ICT 
as a driver of economic growth is lower in Russia, and in 
all three cases the innovation system that underwent a 
deep restructuring after the collapse of Communism has 
not yet been fully reorganized or redeveloped.
Asia and the Pacific region is home to some of the 
world’s wealthiest, most innovative and digitized na-
tions in the world and also to some of its poorest, least-
connected countries. Six economies besides Singapore 
feature among the top 20, namely Taiwan, China (11th), 
Korea, Rep. (12th), Hong Kong SAR (13th), New Zealand 
(14th), Australia (17th), and Japan (18th). At 51st place, 
China leads the BRICS, the group of large emerging 
economies. Yet the country faces important challenges 
ahead that must be met to more fully adopt and lever-
age ICT. China’s institutional framework and especially its 
business environment present a number of shortcomings 
that stifle entrepreneurship and innovation.
Latin America and the Caribbean continues to suffer 
from an important lag in adopting ICT and technology 
more broadly. This is reflected in the rankings, as no 
country manages to reach the top 30 and only a hand-
ful of small economies manage to be included among 
the top 50—the exceptions are Barbados, Puerto Rico, 
Chile, and Uruguay. Although the region is vast and 
heterogeneous, three shared reasons for this lag can be 
identified: an insufficient investment in developing the 
ICT infrastructure; a weak skill base in the population, the 
result of poor educational systems that hinder society’s 
capacity to make an effective use of these technologies; 
and unfavorable business conditions that do not support 
the spur of entrepreneurship and innovation. Addressing 
these weaknesses will be crucial for improving the re-
gion’s competitiveness and shifting its economies toward 
more knowledge-based activities.
The level of ICT readiness in sub-Saharan Africa is 
still very low, with most countries evidencing strong lags 
in connectivity because of an insufficient development of 
ICT infrastructure, which remains too costly. Low levels 
of skills that do not allow for an efficient use of the avail-
able technology add to the challenges these countries 
face if they are to increase ICT uptake. Moreover, most 
countries still suffer from poor framework conditions for 
business activity that, coupled with the above-explained 
weaknesses, result in poor economic impacts that hinder 
the much-needed transformation of the region toward 
less resource-extraction-oriented activities and higher-
value-added production. Nine out of the last 10 countries 
in our sample belong to the region and the results evi-
dence the digital divide the region suffers vis-á-vis more 
developed regions.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
xiv  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
There are large differences across the Middle East 
and North Africa, with countries grouping around three 
subregions: Israel and the Gulf Cooperation Council 
states; the Levantine nations; and, finally, the coun-
tries in North Africa. While Israel and most of the Gulf 
Cooperation Council states seem to have embraced ICT 
uptake and have started to gain from the associated 
benefits, countries in the former two groups still suffer 
from important weaknesses that hinder their capacity to 
fully leverage the use of ICT to increase competitiveness 
and accelerate the positive social impacts that are asso-
ciated with technology.
An analysis of regional differences in leveraging ICT 
for competitiveness and well-being is also included in the 
chapter.
The Convergence of Information and Communication 
Technologies Gains Momentum
The convergence of information technology (IT) and 
communications technology (CT) is driven by several 
factors, including the proliferation of web-enabled mobile 
devices that allow access to cloud computing services. 
A discussion of the trends in ICT convergence, which are 
taking place at three levels of technology innovation—
cloud, pipe, and device—and the adaptations that indus-
try is making to deliver enriched user experiences across 
industries and the private sector is presented in Chapter 
1.2., by Ivan Huang, Roc Guo, Harry Xie, and Zhengxian 
Wu of Huawei Technologies.
Cloud computing services provide a catalyst for ICT 
convergence. Telecommunications carriers will gradu-
ally move IT systems and Internet data centers into the 
cloud, and telecommunications and IT industries will de-
velop uniform standards to facilitate rapid cloud develop-
ment. As a result, CT is transforming from voice-services 
to services supported by integrated mobile networks, 
and IT is evolving from traditional data centers to cloud 
computing. Likewise, the “pipes” of the telecommunica-
tions industry (fixed and mobile telecommunications net-
works) are converging along with the evolution to flexible 
and cost-effective all-IP networks. The addition of optical 
network technology will ensure the increased transmis-
sion speed needed for the high bandwidth transmissions 
of the future. In addition, the close integration of smart 
devices with the cloud will change the way consumers 
use their home devices (television sets, smartphones, 
and personal computers or PCs) and blur the boundaries 
between formerly separate industries.
ICT convergence significantly impacts consum-
ers, industries, and governments. For consumers, the 
integration of smart devices with peripheral devices, 
ubiquitous networks, and robust cloud data centers is 
changing experiences involving entertainment, travel, 
healthcare, and shopping. For industry, ICT convergence 
extends employee productivity with collaborative tools, 
reduces travel expense with videoconferencing, and 
enables customized products to develop across many 
industries.
As the chapter points out, governments can encour-
age ICT convergence in three key ways. They can reform 
policies and regulations to encourage competition and 
remove barriers to investment; they can offer financial 
incentives to firms that deploy ICT services; and they can 
directly invest in ICT infrastructure and services. By tak-
ing these steps, governments can facilitate the techno-
logical innovation required for ICT convergence and meet 
market demands.
Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
Chapter 1.3, contributed by International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), considers the growth 
and expansion of our hyperconnected world as well as 
some of the issues associated with it. Our future hy-
perconnected world will build on the functionality made 
possible by converged next-generation networks (NGN) 
and open access networks, but extends the concept of 
NGN in several ways—through embedded ambient intel-
ligence, automated machine-to-machine traffic, and the 
sheer size and scale of the Internet of Things. In practice, 
we should be able to enjoy super-fast connectivity on the 
move, always-on, roaming seamlessly from network to 
network, wherever we go—anywhere, anytime, via any 
device.
In this chapter, Phillippa Biggs and her co-authors 
explore some of the consequences and issues that may 
arise through embedding ICTs and connectivity into 
mobile devices and everyday objects. From technologi-
cal advances and growth in connection speeds to an 
explosion in data traffic and a more extensive role for 
regulators, this chapter provides an overview of some of 
the major trends shaping the hyperconnected world of 
converged ICTs. Given the predicted massive expansion 
of data traffic, the chapter highlights the importance of 
traffic prioritization and the different approaches possible 
to the net neutrality debate. It concludes that regulators 
and policymakers have a vital role to play at this point in 
time in establishing the mores and norms for the online 
world—in what is and is not acceptable, and in develop-
ing principles and best practices going forward, so that 
the risks and opportunities of our hyperconnected world 
are managed appropriately to protect both consumers 
and citizens.
Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a 
Sustainable Industry Model
Network neutrality is the principle that inhibits telecom-
munications network operators from discriminating 
among different kinds of Internet content, applica-
tions, and services traveling across their networks. In 
Chapter 1.4, authors Scott Beardsley, Yavuz Demirci, 
Luis Enriquez, Mehmet Guvendi, Stagg Newman, Sergio 
Sandoval, Malin Strandell-Jansson, Oleg Timchenko, and 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  xv 
Wim Torfs of McKinsey & Company consider the debate 
surrounding this issue. Advocates of network neutrality 
argue that the principle underpins the Internet’s explosive 
growth: if any and every kind of content, service, and ap-
plication can be distributed over the Internet, then there 
is no limit to the innovations that Internet companies 
will invent for consumers to choose from. But network 
neutrality has, arguably, become the victim of its own 
success. Internet traffic has grown faster than network 
operators’ related revenues and they are now struggling 
to invest in the new network infrastructure needed to 
support more Internet traffic.
Not surprisingly, network operators are also trying 
to manage traffic volumes. Some are even deploying 
sophisticated network management technologies, such 
as deep packet inspection, which examine the nature 
and content of the traffic to identify possible sources of 
harm to network performance and also to protect the 
networks and consumers from increasingly sophisticated 
attacks and abuse. But as soon as network operators 
start scrutinizing the content of Internet traffic, edge 
players (providers of content, applications, and services 
as well as aggregators) worry that network neutrality may 
be infringed, limiting their will to innovate. Both consum-
ers and regulators also worry about maintaining the 
confidentiality of consumer data.
Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and 
Empowering Individuals
With more than 6 billion connections worldwide and 
US$1.3 trillion in annual revenue, mobile telephony has 
become the largest ICT in history. Mobile connects four 
times as many people as landline telephony because of 
its better reach, convenience, and functionality, as well 
as its lower costs. Mobile telephony also surpasses the 
landline Internet by more than 3.5 billion users, while 
driving economic growth and important societal benefits, 
as documented in the World Economic Forum’s Global 
Information Technology Report 2008–2009: Mobility in a 
Networked World and other research.
While the global scale of mobile telephony and its 
economic impacts are well understood by ICT indus-
try participants and governments today, the authors 
of Chapter 1.5, William Bold and William Davidson of 
Qualcomm, envision that mobile broadband—with its 
ability to connect people to the Internet in an ultra-
personal and pervasive manner—will have a far greater 
impact.
Mobile broadband, or high-speed access to the 
Internet and other data services over mobile networks, 
is already changing the way people across the globe 
access the Internet. It promises to drive even stronger 
economic growth than mobile telephony alone and to 
fundamentally change the way in which we live, learn, 
work, and collaborate. This in turn is driving seismic 
shifts across the communications and computing 
industries. Perhaps most importantly, it provides unprec-
edented opportunities to empower individuals across all 
socioeconomic classes.
The authors present this view within the framework 
of two fundamental shifts, or tipping points, and related 
trends that underscore how mobile broadband is chang-
ing the way people access the Internet and, in turn, how 
the Internet itself is changing. They explore the transfor-
mative opportunities these shifts create in areas such 
as healthcare and education, as well as some key steps 
stakeholders can take to both enable and take advan-
tage of these new possibilities.
Reaching the Third Billion: Arriving at Affordable 
Broadband to Stimulate Economic Transformation in 
Emerging Markets
In Chapter 1.6, authors Chris S. Thomas and Frederico 
Carvalho of Intel Corporation present an analysis of 
the background to the current issues affecting network 
operators’ revenue and capacity as well as measures 
so far taken by the industry to address them, and dis-
cuss current regulatory positions on network neutrality. 
The authors then propose a set of aims that all industry 
players—network operators, companies offering Internet 
services and applications, and regulators—can pursue 
that will balance growing industry revenues to fund 
infrastructure investment with safeguarding network 
neutrality, and so release the next wave of services and 
applications over the Internet, with all the economic and 
societal benefits they promise.
Direct correlations can be made between the afford-
ability of broadband connectivity and an individual’s or 
country’s ability to successfully transform itself through 
the utilization of ICT capabilities.
The chapter outlines several examples of countries 
arriving at affordable broadband programs, and consid-
ers the bundling of total computing and connectivity 
packages. Many creative and successful strategies are 
being employed to extend the reach and impact of tech-
nology by driving broader Internet access, affordability, 
and awareness, ultimately accelerating the use of tech-
nology to improve national competitiveness and GDP as 
well as individual livelihoods.
Advocating reaching more people by paying less 
for less, these strategies are employed in many different 
countries with the aim of closing the affordability gap. 
Business and deployment strategies similar to those of 
the pre-paid mobile phone market that enabled its suc-
cessful reach to the majority of the world population are 
then encouraged.
The chapter provides a number of examples that 
highlight an informed leadership emerging in the form 
of national broadband strategies, programs, and incen-
tives; new private and nationalized telecommunications 
offerings and programs; vendor bundles; and financ-
ing options as well as the cooperation of development 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
xvi  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
organizations and funds. By implementing different ICT 
programs with more affordable broadband, countries 
are providing impacts through levels of computing and 
Internet accessible to a much higher percentage of the 
population.
Harnessing the Power of Big Data in Real Time 
through In-Memory Technology and Analytics
Chapter 1.7, by SAP AG, considers the power and the 
complications presented by the enormous quantity of 
data that can now be experienced as overwhelming. The 
world today is flooded with data from multiple sources 
such as corporate databases, sensor networks, and the 
Internet—and the trend is increasing. In the face of this 
rising tide of data, organizations are finding it difficult to 
keep up.
Since the 1960s, many companies have used com-
puters to manage their business—to determine such 
things as how much cash is available, how much debt 
is outstanding, what the risks are for certain ventures, 
and so on. Complex software programs called enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) systems have been created to 
manage and provide insights into the daily operations 
of a company. However, increasing data volumes have 
led to a problem. By the turn of the 21st century, large 
organizations were no longer always able to access the 
information they required in a timely manner. There were 
just too many data to analyze.
As the chapter points out, at the heart of any enter-
prise application is the database management system, 
responsible for storing the myriad of data generated 
by the day-to-day operations of a business. Today, 
enterprise data are split into separate databases for 
performance reasons. Analytical data reside in data or 
business warehouses, synchronized periodically with 
transactional ERP systems. This separation makes real-
time reporting on current data impossible.
Multi-core CPUs, large main memories, cheaper 
and more powerful hardware, and cloud computing are 
now laying the foundation for the transition of enterprises 
away from this restrictive model. New database systems 
called in-memory technology can execute fast, flexible 
analyses in real time to facilitate decision making for top 
managers and other users. These can now accelerate 
business processes by a factor of up to 1,000.
The use of in-memory technology marks an inflec-
tion point for enterprise applications. The availability 
and capacity per dollar of main memory have increased 
markedly in the last few years, leading to a rethinking of 
how mass data should be stored.
The Wisdom of the Cloud: Hyperconnectivity, Big 
Data, and Real-Time Analytics
The exponential increases in data volumes—often re-
ferred to as big data—are increasingly driven by unprec-
edented hyperconnectivity and the rapid adoption of 
social media that present new opportunities for savvy 
organizations to capture “the wisdom of the cloud” and 
leverage the flood of unstructured data that is being 
created.
Using case studies, in Chapter 1.8 Mikael Hagström 
and Neena Gill of SAS discuss the implications of these 
trends in re-engineering the healthcare industry, trans-
forming the public sector, and creating new and intel-
ligent intersections between businesses and consumer 
that allow for fluid dialogue. The chapter explains how, 
in healthcare, researchers can share results with one 
another to tap their collective knowledge, clinicians can 
improve their ability to manage disease outbreaks, and 
hospitals can improve patient safety. In the public sec-
tor, the “civic long tail” is making it easier for people to 
voice their views and connect with like-minded citizens. 
Government can use these data to become more ef-
ficient and responsive. In the business world, com-
panies are leveraging big data to improve their offers, 
respond to key influencers, reduce churn, manage risks, 
strengthen brands, get to know their customers, and 
more.
On the Value of Digital Traces for Commercial 
Strategy and Public Policy: Telecommunications 
Data as a Case Study
At a time when governments and corporations are look-
ing to target policy, strategy, and investment so as to 
reduce costs and improve impact measurement, the 
potential value of real-time data and, in particular, a real-
time census is becoming increasingly clear. Digital data 
from large-volume transactional sources such as credit 
cards and telecommunications, as well as health and 
other administrative systems, offers the timeliness and 
scalability required for such applications, and it promises 
to transform the way that policymakers and strategic 
planners see the social, environmental, and economic 
context of their work.
Eventually, historical approaches to the classification 
and characterization of households and places—such 
as though lifestyle segmentation and geodemograph-
ics—may be replaced with novel real-time, adaptive 
systems based on up-to-the-minute spatially referenced 
(geo-coded) data. In Chapter 1.9, authors Rob Claxton, 
Jon Reades, and Ben Anderson use telecommunica-
tions data—coupled with the network-oriented methods 
of an emerging computational social science—as a lens 
through which to examine society and the knowledge 
economy. The authors present results from four studies 
that offer a taste of the ways in which this type of data 
can be used to expand our understanding of social and 
economic activity.
They begin with a study of regions, comparing the 
“geographies of talk” with existing administrative units; 
then they consider the ways in which social networks 
reflect underlying problems of access to opportunity 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  xvii 
before turning to access of a different sort, using indica-
tors of globalization within Britain’s most competitive 
industries. Finally, the authors conclude with early work 
on real-time data-driven household classification systems 
and a discussion of the implications for government and 
corporations.
The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity for 
Organizations and Societies
Hyperconnectivity is a relatively new term that was 
coined in response to the rapid availability and broad 
assimilation of entirely new ways to communicate. 
Hyperconnectivity refers not only to the means of com-
munication and interaction, but also to the impact this 
phenomenon has on both personal and organizational 
behavior.
Hyperconnectivity results from a combination of 
broadband expansion, the proliferation of mobile devices 
and wireless access, the dominance of social media in 
daily life and, most recently, the use of the cloud for data 
and applications access. Hyperconnected communi-
cation includes not only people-to-people formats (as 
individuals and as members of groups and using a vast 
array of media), but also communication between people 
and machines and between machines themselves with-
out any direct human involvement.
In a short period of time, the hyperconnectivity phe-
nomenon has had a notable impact on society, which 
authors John Fredette, Revital Marom, Kurt Steinert, 
and Louis Witters of Alcatel-Lucent explore in Chapter 
1.10. For institutions and organizations, research reveals 
hyperconnectivity’s influence on the nature of work 
practices, functions, and missions. Hyperconnectivity 
breaks down the boundaries of both time and space. It 
brings people (and things) together from anywhere and 
at anytime. Its impact is both ubiquitous and unceas-
ing. Thanks in part to hyperconnectivity we now live in a 
world of neo-urbanization, where the distinctions be-
tween rural and urban are decreasing. Hyperconnectivity 
has also given rise to a globalized “168” world (24 × 7 = 
168), where the work day continues around the clock.
On a societal level, the impact of hyperconnectivity 
can be readily discerned in neo-urbanization, govern-
ment, education, healthcare, business, workforces, and 
sustainability.
The authors point out that hyperconnectivity has 
rapidly become an influential aspect of contemporary life. 
There is great potential for it to be used to improve the 
quality of life on a global basis, thus providing hereto-
fore unforeseen opportunity. There is also the possibility 
that hyperconnectivity could remain a key differentiator 
between the haves and the have nots. Public-private 
alliances appear to be the best model to get optimum 
value from hyperconnectivity. To embrace an alliance 
model, both public and private organizations need to ac-
cept that a hyperconnected public is certain to be better 
informed, more easily aligned, and more responsive than 
ever before; this can have both positive and negative 
consequences.
Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
Policymakers today face a different environment for 
information and communications technology (ICT) than 
the one for which they designed policies. ICT technolo-
gies are far more pervasive than they were previously: 
more people today have access to a cell phone than to 
electricity, powering exponential growth in global data 
generation. With ICT access approaching ubiquity, poli-
cymakers’ next challenge is to ensure that individuals, 
businesses, and governments are making the best pos-
sible use of networks and applications. Countries that 
have achieved advanced levels of digitization—the mass 
adoption of connected digital technologies and applica-
tions by consumers, enterprises, and governments—
have realized significant benefits in their economies, their 
societies, and the functioning of their public sectors.
The authors of Chapter 1.11—Karim Sabbagh, 
Roman Friedrich, Bahjat El-Darwiche, Milind Singh, and 
Sandeep Ganediwalla of Booz & Company and Raul 
Katz of Telecom Advisory Services LLC—note that previ-
ous attempts to measure the impact of ICT have focused 
primarily on assessing the economic effects of wide-
spread access to either wireless or broadband technolo-
gies. But in developing a comprehensive methodology 
to measure the impact of digitization, Booz & Company 
found greater benefits linked to growing usage of digital 
technologies and applications rather than access alone. 
Benefits are not just economic, but social and political. 
Digitization offers incremental economic growth: coun-
tries at the most advanced stage of digitization derive 
20 percent more in economic benefits than those at 
the initial stage. Digitization also has a proven impact 
on reducing unemployment, improving quality of life, 
and boosting citizens’ access to public services. Finally, 
digitization allows governments to operate with greater 
transparency and efficiency.
The chapter concludes that policymakers have an 
important role to play in ensuring that their countries are 
progressing toward advanced stages of digitization. They 
need to acknowledge where they currently stand, and 
recognize the benefits of digitization. Finally, they need to 
shift focus away from access and set into motion pro-
grams and plans that focus on the widespread adoption 
and usage of technology. That includes elevating digiti-
zation on the national agenda, including the systematic 
planning and tracking of their efforts; evolving sector 
governance structure; adopting an ecosystem perspec-
tive; enabling competition; and stimulating demand.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
xviii  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Trusting the Unknown: The Effects of Technology 
Use in Education
Governments have been investing in educational tech-
nology since the early 1980s. The devices, services, and 
applications are constantly evolving, as is the nature of 
the school and classroom arrangements aimed at mak-
ing the most out of those technologies. The increasing 
emphasis on personal ubiquitous access to connectiv-
ity, for communication or information purposes, coupled 
with the evolution of technology and lower prices rep-
resent additional factors that contribute to modify the 
context in which investment decisions about educational 
technology—the so-called technology policies in educa-
tion—have to be made.
When reviewing these policies, one of the most 
striking findings is how little is known about the effects of 
technology use on the quality of school education, and 
more specifically which particular uses of technology can 
result in better student performance. If a good evidence-
supported knowledge base existed in this domain, then 
the analysis of these effects, and the factors that deter-
mine or condition them, could be used to unveil what 
works and why. But in the absence of hard evidence, the 
evaluation of these policies remains an almost impossible 
endeavor and the whole issue of how policy decisions 
are made remains open.
In Chapter 1.12, author Francesc Pedró from 
UNESCO addresses two particular questions. First is the 
question of what is currently known in this area and what 
are the limitations of the existing knowledge base—with 
the paradox that developing countries, which make com-
paratively bigger efforts in this domain, lag behind also 
in terms of knowledge base. Second is the issue of what 
elements are missing, and how the important method-
ological challenges required to gather those elements 
could be addressed.
PART 2: CASE STUDIES OF LEVERAGING ICT FOR 
COMPETITIVENESS AND WELL-BEING
Part 2 presents deep-dive studies of selected national 
experiences of leveraging ICT or developing the sector, 
showcasing the main challenges faced and the articula-
tion of strategies to overcome them. In this edition, the 
cases of Azerbaijan and Mauritius are presented.
Big Ambitions in a Rapidly Changing World: 
Azerbaijan
The Republic of Azerbaijan is leveraging its position as 
an oil and gas center and developing strong regional ties, 
while also promoting economic diversity. Development 
of the ICT sector is expected to play a crucial role in this 
policy as a result of its considerable impact on the coun-
try’s socioeconomic life in recent years.
In Chapter 2.1, authors Rasim Aliguliyev of the 
Information Technology Institute, Azerbaijan National 
Academy of Sciences, and Galib Gurbanov of the 
Azerbaijan Internet Society note that Azerbaijan has 
been successful in implementing the following policy ac-
tions: (1) maintaining compliance of domestic legislation 
with relevant international standards and requirements of 
the World Trade Organization, (2) attracting new telecom-
munications operators to the market and establishing 
sound competitive environment for market participants, 
(3) ensuring effective and fair use of limited number and 
frequency resources, and (4) regulating interconnec-
tion issues and ensuring implementation of advanced 
licensing.
However, there are still some serious challenges 
that need to be addressed. Individual and business 
technological readiness, industry-university coopera-
tion, and the accompanying institutional framework are 
all areas that will require further improvement to boost 
ICT impacts for competitiveness. In addition, the govern-
ment will also need to improve the quality, relevance, 
and usefulness of its websites as well as its willingness 
to provide online information and participatory tools and 
services to the people, where country still lags behind.
Domestic and regional ICT projects carried out in 
accordance with the government programs and strate-
gies, as well as the sectorial growth rate and evalua-
tions by international experts, allow the expectation that 
Azerbaijan’s ICT sector will catch up with oil revenues by 
2025, and the country will become a regional ICT hub.
The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
Globally, the past few years have been marked by pro-
found geopolitical changes against a backdrop of un-
abated financial turmoil. The credit crunch has irrevoca-
bly altered consumer behaviors, which in turn challenged 
many business processes and models. In this context, 
the ICT sector has been recognized as one of the most 
resilient sectors of many world economies. In fact, the 
foresightedness of the Government of Mauritius in de-
veloping its ICT sector as a strong pillar of the Mauritian 
economy has been handsomely rewarded by the dou-
ble-digit growth that the sector has recently experienced.
In Chapter 2.2, authors Krishna Oolun of the 
Information & Communications Technologies Authority, 
Suraj Ramgolam of the National Computer Board, and 
Vasenden Dorasami of the Ministry of Information and 
Communication Technology present the state of the 
ICT/business process outsourcing in Mauritius through 
illustrative indicators. The chapter also describes the 
main challenges the country has faced in making the 
ICT sector what it is today, particularly because ICT is 
not only a sector/industry in its own right but also a vital 
support for almost all industries that contribute to the 
national wealth. In addition, the authors demonstrate 
how the adoption of a coherent policy-orientation ap-
proach and a sound governance structure that steers 
the implementation process, underpinned by various 
national ICT strategic plans over the last 15 years, has 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Executive Summary
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  xix 
resulted in widespread adoption of ICT by its citizens. 
This has led to an all-inclusive information society where 
the digital divide has been effectively bridged in terms of 
the key performance indicators set under the Millennium 
Development Goals.
Finally, the chapter focuses on the way forward for 
Mauritius and its ICT sector against the backdrop that 
presented earlier, particularly the anticipated euro crisis 
within the European market (see http://www.ft.com/intl/
indepth/euro-in-crisis), which is Mauritius’s major trading 
partner.
PARTS 3 AND 4: COUNTRY/ECONOMY PROFILES 
AND DATA PRESENTATION
Parts 3 and 4 feature comprehensive profiles for each 
of the 142 economies covered in this year’s Report and 
data tables for each of the 53 variables composing the 
NRI, with global rankings. Each part begins with a de-
scription of how to interpret the data provided.
Technical notes and sources, included at the end 
of Part 4, provide additional insight and information on 
the definitions and sources of specific quantitative non-
Survey data variables included in the NRI computation 
this year.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Networked  
Readiness Index  
Rankings
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  xxiii 
The Networked Readiness Index Rankings
The Networked Readiness Index 2012
 Rank Country/Economy Score
 1 Sweden 5.94
 2 Singapore 5.86
 3 Finland 5.81
 4 Denmark 5.70
 5 Switzerland 5.61
 6 Netherlands 5.60
 7 Norway 5.59
 8 United States 5.56
 9 Canada 5.51
 10 United Kingdom 5.50
 11 Taiwan, China 5.48
 12 Korea, Rep. 5.47
 13 Hong Kong SAR 5.46
 14 New Zealand 5.36
 15 Iceland 5.33
 16 Germany 5.32
 17 Australia 5.29
 18 Japan 5.25
 19 Austria 5.25
 20 Israel 5.24
 21 Luxembourg 5.22
 22 Belgium 5.13
 23 France 5.12
 24 Estonia 5.09
 25 Ireland 5.02
 26 Malta 4.91
 27 Bahrain 4.90
 28 Qatar 4.81
 29 Malaysia 4.80
 30 United Arab Emirates 4.77
 31 Lithuania 4.66
 32 Cyprus 4.66
 33 Portugal 4.63
 34 Saudi Arabia 4.62
 35 Barbados 4.61
 36 Puerto Rico 4.59
 37 Slovenia 4.58
 38 Spain 4.54
 39 Chile 4.44
 40 Oman 4.35
 41 Latvia 4.35
 42 Czech Republic 4.33
 43 Hungary 4.30
 44 Uruguay 4.28
 45 Croatia 4.22
 46 Montenegro 4.22
 47 Jordan 4.17
 48 Italy 4.17
 49 Poland 4.16
 50 Tunisia 4.12
 51 China 4.11
 52 Turkey 4.07
 53 Mauritius 4.06
 54 Brunei Darussalam 4.04
 55 Kazakhstan 4.03
 56 Russian Federation 4.02
 57 Panama 4.01
 58 Costa Rica 4.00
 59 Greece 3.99
 60 Trinidad and Tobago 3.98
 61 Azerbaijan 3.95
 62 Kuwait 3.95
 63 Mongolia 3.95
 64 Slovak Republic 3.94
 65 Brazil 3.92
 66 Macedonia, FYR 3.91
 67 Romania 3.90
 68 Albania 3.89
 69 India 3.89
 70 Bulgaria 3.89
 71 Sri Lanka 3.88
 Rank Country/Economy Score
 72 South Africa 3.87
 73 Colombia 3.87
 74 Jamaica 3.86
 75 Ukraine 3.85
 76 Mexico 3.82
 77 Thailand 3.78
 78 Moldova 3.78
 79 Egypt 3.77
 80 Indonesia 3.75
 81 Cape Verde 3.71
 82 Rwanda 3.70
 83 Vietnam 3.70
 84 Bosnia and Herzegovina 3.65
 85 Serbia 3.64
 86 Philippines 3.64
 87 Dominican Republic 3.60
 88 Georgia 3.60
 89 Botswana 3.58
 90 Guyana 3.58
 91 Morocco 3.56
 92 Argentina 3.52
 93 Kenya 3.51
 94 Armenia 3.49
 95 Lebanon 3.49
 96 Ecuador 3.46
 97 Ghana 3.44
 98 Guatemala 3.43
 99 Honduras 3.43
 100 Senegal 3.42
 101 Gambia, The 3.41
 102 Pakistan 3.39
 103 El Salvador 3.38
 104 Iran, Islamic Rep. 3.36
 105 Namibia 3.35
 106 Peru 3.34
 107 Venezuela 3.32
 108 Cambodia 3.32
 109 Zambia 3.26
 110 Uganda 3.25
 111 Paraguay 3.25
 112 Nigeria 3.22
 113 Bangladesh 3.20
 114 Tajikistan 3.19
 115 Kyrgyz Republic 3.13
 116 Malawi 3.05
 117 Benin 3.05
 118 Algeria 3.01
 119 Belize 3.01
 120 Mozambique 2.99
 121 Suriname 2.99
 122 Côte d’Ivoire 2.98
 123 Tanzania 2.95
 124 Zimbabwe 2.94
 125 Cameroon 2.93
 126 Mali 2.93
 127 Bolivia 2.92
 128 Nepal 2.92
 129 Syria 2.85
 130 Ethiopia 2.85
 131 Nicaragua 2.84
 132 Timor-Leste 2.84
 133 Lesotho 2.78
 134 Madagascar 2.73
 135 Burkina Faso 2.72
 136 Swaziland 2.70
 137 Burundi 2.57
 138 Chad 2.55
 139 Mauritania 2.55
 140 Angola 2.49
 141 Yemen 2.41
 142 Haiti 2.27
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Part 1
The Current Networked 
Readiness Describing a 
Hyperconnected World
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  3 
CHAPTER 1.1
The Networked Readiness 
Index 2012: Benchmarking 
ICT Progress and Impacts 
for the Next Decade
SOUMITRA DUTTA, INSEAD
BEÑAT BILBAO-OSORIO, World Economic Forum
THIERRY GEIGER, World Economic Forum
Last year, the Global Information Technology Report 
(GITR) series celebrated its 10th anniversary. The World 
Economic Forum, in collaboration with INSEAD, initially 
began this project to explore the impact of information 
and communication technologies (ICT) on productiv-
ity and development, as a component of the Forum’s 
research on competitiveness. To this end, over the 
past decade the Networked Readiness Index (NRI) has 
been measuring the degree to which economies across 
the world leverage ICT for enhanced competitiveness. 
During this period, it has been helping policymakers and 
relevant stakeholders to track their economies’ strengths 
and weaknesses as well as their progress over time. In 
addition, it has identified best practices in networked 
readiness and designed roadmaps and strategies for es-
tablishing optimal ICT diffusion to boost competiveness.
Since 2002, the networked readiness framework 
has remained stable, aside from some minor adjust-
ments at the variable level to better reflect the dynamic 
trends in the technology landscape. This has allowed 
for meaningful comparisons across time and created a 
valuable database of technology metrics. However, the 
ICT industry has changed dramatically since 2002 and 
its effects are increasingly transforming our economies 
and societies.
More precisely, over the past decade, the world has 
become increasingly “hyperconnected.” We live in an en-
vironment where the Internet and its associated services 
are accessible and immediate, where people and busi-
nesses can communicate with each other instantly, and 
where machines are equally interconnected with each 
other. The exponential growth of mobile devices, big 
data, and social media are all drivers of this process of 
hyperconnectivity. Gartner reported that worldwide sales 
of mobile devices reached 440.5 million units alone in the 
third quarter of 2011, while smartphone sales increased 
by 42 percent from the previous year.1 Ericsson esti-
mates that there will be more than 50 billion connected 
devices in the world by 2020.2 Even emerging markets 
are joining the trend, as mobile penetration increases 
(after Asia, in 2011 Africa became the second-largest 
mobile market in the world),3 and fixed broadband prices 
in developing countries dropped by over 50 percent in 
the last two years.4 This trend is expected to accelerate 
in the current decade. The topic of hyperconnectivity 
therefore is appropriate as the main theme of this year’s 
Report.
The multitude of connected devices consequently 
gives rise to the escalating growth of data and data traf-
fic. According to the International Data Corporation (IDC), 
the amount of data transmitted worldwide surpassed 
one zettabyte for the first time in 2010.5 The digital 
universe is now expected to double every two years.6 
Growing numbers of connected devices have also wid-
ened the gateway to online social networks. Facebook 
boasts more than 800 million active users in 2011,7 while 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
4  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Google Plus surpassed 40 million users in less than six 
months (it took Facebook three years to reach the 25 
million mark).8 Other factors, identified by Cisco—such 
as the growth of high-speed broadband penetration, the 
expansion of digital screen surface area and resolution, 
the proliferation of networked-enabled devices, and the 
increase in power and speed of computer devices—have 
also contributed to the world’s hyperconnected state.9
As a result, we are beginning to see fundamental 
transformations in society. Hyperconnectivity is redefin-
ing relationships between individuals, consumers and 
enterprises, and citizens and the state. It is introducing 
new opportunities to increase productivity and well-being 
by redefining the way business is done, generating new 
products and services, and improving the way public 
services are delivered. However, hyperconnectivity can 
also bring about new challenges and risks in terms of 
security, cybercrime, privacy, the flow of personal data, 
individual rights, and access to information. Traditional 
organizations and industry infrastructures are also fac-
ing challenges as industries converge. This will inevitably 
have consequences for policy and regulation because 
regulators will have to mediate the blurring lines between 
sectors and industries and will be obligated to oversee 
more facets in a pervasive way. For example, in terms of 
security and surveillance, hyperconnectivity is transform-
ing the way people, objects, and even animals are being 
monitored. Experts also predict that it will have an im-
pact on inventory, transport and fleet management, wire-
less payments, navigation tools, and so on. The impact 
of ICT in different facets of life and work is growing.
In this context, the way we monitor, measure, and 
benchmark the deployment and impacts of ICT must 
evolve to take into account the rapid changes and 
consequences of living in a hyperconnected world. 
Reflecting on this imperative of adaptation, a compre-
hensive review process of the NRI framework has been 
undertaken, guided by a process of high-level consulta-
tions with academic experts, policymakers, and repre-
sentatives of the ICT industry. The results of this new 
framework are presented for the first time in this edition 
of the Report.
More precisely, this chapter presents the evolution 
of the framework and methodology underpinning the 
NRI. In addition, highlights of the 2012 rankings for a 
record 142 economies are also presented.
THE EVOLVING NETWORKED READINESS 
FRAMEWORK: FROM ICT ACCESS TO ICT IMPACTS
Over the last decade, several attempts have been made 
to assess ICT developments. Appendix B includes a 
historical overview of the efforts made by various orga-
nizations to measure and benchmark ICT developments. 
One of the most authoritative exercises has been the 
NRI, which has been adopted by several governments as 
a valuable tool for assessing and leveraging technology 
Box 1: Main changes in the NRI framework
In order to ensure that the Networked Readiness Index 
(NRI) framework remains aligned with the latest changes in 
the ICT industry and responds better to policy needs, the 
present edition of the GITR presents an evolved NRI that 
aims at measuring and benchmarking ICT progress and 
impacts for the next decade. This box highlights the main 
changes introduced in this framework this year. These are:
1. Introducing an ICT impact subindex: To emphasize 
their importance, we have included a fourth subindex 
measuring the impacts of ICT on both the economy 
and society. Although measuring ICT impacts is a com-
plex task, this subindex captures some of the broader 
economic and social impacts accruing from ICT. In the 
near future, as richer datasets become available, we 
hope to be able to cover a wider range of impacts and 
include such areas as the environment, energy, and 
health.
2. Redefining the pillars in the readiness subindex: 
We have chosen to redefine the pillars within the  
readiness subindex to focus on infrastructure, afford-
ability, and skills. We believe these new categories  
are aligned with key policy action areas that affect  
all actors within an economy and measure the overall 
preparedness of a country to use ICT. In this sense, 
when a government improves the ICT infrastructure  
or provides greater investment in skills upgrade,  
everyone—individuals and public- and private-sector 
organizations—benefit from it.
3. Restructuring the pillars in the environment  
subindex: The pillars within the environment subindex 
have been modified to reflect the importance of hav-
ing an overall framework that is not only conducive to 
ICT and technology uptake, but that also acts as a 
catalyst for innovation and entrepreneurship rather than 
acting as a filter. The previous pillars included political 
and regulatory environment, market environment, and 
infrastructure. The revised pillars include political and 
regulatory environment and the business and innova-
tion environment. The latter reflects the growing role of 
an innovation- and entrepreneurial-friendly environment 
for enabling ICT economic transformational impacts to 
accrue.
4. Separating usage from impacts in the usage  
subindex: The original distribution of pillars within the 
usage subindex is maintained according to economic 
agent (e.g., individuals, business, and government). 
This allows for in-depth analysis about the role and 
uptake efforts of specific agents in a society. However, 
all ICT impact–related variables have been regrouped 
under the newly created impact subindex.
5. Updating and rationalizing the selection of  
variables: In order to take into account the rapid 
changes in the ICT industry, several outdated variables 
(e.g., number of telephone lines) have been dropped 
and new and more relevant variables have been includ-
ed (e.g., mobile broadband Internet subscriptions). 
Moreover, several variables that captured similar con-
cepts have been eliminated to obtain a more balanced 
picture of the underlying factors defining networked 
readiness.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  5 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
for competitiveness and development. Its success 
emphasizes the importance of continuing to adapt its 
framework in alignment with the changing landscape 
of technology and the new opportunities it introduces 
(Box 1).
As has been noted in the past two editions of this 
Report, the ICT industry has changed rapidly over the 
past decade. More powerful technologies, new mecha-
nisms of accessing ICT and integrating it in multiple de-
vices (e.g., through mobile broadband), and new ways of 
producing digital content (e.g., via social networks) have 
been developed, radically changing the industry and 
accelerating the convergence among the ICT, telecom-
munications, and media industries. Moreover, the many 
manifestations of ICT have become truly ubiquitous. 
Economic structures and the ways economic activities 
are organized have been rapidly transformed by new 
ICT-based or enabled business practices, generating 
sharp productivity gains. Society, and the way citizens 
interact among themselves and with governments, has 
also changed thanks to ICT. New modes of engagement 
between governments and citizens, not only in the shape 
of new ways of delivering public services but also in 
terms of redefining governance mechanisms and social 
engagement, have appeared.
Consequently, much of the policy attention paid to 
ICT has also shifted. Because ICT has become increas-
ingly omnipresent and almost universal in today’s world, 
the focus has moved from one of how to provide access 
to one of how to make the best use of ICT in order to im-
prove business innovation, governance, citizens’ political 
participation, and social cohesion.
As described above, although the NRI has benefited 
from minor adjustments both in its variables—to better 
reflect the dynamic trends in the technology landscape—
and in the methodology employed to compute the 
rankings, it has remained essentially stable since 2002. 
However, over the past two years a review of the frame-
work has been undertaken to make certain not only that 
it continues to effectively capture the main drivers of 
ICT readiness but also that it increasingly incorporates 
data on ICT impacts. The objective of this process is to 
ensure that the framework remains relevant and at the 
forefront of measuring and benchmarking the role of ICT 
for competitiveness and well-being for the next decade.
As a result of the efforts of the past two years, in 
this edition of the Report a new framework is being 
introduced (Figure 1). This evolved framework is inspired 
by five underlying principles:
1. Measuring the economic and social impacts 
of ICT is crucial. The NRI must include aspects 
of the way ICT is transforming the economy and 
society. In the economy, the development of the 
ICT industry has become increasingly important 
and now accounts for a significant share of value-
added and employment. In addition, ICT interacts 
closely with many other sectors, thus enabling 
innovations to accrue and affecting the overall 
productivity of a country. Moreover, the impacts 
of ICT are also evident in the development of new 
skills that are important in knowledge-based, 
information-rich societies and that are crucial for 
employment. In society, ICT empowers citizens to 
participate more actively and steadily in social and 
political debates, and to obtain better and faster 
services—for example, financial services—that 
Infrastructure
Affordability Skills
Individual
Environment
DRIVERS
Business Government
IMPACTS
Economic
Social
Readiness Usage
Figure 1: The evolved Networked Readiness Index framework
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
6  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
have an important impact on the quality of life 
and can potentially transform the quality and out-
comes of important services such as education 
or health.
2. An enabling environment determines the 
capacity of an economy and society to benefit 
from the use of ICT. The success of a country 
in leveraging ICT and achieving the desired eco-
nomic and social benefits will depend on its over-
all environment—including market conditions, the 
regulatory framework, and innovation-prone con-
ditions—to boost innovation and entrepreneurship.
3. ICT readiness and usage remain key drivers 
and preconditions for obtaining any impacts. 
Despite ICT becoming increasingly universal, the 
question of access and usage remains impor-
tant—especially for developing countries, given 
their need to narrow the digital divide. Even within 
developed nations, the need to provide high-
speed broadband to all segments of the popula-
tion has acquired importance in recent years. The 
NRI should include aspects related to access and 
usage covering not only affordable ICT infrastruc-
ture but also digital resources, including software, 
and the development of skills. Moreover, ICT 
impacts can arise only if ICT is widely used by all 
key actors—individuals, businesses, and govern-
ments. It is a society-wide effort. Those actors 
demonstrating better preparedness and greater 
interest are likely to use ICT more and more effec-
tively, contributing to a greater impact on com-
petitiveness and development.
4. All factors interact and co-evolve within an 
ICT ecosystem. Those societies that count on 
better-prepared actors and an enabling environ-
ment are more likely to benefit from higher rates 
of ICT use and impacts. At the same time, those 
societies that benefit from higher rates of ICT use 
and positive impacts will, in turn, be more likely 
to benefit from a push on the part of the differ-
ent stakeholders to be better prepared and keep 
improving the framework conditions that will allow 
for more and stronger benefits to accrue. As a 
result, a virtuous circle starts where improvements 
in one area affect and drive improvements in other 
areas. Conversely, lags in one particular factor 
also affect the evolution of the other factors.
5. The framework should provide clear policy  
orientations and identify public-private  
partnership opportunities. The NRI should 
clearly facilitate the identification of areas where 
policy intervention—through investment, includ-
ing public-private partnerships; smart regulation; 
or the provision of incentives—could boost the 
impacts of ICT. This is important because the 
development and general uptake of ICT depends 
on the capacity of a country to provide an institu-
tional framework with reliable and efficient rules 
and regulations; favorable business conditions for 
the birth and growth of new (social and commer-
cial) enterprises; an innovation-prone environment, 
The Networked
Readiness Index
Readiness Affordability
Infrastructure and digital content
Skills
Business usage
Individual usage
Government usage
Usage
Business and innovation environment
Political and regulatory environment
Environment
Subindexes Pillars
Social impacts
Economic impacts
Impact
Figure 2: The evolved Networked Readiness Index structure
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  7 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
capable of developing and absorbing new knowl-
edge; and an ICT-friendly government policy.
ELEMENTS OF THE NETWORKED READINESS INDEX
The networked readiness framework translates into the 
NRI, comprising four subindexes that measure the en-
vironment for ICT; the readiness of a society to use ICT; 
the actual usage of all main stakeholders; and, finally, the 
impacts that ICT generates in the economy and society. 
The three first subindexes can be regarded as the driv-
ers that condition the results of the fourth subindex—that 
is, ICT impacts. These four subindexes are divided into 
10 pillars and 53 variables according to the following 
structure (see also Figure 2):
A. Environment subindex
 1. Political and regulatory environment
 2. Business and innovation environment
B. Readiness subindex
 3. Infrastructure and digital content
 4. Affordability
 5. Skills
C. Usage subindex
 6. Individual usage
 7. Business usage
 8. Government usage
D. Impact subindex
 9. Economic impacts
 10. Social impacts
The final NRI score is a simple average of the four 
composing subindex scores, while each subindex’s 
score is a simple average of those of the composing  
pillars. In doing this, we assume that all Index subindexes 
give a similar contribution to national networked readi-
ness. Appendix A at the end of this chapter includes 
detailed information on the composition and computa-
tion of the NRI 2012.
A brief description of the different composing ele-
ments (at the subindex and pillar level) follows.
Environment subindex
The environment subindex gauges the friendliness of 
a country’s market and regulatory framework in sup-
porting high levels of ICT uptake and the development 
of entrepreneurship and innovation-prone conditions. A 
supportive environment is necessary to maximize the 
potential impacts of ICT in boosting competitiveness and 
well-being. It includes a total of 18 variables distributed 
into two pillars.
The political and regulatory environment pillar (nine 
variables) assesses the extent to which the national legal 
framework facilitates ICT penetration and the safe devel-
opment of business activities, taking into account gen-
eral features of the regulatory environment (including the 
protection afforded to property rights, the independence 
of the judiciary, and the efficiency of the law-making 
process) as well as more ICT-specific dimensions (the 
passing of laws relating ICT and software piracy rates).
The business and innovation environment pillar (nine 
variables) gauges the quality of the business framework 
conditions to boost entrepreneurship, taking into ac-
count dimensions related to the ease of doing business 
(including the presence of red tape and excessive fis-
cal charges). This pillar also measures the presence of 
conditions that allow innovation to flourish by including 
variables on the overall availability of technology, the 
demand conditions for innovative products (as proxied 
by the development of government procurement of 
advanced technology products), the availability of venture 
capital for financing innovation-related projects, and the 
presence of a skillful labor force.
Readiness subindex
The readiness subindex, with a total of 12 variables, 
measures the degree to which a society is prepared to 
make good use of an affordable ICT infrastructure and 
digital content.
The infrastructure and digital content pillar (five 
variables) captures the development of ICT infrastructure 
(including the mobile network coverage, international 
Internet bandwidth, secure Internet servers, and elec-
tricity production) as well as the accessibility of digital 
content.
The affordability pillar (three variables) assesses the 
cost of accessing ICT, either via mobile telephony or 
fixed broadband Internet, as well as the level of competi-
tion in the Internet and telephony sectors that determine 
this cost.
The skills pillar (four variables) gauges the ability of a 
society to make effective use of ICT thanks to the exis-
tence of basic educational skills captured by the quality 
of the educational system, the level of adult literacy, and 
the rate of secondary education enrollment.
Usage subindex
The usage subindex assesses the individual efforts of 
the main social agents—that is, individuals, business, 
and government—to increase their capacity to use ICT, 
as well as their actual use in their day-to-day activities 
with other agents. It includes 15 variables.
The individual usage pillar (seven variables) mea-
sures ICT penetration and diffusion at the individual level, 
using indicators such as the number of mobile phone 
subscriptions, individuals using the Internet, households 
with a personal computer (PC), households with Internet 
access, both fixed and mobile broadband subscriptions, 
and the use of social networks.
The business usage pillar (five variables) captures 
the extent of business Internet use as well as the efforts 
of the firms in an economy to integrate ICT into an inter-
nal, technology-savvy, innovation-conducive environment 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
8  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
that generates productivity gains. Consequently, this 
pillar measures the firm’s technology absorption capacity 
as well as its overall capacity to innovate and the pro-
duction of technology novelties measured by the number 
of PCT patent applications. It also measures the extent 
of staff training available, which indicates the extent to 
which management and employees are better capable of 
identifying and developing business innovations.
The government usage pillar (three variables) pro-
vides insights into the importance that governments 
place on carrying out ICT policies for competitiveness 
and the well-being of their citizens, the efforts they make 
to implement their visions for ICT development, and the 
number of government services they provide online.
Impact subindex
The impact subindex gauges the broad economic and 
social impacts accruing from ICT to boost competitive-
ness and well-being and that reflect the transformations 
toward an ICT- and technology-savvy economy and 
society. It includes a total of eight variables.
The economic impacts pillar measures the effect of 
ICT on competitiveness thanks to the generation of tech-
nological and non-technological innovations in the shape 
of patents, new products or processes, and organiza-
tional practices. In addition, it also measures the overall 
shift of an economy toward more knowledge-intensive 
activities.
The social impacts pillar aims at assessing the ICT-
driven improvements in well-being thanks to its impacts 
on the environment, education, energy consumption, 
health progress, or more-active civil participation. At the 
moment, because of data limitations, this pillar focuses 
on measuring the extent to which governments are 
becoming more efficient in the use of ICT and provid-
ing increasing online services to their citizens, and thus 
improving their e-participation. It also assess the extent 
to which ICT is present in education, as a proxy for the 
potential benefits that are associated with the use of ICT 
in education.
In general, measuring the impacts of ICT is a com-
plex task and the development of rigorous quantitative 
data to do so is still in its infancy.10 As a result, many of 
the dimensions where ICT is producing important im-
pacts—especially when these impacts are not translated 
into commercial activities, such as the environment of 
health—cannot be covered yet. Therefore this subindex 
should be regarded as a work in progress that will evolve 
to accommodate new data on many of these dimensions 
as they become available.
COMPUTATION METHODOLOGY AND DATA
In order to capture as comprehensively as possible all 
relevant dimensions of societies’ networked readiness, 
the NRI 2012 is composed of a mixture of quantitative 
and survey data, as shown in Figure 3.
Of the 53 variables composing the NRI, 28—or 
53 percent—are quantitative data, collected primar-
ily by international organizations such as International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), the World Bank, and 
the United Nations. International sources ensure the 
validation and comparability of data across countries. In 
addition, some other quantitative data come from pri-
vate enterprises—such as Informa, in the case of mobile 
Figure 3: Breakdown of indicators used in the Networked Readiness Index 2012 by data source
TOTAL: 53 INDICATORS
INDICATORS FROM 
OTHER SOURCES
28 INDICATORS
(53%)
EXECUTIVE OPINION 
SURVEY
25 INDICATORS
(47%)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  9 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
broadband penetration—that are leaders in collecting 
commercial ICT data.
The remaining 25 variables capture aspects that 
are more qualitative in nature or for which internationally 
comparable quantitative data are not available for a large 
enough number of countries, but that nonetheless are 
crucial to fully measure national networked readiness. 
These data come from the Executive Opinion Survey 
(the Survey), which the Forum administers annually to 
over 15,000 business leaders in all economies included 
in the Report.11 The Survey represents a unique source 
of insight on many important dimensions of an enabling 
environment, such as the effectiveness of law-making 
bodies and the intensity of local competition; on dimen-
sions of ICT readiness, such as the quality of the educa-
tional system and accessibility to digital content; on ICT 
usage, such as capacity to innovate and the importance 
of government vision for ICT; and finally on impact, such 
as ICT impacts on developing new products and ser-
vices and improving access to basic services.
The NRI’s coverage every year is determined by 
the Survey coverage and quantitative data availability. 
This year the Report includes 142 economies, three 
more than in the past edition. Three new countries are 
included for the first time: Belize, Haiti, and Yemen, while 
Suriname has been reinstated. Libya had to be dropped 
for lack of Survey data because of the events that took 
place in the country last spring.
More details on variables included in the Index and 
their computation can be found in Appendix A at the end 
of this chapter and in the Technical Notes and Sources 
section at the end of the Report.
THE CURRENT NETWORKED READINESS 
LANDSCAPE: INSIGHTS FROM THE NRI 2012
This section provides an overview of the networked 
readiness landscape of the world as assessed by the 
NRI 2012. It highlights the top 10 performers and the 
main regional results for Europe and the Commonwealth 
of Independent States, Asia and the Pacific, Latin 
America and the Caribbean, sub-Saharan Africa, and the 
Middle East and North Africa. Tables 1 through 5 report 
the 2012 rankings for the overall NRI, its four subindexes, 
and its ten pillars. In addition, the Country/Economy 
Profiles and Data Table sections at the end of the Report 
present the detailed results for the 142 economies cov-
ered by the study and the 53 indicators composing the 
NRI. To complement the analysis of the 2012 results, 
Box 2 depicts a comparative study of networked readi-
ness across and within different world regions (see also 
Figure 4) and Box 3 presents the correlation between ICT 
drivers, calculated as the average of the environment, 
readiness, and usage subindexes and ICT impacts.
TOP 10
The top 10 of the NRI is made up exclusively of ad-
vanced economies. That group is dominated by the 
Nordics, with Sweden, Finland, Denmark, and Norway 
featuring in the top 7, and Iceland coming in at a not-
so-distant 15th place. All members of the top 10 are 
relatively close to each other, and they tend to do well 
across all pillars, with some noticeable exceptions men-
tioned below.
Sweden’s performance is remarkable in every 
aspect. The country leads four of the 10 pillars of the 
Figure 4: Networked Readiness Index map
Score
n  5.5–7.0 (best)
n  5.0–5.5
n  4.0–5.0
n  3.5–4.0
n  3.5–1.0 (worst)
n  Not covered
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
10  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Box 2: Charting the digital divide
This brief comparative analysis confirms the existence of a 
global digital divide. Broadly defined, the digital divide refers 
to inequalities between the advanced economies and the rest 
of the world in terms of access and use of information and 
communication technologies (ICT), and thus its economic and 
social impacts. The Networked Readiness Index (NRI) frame-
work and rankings aim to shed light on the reasons behind 
the persistence and depth of this gap, through a holistic 
analysis of a country’s digital ecosystem.
Figure A plots the average score of selected country 
groups in the 10 pillars of the NRI and reveals the depth of 
the digital divide.1 The advanced economies lead the emerg-
ing countries by a significant margin in each category. The 
gap is the widest with sub-Saharan Africa, and smaller with 
Developing Asia and with Latin America and the Caribbean.
The divide is particularly deep in terms of infrastructure 
quality and digital content accessibility. In sub-Saharan Africa, 
the shortcomings in terms of skills and affordability—two criti-
cal areas of ICT readiness—are just as serious. This poor pre-
paredness in turn contributes to explaining the region’s dismal 
performance in terms of usage. Sub-Saharan Africa remains 
by far the world’s least-connected region. Despite mobile tele-
phony becoming almost commonplace in the region, with 49 
subscriptions per 100 population, access to other technolo-
gies remains the privilege of a few.2 For instance, only 13 per-
cent of individuals in sub-Saharan Africa use the Internet, 8 
percent of households in the region own a personal computer 
(PC), and less than 4 percent have access to the Internet at 
home. By comparison, in Developing Asia 20 percent of indi-
viduals use the Internet, 22 percent of households own a PC, 
and 14 percent have access to the Internet at home. In terms 
of differences across developing regions, Developing Asia 
and Latin America and the Caribbean are very close in most 
dimensions. Exceptions are found in the affordability pillar and 
government usage pillar—that is, the leadership role that gov-
ernments undertake to develop and leverage ICT in society, 
where the former outperforms the latter. In fact, Developing 
Asia has almost closed the gap with advanced economies in 
this latter dimension.
Group averages often conceal wide disparities within 
a group of countries. Although the dominance of advanced 
economies in the NRI is uncontested, Figure B shows the 
profound diversity within the group. The performance of 
the Nordics, led by Sweden, and of the Asian Tigers, led by 
Singapore, offers a stark contrast to the picture drawn by 
Southern and Eastern European economies.3 The average 
performance of Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain, grouped 
under Southern Europe for the purpose of this analysis, is sig-
nificantly below that of the Nordic countries. The chasm turns 
cavernous when considering specific dimensions of the NRI. 
That is the case in the business usage pillar, where the gap 
between Southern Europe and the Nordics is comparable to 
that between Developing Asia and advanced economies.
Similarly, Figure C illustrates the existence of a digital 
divide within the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region, 
where the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries stand 
out remarkably.4 Five of the GCC member countries place 
between the 27th (Bahrain) and 40th (Oman) ranks. Most of 
their governments have embraced ambitious digital strategies 
coupled with pro-business reforms and massive infrastructure 
developments as part of their efforts to attract foreign inves-
tors and to diversify their economies. This big government-
led push is reflected in the strong performance achieved in 
several dimensions of the NRI where the government plays 
a critical role, including the creation of an environment and 
legal framework conducive to business and innovation, skills, 
and usage of ICT by the government. In those pillars, the 
GCC average score tends to be very close to the average of 
advanced economies. The rest of MENA presents a much 
bleaker picture, with Syria (129th), Mauritania (139th), and 
Yemen (141st) ranking among the worst-performing countries 
globally.
Figure 4 in this chapter complements the present analy-
sis. It visualizes on a map the NRI score of the 142 economies 
covered by the study. The areas of the 10 best-performing 
countries are shaded dark red, whereas the worst-performing 
economies appear in dark blue. The orange color identifies 
economies with a fairly high degree of networked readiness, 
which, however, does not match that of the top-performing 
economies. This group of 15 notably includes several econo-
mies in Western Europe and all advanced economies in Asia 
and the Pacific except Singapore, which belongs to the red 
category. The brown shading is used for countries that are 
only partly leveraging ICT for enhancing their competitive-
ness and well-being. This is the case for several countries 
in Southern and Eastern Europe, Central Asia, and MENA. 
Indeed, the patchwork of colors in Europe reflects its huge 
diversity. Finally, blue shadings designate countries that pres-
ent major weaknesses in various dimensions of the NRI. The 
impacts of ICT therefore remain very limited, and minimal in 
the case of dark blue shaded countries. Africa is overwhelm-
ingly blue, and exclusively of the darkest shade in the western 
part of the continent.
Notes
1 In this box, all cited scores are expressed on a 1-to-7 scale, 
unless noted otherwise. When referring to a group, scores 
correspond to simple averages. Refer to Table 1 for the 
classification of economies by groups.
2 Figures cited in this paragraph are weighted average rates for 
2010 computed using data from International Telecommunication 
Union’s World Telecommunication Indicators 2011 Database 
(December 2011 update).
3 The Nordics group comprises Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, 
and Sweden. The Asian Tigers group comprises Honk Kong SAR, 
Korea, Singapore, and Taiwan, China.
4 The Gulf Cooperation Council comprises Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates.
(Cont’d.)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  11 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
Box 2: Charting the digital divide (cont’d.)
  Advanced economies
  Developing Asia
  Latin America and Caribbean
  Sub-Saharan Africa
  Advanced economies
  Nordics
  Asian Tigers
  Southern Europe
  Advanced economies
  Middle East & North Africa
  Gulf Cooperation Council
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
2
3
4
5
6
7
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure A: Performance in the NRI: Advanced economies and selected emerging regions
Figure B: Performance in the NRI: Advanced economies, selected subgroups
Figure C: Performance in the NRI: Advanced economies, Middle East and North Africa and Gulf Cooperation 
Council states
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
12  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Table 1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
 Rank Country/Economy Score Group*
1 Sweden 5.94 ADV
2 Singapore 5.86 ADV
3 Finland 5.81 ADV
4 Denmark 5.70 ADV
5 Switzerland 5.61 ADV
6 Netherlands 5.60 ADV
7 Norway 5.59 ADV
8 United States 5.56 ADV
9 Canada 5.51 ADV
10 United Kingdom 5.50 ADV
11 Taiwan, China 5.48 ADV
12 Korea, Rep. 5.47 ADV
13 Hong Kong SAR 5.46 ADV
14 New Zealand 5.36 ADV
15 Iceland 5.33 ADV
16 Germany 5.32 ADV
17 Australia 5.29 ADV
18 Japan 5.25 ADV
19 Austria 5.25 ADV
20 Israel 5.24 ADV
21 Luxembourg 5.22 ADV
22 Belgium 5.13 ADV
23 France 5.12 ADV
24 Estonia 5.09 ADV
25 Ireland 5.02 ADV
26 Malta 4.91 ADV
27 Bahrain 4.90 MENA
28 Qatar 4.81 MENA
29 Malaysia 4.80 DEVASIA
30 United Arab Emirates 4.77 MENA
31 Lithuania 4.66 CEE
32 Cyprus 4.66 ADV
33 Portugal 4.63 ADV
34 Saudi Arabia 4.62 MENA
35 Barbados 4.61 LATAM
36 Puerto Rico 4.59 ADV
37 Slovenia 4.58 ADV
38 Spain 4.54 ADV
39 Chile 4.44 LATAM
40 Oman 4.35 MENA
41 Latvia 4.35 CEE
42 Czech Republic 4.33 ADV
43 Hungary 4.30 CEE
44 Uruguay 4.28 LATAM
 45 Croatia 4.22 CEE
 46 Montenegro 4.22 CEE
 47 Jordan 4.17 MENA
48 Italy 4.17 ADV
49 Poland 4.16 CEE
50 Tunisia 4.12 MENA
51 China 4.11 DEVASIA
52 Turkey 4.07 CEE
53 Mauritius 4.06 SSA
54 Brunei Darussalam 4.04 DEVASIA
55 Kazakhstan 4.03 CIS
56 Russian Federation 4.02 CIS
57 Panama 4.01 LATAM
58 Costa Rica 4.00 LATAM
59 Greece 3.99 ADV
60 Trinidad and Tobago 3.98 LATAM
 61 Azerbaijan 3.95 CIS
 62 Kuwait 3.95 MENA
 63 Mongolia 3.95 CIS
 64 Slovak Republic 3.94 ADV
 65 Brazil 3.92 LATAM
 66 Macedonia, FYR 3.91 CEE
 67 Romania 3.90 CEE
 68 Albania 3.89 CEE
 69 India 3.89 DEVASIA
 70 Bulgaria 3.89 CEE
 71 Sri Lanka 3.88 DEVASIA
 Rank Country/Economy Score Group*
 72 South Africa 3.87 SSA
 73 Colombia 3.87 LATAM
 74 Jamaica 3.86 LATAM
 75 Ukraine 3.85 CIS
 76 Mexico 3.82 LATAM
 77 Thailand 3.78 DEVASIA
 78 Moldova 3.78 CIS
 79 Egypt 3.77 MENA
 80 Indonesia 3.75 DEVASIA
 81 Cape Verde 3.71 SSA
 82 Rwanda 3.70 SSA
 83 Vietnam 3.70 DEVASIA
 84 Bosnia and Herzegovina 3.65 CEE
 85 Serbia 3.64 CEE
 86 Philippines 3.64 DEVASIA
 87 Dominican Republic 3.60 LATAM
 88 Georgia 3.60 CIS
 89 Botswana 3.58 SSA
 90 Guyana 3.58 LATAM
 91 Morocco 3.56 MENA
 92 Argentina 3.52 LATAM
 93 Kenya 3.51 SSA
 94 Armenia 3.49 CIS
 95 Lebanon 3.49 MENA
 96 Ecuador 3.46 LATAM
 97 Ghana 3.44 SSA
 98 Guatemala 3.43 LATAM
 99 Honduras 3.43 LATAM
 100 Senegal 3.42 SSA
 101 Gambia, The 3.41 SSA
 102 Pakistan 3.39 DEVASIA
 103 El Salvador 3.38 LATAM
 104 Iran, Islamic Rep. 3.36 MENA
 105 Namibia 3.35 SSA
 106 Peru 3.34 LATAM
 107 Venezuela 3.32 LATAM
 108 Cambodia 3.32 DEVASIA
 109 Zambia 3.26 SSA
 110 Uganda 3.25 SSA
 111 Paraguay 3.25 LATAM
 112 Nigeria 3.22 SSA
 113 Bangladesh 3.20 DEVASIA
 114 Tajikistan 3.19 CIS
 115 Kyrgyz Republic 3.13 CIS
 116 Malawi 3.05 SSA
 117 Benin 3.05 SSA
 118 Algeria 3.01 MENA
 119 Belize 3.01 LATAM
 120 Mozambique 2.99 SSA
 121 Suriname 2.99 LATAM
 122 Côte d’Ivoire 2.98 SSA
 123 Tanzania 2.95 SSA
 124 Zimbabwe 2.94 SSA
 125 Cameroon 2.93 SSA
 126 Mali 2.93 SSA
 127 Bolivia 2.92 LATAM
 128 Nepal 2.92 DEVASIA
 129 Syria 2.85 MENA
 130 Ethiopia 2.85 SSA
 131 Nicaragua 2.84 LATAM
 132 Timor-Leste 2.84 DEVASIA
 133 Lesotho 2.78 SSA
 134 Madagascar 2.73 SSA
 135 Burkina Faso 2.72 SSA
 136 Swaziland 2.70 SSA
 137 Burundi 2.57 SSA
 138 Chad 2.55 SSA
 139 Mauritania 2.55 MENA
 140 Angola 2.49 SSA
 141 Yemen 2.41 MENA
 142 Haiti 2.27 LATAM
Note: Group classification follows the International Monetary Fund’s classification (situation as of September 2011). 
* Groups: ADV = Advanced economies; CEE = Central and Eastern Europe; CIS = Commonwealth of Independent States and Mongolia; DEVASIA = Developing Asia;  
LATAM = Latin America and the Caribbean; MENA = Middle East and North Africa; SSA = Sub-Saharan Africa.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  13 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
Table 2: Environment subindex and pillars
 
ENVIRONMENT SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score
1 Singapore 5.73 1 5.96 1 5.51
2 Finland 5.56 4 5.80 4 5.32
3 Sweden 5.51 2 5.86 11 5.15
4 New Zealand 5.48 3 5.84 14 5.12
5 Denmark 5.44 6 5.63 7 5.24
6 Switzerland 5.37 7 5.61 13 5.13
7 Hong Kong SAR 5.34 15 5.32 3 5.36
8 Canada 5.33 12 5.36 5 5.30
9 Netherlands 5.33 8 5.55 17 5.10
10 Norway 5.32 9 5.53 16 5.12
11 United Kingdom 5.28 10 5.51 20 5.05
12 Australia 5.28 11 5.48 18 5.07
13 Luxembourg 5.27 5 5.79 27 4.75
14 United States 5.11 21 4.99 9 5.22
15 Qatar 5.10 27 4.82 2 5.37
16 Iceland 5.02 22 4.98 19 5.06
17 Saudi Arabia 5.00 29 4.75 8 5.24
18 Germany 4.99 13 5.34 32 4.63
19 Israel 4.98 28 4.79 10 5.16
20 Ireland 4.95 18 5.16 28 4.75
21 Austria 4.93 14 5.33 37 4.53
22 Belgium 4.93 26 4.84 21 5.01
23 Malaysia 4.92 24 4.87 24 4.97
24 Taiwan, China 4.88 37 4.47 6 5.28
25 France 4.87 17 5.17 33 4.57
26 Japan 4.85 16 5.18 39 4.53
27 Bahrain 4.84 35 4.53 12 5.14
28 United Arab Emirates 4.83 31 4.66 22 5.00
29 Barbados 4.82 20 5.09 35 4.55
30 Chile 4.72 38 4.45 23 4.99
31 Cyprus 4.69 36 4.53 25 4.86
32 Estonia 4.69 25 4.85 36 4.54
33 Rwanda 4.66 19 5.10 57 4.22
34 South Africa 4.65 23 4.92 50 4.37
35 Korea, Rep. 4.63 43 4.14 15 5.12
36 Oman 4.63 34 4.59 31 4.67
37 Malta 4.60 30 4.68 41 4.51
38 Portugal 4.47 42 4.20 29 4.74
39 Puerto Rico 4.42 41 4.33 40 4.52
40 Spain 4.39 44 4.12 30 4.67
41 Mauritius 4.38 39 4.36 46 4.40
42 Slovenia 4.34 57 3.88 26 4.81
43 Uruguay 4.22 50 4.01 45 4.42
44 Namibia 4.22 33 4.60 87 3.83
45 Hungary 4.19 45 4.10 52 4.27
46 Lithuania 4.17 53 3.95 49 4.39
47 Montenegro 4.17 61 3.80 38 4.53
48 Jordan 4.16 58 3.87 43 4.45
49 Latvia 4.14 59 3.87 44 4.42
50 Czech Republic 4.11 51 4.00 59 4.21
51 Zambia 4.10 70 3.66 34 4.55
52 Botswana 4.10 40 4.33 79 3.88
53 Turkey 4.06 62 3.80 51 4.33
54 Gambia, The 4.06 32 4.61 117 3.51
55 Tunisia 4.02 49 4.02 67 4.03
56 Kuwait 3.99 60 3.81 61 4.17
57 Brunei Darussalam 3.99 48 4.03 76 3.95
58 Poland 3.98 66 3.75 58 4.22
59 Thailand 3.96 69 3.67 54 4.24
60 Macedonia, FYR 3.95 83 3.51 47 4.40
61 Panama 3.95 84 3.51 48 4.39
62 Jamaica 3.93 56 3.91 75 3.95
63 Ghana 3.89 55 3.94 82 3.85
64 China 3.88 46 4.07 105 3.69
65 Cape Verde 3.88 54 3.95 90 3.80
66 Morocco 3.86 68 3.68 66 4.04
67 Slovak Republic 3.86 74 3.63 65 4.09
68 Croatia 3.85 80 3.53 62 4.17
69 Greece 3.85 87 3.49 60 4.21
70 Malawi 3.80 47 4.05 114 3.56
71 Sri Lanka 3.79 64 3.75 85 3.84
 
ENVIRONMENT SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score
 72 Indonesia 3.79 88 3.48 64 4.09
 73 Bulgaria 3.78 99 3.30 53 4.27
 74 Georgia 3.77 98 3.31 55 4.23
 75 Italy 3.75 85 3.50 70 3.99
 76 Trinidad and Tobago 3.73 90 3.48 72 3.99
 77 Azerbaijan 3.73 75 3.60 80 3.86
 78 India 3.72 71 3.65 91 3.80
 79 Mexico 3.72 86 3.50 77 3.94
 80 Iran, Islamic Rep. 3.71 78 3.57 81 3.85
 81 Kazakhstan 3.70 92 3.42 71 3.99
 82 Albania 3.70 89 3.48 78 3.92
 83 Romania 3.69 95 3.37 68 4.02
 84 Ethiopia 3.69 72 3.64 99 3.75
 85 Egypt 3.68 76 3.59 94 3.76
 86 Guyana 3.67 81 3.52 88 3.81
 87 Tajikistan 3.67 52 3.97 128 3.36
 88 Senegal 3.66 106 3.18 63 4.15
 89 Cambodia 3.66 73 3.64 106 3.69
 90 Costa Rica 3.66 67 3.70 108 3.62
 91 Uganda 3.64 63 3.78 120 3.50
 92 Lebanon 3.64 129 2.78 42 4.50
 93 Peru 3.64 114 3.05 56 4.23
 94 Colombia 3.63 82 3.51 95 3.76
 95 Mongolia 3.59 105 3.18 69 4.01
 96 Vietnam 3.58 79 3.55 109 3.62
 97 Dominican Republic 3.58 104 3.19 73 3.98
 98 Nigeria 3.58 91 3.45 104 3.71
 99 Kenya 3.55 94 3.38 101 3.73
 100 Russian Federation 3.54 102 3.24 83 3.84
 101 Brazil 3.52 77 3.59 121 3.46
 102 Tanzania 3.51 65 3.75 129 3.28
 103 El Salvador 3.46 121 2.97 74 3.96
 104 Mali 3.45 93 3.39 118 3.51
 105 Serbia 3.45 113 3.05 84 3.84
 106 Moldova 3.45 109 3.08 89 3.81
 107 Honduras 3.44 100 3.28 112 3.60
 108 Mozambique 3.43 97 3.34 116 3.52
 109 Bosnia and Herzegovina 3.43 108 3.10 97 3.75
 110 Armenia 3.42 112 3.06 93 3.77
 111 Philippines 3.42 107 3.15 107 3.69
 112 Pakistan 3.42 110 3.08 96 3.76
 113 Burkina Faso 3.40 96 3.36 123 3.45
 114 Benin 3.35 101 3.27 124 3.43
 115 Syria 3.33 126 2.88 92 3.79
 116 Guatemala 3.32 128 2.81 86 3.84
 117 Ukraine 3.31 125 2.88 98 3.75
 118 Cameroon 3.30 119 2.98 111 3.61
 119 Ecuador 3.30 120 2.98 110 3.62
 120 Lesotho 3.28 115 3.03 115 3.54
 121 Belize 3.26 116 3.03 119 3.50
 122 Argentina 3.26 122 2.94 113 3.57
 123 Bangladesh 3.24 130 2.75 100 3.73
 124 Madagascar 3.20 134 2.68 103 3.72
 125 Nepal 3.19 123 2.93 122 3.46
 126 Paraguay 3.18 138 2.63 102 3.72
 127 Zimbabwe 3.13 111 3.06 132 3.21
 128 Swaziland 3.09 103 3.21 136 2.96
 129 Timor-Leste 3.08 124 2.90 130 3.27
 130 Côte d’Ivoire 3.03 135 2.68 127 3.38
 131 Suriname 3.02 137 2.64 126 3.40
 132 Kyrgyz Republic 2.99 131 2.73 131 3.25
 133 Bolivia 2.98 118 2.99 135 2.98
 134 Yemen 2.86 142 2.31 125 3.42
 135 Mauritania 2.85 117 3.01 140 2.69
 136 Algeria 2.83 132 2.70 137 2.96
 137 Nicaragua 2.82 136 2.66 134 2.99
 138 Venezuela 2.78 139 2.45 133 3.12
 139 Chad 2.68 127 2.82 142 2.54
 140 Burundi 2.63 141 2.33 138 2.93
 141 Angola 2.63 133 2.69 141 2.57
 142 Haiti 2.62 140 2.38 139 2.86
 Political and Business and 
 regulatory innovation 
 environment environment
 Political and Business and 
 regulatory innovation 
 environment environment
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
14  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Table 3: Readiness subindex and pillars
 
READINESS SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score Rank Score
1 Iceland 6.52 2 6.89 4 6.48 7 6.18
2 Finland 6.50 5 6.82 16 6.17 1 6.51
3 Sweden 6.44 1 6.90 7 6.38 12 6.03
4 Canada 6.35 3 6.84 21 6.03 5 6.19
5 United States 6.26 6 6.80 10 6.34 32 5.65
6 Norway 6.17 4 6.83 20 6.04 34 5.65
7 Switzerland 6.13 8 6.49 48 5.55 4 6.34
8 Singapore 6.06 20 5.88 29 5.84 2 6.46
9 Denmark 6.04 15 6.07 18 6.13 14 5.93
10 Austria 5.99 12 6.20 24 5.99 24 5.79
11 Netherlands 5.98 10 6.26 47 5.57 8 6.12
12 New Zealand 5.96 9 6.40 63 5.31 6 6.18
13 United Kingdom 5.96 11 6.21 27 5.85 21 5.81
14 Taiwan, China 5.95 19 5.92 30 5.83 9 6.11
15 Cyprus 5.93 23 5.71 14 6.21 17 5.85
16 Hong Kong SAR 5.90 28 5.48 5 6.40 23 5.81
17 Germany 5.88 14 6.09 38 5.72 20 5.82
18 Ireland 5.86 17 6.02 44 5.64 15 5.92
19 Luxembourg 5.86 13 6.17 36 5.74 31 5.66
20 Belgium 5.83 21 5.80 68 5.25 3 6.42
21 Malta 5.73 16 6.05 65 5.29 19 5.83
22 Lithuania 5.69 35 5.00 6 6.40 30 5.67
23 Estonia 5.67 24 5.69 54 5.48 18 5.83
24 Korea, Rep. 5.64 18 5.98 70 5.22 27 5.72
25 Bahrain 5.54 31 5.20 31 5.83 36 5.60
26 Australia 5.53 7 6.60 100 3.97 11 6.03
27 Japan 5.52 22 5.72 78 5.03 22 5.81
28 France 5.51 30 5.42 69 5.24 16 5.88
29 Latvia 5.44 47 4.68 13 6.23 43 5.40
30 Slovenia 5.43 29 5.43 71 5.20 29 5.67
31 Croatia 5.41 45 4.72 19 6.08 42 5.43
32 Russian Federation 5.41 40 4.84 17 6.16 53 5.22
33 Ukraine 5.34 74 3.76 2 6.76 39 5.51
34 Israel 5.32 38 4.86 32 5.81 48 5.29
35 Italy 5.30 43 4.78 28 5.85 51 5.28
36 United Arab Emirates 5.29 25 5.65 92 4.70 38 5.53
37 Portugal 5.28 34 5.02 40 5.70 59 5.12
38 Poland 5.25 41 4.78 50 5.53 41 5.43
39 Puerto Rico 5.24 53 4.55 11 6.33 78 4.84
40 Mongolia 5.22 64 4.22 3 6.52 71 4.92
41 Moldova 5.22 63 4.26 8 6.36 65 5.03
42 Romania 5.19 51 4.56 37 5.73 46 5.30
43 Trinidad and Tobago 5.19 44 4.73 64 5.30 37 5.53
44 Greece 5.17 42 4.78 49 5.54 55 5.19
45 Czech Republic 5.16 26 5.49 93 4.65 44 5.34
46 Saudi Arabia 5.14 36 4.99 85 4.81 35 5.61
47 Jordan 5.10 79 3.66 9 6.35 49 5.29
48 Kuwait 5.09 37 4.93 62 5.32 66 5.02
49 Hungary 5.08 61 4.32 55 5.47 40 5.46
50 Bosnia and Herzegovina 5.07 62 4.26 45 5.64 45 5.30
51 Barbados 5.06 33 5.13 102 3.97 10 6.09
52 Kazakhstan 5.06 71 3.88 15 6.18 60 5.12
53 Montenegro 5.05 46 4.68 87 4.80 28 5.68
54 Costa Rica 5.05 77 3.68 35 5.76 26 5.72
55 Malaysia 5.03 65 4.12 41 5.69 47 5.29
56 Spain 4.99 32 5.17 90 4.73 64 5.07
57 Serbia 4.97 56 4.40 59 5.39 61 5.11
58 Mauritius 4.95 73 3.78 23 6.00 63 5.08
59 Qatar 4.93 27 5.48 111 3.33 13 5.98
60 Turkey 4.86 52 4.55 53 5.48 92 4.54
61 Azerbaijan 4.86 72 3.78 25 5.98 82 4.81
62 Jamaica 4.82 54 4.46 61 5.35 90 4.65
63 Uruguay 4.81 49 4.65 83 4.92 76 4.87
64 India 4.79 100 3.16 1 6.94 100 4.27
65 Albania 4.78 75 3.74 57 5.43 56 5.18
66 China 4.78 87 3.49 42 5.67 57 5.18
67 Sri Lanka 4.78 102 3.12 22 6.02 54 5.20
68 Tunisia 4.76 70 3.91 73 5.16 52 5.22
69 Panama 4.74 55 4.43 39 5.72 102 4.09
70 Oman 4.74 69 3.99 82 4.94 50 5.28
 71 Chile 4.71 50 4.59 89 4.74 83 4.79
 
READINESS SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score Rank Score
 72 Brazil 4.66 68 4.00 67 5.27 86 4.72
 73 Bulgaria 4.65 39 4.86 98 4.12 70 4.98
 74 Indonesia 4.63 103 3.11 34 5.78 69 4.99
 75 Thailand 4.58 107 3.06 33 5.80 74 4.87
 76 Mexico 4.57 81 3.62 52 5.50 91 4.59
 77 Philippines 4.57 80 3.66 72 5.18 77 4.86
 78 Macedonia, FYR 4.55 59 4.36 96 4.29 68 5.00
 79 Egypt 4.54 89 3.43 12 6.30 108 3.87
 80 Venezuela 4.47 83 3.54 60 5.37 93 4.52
 81 Guyana 4.44 92 3.35 66 5.28 88 4.68
 82 Paraguay 4.44 67 4.01 56 5.44 109 3.86
 83 Slovak Republic 4.43 57 4.38 104 3.91 67 5.01
 84 Argentina 4.38 58 4.37 103 3.93 80 4.83
 85 Colombia 4.37 88 3.47 95 4.49 58 5.15
 86 Vietnam 4.36 101 3.12 76 5.07 73 4.89
 87 Brunei Darussalam 4.34 48 4.66 135 2.58 25 5.78
 88 Algeria 4.33 105 3.08 51 5.52 97 4.40
 89 Lebanon 4.31 95 3.22 99 4.06 33 5.65
 90 Armenia 4.26 85 3.52 97 4.19 62 5.09
 91 Ecuador 4.25 90 3.37 81 4.95 96 4.42
 92 Dominican Republic 4.18 84 3.54 75 5.12 107 3.87
 93 Georgia 4.15 60 4.34 116 3.27 79 4.83
 94 South Africa 4.13 82 3.58 94 4.55 101 4.26
 95 Cape Verde 4.12 117 2.78 86 4.81 84 4.76
 96 Honduras 4.05 96 3.22 80 5.01 105 3.92
 97 Pakistan 4.03 108 3.05 26 5.91 129 3.13
 98 Botswana 4.00 93 3.27 101 3.97 85 4.75
 99 Ghana 4.00 124 2.62 46 5.57 112 3.79
 100 Morocco 3.97 94 3.25 77 5.06 119 3.62
 101 Kyrgyz Republic 3.93 98 3.21 106 3.70 75 4.87
 102 El Salvador 3.92 104 3.11 84 4.86 113 3.79
 103 Bangladesh 3.87 114 2.87 58 5.41 125 3.32
 104 Iran, Islamic Rep. 3.75 99 3.16 114 3.27 81 4.82
 105 Guatemala 3.75 110 3.03 91 4.71 122 3.49
 106 Cambodia 3.74 66 4.07 110 3.34 111 3.82
 107 Uganda 3.74 118 2.78 79 5.03 124 3.41
 108 Kenya 3.68 112 2.90 109 3.43 87 4.70
 109 Burundi 3.54 131 2.28 43 5.66 135 2.68
 110 Zimbabwe 3.50 126 2.51 107 3.59 98 4.39
 111 Nepal 3.47 135 2.05 74 5.14 128 3.22
 112 Belize 3.39 78 3.66 131 2.83 116 3.67
 113 Namibia 3.37 97 3.21 126 2.91 104 3.99
 114 Suriname 3.36 130 2.37 120 3.04 89 4.68
 115 Tajikistan 3.28 138 1.94 122 3.00 72 4.90
 116 Zambia 3.28 120 2.73 115 3.27 110 3.83
 117 Timor-Leste 3.26 76 3.73 113 3.28 133 2.77
 118 Senegal 3.20 109 3.04 112 3.32 127 3.24
 119 Nicaragua 3.19 91 3.37 134 2.60 120 3.61
 120 Rwanda 3.19 113 2.89 119 3.05 118 3.64
 121 Côte d’Ivoire 3.15 106 3.08 108 3.49 131 2.87
 122 Bolivia 3.11 129 2.40 136 2.44 95 4.49
 123 Nigeria 3.09 119 2.75 118 3.08 123 3.44
 124 Swaziland 3.04 122 2.68 137 2.40 103 4.04
 125 Tanzania 3.03 125 2.54 128 2.88 117 3.67
 126 Gambia, The 3.01 115 2.82 133 2.62 121 3.61
 127 Lesotho 3.00 133 2.13 123 2.98 106 3.90
 128 Benin 2.99 116 2.80 125 2.91 126 3.25
 129 Peru 2.96 86 3.52 141 1.00 99 4.37
 130 Chad 2.94 141 1.77 88 4.76 140 2.30
 131 Cameroon 2.94 132 2.21 129 2.87 114 3.74
 132 Malawi 2.86 123 2.68 138 2.21 115 3.70
 133 Syria 2.86 111 2.98 140 1.11 94 4.50
 134 Mozambique 2.84 136 2.05 105 3.77 134 2.69
 135 Madagascar 2.77 134 2.11 117 3.10 130 3.10
 136 Yemen 2.71 121 2.69 127 2.90 136 2.53
 137 Mauritania 2.58 128 2.42 124 2.93 139 2.41
 138 Ethiopia 2.50 140 1.86 132 2.80 132 2.86
 139 Angola 2.49 137 1.98 121 3.04 137 2.46
 140 Mali 2.31 139 1.86 130 2.87 141 2.22
 141 Burkina Faso 2.14 127 2.45 139 1.83 142 2.13
 142 Haiti 1.97 142 1.50 n/a n/a 138 2.44
 Infrastructure  
 and digital  
 content Affordability Skills
 Infrastructure  
 and digital  
 content Affordability Skills
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  15 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
   
 Individual Business Governent 
 usage usage usage
   
 Individual Business Governent 
 usage usage usage
Table 4: Usage subindex and pillars
 
USAGE SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score Rank Score
1 Sweden 5.92 1 6.33 1 6.22 10 5.21
2 Korea, Rep. 5.84 2 6.27 12 5.36 1 5.90
3 Denmark 5.77 4 6.22 4 5.96 12 5.15
4 Finland 5.66 5 6.15 5 5.96 17 4.88
5 Singapore 5.60 10 5.79 14 5.25 2 5.78
6 Norway 5.59 3 6.23 9 5.46 13 5.08
7 Switzerland 5.54 6 5.95 2 6.13 35 4.55
8 Japan 5.51 13 5.61 3 6.09 21 4.83
9 Netherlands 5.46 11 5.78 8 5.75 19 4.84
10 United States 5.45 18 5.37 10 5.45 5 5.52
11 United Kingdom 5.41 8 5.88 16 5.09 7 5.27
12 Israel 5.36 15 5.53 7 5.80 24 4.74
13 Germany 5.33 14 5.53 6 5.86 30 4.61
14 Taiwan, China 5.31 28 4.92 13 5.31 3 5.70
15 Luxembourg 5.26 7 5.91 18 5.03 20 4.83
16 Hong Kong SAR 5.22 12 5.64 20 4.99 15 5.03
17 Australia 5.19 16 5.48 22 4.82 8 5.26
18 Canada 5.11 20 5.29 23 4.78 9 5.24
19 Iceland 5.10 9 5.83 15 5.11 42 4.35
20 Austria 5.07 17 5.37 11 5.39 39 4.43
21 France 5.06 21 5.27 17 5.07 18 4.86
22 New Zealand 5.04 19 5.34 24 4.73 14 5.04
23 Belgium 4.91 23 5.15 19 5.03 34 4.56
24 Estonia 4.80 22 5.17 28 4.35 16 4.89
25 Qatar 4.79 26 5.07 26 4.54 22 4.78
26 Bahrain 4.77 30 4.78 39 3.94 4 5.59
27 Malta 4.69 27 4.94 35 3.98 11 5.16
28 Ireland 4.66 25 5.08 25 4.66 47 4.26
29 Malaysia 4.60 47 4.01 27 4.43 6 5.35
30 United Arab Emirates 4.52 31 4.77 30 4.20 32 4.59
31 Portugal 4.47 35 4.67 36 3.98 23 4.75
32 Spain 4.34 34 4.70 40 3.89 40 4.43
33 Saudi Arabia 4.33 44 4.08 31 4.20 25 4.70
34 Barbados 4.30 24 5.08 41 3.88 61 3.94
35 Lithuania 4.28 32 4.76 38 3.94 49 4.13
36 Puerto Rico 4.26 53 3.86 21 4.84 54 4.07
37 Slovenia 4.24 33 4.76 32 4.15 69 3.81
38 Czech Republic 4.15 38 4.57 29 4.20 77 3.69
39 Chile 4.12 55 3.80 42 3.88 26 4.69
40 Oman 4.12 51 3.90 46 3.82 29 4.65
41 Brunei Darussalam 4.10 39 4.57 61 3.61 50 4.12
42 Hungary 4.06 41 4.53 54 3.70 60 3.95
43 Uruguay 4.01 48 3.98 64 3.55 36 4.49
44 Latvia 3.98 42 4.51 52 3.73 76 3.70
45 Italy 3.95 29 4.79 45 3.82 113 3.24
46 Cyprus 3.91 45 4.06 50 3.74 62 3.94
47 Croatia 3.90 36 4.58 79 3.48 82 3.64
48 Slovak Republic 3.89 37 4.58 55 3.67 100 3.42
49 Poland 3.88 40 4.55 58 3.65 99 3.43
50 Montenegro 3.84 50 3.91 70 3.51 53 4.09
51 China 3.82 82 2.92 37 3.97 33 4.58
52 Trinidad and Tobago 3.79 43 4.26 81 3.46 81 3.65
53 Tunisia 3.78 78 2.95 51 3.74 27 4.67
54 Brazil 3.78 66 3.34 33 4.04 59 3.97
55 Jordan 3.77 67 3.31 69 3.52 37 4.48
56 Panama 3.76 64 3.42 48 3.79 55 4.07
57 Azerbaijan 3.73 70 3.25 72 3.51 38 4.44
58 Colombia 3.72 76 2.99 71 3.51 28 4.65
59 Turkey 3.69 62 3.45 57 3.65 58 3.98
60 Russian Federation 3.69 52 3.90 83 3.43 71 3.73
61 Macedonia, FYR 3.68 46 4.03 113 3.12 63 3.90
62 Albania 3.66 59 3.58 74 3.51 64 3.90
63 Costa Rica 3.64 65 3.34 43 3.86 74 3.72
64 Mauritius 3.61 73 3.15 62 3.60 52 4.10
65 Kazakhstan 3.61 74 3.09 93 3.34 41 4.39
66 Greece 3.55 49 3.96 97 3.30 102 3.39
67 Kuwait 3.55 60 3.55 80 3.47 84 3.63
68 Bulgaria 3.54 56 3.79 101 3.23 87 3.60
69 Vietnam 3.52 80 2.94 78 3.48 48 4.14
70 Romania 3.50 54 3.80 91 3.34 105 3.36
71 Sri Lanka 3.47 107 2.24 44 3.84 43 4.32
 
USAGE SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score Rank Score
 72 Mexico 3.45 77 2.98 75 3.50 66 3.87
 73 Morocco 3.44 69 3.25 92 3.34 70 3.75
 74 Egypt 3.42 79 2.95 103 3.23 51 4.10
 75 Mongolia 3.40 101 2.46 84 3.43 44 4.32
 76 South Africa 3.38 96 2.57 34 4.01 89 3.55
 77 Argentina 3.38 58 3.59 86 3.42 119 3.12
 78 India 3.36 117 2.01 47 3.81 46 4.26
 79 Jamaica 3.36 84 2.87 67 3.53 78 3.68
 80 Cape Verde 3.35 94 2.61 110 3.16 45 4.29
 81 Peru 3.34 85 2.87 85 3.43 73 3.72
 82 Dominican Republic 3.33 87 2.78 95 3.33 65 3.88
 83 Thailand 3.32 90 2.73 60 3.63 86 3.61
 84 Ukraine 3.31 72 3.16 76 3.49 111 3.28
 85 Indonesia 3.28 103 2.39 49 3.76 75 3.70
 86 Philippines 3.28 95 2.61 63 3.58 79 3.66
 87 Rwanda 3.28 133 1.69 66 3.53 31 4.61
 88 Senegal 3.24 115 2.11 59 3.64 57 3.98
 89 Armenia 3.24 75 3.04 104 3.21 95 3.47
 90 Moldova 3.24 71 3.20 120 3.04 94 3.48
 91 Kenya 3.23 109 2.19 56 3.65 67 3.87
 92 Guyana 3.22 97 2.55 82 3.46 80 3.66
 93 Serbia 3.22 57 3.68 133 2.79 115 3.20
 94 Georgia 3.21 83 2.92 109 3.17 90 3.53
 95 Gambia, The 3.19 110 2.17 65 3.54 68 3.85
 96 Botswana 3.17 102 2.41 87 3.39 72 3.72
 97 Ecuador 3.16 86 2.80 100 3.24 96 3.45
 98 Honduras 3.16 93 2.63 73 3.51 107 3.33
 99 Bosnia and Herzegovina 3.14 61 3.46 126 2.96 123 3.01
 100 El Salvador 3.14 88 2.74 88 3.39 110 3.28
 101 Guatemala 3.13 91 2.65 53 3.73 121 3.02
 102 Suriname 3.11 63 3.45 102 3.23 133 2.66
 103 Venezuela 3.05 81 2.94 117 3.09 117 3.13
 104 Iran, Islamic Rep. 3.05 92 2.63 121 3.00 92 3.51
 105 Lebanon 3.02 68 3.25 94 3.33 138 2.47
 106 Namibia 3.01 111 2.16 68 3.53 108 3.33
 107 Pakistan 3.00 104 2.32 96 3.30 103 3.39
 108 Bangladesh 2.98 125 1.84 118 3.05 56 4.06
 109 Nigeria 2.98 105 2.32 77 3.49 116 3.13
 110 Côte d’Ivoire 2.92 113 2.12 105 3.20 97 3.44
 111 Cambodia 2.92 126 1.82 89 3.37 88 3.57
 112 Benin 2.89 112 2.12 106 3.18 104 3.37
 113 Zambia 2.88 123 1.88 90 3.36 101 3.39
 114 Ghana 2.86 116 2.01 99 3.25 109 3.32
 115 Tajikistan 2.81 119 1.94 111 3.14 106 3.34
 116 Syria 2.79 98 2.50 129 2.87 127 2.98
 117 Uganda 2.78 135 1.67 108 3.17 93 3.50
 118 Mali 2.77 129 1.72 124 2.97 83 3.63
 119 Paraguay 2.77 100 2.50 116 3.09 131 2.72
 120 Bolivia 2.75 108 2.22 123 2.98 120 3.05
 121 Mozambique 2.73 138 1.58 115 3.09 91 3.51
 122 Kyrgyz Republic 2.68 106 2.28 134 2.77 126 2.99
 123 Belize 2.68 99 2.50 119 3.05 137 2.49
 124 Tanzania 2.67 131 1.70 114 3.11 114 3.21
 125 Zimbabwe 2.67 122 1.90 112 3.12 125 2.99
 126 Cameroon 2.66 134 1.68 107 3.18 118 3.12
 127 Algeria 2.66 89 2.74 140 2.60 135 2.64
 128 Burkina Faso 2.62 139 1.56 131 2.86 98 3.43
 129 Malawi 2.62 137 1.59 98 3.25 124 3.01
 130 Angola 2.58 127 1.81 137 2.67 112 3.27
 131 Timor-Leste 2.58 120 1.94 132 2.79 122 3.02
 132 Nicaragua 2.57 118 2.01 122 3.00 132 2.70
 133 Ethiopia 2.55 142 1.33 136 2.71 85 3.62
 134 Lesotho 2.54 130 1.71 125 2.97 129 2.93
 135 Nepal 2.48 136 1.62 130 2.86 128 2.95
 136 Madagascar 2.46 132 1.69 128 2.91 130 2.78
 137 Swaziland 2.41 114 2.11 127 2.91 140 2.21
 138 Mauritania 2.35 124 1.84 141 2.57 136 2.63
 139 Haiti 2.25 121 1.94 135 2.71 141 2.11
 140 Chad 2.22 141 1.37 138 2.61 134 2.66
 141 Yemen 2.16 128 1.80 139 2.61 142 2.07
 142 Burundi 2.05 140 1.42 142 2.45 139 2.28
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
16  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Table 5: Impact subindex and pillars
 
IMPACT SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score
1 Singapore 6.03 2 6.14 3 5.91
2 Sweden 5.90 1 6.15 6 5.64
3 Taiwan, China 5.78 7 5.61 2 5.95
4 Korea, Rep. 5.76 12 5.31 1 6.21
5 Netherlands 5.64 4 5.89 13 5.40
6 Denmark 5.53 8 5.48 7 5.58
7 Finland 5.50 5 5.84 18 5.17
8 United States 5.42 9 5.47 14 5.38
9 Switzerland 5.42 3 5.92 25 4.92
10 Hong Kong SAR 5.37 16 5.05 5 5.69
11 United Kingdom 5.35 14 5.18 9 5.52
12 Israel 5.29 6 5.70 28 4.88
13 Norway 5.28 11 5.33 17 5.24
14 Canada 5.23 17 5.02 11 5.45
15 Estonia 5.21 21 4.65 4 5.77
16 Australia 5.16 20 4.75 8 5.57
17 Japan 5.13 10 5.37 26 4.90
18 Germany 5.10 13 5.31 27 4.89
19 France 5.03 15 5.08 23 4.98
20 Austria 5.02 19 4.76 16 5.29
21 New Zealand 4.98 25 4.50 10 5.45
22 Belgium 4.86 22 4.65 20 5.08
23 Iceland 4.67 23 4.58 32 4.77
24 Malaysia 4.64 31 3.97 15 5.31
25 Malta 4.61 28 4.11 19 5.12
26 Ireland 4.58 18 4.82 41 4.34
27 Lithuania 4.52 30 4.07 24 4.96
28 Luxembourg 4.50 27 4.28 34 4.72
29 Puerto Rico 4.45 24 4.50 39 4.40
30 Bahrain 4.44 54 3.44 12 5.44
31 Spain 4.44 33 3.86 22 5.02
32 Qatar 4.43 34 3.81 21 5.05
33 United Arab Emirates 4.42 29 4.09 33 4.76
34 Slovenia 4.32 32 3.87 31 4.77
35 Portugal 4.30 37 3.74 29 4.87
36 Barbados 4.26 26 4.32 44 4.20
37 Chile 4.21 35 3.78 36 4.63
38 Cyprus 4.11 43 3.59 37 4.63
39 Uruguay 4.08 47 3.51 35 4.65
40 Saudi Arabia 4.01 40 3.64 40 4.37
41 China 3.96 79 3.15 30 4.77
42 Oman 3.92 55 3.44 38 4.41
43 Czech Republic 3.91 38 3.71 48 4.10
44 Tunisia 3.90 51 3.46 42 4.33
45 Hungary 3.87 44 3.56 45 4.18
46 Latvia 3.83 42 3.62 53 4.04
47 Montenegro 3.80 39 3.70 57 3.91
48 Colombia 3.76 58 3.36 47 4.15
49 Kazakhstan 3.73 80 3.15 43 4.31
50 Brunei Darussalam 3.73 64 3.28 46 4.18
51 Croatia 3.71 61 3.33 50 4.09
52 India 3.70 41 3.64 65 3.76
53 Brazil 3.70 52 3.46 54 3.93
54 Italy 3.68 36 3.74 74 3.62
55 Turkey 3.67 67 3.27 52 4.07
56 Rwanda 3.67 50 3.49 60 3.85
57 Jordan 3.66 70 3.23 49 4.10
58 Costa Rica 3.66 45 3.55 63 3.77
59 Kenya 3.59 56 3.41 64 3.77
60 Bulgaria 3.59 69 3.26 55 3.92
61 Panama 3.58 65 3.28 59 3.88
62 Mongolia 3.56 84 3.04 51 4.09
63 Slovak Republic 3.56 49 3.50 72 3.62
64 Senegal 3.56 46 3.53 79 3.58
65 Mexico 3.56 71 3.22 58 3.89
66 Poland 3.53 57 3.37 68 3.69
67 Guatemala 3.52 48 3.51 81 3.54
68 Cape Verde 3.50 74 3.20 62 3.79
69 Sri Lanka 3.49 63 3.30 70 3.68
70 Azerbaijan 3.48 68 3.27 67 3.70
71 Macedonia, FYR 3.45 87 2.99 56 3.91
 
IMPACT SUBINDEX
 Rank Country/Economy Score Rank Score Rank Score
 72 Albania 3.44 75 3.18 69 3.69
 73 Russian Federation 3.43 53 3.45 89 3.41
 74 Egypt 3.43 62 3.33 83 3.52
 75 Ukraine 3.42 66 3.28 80 3.56
 76 Peru 3.41 72 3.22 75 3.61
 77 Greece 3.40 73 3.21 77 3.59
 78 Gambia, The 3.37 78 3.16 78 3.58
 79 Vietnam 3.33 102 2.85 61 3.81
 80 Dominican Republic 3.33 76 3.16 86 3.50
 81 South Africa 3.32 59 3.36 98 3.29
 82 Jamaica 3.32 81 3.13 84 3.51
 83 Mauritius 3.29 83 3.06 82 3.53
 84 Philippines 3.29 77 3.16 88 3.42
 85 Thailand 3.28 96 2.93 71 3.64
 86 Indonesia 3.28 106 2.84 66 3.72
 87 Georgia 3.26 100 2.91 73 3.62
 88 Nigeria 3.25 60 3.33 102 3.16
 89 Moldova 3.21 91 2.98 87 3.44
 90 Romania 3.21 98 2.92 85 3.50
 91 Trinidad and Tobago 3.20 89 2.99 90 3.41
 92 Mali 3.18 86 3.01 94 3.35
 93 Kuwait 3.17 110 2.73 76 3.60
 94 Pakistan 3.12 94 2.95 99 3.29
 95 Ecuador 3.12 97 2.92 95 3.31
 96 Argentina 3.07 82 3.07 108 3.08
 97 Honduras 3.07 85 3.01 104 3.12
 98 Botswana 3.06 113 2.70 91 3.41
 99 Armenia 3.05 90 2.98 106 3.11
 100 Ghana 3.02 88 2.99 111 3.04
 101 Guyana 3.00 114 2.69 96 3.30
 102 El Salvador 2.99 93 2.96 113 3.03
 103 Tajikistan 2.99 115 2.69 97 3.30
 104 Lebanon 2.99 92 2.97 114 3.00
 105 Bosnia and Herzegovina 2.97 111 2.73 101 3.21
 106 Benin 2.97 101 2.88 110 3.05
 107 Venezuela 2.97 95 2.94 115 2.99
 108 Mozambique 2.95 104 2.84 109 3.06
 109 Morocco 2.94 127 2.49 92 3.40
 110 Cambodia 2.94 126 2.52 93 3.36
 111 Serbia 2.94 108 2.76 105 3.11
 112 Malawi 2.94 99 2.91 117 2.96
 113 Iran, Islamic Rep. 2.93 107 2.76 107 3.10
 114 Kyrgyz Republic 2.91 120 2.59 100 3.24
 115 Uganda 2.86 121 2.59 103 3.12
 116 Bolivia 2.85 117 2.65 112 3.04
 117 Cameroon 2.84 105 2.84 124 2.84
 118 Côte d’Ivoire 2.81 103 2.84 125 2.78
 119 Namibia 2.81 116 2.68 118 2.93
 120 Nicaragua 2.78 118 2.63 119 2.93
 121 Zambia 2.77 122 2.58 116 2.96
 122 Burkina Faso 2.74 109 2.75 127 2.72
 123 Belize 2.72 123 2.56 122 2.88
 124 Bangladesh 2.72 125 2.53 120 2.91
 125 Ethiopia 2.66 128 2.43 121 2.89
 126 Paraguay 2.62 112 2.72 131 2.52
 127 Tanzania 2.57 133 2.30 123 2.84
 128 Nepal 2.54 132 2.33 126 2.75
 129 Madagascar 2.47 134 2.29 128 2.66
 130 Zimbabwe 2.44 124 2.55 137 2.34
 131 Suriname 2.44 119 2.59 138 2.29
 132 Syria 2.43 136 2.26 129 2.61
 133 Timor-Leste 2.43 131 2.36 132 2.49
 134 Mauritania 2.40 137 2.25 130 2.55
 135 Chad 2.37 130 2.38 136 2.37
 136 Lesotho 2.27 139 2.11 134 2.44
 137 Angola 2.26 135 2.26 139 2.26
 138 Haiti 2.25 129 2.42 140 2.08
 139 Swaziland 2.24 142 2.01 133 2.47
 140 Algeria 2.24 140 2.10 135 2.37
 141 Burundi 2.07 138 2.19 141 1.95
 142 Yemen 1.93 141 2.08 142 1.77
 Economic  Social 
 impacts impacts
 Economic  Social 
 impacts impacts
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  17 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
NRI, namely infrastructure and digital content, individual 
usage, business usage, and economic impacts; and 
in the remaining six pillars, it ranks no lower than 12th. 
Sweden has in place a virtuous circle. A conducive 
environment, combined with the highest degree of readi-
ness and widespread use of ubiquitous technologies, 
maximize the economic and social impacts of ICT, create 
new business opportunities, foster innovation, and con-
tribute to reinforce a knowledge-based economy. In this 
near-perfect assessment, only a handful of indicators call 
for attention: the typical corporate tax rate is fairly high 
at 53 percent of profits (114th), and two indicators reveal 
the length of certain administrative procedures, contrast-
ing with the otherwise extremely efficient institutional 
framework. In addition, the government could certainly 
improve its online presence and its degree of interaction 
with the population, on which two measures Sweden 
earns a middling 0.53 and 0.49, respectively, on a 0-to-1 
scale.
Second to Sweden, Singapore leads the group of 
the Asian Tigers, ahead of Taiwan, China (11th), Korea, 
Rep. (12th), and Hong Kong SAR (13th), which stand 
at the doorway of the top 10. Compared with Sweden, 
Singapore’s performance is nearly as impressive. The 
city state leads the political and regulatory environment 
pillar and the business and innovation environment pillar, 
and is among the top 10 of five more pillars. It tops the 
impact subindex thanks to the 2nd and 3rd rank earned 
in the economic impacts pillar and social impacts pillar, 
respectively.
Third overall and second among the Nordics, 
Finland posts a strong performance across all pillars, 
earning the top spot in the skills pillar, placing in the 
top 10 of six others, and ranking no lower than 17th in 
the remaining three. The country’s level of readiness is 
first rate, thanks to its world-class educational system, 
relatively inexpensive technologies, and excellent in-
frastructure. As a result, ICT is ubiquitous and uptake 
by the population is quasi universal. Over 80 percent 
of households own a PC (16th) and are connected to 
the Internet (13th). A staggering 87 percent (7th highest 
rate) of individuals are regular Internet users and mobile 
broadband Internet is already widespread, with 61 such 
subscriptions per 100 population. A conducive environ-
ment, a skilled population, and pervasive technology 
all contribute to making Finland one of the most prolific 
innovators in the world, ranking 3rd for the number of 
patent applications per capita. In this context, one would 
almost be concerned by the government’s limited suc-
cess in promoting (20th) and using ICT to engage with 
the population (30th).
As for the two Nordics preceding it, Denmark’s 
state of networked readiness is astounding (4th). The 
country ranks in the top 10 of six pillars and no lower 
than 18th in the remaining four. The environment is par-
ticularly conducive, be it the institutional and regulatory 
framework (6th) or the business context (7th). Individual 
and business usage is widespread. Denmark posts 
some of the world’s highest per capita figures in terms 
of Internet users, fixed and mobile broadband Internet 
subscribers, and PCs. The use of virtual social networks 
is pervasive, as reflected in Denmark’s score (6.6 out 
of 7) and rank (2nd, behind Iceland) in the associated 
indicator.
Switzerland rounds up the top 5. The country 
features in the top 10 of six pillars, and comes in at 
4th place in the skills pillar. Boosted by the high de-
gree of readiness and a propitious environment, the 
country boasts very high usage rates. It ranks 6th on 
the individual usage pillar, owing to very high penetra-
tion rates of mobile telephony, computers, Internet, and 
broadband Internet. Furthermore, it places 2nd in the 
business usage pillar, behind Sweden. ICT is having a 
very significant impact on the economy (3rd), leading 
to new services, products, and business models and 
fostering innovation. Its impact on society seems to be 
less marked (25th). This relates to the weakest aspect 
of Switzerland’s performance, namely the modest en-
gagement of its government in promoting and using ICT 
(35th). The country’s performance is also affected by the 
costliness of ICT (48th) even when adjusting for purchas-
ing power differentials.
The Netherlands (6th) delivers a strong perfor-
mance. The affordability pillar represents the only real 
weakness in its assessment (47th). The country earns 
excellent marks in terms of ICT usage (9th). In particular, 
the Netherlands boasts the world’s highest broadband 
Internet penetration rate with 40 subscriptions per 100 
population, the second-highest percentage of computer 
ownership (92 percent of households), and third-highest 
percentage of individuals using the Internet (90.1 per-
cent). The country’s best rank is achieved in the eco-
nomic impacts pillar (4th), thanks to the high share of 
knowledge-intensive jobs in the economy—almost 50 
percent, the third highest in the world—and the country’s 
knack for innovation, as reflected in the fifth-highest ratio 
of ICT-related patent applications per capita.
At 7th place, Norway does very well across the 
board. Yet its average performance in the skills pillar 
contrasts with that of the other Nordics, which all excel 
in this dimension, starting with Finland (1st). This turns 
out to be Norway’s weakest performance among the 10 
pillars (34th), owing to the relatively low assessment of 
its educational system. For the rest, the picture is mostly 
bright. Highlights include 3rd rank in the individual usage 
pillar. In particular, some 90 percent of households 
are equipped with a computer and have access to the 
Internet. Overall, 93 percent of the population use the 
Internet on a regular basis (the second-highest percent-
age after Iceland).
At 8th place overall, the United States delivers a 
strong performance. It features in the top 10 of six pillars, 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
18  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
yet fails to make the top 3 of any. Almost all dimensions 
of the NRI offer room for improvement. The country 
boasts an environment that is generally conducive for 
successfully leveraging ICT. Yet the political and regu-
latory framework (21st) presents some impediments, 
including the poor functioning of the law-making institu-
tions and regulation that remains burdensome in several 
aspects. The business and innovation environment is 
more propitious (9th). In terms of readiness, the country 
can rely on a very good (6th) and affordable (10th) ICT 
infrastructure. In order to further boost readiness, ef-
forts are needed to upgrade the skill set of its population 
(32nd). In terms of individual usage, the United States 
fails to play a leading role (18th) as usage, though high, 
is not as widespread as in several other countries, most 
noticeably the Nordics. For instance, whereas Sweden 
posts penetration rates of around 90 percent for Internet 
and PC ownership, the United States’ rates do not ex-
ceed 75 percent. The picture in terms of business usage 
is brighter, thanks to the country’s innovation capacity. 
However, once the champion of innovation, challenged 
only by Japan, for the past two decades the United 
States has been witnessing several Asian Tigers, the 
Nordics, Switzerland, and Israel emerging as innovation 
powerhouses. Indeed, when taking into account their 
size, some of these economies are actually more prolific 
than the United States as measured by the number of 
patent applications per population.
Canada ranks 9th overall, earning its best marks in 
the environment (8th) and readiness (4th) subindexes of 
the NRI, while lagging behind the best-performing coun-
tries in the usage (18th) and impacts (14th) subindexes. 
In particular, the country ranks 3rd for the quality of its 
infrastructure and accessibility of digital content, 5th in 
the business and innovation environment pillar, and 5th 
in the skills pillar. Despite their proximity in the NRI rank-
ings—with a score difference of only 0.05—Canada and 
the United States present some disparities when consid-
ering the different subindexes. Whereas Canada offers 
a more conducive environment than the United States, 
it trails the latter in terms of business usage as well as 
economic impacts—one of the chief reasons for this is 
the superior innovation capacity of the United States.
Rounding up the top 10, the United Kingdom 
delivers a consistent, yet perfectible, performance in the 
NRI. The country obtains its best marks in the usage and 
impact subindexes. ICT is pervasive among the popula-
tion at large and in the government. Yet in all these cat-
egories, the United Kingdom does not play a leading role 
as it is systematically outperformed by the Nordics, the 
Asian Tigers, or both. Finally, its business and innovation 
environment (20th) would benefit from reforms to further 
encourage entrepreneurship.
EUROPE AND THE COMMONWEALTH OF 
INDEPENDENT STATES (CIS)
Overall, Europe remains at the forefront of the efforts 
to leverage ICT to transform its economy and society. 
As previously presented, seven European countries are 
positioned in the top 10 of the NRI rankings, with the 
Nordic countries, including Sweden at the very top, 
leading the way. Notwithstanding this overall strength 
of Europe as a whole, there are important disparities 
within the region. Four broadly defined groups of coun-
tries sharing different ICT development paths and fac-
ing different challenges to further leverage ICT can be 
identified: the Nordic countries, advanced economies 
of Western Europe, Southern Europe, and Central and 
Eastern Europe.
As presented in the section above, the Nordic 
countries, together with Singapore, are the most suc-
cessful in the world in leveraging ICT. They have fully 
integrated ICT in their competitiveness strategies to 
boost innovation, and ICT is present everywhere and in 
all areas of society, such as education and healthcare. 
The constant efforts to upgrade ICT infrastructure, cou-
pled with world-class educational systems that specifi-
cally focus on developing ICT-related competencies, 
have resulted in very high rates of penetration. Moreover, 
the development of business-friendly environments and 
strong and well-rounded innovation systems conclude 
the virtuous circle that has led to an emergence of global 
players in high-tech and innovative products that have 
transformed these economies.
In Western Europe, besides Switzerland (5th), the 
Netherlands (6th), and the United Kingdom (10th), five 
other advanced economies attain high positions, ranging 
from 16th to 23rd place. Overall, these countries exhibit 
fairly well developed conditions for ICT, although not to 
the extent of the Nordic countries.
Germany, at 16th position, manages to achieve 
fairly good economic impacts (13th) thanks to its high 
level of ICT-related innovations and a robust innova-
tion system led by the business community (6th). The 
country’s well-developed ICT infrastructure (14th) and its 
high-quality educational system (17th), which provides 
the vast majority of the population with the required skills 
to effectively use ICT (20th), result in high levels of ICT 
usage by individuals (14th). Notwithstanding these clear 
strengths, further improvements could be achieved by 
rendering access to ICT, especially fixed broadband, 
more affordable (38th); also the government should 
recognize further the importance of ICT for the future 
economic and social development of the country (47th), 
in line with the Nordic experiences.
With a very similar profile, Austria is in 19th position 
in our rankings. Its very good ICT infrastructure develop-
ment (12th), including access to digital content (4th) and 
the fact that virtually the entire population has the basic 
skills to utilize and access ICT (24th), result in very good 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  19 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
penetration rates by individuals (17th) and the business 
community (11th). Moreover, the successful integration 
of ICT in a well-performing innovation system results in 
positive economic impacts (19th) in terms of innovation 
and focus on knowledge-intensive activities. On a less 
positive note, the high tax rate (115th) and the cumber-
some procedures to open new businesses (97th) can 
affect the spirit of entrepreneurship and hinder seizing 
new ICT-based business opportunities.
Luxembourg and Belgium, while placed very 
close to each other at 21st and 22nd place, respectively, 
present slightly different pictures in terms of ICT devel-
opment. Although both countries benefit from a fairly 
well developed ICT infrastructure that facilitates a good 
uptake by individuals and businesses, Belgium benefits 
from a better-performing and more robust innovation and 
educational system that allows the country to obtain bet-
ter economic impacts thanks to higher innovation rates. 
On the other hand, Luxembourg counts on more afford-
able access to ICT and a more entrepreneurial-prone 
environment with lower taxes.
France, in 23rd position, achieves a harmonious 
uptake of ICT by all agents in society, producing good 
economic results (15th) in terms of developing innovative 
products and services (6th) and granting a wide access 
to basic services (18th). Despite the high cost of mobile 
cellular rates (121st), ICT infrastructure is fairly well devel-
oped and the educational system has allowed the popu-
lation to acquire a skill base to use ICT. In order to further 
boost entrepreneurship and innovation via the creation 
and development of new technology-based companies, 
the high corporate tax rate (127th) and the insufficient 
development of venture capital (36th) are areas that may 
require further attention.
All four of the European Union’s Southern coun-
tries—Portugal, Spain, Italy, and Greece—are still lag-
ging behind in terms of ICT uptake and impacts vis-á-vis 
the rest of the Western European economies. In general, 
despite acceptable levels of ICT infrastructure develop-
ment, the traditional lag in poorly performing educational 
and innovation systems does not allow these countries 
to benefit to the same extent from the potential eco-
nomic impacts accruing from ICT.
Portugal and Spain, in 33rd and 38th position, 
respectively, benefit from a fairly well developed ICT 
infrastructure as reflected by the international Internet 
bandwidth values, where Portugal ranks 7th and Spain 
24th. However, the cost of accessing this infrastructure, 
especially in the case of Spain (90th), is still high and 
therefore the uptake rates by individuals and businesses 
in both countries still lag behind those of more advanced 
economies. Moreover, the poor quality of the educational 
system (76th and 98th, respectively) and the traditional 
lag in research and development and other related inno-
vation investments—especially at the corporate level—do 
not allow these countries to fully leverage ICT and obtain 
the positive economic impacts of other advanced econo-
mies in the European Union.
Italy, in 48th position, presents a profile similar to 
those of Portugal and Spain, with a couple of singular 
characteristics that have relegated the country to this 
lower position. In addition to the underperformance of 
the educational and innovation systems, the first particu-
lar feature of the Italian case is the weak functioning of 
the political and regulatory environment (85th), which hin-
ders the overall functioning of the economy. The second 
singular characteristic is that the government is clearly 
lagging behind in the effort to leverage ICT to boost 
competitiveness (113th). Addressing these weaknesses 
should be a priority not only to leverage the use of ICT, 
but to boost competitiveness more broadly.
Greece, at 59th place, depicts important weak-
nesses that hinder its capacity to take full advantage of 
its fairly good ICT infrastructure (42nd). Despite a good 
ICT penetration at the individual level (49th), both busi-
nesses (97th) and the government (102nd) have failed 
to recognize and fully integrate ICT in their activities. 
Moreover, in addition to the traditional severe lag in 
innovation, the convulsive political and regulatory envi-
ronment (87th) is contributing to the country’s inability 
to fully benefit from ICT, both economically (73rd) and 
socially (77th).
Central and Eastern Europe presents a mixed 
picture in terms of ICT development and uptake. While 
some large countries in Central Europe share similar 
characteristics, other countries are confronted with spe-
cific challenges that influence their capacity to take more 
or less advantage of the potential of ICT.
In the Baltic states, Estonia, in 24th place, following 
the example of the Nordic countries, has widely recog-
nized the role that ICT can play to transform its economy 
and society. In general, a good ICT infrastructure devel-
opment coupled with fairly well performing educational 
systems has resulted in good uptake rates by all agents 
in the region, especially in Estonia and to a lesser extent 
in Latvia. The government vision to develop the sector 
and spread its effects to all areas of the economy has 
been significantly important in Estonia (18th), while this 
has lagged behind a bit in both Lithuania (71st) and 
Latvia (103rd). As a result, Estonia is benefiting from 
important ICT-related impacts both in the economy and 
society (15th), while Lithuania (27th) and Latvia (46th) are 
not yet at that level.
Slovenia (37th) and Croatia (45th) have both man-
aged to develop a fairly good ICT infrastructure that, 
coupled with high rates of adult literacy and secondary 
education enrollment, allows for important penetration 
rates (37th and 47th, respectively). Improving the quality 
of the educational system and strengthening the overall 
innovation system so that ICT investments can be fully 
integrated and yield better economic results remain an 
outstanding challenge, especially for Croatia. In contrast 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
20  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
with this rather good outlook, Bosnia and Herzegovina 
and Serbia are relegated to 84th and 85th position, 
respectively, in our rankings. These scores are the result 
not so much of the level of infrastructure development 
or the skill base of their populations, but of the actual 
ICT uptake, especially by the business community (126th 
and 133th, respectively) and the government (123rd and 
115th, respectively). In addition, serious weaknesses in 
their innovation systems, which need to be restructured 
and expanded, hinder their capacity to leverage ICT for 
deeper economic and social impacts.
In Central Europe, the Czech Republic, Hungary, 
Poland, the Slovak Republic, and to a lesser extent 
Romania and Bulgaria—in 42nd, 43rd, 49th 64th, 67th, 
and 70th place, respectively—manage to develop their 
ICT infrastructures fairly well, although the high costs 
of accessing it, especially in the Czech Republic (93rd) 
and the Slovak Republic (104th), affects the actual up-
take capacity of large shares of the population. The ICT 
development in these countries has been favored by 
their integration into the European Union and the positive 
actions carried out under the Digital Agenda initiative of 
the European Commission. However, their governments 
seem to lag behind in recognizing the importance of ICT 
and drawing a clear vision and development plan (rank-
ing 106th, 95th, 116th, 107th, 117th, and 101st, respec-
tively, on this indicator) for its expansion. Moreover, with 
the exception of the Czech Republic, important weak-
nesses in the overall innovation system, especially at the 
corporate level, hinder full leverage of ICT and therefore 
the economic transformation of these economies toward 
more knowledge-intensive activities. Finally, in the cases 
of Romania and Bulgaria, the overall political and regula-
tory environment (95th and 99th) also affects the devel-
opment of privately led economic activity in general, and 
the birth and growth capacity of any innovation-related 
business in particular.
Turkey, in 52nd position, does not manage to enter 
into the top 50 economies that are best leveraging ICT to 
boost competitiveness and well-being. The population’s 
insufficient level of skills (92nd), caused by its relatively 
low levels of secondary education enrollment (93rd) and 
the poor quality of the educational system (94th), hinder 
an effective ICT use of all the agents in the economy 
(59th). In order to further benefit from the positive  
impacts of ICT and move its economy toward more 
knowledge-intensive activities, an overall strengthening  
of the educational and innovation systems, with more 
and more efficient investments, will be crucial. These 
investments cannot be the exclusive responsibility of 
the government; the business community will have to 
contribute as well by fully recognizing the business op-
portunities that they can offer and how these affect their 
capacity to compete in an increasingly globalized market.
Kazakhstan, the Russian Federation, and 
Azerbaijan are the best performers among the CIS 
countries, at 55th, 56th, and 61st position, respectively. 
All three countries count on affordable access to ICT in-
frastructure, although the development of this infrastruc-
ture is superior in the case of the Russian Federation 
(40th, compared with 71st and 72nd for Kazakhstan and 
Azerbaijan). However, the vision and commitment of the 
government to boost ICT as a driver of economic growth 
is lower in Russia, and in all three cases the innovation 
system, which underwent deep restructuring after the 
collapse of Communism, has not yet been fully reorga-
nized or redeveloped. The Russian Federation still main-
tains pockets of scientific excellence, but unfortunately 
they do not seem to spill over into the productive sector. 
This, coupled with a weak political and regulatory envi-
ronment (92nd, 102th, and 75th for Kazakhstan, Russia, 
and Azerbaijan, respectively) and a somewhat entrepre-
neurship- and innovation-averse environment (71st, 83rd, 
and 80th, respectively) affect the capacity of all three 
countries to reap the full economic benefits associated 
with higher rates of technology development (80th, 53rd, 
and 68th, respectively). Moving forward, in addition to 
continuing to upgrade and develop their ICT infrastruc-
ture, all three countries should improve the quality of 
their educational systems and build effective innovation 
systems with the active participation of the private sec-
tor. Improvements in these three areas should go hand in 
hand with more and stronger economic impacts associ-
ated with higher rates of innovation and the development 
of more knowledge-intensive activities.
Despite benefiting from a relatively skillful popula-
tion (39th), a considerable development of the innovation 
capacity of its firms (42nd), and one of the lowest access 
tariffs for ICT (2nd), Ukraine places only at 75th posi-
tion. Its ICT infrastructure needs to be further developed. 
Moreover, the lack of a strong government vision to 
develop ICT coupled with unfavorable innovation condi-
tions (98th) and weak legal foundations for economic 
activity (125th) are jeopardizing the country’s great poten-
tial to benefit from stronger social and economic impacts 
(75th). Improvements in the framework conditions will 
be a prerequisite for the country to boost the economic 
benefits accruing from deeper levels of technological 
progress.
Georgia, Armenia, and especially Tajikistan and 
the Kyrgyz Republic, in 88th, 94th, 114th, and 115th 
position, respectively, close the regional rankings. 
Weaknesses in the development of ICT infrastructure, 
especially for the two Central Asian republics, coupled 
with the high costs of accessing it, result in a poor tech-
nology uptake by all agents. Unlike the cases of mineral-
rich Kazakhstan and Azerbaijan, governments in these 
countries have not yet led the process of fully deploying 
ICT; this results in inevitable lower economic and social 
impacts.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  21 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
Asia and the Pacific region is home to some of the 
world’s wealthiest, most innovative, and most digitized 
nations in the world and also to some of its poorest, 
least-connected countries.
The second of the Tigers, Taiwan, China comes 
in at 11th place overall. ICT has been at the core of the 
island’s economic success since the early 1980s when it 
started moving up quickly the value chain, away from ag-
riculture and low-end manufacturing, to become a major 
manufacturer of electronics and high-tech products 
and later an innovation hub. The government has been 
instrumental in this transformation. In the NRI, Taiwan, 
China ranks 3rd in the government usage pillar, 7th in 
the economic impacts pillar, and 2nd in the social im-
pacts pillar. Yet, unlike Singapore and Hong Kong SAR, 
which feature prominently in this category, Taiwan, China 
suffers from weaknesses in its political and regulatory 
framework (37th). By contrast, its business and innova-
tion environment are very favorable (6th).
For the Republic of Korea (12th), the regulatory 
framework also represents the main area of concern 
(43rd). The third-ranked Tiger earns low marks in areas 
related to the functioning of its public institutions. For 
the rest, the country’s performance ranges from good to 
outstanding. It ranks 2nd to Sweden in terms of individ-
ual usage, with impressive penetration rates. In particu-
lar, Korea shows the way in terms of mobile broadband 
access, with close to 80 subscriptions per 100 inhabit-
ants. At home, a staggering 97 percent of households 
have access to the Internet. Furthermore, Korea leads 
the government usage and social impacts pillars.
Hong Kong SAR (13th) delivers a consistent perfor-
mance, although punctuated by fewer highlights than the 
other three Tigers. The territory appears in the top 10 of 
three pillars, ranking 3rd in the business and innovation en-
vironment pillar, and 5th in both the affordability pillar and 
the social impacts pillar. In addition, and unlike Korea and 
Taiwan, China, its economy is not innovation driven and 
relies more on trade and financial services. On the other 
hand, Hong Kong does not exhibit any major weaknesses 
in the NRI, its lowest pillar rank being a quite strong 28th in 
the infrastructure and digital content pillar. And when look-
ing at individual indicators, one notices that Hong Kong 
has almost 200 mobile telephone subscriptions per 100 
inhabitants, a world record. It also boasts the world’s larg-
est Internet bandwidth per user (780 kilobytes per second).
New Zealand (14th) offers one of the most condu-
cive environments for the successful development and 
leveraging of ICT. Its public institutions are particularly 
well functioning and efficient (3rd). The country also 
boasts a high degree of readiness, thanks to the excel-
lent skill base of the population (6th) and world-class 
infrastructure (9th). As for most advanced economies 
featuring high in the NRI, the affordability pillar is the only 
real weakness of New Zealand (63rd).
New Zealand’s distant neighbor, Australia, ranks 
three notches behind at 17th position. Its institutional 
framework and business climate also offer a favorable 
context (12th in the environment subindex). The coun-
try’s readiness would be excellent if not for its pricy ICT. 
Australia ranks 100th in the affordability pillar, at odds 
with its 7th rank in the infrastructure and digital content 
pillar and 11th in the skills pillar. The government’s suc-
cess at ICT promotion and usage is reflected in its good 
marks in the government usage (8th) and social impacts 
(8th) pillars.
One of the world most prominent innovation pow-
erhouses, Japan ranks only 18th, owing to a number 
of important shortcomings in the environment subindex 
of the NRI, including red tape. The biggest competitive 
advantage of Japan is, without contest, its innovative 
and sophisticated business sector (3rd). Technology and 
innovation have greatly contributed to making Japan one 
of the most productive economies in the world. Beyond 
this economic impact, they have not had such a transfor-
mational impact on society at large (26th). A more sup-
portive business environment and renewed commitment 
by the government to lead the digital revolution could 
usher in a new development model for Japan.
In 29th position, Malaysia is the top-ranked country 
from the Developing Asia region. Trying to emulate the 
success of Korea and other Asian Tigers, the Malaysian 
government has been pursuing a long-term plan with  
the ambition of achieving high-income status by the 
end of the decade, with ICT playing a critical role. Most 
government-related indicators reflect this commitment, 
and Malaysia ranks 6th in the government usage pillar—
not too far behind three Asian Tigers. Businesses are 
quite aggressive at adopting technology and increasingly 
innovative. These government-led efforts seem to be 
starting to have a transformational impact on the econ-
omy (31st) and on society at large (15th). On a less posi-
tive note, Malaysia ranks an average 47th in the individual 
usage pillar.
More than 20 places separate Malaysia from China, 
the next-ranked Developing Asian country. At 51st, China 
leads the BRICS, the group of large emerging econo-
mies.12 Yet this should offer little consolation in light of 
the important challenges ahead that must be met to 
more fully adopt and leverage ICT. China’s institutional 
framework (46th) and especially its business environment 
(105th) present a number of shortcomings that stifle 
entrepreneurship and innovation, including excessive red 
tape and long administrative procedures, lofty taxation 
amounting to 64 percent of profits (124th), uncertain in-
tellectual property protection—it is estimated that almost 
80 percent of installed software in China is pirated—and 
limited or delayed availability of new technologies (100th). 
In terms of readiness, the country ranks a low 87th in the 
infrastructure and digital content pillar, mainly because 
of its underdeveloped Internet infrastructure. China gets 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
22  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
high marks in the cost measures (42nd, with a score of 
5.7) and to some extent in the education-related vari-
ables, as reflected in the satisfactory score of 5.2 in the 
skills pillar. Looking at actual ICT usage, figures remain 
quite low in absolute terms but should be considered 
in light of the sheer size of the country. ICT usage by 
businesses is significant (37th). China is becoming more 
and more innovative and this in turn encourages further 
and quicker adoption of technologies. The government 
is placing great hopes in ICT as a catalyst for future 
growth, because more traditional sources of growth will 
dry up. The efforts of the government in promoting and 
using ICT are reflected in China’s good showing in the 
government usage pillar (33rd). For the time being, the 
impact of ICT on the economy remains limited (79th in 
the economic impacts pillar).
Almost 20 ranks behind China, India at 69th place 
overall delivers a very mixed performance, with en-
couraging results in a few areas and a lot of room for 
improvement elsewhere, notably in the political and 
regulatory environment (71st) and the business and in-
novation environment (91st). Extensive red tape stands 
in the way of businesses and corporate tax is among the 
highest of all analyzed countries. For instance, it typi-
cally takes four years and 46 procedures to enforce a 
contract. Starting a business is longer and requires more 
paperwork than in most countries. Other variables in the 
environment subindex are better assessed, including the 
availability of new technologies (47th), the availability of 
venture capital (27th), the intensity of local competition 
(31st), and the quality of management schools (30th). 
One of the weakest aspects of India’s performance lies 
in its low penetration of ICT. The country ranks 117th in 
the individual usage pillar. There are 61 mobile subscrip-
tions for every100 population—a relatively low figure. A 
mere 7.5 percent of the population uses the Internet. 
Six percent of households own a PC and broadband 
Internet remains the privilege of a few, with less than 
one subscription per 100 population. Upgrading skills 
and infrastructure would contribute to increasing these 
figures. Already, fierce competition and innovations for 
the “bottom of the pyramid” have made India the leader 
in the affordability pillar, thus providing a significant boost 
to the country’s readiness. Although penetration is still 
limited among the population at large, businesses are 
early and assiduous adopters of new technologies (47th). 
And the government is placing a great deal of emphasis 
on ICT as a way to address some of the country’s most 
pressing issues, including job creation, corruption and 
red tape, and education. Whether this vision will trans-
late into a transformation of the economy and society 
remains to be seen. But already ICT is having a—small—
transformational impact on the economy, which is partly 
reflected in India’s performance in the economic impacts 
pillar (41st).
Coming in at a low 77th rank, Thailand presents 
a number of shortcomings in all dimensions of the NRI. 
Thailand ranks in the top 50 of just one pillar, affordability 
(33rd), and as low as 107th in infrastructure and digital 
content. Indeed, there are only 2 indicators out of 53 in 
which the country ranks better than 50th: the number of 
procedures to start a business (28th) and mobile cellular 
tariffs (14th). ICT usage (83rd) remains scant by inter-
national standards. And, unlike other economies in the 
region, ICT development does not seem to be a prior-
ity for the government, witness Thailand’s 86th rank on 
government usage.
Thailand is followed closely by three fellow 
Association of Southeast Asian Nation (ASEAN) mem-
bers: Indonesia at 80th position, Vietnam at 83rd, and 
the Philippines at 86th. The performances of these 
four countries, which together are home to almost 500 
million people, are remarkably similar across the differ-
ent components of the Index, and disappointing, too. 
Some differences exist in the environment subindex and 
to some extent the readiness subindex. The environ-
ment is significantly more conducive in Thailand (59th) 
and Indonesia (72nd) than in Vietnam (96th) and the 
Philippines (111th). Using ICT is also much cheaper in 
Thailand and Indonesia. When it comes to ICT usage, 
all four countries display very limited uptake among 
the population, especially Indonesia (103rd) where the 
Internet, for instance, is used by less than 10 percent 
of the population. Businesses are generally prompter at 
adopting technology in Indonesia, but even then figures 
are low by international standards. As for the efforts of 
the respective governments in using and promoting ICT, 
they remain very timid, with the exception of Vietnam, 
which ranks 48th in government usage, while the oth-
ers are found beyond the 70th mark. In light of the many 
shortcomings, the economic and social impacts of ICT in 
these countries are necessarily limited. No doubt these 
countries could learn from Singapore and Malaysia, two 
ASEAN members that have been very successful at 
leveraging ICT. This could be done in the context of the 
recently adopted ASEAN ICT Master Plan 2015.
LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
Latin America and the Caribbean continues to suffer 
from an important lag in adopting ICT and technology 
more broadly. This is reflected in the rankings, as no 
country manages to reach the top 30 and only a hand-
ful of small economies manage to be included among 
the top 50—the exceptions are Barbados, Puerto Rico, 
Chile, and Uruguay. Although the region is vast and 
heterogeneous, three shared reasons for this lag can 
be identified: these countries all exhibit an insufficient 
investment in developing their ICT infrastructure, a weak 
skill base in the population because of poor educational 
systems that hinder society’s capacity to make an effec-
tive use of these technologies, and unfavorable business 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  23 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
conditions that do not support the spur of entrepreneur-
ship and innovation. Addressing these weaknesses will 
be crucial for improving the region’s competitiveness and 
shifting its economies toward more knowledge-based 
activities.
Two small Caribbean islands top the regional rank-
ings: Barbados in 35th place and Puerto Rico in 36th 
place. Both economies boast environments conducive 
for entrepreneurship and benefit from relatively ro-
bust ICT infrastructures, although mobile coverage in 
Puerto Rico (123rd) remains insufficient. In the case of 
Barbados, the strong skill base (10th) results in a large 
individual uptake of technology (24th) and offsets the 
high costs of using ICT (102nd). On the other hand, 
Puerto Rico needs to further develop the skills of its 
population (78th), which currently negatively affects the 
uptake of technology by individuals (53rd). In both cases, 
ICT development has been led mainly by the private 
sector, especially in the case of Puerto Rico (21st), as 
the governments in both islands have lagged behind 
in steering ICT progress (61st and 54th, respectively). 
Moving forward, Barbados would obtain higher eco-
nomic impacts from its overall good ICT uptake should 
the private sector further improve its overall innovation 
capacity (91st). In the case of Puerto Rico, improvements 
in the performance of its educational system, especially 
in math- and science-related subjects (91st), would also 
allow a better integration of ICT in a more solid innova-
tion system.
Chile, in 38th position, clearly depicts the strong - 
est performance in Latin America. Benefiting from an 
entrepreneurial-friendly and well-functioning legal frame-
work, recent efforts to improve the overall innovation 
system, while still insufficient, have paved the way for 
this top position within the region. Notwithstanding these 
important merits, the country still suffers from a series 
of weaknesses that do not allow it to benefit from the 
potential benefits of ICT and technology more broadly. 
Although its ICT infrastructure achieves good scores in 
certain dimensions, notably mobile network coverage 
(1st), the technological preparedness of the country is 
severely hindered by the excessive costs of accessing 
ICT (89th) and above all the poor quality of an educa-
tional system that requires improvement and that fails to 
provide the necessary skill base (83rd) to fully optimize 
the use of ICT. Therefore, despite the government-led 
effort to leverage ICT (26th) with one of the widest offer-
ings of online services in the world (18th), the penetration 
rates in individual households (55th) still lags behind. 
In addition, the business community needs to invest in 
upgrading its capacity for innovation (62nd) in order to 
facilitate the achievement of further economic impacts 
and shift the national economy toward more knowledge-
intensive, higher-value-added activities.
Close behind, Uruguay, at 44th place, is one of the 
leading countries in the region that has recognized the 
importance of ICT. This process has been led by the 
government (36th), which has made important efforts to 
build a good ICT infrastructure in the country (49th) and 
grant wide access to ICT to school pupils (11th) with its 
one computer per student policy. Despite these efforts, 
the technological readiness (63rd) of the country still 
needs improvement, especially in terms of raising the 
quality of the educational system that presently hinders 
the ability to seize the full benefits of the opportuni-
ties that ICT, and technology more broadly, can offer. 
Moreover, weaknesses in the innovation system, espe-
cially at the corporate level (65th), hamper the capacity 
of the country to move toward more knowledge-intensive 
activities (67th). Addressing these weaknesses would 
represent the next step to fully leveraging ICT deploy-
ment for competitiveness and social well-being.
Panama and Costa Rica, in 57th and 58th position, 
respectively, clearly stand out from the rest of the coun-
tries in Central America—a region that suffers overall 
from an important connectivity lag, a low skill base, and 
weaknesses in its business environment. Despite ob-
taining similar scores and levels of ICT usage (56th and 
63rd, respectively), Panama and Costa Rica face differ-
ent challenges to improving their level of preparedness 
to leverage ICT for competitiveness and well-being. In 
the case of Panama—while by regional standards the 
country benefits from a fairly good ICT infrastructure 
(55th), especially in terms of international Internet band-
width (47th)—the very low skill base hinders its capacity 
to achieve higher ICT uptakes and stronger economic 
impacts (65th). Conversely, Costa Rica benefits from 
a strong skill base (26th) thanks to a well-performing 
educational system (23rd), but the country suffers from 
an ICT infrastructure lag (77th) that thwarts its ability to 
achieve higher ICT uptake rates. In both cases, improv-
ing their overall innovation systems would allow them 
to benefit further from the ICT efforts and contribute to 
shifting their economies toward more knowledge-inten-
sive activities, especially in the case of Panama (84th).
Brazil, positioned narrowly above the middle range 
of our rankings at 65th place, benefits from strong 
levels of business ICT usage (33rd). These, combined 
with fairly advanced levels of technological capacity 
(31st) in particular segments of its industry, allows the 
country to achieve one of the strongest performances 
of ICT-enabled innovations in the region, both in terms 
of new products and services (29th) and more efficient 
processes (34th). Notwithstanding these strengths, its 
overall business environment with its burdensome proce-
dures to create new businesses (138th) and its high tax 
rates (130th), in addition to its high mobile cellular tariffs 
(133rd) and poor skill availability (86th), hinder the poten-
tial of the Brazilian economy to fully benefit from ICT and 
shift toward more knowledge-based activities (76th) at a 
faster pace.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
24  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Colombia, at 73rd place, right below the median 
of our sample, presents a mixed picture in terms of ICT 
development and uptake. On the one hand, the govern-
ment offers a large number of public services online 
(9th) and the information it provides through its websites 
encourages citizens’ participation (26th). Moreover, 
Colombia benefits from a relatively skillful population 
(58th). On the other hand, the country still suffers from 
important challenges that hamper its capacity to lever-
age ICT to boost competitiveness and raise well-being. 
The lag in terms of ICT infrastructure and digital content 
(88th), coupled with unfavorable framework conditions 
for entrepreneurship and innovation (95th), result in a low 
ICT usage by businesses (71st). In addition, the uptake of 
ICT by individuals (76th) is still low, with less than 20 per-
cent of the population accessing the Internet at home.
The lack of a holistic digital agenda, currently under 
debate, prevents Mexico from taking full advantage of 
ICT. At 76th position, the government of Mexico has 
made important efforts to increase the number of ser-
vices online (38th) and boost the e-participation of citi-
zens through useful, high-quality, and relevant websites 
(32nd) that provide information, thus enhancing public 
governance. However, the country still faces signifi-
cant weaknesses. An insufficient development of ICT 
infrastructure (81st), especially in terms of international 
Internet bandwidth (87th), coupled with the high costs of 
telecommunications (100th) and poor educational stan-
dards (107th) negatively influence the effective and pro-
ductive use of ICT by individuals (77th) and businesses 
(75th). Moreover, despite the recent improvements that 
facilitate entrepreneurship by reducing the number of 
procedures and time to open a business (42nd), the 
functioning of some public institutions and the develop-
ment of a strong innovation system are still pending chal-
lenges to creating a conducive environment for higher 
ICT impacts (79th). Addressing these weaknesses in a 
holistic manner will determine the success of the country 
in benefitting from the opportunities that ICT has to offer.
Argentina, in 92nd position, benefits from a fairly 
well developed ICT infrastructure (58th), especially in 
terms of international Internet bandwidth (41st) and high 
levels of adult literacy (51st) that could pave the way to a 
high and effective ICT uptake by all members of society. 
However, while individuals reach acceptable usage rates 
(58th), businesses (86th) seem to lag behind, and the 
perception of the business community is that the govern-
ment is not prioritizing the use of ICT sufficiently (134th). 
In order to further leverage ICT usage, reducing the high 
costs of accessing ICT (103rd) would be beneficial. In 
addition, addressing the enduring shortcomings in the 
political and regulatory environment (122nd) as well as in 
the framework conditions to boost entrepreneurship and 
innovation (113rd) would allow the country to increasingly 
shift its economy toward more knowledge-intensive, 
higher-value-added activities.
Despite the economic growth that Peru has expe-
rienced in the past year, at 106th place the country still 
lags significantly behind in terms of ICT. An insufficiently 
developed and expensive (141st) ICT infrastructure (86th) 
coupled with a low-quality educational system (128th) 
hinders the preparedness of Peru to make an effective 
use of ICT. As a result, the use of ICT by all three ac-
tors—individual, business, and government—is still low 
(81st), and despite relatively good framework conditions 
for entrepreneurship (56th), the potential economic im-
pacts are not yet accruing.
Finally, Venezuela (107th), Paraguay (111th), Bolivia 
(127th), Nicaragua (131st), and, closing the rankings, 
Haiti (142nd) trail behind the rest of countries in the 
region. These countries continue to suffer from some 
worrisome connectivity weaknesses, both in terms of 
physical and human infrastructure, which—coupled with 
an innovation-adverse environment—result in poor le-
verage of ICT for boosting competitiveness and raising 
well-being.
SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA
The level of ICT readiness in sub-Saharan Africa is still 
very low, with most countries evidencing strong lags in 
connectivity because of an insufficient development of 
ICT infrastructure, which remains too costly. Low levels 
of skills that do not allow for an efficient use of the avail-
able technology add to the challenges these countries 
face if they are to increase ICT uptake. Moreover, most 
countries still suffer from poor framework conditions for 
business activity that, coupled with the above-explained 
weaknesses, result in poor economic impacts that hinder 
the much-needed transformation of the region toward 
less resource extraction–oriented activities and higher-
value-added production. Nine out of the last 10 countries 
in our sample belong to the region and the results evi-
dence the digital divide the region suffers vis-á-vis more 
developed regions.
Mauritius, in 53rd position, leads the regional 
classification and is the only economy in the top half of 
our rankings. By means of a process decisively led by 
the government that has identified ICT development as 
one of its three pillars for economic development,13 the 
country has managed to create a fairly sophisticated 
enabling environment for ICT development (41st), with a 
stable political and regulatory framework (39th) and fairly 
good conditions for entrepreneurship and innovation 
(46th), although the rate of tertiary education enrollment 
is low (82nd). However, despite ICT infrastructure (73rd), 
which is still in need of improvement, becoming afford-
able (23rd), the level of uptake by businesses (62nd) and 
individuals (73rd) remains low. This, in turn, results in low 
economic (83rd) and social (82nd) impacts. Improving 
the overall skills (63rd) and the capacity to integrate 
ICT into a broader innovation system at the corporate 
level will be crucial for the country to benefit from the 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  25 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
transformational impacts of ICT and drive the national 
economy toward more value-added activities.
Despite counting on one of the most solid political 
and regulatory environments (23rd) and better frame-
work conditions for entrepreneurship and innovation 
(50th) in the region, South Africa, at 72nd place, is not 
yet leveraging the potential benefits associated with ICT. 
Important shortcomings in terms of basic skills avail-
ability (94th) in large segments of the population and the 
high costs (94th) of accessing the insufficiently devel-
oped ICT infrastructure (82nd) result in poor rates of ICT 
usage (76th), despite efforts on the part of the business 
community to use ICT and integrate it in a broader, firm-
based innovation system (34th). As a result, the eco-
nomic impacts accruing from ICT are patchy (59th) and 
the social impacts disappointing (98th). Upgrading the 
overall skills at all layers of society and increasing efforts 
to build affordable infrastructure for all would allow the 
country to increase its ICT readiness and uptake and, in 
turn, spread its impacts across society.
Rwanda, in 82nd position, evidences important 
problems of connectivity associated with a poor deploy-
ment of an expensive (119th) ICT infrastructure (113th) 
and very low levels of basic skills (118th) that hinder the 
capacity of the population to make effective use of ICT. 
As a result, levels of ICT usage are very low, especially 
for individuals (133rd) and businesses (66th). Improving 
the ICT readiness of the country by developing the 
necessary infrastructure—which could be done through 
public-private partnerships—and enhancing the overall 
skills of the population would result in higher economic 
and social impacts, especially because the country 
counts on fairly favorable framework conditions, allowing 
these benefits to accrue.
Similar to Rwanda, Kenya and Ghana, in 93rd and 
97th position, respectively, suffer from low levels of ICT 
readiness due to the underdevelopment of ICT infra-
structure and the lack of a widespread skill base that 
would enable society to make an optimal use of technol-
ogy. In the case of Kenya, as for Rwanda, in addition 
the cost of accessing these technologies is still high for 
a large share of the population (109th). As a result, both 
countries suffer from low ICT uptake rates by all agents, 
especially individuals, and hence the transformational im-
pacts of ICT are low. Other countries in East Africa, such 
as Zambia, Uganda, and Tanzania—in 109th, 110th, 
and 123rd position, respectively—depict a similar profile 
and face similar challenges to boosting the development 
and uptake of ICT.
Finally, a last tier of countries in West and South 
Africa, including Zimbabwe, Cameroon, Lesotho, 
Madagascar, Burkina Faso, Swaziland, Burundi, 
Chad, Mauritania, Angola, and Yemen—ranging from 
124th to 141st position—essentially close our rankings. 
All these countries suffer from severe weaknesses in all 
components of our Index, from poor connectivity caused 
by expensive and poor-quality ICT infrastructure to very 
low levels of basic skills and weak framework conditions 
for technology-rich activities to flourish. Not surprisingly, 
these countries also present the weakest results in terms 
of ICT impacts.
MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA
Overall, there are large differences in ICT use and im-
pacts across the region, with countries grouping around 
three subregions: Israel and the Gulf Cooperation 
Council states; the Levantine nations; and, finally, the 
countries in North Africa. While Israel and most of the 
Gulf Cooperation Council states seem to have embraced 
ICT uptake and have started to gain from the associated 
benefits, countries in the latter two groups still suffer 
from important weaknesses that hinder their capacity to 
fully leverage the use of ICT to increase competitiveness 
and accelerate the positive social impacts that are asso-
ciated with technology.
Israel, in 20th position in the rankings, epitomizes 
the success of an economy that—despite not counting 
on vast endowments of natural resources—has suc-
ceed in securing a high level of development thanks to 
ICT and innovation. Ranked 6th in terms of economic 
impacts, with one of the highest rates of ICT PCT patent 
applications (3rd), the country has managed to create 
very favorable market conditions for entrepreneurship 
and innovation (10th), which has acted as a catalyst for 
the high ICT uptake and readiness of the business com-
munity (7th). Moving forward, the country could benefit 
even more should it be able to address some of its key 
infrastructure shortcomings, especially in terms of inter-
national Internet bandwidth (84th), and improve further 
the quality of its educational system (48th), especially in 
fields related to math and science (79th).
Leading the Arab World, Bahrain, in 27th place, as 
in the case of Israel, creates a fairly sophisticated en-
abling environment for entrepreneurship and innovation 
(11th) that, coupled with a good ICT readiness (25th) in 
terms of infrastructure, affordability, and overall skills, has 
brought the country to this good position. However, un-
like Israel, this process has been led mainly by a strong 
commitment from the government (4th) that has not yet 
been followed by the rest of the agents with the same 
intensity, notably the business community (39th). As a 
result, the positive economic impacts reflecting higher 
rates of innovation and the shift toward more knowledge-
based activities have not yet taken off (54th). Efforts to 
integrate ICT in a more general innovation ecosystem 
at the corporate level should help to boost the desired 
economic impacts of ICT and technology more broadly.
Closely following Bahrain, Qatar appears in 28th 
position. As in the case of Bahrain, the emirate has 
managed to create one of the best environments for 
entrepreneurship and innovation worldwide (2nd). This, 
coupled with the government’s strong commitment to 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
26  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
boosting ICT-related infrastructure (27th) and spilling over 
the effects across the economy (34th) and society (21st), 
has allowed the country to rank in the top quarter of our 
sample. On a less positive note, the low levels of compe-
tition existing in the ICT and telecommunications sectors 
(122nd) are affecting the overall affordability of access-
ing ICT (111th), especially in terms of broadband (109th), 
hindering a wider diffusion and usage of ICT across 
the different agents in the country, such as broadband 
Internet subscriptions (57th).
The United Arab Emirates, at 30th place, presents 
a profile similar to neighboring Qatar’s. With the govern-
ment’s strong commitment to develop and prioritize 
ICT (7th) as one of the key engines to diversify its still 
oil dependent economy, the country has managed to 
develop a good ICT-related infrastructure (25th) and a 
favorable framework for business and innovation (21st) 
that result in fairly good innovation rates in the form of 
both new products and services (15th) and new organi-
zational models (21st). Notwithstanding these efforts, the 
country would benefit further from expanding its overall 
skill base, especially eradicating adult illiteracy (86th) and 
increasing tertiary education participation (86th). As in 
the case of Qatar, liberalizing the ICT and telecommuni-
cations markets (117th) would help reduce the high costs 
of accessing the Internet (94th).
Saudi Arabia, in 34th place, has equally recognized 
the importance of ICT as a key driver of its economic 
transformation. A committed and strong government-led 
effort (5th) to prioritize ICT (14th) coupled with a very fa-
vorable environment for business development (8th) has 
yielded fairly good results to get the country ready for the 
ICT revolution, especially in terms of infrastructure de-
velopment (36th). However, as in the case of the United 
Arab Emirates and Qatar, boosting higher levels of com-
petition to reduce the costs of communications (85th), 
improving the skill base by reducing adult illiteracy (98th), 
and increasing tertiary education participation (66th) 
should be the immediate priorities to further increase ICT 
uptake by all agents in the country.
Kuwait, in 62nd position, is the laggard in the re-
gion in terms of embracing ICT. Despite a fairly good 
ICT-related infrastructure development, the high costs of 
accessing it and the population’s relatively low level of 
skills are affecting the ICT readiness of the country. As a 
result, Kuwait depicts fairly poor rates of ICT usage (67th) 
that, coupled with a less business friendly environment 
for entrepreneurship (56th) than other Gulf Cooperation 
Council states, result in low levels of ICT impacts (93rd).
Jordan, in 47th position, leads the ICT race by far 
in the group of Levantine states. Despite the need to 
improve its ICT infrastructure (79th), especially in terms 
of getting access to a wider international Internet band-
width (92nd), the country—led by a strong commitment 
of the government (37th)—has managed to liberalize 
the markets and provide affordable access to ICT (9th) 
and improve its business and innovation environment 
(43rd), although some weaknesses remain. Lebanon 
and Syria, in 95th and 125th position, respectively, on 
the other hand, still suffer from important weaknesses 
in terms of ICT development that hinder their capacity 
to take full advantage of the benefits accruing from the 
deployment and use of these and other technologies.
Tunisia, ranked in 50th place, leads the rankings in 
North Africa. ICT development in the country has been 
led by a strong commitment of the government to boost 
ICT uptake. This commitment, coupled with a fairly good 
educational performance—despite a high rate of adult 
illiteracy (108th)—allows the country to position itself 
ahead its North African neighbors. Improving affordable 
(73rd) access to a more robust ICT infrastructure and 
digital content (70th) would help improve the still-low 
uptake of ICT by individuals (78th) and businesses (51st).
ICT development in Egypt has been traditionally 
led by the government that in the past years has made 
a strong effort to make ICT access affordable (12th) and 
enlarge the number of services it offers online (23rd). 
However, despite these efforts, neither the individuals 
(79th) nor especially the business community (103rd) 
have managed to match this effort, and as a result the 
country is placed at 79th place. Upgrading the ICT infra-
structure (89th), developing more digital content in Arabic 
(100th), improving the general environment for entrepre-
neurship and innovation (94th), and enhancing the avail-
able skill base (108th) should be the four priorities for the 
country to encourage higher and more homogeneous 
usage rates and achieve increased positive impacts.
Morocco and Algeria, in 91st and 118th places, 
respectively, are lagging in benefiting from the transfor-
mational impacts of ICT, especially in the economy (127th 
and 140th). Low levels of ICT infrastructure development, 
coupled with insufficient available skills, translate to weak 
uptake rates of technology by all agents, especially the 
business community and individuals. In addition, in the 
case of Algeria, the very unfavorable business condition 
(137th) that acts as a filter for innovation hampers the 
capacity of already-scarce efforts to result in meaningful 
economic impacts. Addressing these weaknesses in a 
timely manner will be crucial for both countries to start 
shifting their national economies toward knowledge-
richer and higher-productivity activities.
CONCLUSIONS
The rapid changes that the ICT industry has experienced 
in the last decade have brought about deep transforma-
tions in the way our economic activity and society are 
organized. We live in a hyperconnected world where 
the sense of immediateness and constant accessibil-
ity is redefining the relationships between and across 
individuals, businesses, and governments. Societies that 
recognize the potential opportunities that new technolo-
gies unveil will be better prepared to reap the potential 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  27 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
Box 3: Testing the robustness of the evolved NRI framework: The relationship between ICT drivers and ICT 
impacts
Any data-driven model that aims at capturing a complex 
process such as measuring the determinants of ICT uptake 
and its associated economic and social impacts can only be 
tentative. No quantitative analysis can fully take into account 
the richness and complexity of the relationships that exist 
between the underlying factors. Furthermore, in many cases 
the available data, especially for a large set of countries, are 
patchy and incomplete. Therefore, assessing the robustness 
of any model becomes crucial to ensure that it captures the 
right factors and the relationship between the determinants 
and the results of the analyzed phenomenon.
The present edition of The Global Information 
Technology Report introduces an evolved framework where, 
for the first time, the ICT economic and social impacts (ICT 
impacts) are explicitly and clearly differentiated from the three 
factors that drive these impacts (ICT drivers): an environment 
enabling a strong ICT uptake and favorable for economic and 
social impacts to accrue, a strong ICT readiness, and sub-
stantial ICT usage. As a result, the model allows—also for the 
first time—the ability to check on the relationship between the 
drivers of ICT on the one hand and their associated impacts 
on the other. In other words, it allows testing whether the 
framework is robust enough to identify and measure those 
factors that are relevant for achieving the desired ICT impacts, 
which is the end policy objective.
Running an econometric model to test the causality 
effect of each of the ICT drivers on the impacts in the NRI 
framework would be statistically difficult because of problems 
of multi-collinearity—that is, the values of the drivers are highly 
correlated with each other and therefore it is difficult to isolate 
unique effects—and also because of reverse causality—that 
is, the drivers affect the results of the impacts and vice versa. 
However, a simple correlation analysis could help us shed 
some light about the validity of the model.
Figure A presents this correlation analysis. As can be 
observed, the relationship between ICT drivers and impacts is 
very strong, with a correlation coefficient of 90 percent. This 
very high correlation, coupled with the practically nonexistent 
statistical outliers that largely divert from the relationship line, 
seems to corroborate the robustness of the NRI framework.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Figure A: Relationship between ICT drivers and impacts
IC
T 
im
pa
ct
s
ICT drivers
R ² = 0.8982
Source: Authors’ calculations.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
28  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
benefits and weather the risks of these technologies. The 
potential benefits of ICT have been widely researched. 
Improvements in innovation performance and raises in 
productivity in those technology-savvy organizations 
have been widely documented. Moreover, improvements 
in people’s well-being, thanks to new ICT-enabled prod-
ucts in healthcare or environmental solutions, are trans-
forming the quality of life of many of our citizens.
The GITR series and the NRI in particular have con-
tributed over the past decade to raise awareness about 
the determinants that drive the capacity of societies to 
transform and benefit from the multiple impacts that ICT 
can bring about. Moving forward, this new edition of the 
GITR continues to innovate and introduces an evolved 
framework that keeps abreast of the latest changes in 
the ICT industry and responds better to policy needs. 
While measuring ICT access remains important, es-
pecially for developing and emerging economies, the 
ubiquity of ICT in all areas of society has rendered the 
measuring and benchmarking of ICT impacts even more 
important.
An analysis of the ICT landscape thanks to the NRI 
results reveals that large differences across regions per-
sist regarding the uptake and impacts of ICT. Despite the 
global economic convergence of the past decade, owing 
to the sharp economic growth of Southeast Asia, Latin 
America, and Africa on the one hand and to the stagna-
tion of the advanced economies on the other, the digital 
divide seems to follow a different process. Advanced 
economies, especially the Nordic countries and the 
Asian Tigers, continue to dominate with well-rounded, 
society-wide strategies to fully leverage ICT. At the other 
end of the scale, sub-Saharan Africa continues to trail 
the rest of the world with important weaknesses, both in 
terms of preparedness caused by a low skill base and an 
environment that does not enable significant economic 
impacts to accrue. Latin America, despite the region’s 
strong resilience in the face of the economic crisis, still 
lags behind, and the need to integrate ICT better in more 
robust innovation systems remains an important chal-
lenge looking forward. On a more positive note, some 
emerging economies in Asia seem to make good prog-
ress, inspired by the good practices of regional champi-
ons such as Korea and Singapore.
The GITR series and the NRI is proud to continue, 
with renewed energy, its task of providing an analytical 
framework that sheds light on national efforts to lever-
age ICT for increased competitiveness and well-being, 
creating a platform for multi-stakeholder interaction and 
action.
NOTES
1 Gartner 2011.
2 Ericsson 2011.
3 GSMA-Atkearney 2011, p. 4.
 4 ITU 2011b.
 5 IDC 2011.
 6 IDC 2011.
 7 Facebook Statistics, available at http://www.facebook.com/press/
info.php?statistics (accessed December 21, 2011).
 8 BT Online Bureau (November 8, 2011), available at http://
businesstoday.intoday.in/story/google-plus-starts-service-for-
businesses-brands/1/19906.html (accessed December 21, 2011).
 9 Cisco 2010, p. 3.
 10 The difficulty in the definition of impacts is one of the main 
handicaps, as ICT has proven transformational in many aspects 
of the economy and society, influencing not only the outcomes 
but also the process through which products and services 
are delivered. As a result, developing metrics to capture these 
dimensions is both difficult and costly, especially when it comes to 
covering a large number of emerging countries. In addition, even 
when impact areas can be defined, it is not always easy to trace 
back specific impacts to all their original sources. Often observed 
economic and social impacts are the result of a thick network of 
several interacting factors, where ICT is but one of them.
 11 The NRI 2012 includes the results of the 2010 and 2011 Surveys. 
For more details on the Survey methodology, see Browne and 
Geiger 2010.
 12 The BRICS are Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, China, and 
South Africa.
 13 For an in-depth review of the policies carried out in Mauritius to 
develop the ICT sector, please refer to Part 2 of the Report.
REFERENCES
APEC e-Commerce Readiness Initiative. 2000. E-Commerce Readiness 
Assessment Guide. Auckland: APEC.
bridges.org. 2001. Comparison of E-Readiness Assessment Models, 
October 2001. Available at http://www.bridges.org/e_readiness_
assessment.
Browne, C. and T. Geiger. 2010. “The Executive Opinion Survey: The 
Business Executives’ Insight into their Operating Environment.” In 
The Global Competitiveness Report 2010–2011. Geneva: World 
Economic Forum. 57–65.
Chen, D. H .C. and C. J. Dahlman. 2005. “The Knowledge Economy, 
the KAM Methodology and World Bank Operations.” World Bank 
Institute Working Paper No. 37256. Washington DC: World Bank 
Institute.
CID (Center for International Development) at Harvard University. 2000. 
Readiness for the Networked World: A Guide for Developing 
Countries. Cambridge: Center for International Development at 
Harvard University.
Cisco. 2010. “Hyperconnectivity and the Approaching Zettabyte Era.” 
White Paper. Available at http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/
collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/Hyperconnectivity_
WP_e-book.pdf.
CSPP (Computer Systems Policy Project). 2000. Readiness Guide for 
Living in the Networked World. Washington DC: CSPP.
Dutta, S. and A. Jain. 2003. “The Networked Readiness of Nations.” in 
The Global Information Technology Report 2002–2003. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 2–25.
EIU (Economist Intelligence Unit). 2010. Digital Economy Rankings 2010: 
Beyond e-Readiness. London: EIU.
Ericsson. 2011. “More Than 50 Billion Connected Devices.” White Paper 
284 23-3149, February. Available at http://www.ericsson.com/res/
docs/whitepapers/wp-50-billions.pdf.
Gartner. 2011. “Gartner Says Sales of Mobile Devices Grew 5.6 Percent 
in Third Quarter of 2011; Smartphone Sales Increased 42 Percent.” 
Press Release, November 15. Available at http://www.gartner.
com/it/page.jsp?id=1848514.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  29 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
GSMA-Atkearney. 2011. “African Mobile Observatory 2011: Driving 
Economic and Social Development through Mobile Services.” 
MobileActive.org, November 21. Available at http://mobileactive.
org/research/african-mobile-observatory-2011-driving-economic-
and-social-development-through-mobile-serv.
IDC (International Data Corporation). 2011. The 2011 Digital Universe 
Study: Extracting Value from Chaos. Available at http://www.emc.
com/collateral/demos/microsites/emc-digital-universe-2011/index.
htm.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2007. Digital Opportunity 
Index. Available at http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/doi/index.html.
———. 2011a. Measuring the Information Society 2011.Geneva: ITU.
———. 2011b. ICT Facts and Figures: The World in 2011. Available at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/index.html.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 
2011. OECD Guide to Measuring the Information Society 
2011. Paris: OECD Publishing. Available at http://dx.doi.
org/10.1787/10.1787/9789264113541-en.
Waverman, L., K. Dasgupta, and J. Rajala. 2010. Connectivity Scorecard 
2010. London: LECG and Nokia Siemens Networks.
Wolcott, P., L. Press, W. McHenry, S. E. Goodman, and W. Foster. 2001. 
“A Framework for Assessing the Global Diffusion of the Internet.” 
Journal of the AIS 2 (November): Article 6.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
30  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
This appendix presents the structure of the Networked 
Readiness Index 2012 (NRI). As explained in the chapter, 
the NRI framework separates environmental factors from 
ICT readiness, usage, and impact. That distinction is re-
flected in the NRI structure, which comprises four subin-
dexes. Each subindex is in turn divided into a number of 
pillars, for a total of 10. The 53 individual indicators used 
in the computation of the NRI are distributed among the 
10 pillars.
In the list below, the number preceding the period 
indicates the pillar to which the variable belongs (e.g., 
indicator 2.05 belongs to the 2nd pillar; indicator 8.03 
belongs to the 8th pillar). The numbering of the indicators 
matches the numbering of the data tables at the end of 
the Report.
The computation of the NRI is based on successive 
aggregations of scores, from the indicator level (i.e., the 
most disaggregated level) to the overall NRI score (i.e., 
the highest level). Unless noted otherwise, we use an 
arithmetic mean to aggregate individual indicators within 
each pillar and also for higher aggregation levels (i.e., 
pillars and subindexes).a
Throughout the Report, scores in the various dimen-
sions of the NRI pillars are reported with a precision of 
one or two decimal points. However, exact figures are 
used at every step of the computation of the NRI.
Variables that are derived from the World Economic 
Forum’s Executive Opinion Survey (the Survey) are iden-
tified here by an asterisk (*). All the other indicators come 
from external sources, as described in the Technical 
Notes and Sources section at the end of the Report. 
These variables are transformed into a 1-to-7 scale in 
order to align them with the Survey’s results. We apply 
a min-max transformation, which preserves the order of, 
and the relative distance between, scores.b
NETWORKED READINESS INDEX 2012
 Networked Readiness  
 Index  =  1/4 Environment subindex 
  +  1/4 Readiness subindex 
  +  1/4 Usage subindex 
  +  1/4 Impact subindex
ENVIRONMENT SUBINDEX
 Environment subindex  =  1/2 Political and regulatory  
    environment 
  + 1/2 Business and innovation  
    environment
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies*
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT*
 1.03 Judicial independence*
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling 
disputes*c
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging 
regulations*c
 1.06 Intellectual property protection*
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed
 1.08 Number of procedures to enforce a 
contractd
 1.09 Time to enforce a contract, daysd
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies*
 2.02 Venture capital availability*
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits
 2.04 Time required to start a business, dayse
 2.05 Number of procedures to start a  
businesse
 2.06 Intensity of local competition*
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment  
rate, %
 2.08 Quality of management schools*
 2.09 Government procurement of advanced 
technology products
Appendix A:  
Structure and computation of the Networked Readiness Index 2012
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  31 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
READINESS SUBINDEX
Readiness subindex  =  1/3 Infrastructure and digital content 
+  1/3 Affordability 
+  1/3 Skills
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita
3.02 Mobile network coverage rate,  
% population
3.03 International Internet bandwidth,  
kb/s per user
3.04 Secure Internet servers per million 
population
3.05 Accessibility of digital content*
4th pillar: Affordabilityf
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min.
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP  
$/month
4.03 Internet and telephony sectors 
competition index, 0–2 (best)
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system*
5.02 Quality of math and science education*
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment 
rate, %
5.04 Adult literacy rate, %
USAGE SUBINDEX
Usage subindex  =  1/3 Individual usage 
+  1/3 Business usage 
+  1/3 Government usage
6th pillar: Individual usage
6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions per 100 
population
6.02 Internet users per 100 population
6.03 Households with personal computer, %
6.04 Households with Internet access, %
6.05 Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions 
per 100 population
6.06 Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions 
per 100 population
6.07 Use of virtual social networks*
7th pillar: Business usage
7.01 Firm-level technology absorption*
7.02 Capacity for innovation*
7.03 PCT patent applications per million 
population
7.04 Extent of business Internet use*
7.05 Extent of staff training*
8th pillar: Government usage
8.01 Government prioritization of ICT*
8.02 Importance of ICT to government vision 
of the future*
8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 
(best)
IMPACT SUBINDEX
 Impact subindex  =  1/2 Economic impacts 
  + 1/2 Social impacts
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and 
products*
 9.02 PCT ICT patent applications per million 
population
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational 
models*
 9.04 Employment in knowledge-intensive 
activities, % workforce
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic 
services*
 10.02 Internet access in schools*
 10.03 ICT use and government efficiency*
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)
NOTES
 a Formally, for a category i composed of K indicators, we have:
 b Formally, we have:  
6  x
  country score – sample minimum 
+  1
 ( sample maximum – sample minimum )
  The sample minimum and sample maximum are, respectively, the 
lowest and highest country scores in the sample of economies 
covered by the GCI. In some instances, adjustments were made 
to account for extreme outliers. For those indicators for which 
a higher value indicates a worse outcome (i.e., indicators 1.07, 
1.08, 1.09, 2.03, 2.04, 2.05, 4.01, and 4.02), the transformation 
formula takes the following form, thus ensuring that 1 and 7 
still corresponds to the worst and best possible outcomes, 
respectively:
– 6  x
  country score – sample minimum 
+  7
 ( sample maximum – sample minimum )
 c For Indicators 1.04 and 1.05, the average of the respective 
normalized scores is used in the computation of the NRI.
 d For Indicators 1.08 and 1.09, the average of the respective 
normalized scores is used in the computation of the NRI.
 e For Indicators 2.04 and 2.05, the average of the respective 
normalized scores is used in the computation of the NRI.
 f The affordability pillar is computed as follows: the average of the 
normalized scores of indicators 4.01 mobile cellular tariffs and 
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs is multiplied by a competition 
factor, the value of which is derived from indicator 4.03 Internet 
and telephony sectors competition index. It corresponds to the 
score achieved by an economy on this indicator normalized 
on a scale from 0.75 (worst) to 1.00 (best), using the min-max 
transformation described above. A normalized score of 0.75 
is assigned to an economy with a competition index score of 
0, which means that a monopolistic situation prevails in the 19 
categories of ICT services considered. A normalized score of 
1.00 is assigned to an economy where all 19 categories are fully 
liberalized. Where data are missing for indicator 4.03 (i.e., Hong 
Kong SAR, Puerto Rico, and Timor-Leste), the score on the 
affordability pillar is simply the average of the normalized scores 
of indicators 4.01 and 4.02 is used. For example, Albania obtains 
a score of 1.69 on the competition index. This translates into a 
competition factor of 0.96, which multiplies 5.65, corresponding 
to the average of Albania’s normalized scores on the two tariff 
measures. Albania’s score on the affordability pillar therefore is 
5.43.
categoryi
K

k=1
indicatork
K

© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
32  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
The Networked Readiness Index (NRI) framework was 
first developed to make conceptual sense of the com-
plex realities of information communication technologies 
(ICT) and to provide guidance to policymakers and civil 
society. When the original NRI framework was estab-
lished in 2002, numerous attempts had already been 
made to measure comparative levels of ICT development 
in nations.1
The task of capturing a nation’s competitiveness 
in a single index score was a significant challenge in 
2002; it continues to present difficulties today. Since the 
development of the original framework, further efforts 
have been made and new models have emerged in the 
attempt to find effective measurements for assessing 
ICT development in economies. From a review of these 
models, as presented in Table B1, we found that the 
conceptual frameworks for measuring ICT have evolved 
in three stages and that previous works in this field could 
be grouped in three categories.
The first group includes frameworks that were 
developed prior to the original NRI framework, launched 
in 2002. Conceptual frameworks in measuring ICT com-
petitiveness were then still in their infancy. Various orga-
nizations, such as the Computer Systems Policy Project 
(CSPP) and the Center for International Development 
(CID) at Harvard, worked out some of the first policymak-
ing and evaluation tools for countries.2
The focus of these initial frameworks was on  
individual assessment and policy development around 
e-readiness and increasing Internet penetration rates: 
APEC’s e-Commerce Readiness Assessment Guide 
(2002) and the Mosaic Group’s Framework for Assessing 
the Global Diffusion of the Internet (2001) attempted 
to do this.3 There were few ranking systems for com-
parative analysis of countries. Furthermore, because 
of the lack of or difficulty in obtaining data, low-income 
economies were often excluded from the analysis. In 
2002, the NRI became the most comprehensive index 
for assessing and evaluating a large number of countries 
(82 economies) by taking into consideration the main 
stakeholders (individuals, businesses, and governments) 
in the development and use of ICT, as well as the general 
macroeconomic and regulatory environments in which 
these stakeholders play out their respective roles.4
Appendix B:  
Historical overview of the efforts to measure and benchmark ICT developments
Following the 2002 NRI, many more compara-
tive analyses and country indexes emerged. Since the 
World Summits on the Information Society (in Geneva 
in 2003 and Tunis in 2005), a stronger sense of ur-
gency in leveraging ICT for meeting the UN Millennium 
Development Goals emerged. This is reflected in the 
second group of frameworks, which widened their scope 
and included a broader range of countries, especially 
developing countries. Models such as International 
Telecommunication Union’s Digital Opportunity Index 
and ICT Development Index (IDI) were developed in 
order to find opportunities to bridge the digital divide.5 
However, the increase in the number of countries ana-
lyzed often meant a reduction in the number of indicators 
used. This was the result of a lack of reliable data from 
numerous countries. Guidebooks and methodologies—
such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation 
and Development (OECD)’s Guide to Measuring the 
Information Society and the World Bank Institute’s 
Knowledge Assessment Methodology6—have therefore 
been produced in an attempt to create worldwide stan-
dards in collecting data for measuring the state of ICT 
development.
Yet with time, as Internet penetration began to 
stabilize in several developed economies, the need for 
a broader and more comprehensive measurement of 
ICT (not just penetration and adoption rates) became 
apparent. The third group of work follows this focus in 
understanding the role of ICT in long-term economic 
and social growth and in fostering competitiveness. In 
addition to the NRI, the Economist’s Intelligence Unit 
(EIU)’s Digital Economy Rankings—previously known 
as the E-readiness Rankings—and Waverman et al.’s 
Connectivity Scorecards have attempted to examine 
both countries’ e-readiness and the challenges they will 
face in maximizing ICT use.7 This underlines the growing 
shift toward measuring the impact of ICT in numerous 
dimensions.
In our analysis of past works to measure levels of 
ICT competitiveness we find that approaches vary signifi-
cantly with the type of organizations by which they were 
developed, their aims and objectives, their methodology, 
and finally in the results they produced (see Table B2).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  33 
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
Table B1: Evolution of conceptual ICT frameworks, rankings, and indexes
Objective Characteristics Initiative and institution
Prior to the original NRI framework (2001)
Measuring ICT competitiveness Developed prior to the original NRI 
framework in 2002
Development of first policymaking and 
evaluation tools for countries
Relatively few ranking systems for 
comparative analysis of countries
Measure state of Internet acceptance (or 
e-readiness) in a country or community
Measure the growth of Internet in the world
Readiness for Living in the Networked 
World, by the Computer Systems Policy 
Project (CSPP), 2000
Readiness for the Networked World: A 
Guide for Developing Countries, by the 
Center for International Development (CID) 
at Harvard University, 2000
International Survey of E-Commerce, by 
The World Information Technology and 
Service Alliance (WITSA), 2000
APEC e-Commerce Readiness Assessment 
Guide, by the Asian Pacific Economic 
Cooperation (APEC) Electronic Commerce 
Steering Group, 2000
A Framework for Assessing the Global 
Diffusion of the Internet, by The Mosaic 
Group, 2001
Ready? Net. Go!, by McConnell 
International, 2001
After the development of the NRI framework (2002–07)
Leveraging ICT for development Focus on bridging the digital divide and 
meeting the Millennium Development Goals
Wider range of economies to include low-
income countries 
Many self-assessment tools to help 
governments and policymakers assess 
their country’s state
Developed shortly before or after the 
World Summits on the Information Society 
(Geneva 2003, Tunis 2005)
2002 Global Technology Index, by Howard 
Rubin, Metricnet.com, 2002
The Knowledge Economy, the KAM 
Methodology and World Bank Operations, 
by Chen and Dalhman, World Bank 
Institute, 2005
Digital Opportunity Index (DOI), by ITU, 
2006–07
More recent frameworks (after 2007)
Understanding and measuring ICT in a 
broader sense
Overall increase of indicators as data 
become more available
Stronger focus on business and social 
perspective and on developing more 
economic competitiveness among 
countries
Attempts to include more measurements of 
the impact of ICT
ICT Development Index (IDI), by ITU, 
2008–11
Guide to Measuring the Information 
Society, by the OECD, 2011
Digital Economy Rankings 2010-Beyond 
e-readiness, by the Economist Intelligence 
Unit, 2010 (previously the E-readiness 
Rankings)
Connectivity Scorecard, by Waverman, 
Dasgupta and Rajala, 2008–11
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.1: The Networked Readiness Index 2012
34  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
The methodology used in research prior to the NRI 
has varied. Studies such as the APEC e-Commerce 
Readiness Assessment Guide and the Mosaic Group’s 
Global Diffusion of the Internet rely on questionnaire-
based data. Others, such as the work of the CID and 
the EIU, are a hybrid of survey questionnaires and hard 
data. The Connectivity Scorecard insists on using only 
hard data. The move to incorporate impact metrics is not 
new. Some of the older models, such as the CSPP and 
APEC models, are primarily readiness-based analyses. 
Reflecting the development of thought in this direction, 
agencies such as the EIU and the CID have incorporated 
selected impact metrics in their frameworks. ITU’s ICT 
Digital Index and the EIU’s Digital Economy Rankings 
have also included some indicators of impact. However, 
measurements of impacts in previous frameworks are 
very limited and finding suitable metrics remains a con-
siderable challenge.
The results produced by the different tools fall pri-
marily into four categories. The first category comprises 
those that look to provide a comparative analysis among 
the various countries (e.g., Connectivity Scorecard, ICT 
Digital Index, Digital Economy Rankings); the second 
is those designed to identify gaps and strong points of 
independent communities (e.g., McConnell’s Ready? 
Net. Go! and the World Bank Institute’s Knowledge 
Assessment Methodology); the third is the identification 
of the stage of development of a country (e.g., those of 
the CID and the CSPP); and the fourth consists of guide-
lines and methodology in collecting comparable and 
reliable data for a larger number of countries (e.g., the 
work of the OECD).
Table B2: Key differences among approaches used to measure ICT
Type of organization Private-sector organizations
Government organizations
Academic institutions
Objectives Policymaking and evaluation tool for countries
Measure state of Internet acceptance (or e-readiness) in a country or community
Measure the growth of the Internet in the world and ICT impact 
Methodology and data Questionnaire-based data (based on opinions of key decision makers and leaders)
Hard data–based, using sources such as the World Bank, Pyramid, ITU, and so on
Individual country self-assessment tools and guides
Results Comparative analysis of countries
Identification of gaps and strong points within independent communities
Stage of ICT development of a country determined
Guidelines in data collection and methodology
NOTES
 1 See the Comparison of E-Readiness Assessment Models, October 
2001, at http://www.bridges.org/e_readiness_assessment.
 2 See CSPP 2000; CID 2000.
 3 See APEC e-Commerce Readiness Initiative 2000; Wolcott et al. 
2001.
 4 Dutta and Jain 2003.
 5 See ITU 2007, 2011a.
 6 See OECD 2011; Chen and Dahlman 2005.
 7 See EIU 2010; Waverman et al. 2010.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  35 
CHAPTER 1.2
The Convergence 
of Information and 
Communication 
Technologies Gains 
Momentum
IVAN HUANG
ROC GUO
HARRY XIE
ZHENGXIANG WU
Huawei Technologies
In the past few years, the boundaries between infor-
mation technology (IT)—which refers to hardware and 
software used to store, retrieve, and process data—and 
communications technology (CT)—which includes elec-
tronic systems used for communication between individ-
uals or groups—have become increasingly indistinguish-
able. The rapid convergence of IT and CT is taking place 
at three layers of technology innovation—cloud, pipe, 
and device—which are described in detail in this chapter. 
As a result of this convergence, industries are adapting 
and new industries are emerging to deliver enriched user 
experiences for consumers, enterprises, and the private 
sector.
Several factors are driving the convergence of IT 
and CT and, consequently, contributing to the integration 
and transformation of cloud, pipe, and device technolo-
gies (Figure 1). For example, as the mobile penetration 
rate nears 90 percent globally, more people are able to 
communicate with each other through mobile devices. 
Many of these devices can interconnect through cloud 
computing services when accessed via the Internet. 
Adding to this momentum are innovations in smart-
phones, which allow users to send and download music 
and images, to use the Internet to purchase products, 
and to pay retailers and financial institutions electroni-
cally. In addition, more than 50 countries have invested in 
national broadband projects that lay solid foundations for 
bandwidths adequate to drive ICT convergence.
After years of evolution, Internet services, telecom-
munications value-added services, and even media ser-
vices are converging for both consumers and industry. 
Services carried by optical networks and other modern 
wireless “pipes” are moving to the cloud, and both 
industries and consumers are utilizing those services 
through a variety of integrated smart devices.
THE CLOUD: A CATALYST FOR ICT CONVERGENCE
The IT and telecommunications industries will converge 
for cloud services. In addition to providing bandwidths 
for cloud services, telecommunications carriers will 
gradually move their IT systems, value-added services, 
and Internet data centers into the cloud to provide ser-
vices to a variety of industries. To integrate their services 
successfully, telecommunications and IT industries will 
seek a common understanding on standards, interfaces, 
and security specifications. Most important will be the 
unification of industry standards. Uniform standards will 
significantly drive down the cost of the cloud, making 
interconnection a reality and facilitating its rapid develop-
ment. Cloud services, such as e-government, e-educa-
tion, and e-healthcare, will be able to better cater to the 
needs of governments, industries, and enterprises.
Although convergence presents many challenges to 
IT and CT, ICT convergence will strengthen both indus-
tries by accelerating the development of cloud comput-
ing services. As a groundbreaking business model and 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies
36  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
an innovative technology, cloud computing is becoming 
a powerful catalyst in the restructuring and integration of 
IT and CT. Traditional IT and CT once tried to integrate 
with the Internet, but without the uniform standards that 
are required to enable cloud computing, the integration 
provided limited results. However, the current integration 
of the Internet with IT and CT is transforming both indus-
tries and enabling the development of next-generation 
technologies (Figure 2).
Traditional IT centers on data, whereas traditional 
CT centers on connection-based networks. Converged 
IT and CT produce ICT, which is the cornerstone of 
what we often refer to as cloud computing, a technology 
focused on interaction and collaboration between users 
and systems.
Before the transformation of CT into ICT, real-time 
voice services played a dominant role in CT. At that time, 
the telecommunications industry focused on finding solu-
tions that empowered customers to roam with their mo-
bile phones over a mobile network with acceptable price 
points for both the carrier and the subscriber. Since the 
transformation of CT into ICT, media services and break-
ing news are widely available via mobile networks and 
have replaced the previously dominant real-time voice 
services in CT. Today, the telecommunications industry 
focuses on the customer need for seamless services 
supported by integrated mobile networks (Figure 3). 
The very meaning of the word pipes has also changed. 
Although the term still refers to a data connection—with 
a pipe being analogous to bandwidth or throughput—it 
has evolved from a physical connection, such as a cable, 
to all–Internet protocol (all-IP) networks. Likewise, when 
telecommunications companies referred to networks in 
the past, they meant connected networks. Today, the 
same word also refers to data transmitted via ICT.
Just as traditional CT has changed since its trans-
formation into ICT, IT is also rapidly evolving. In recent 
years, new IT enterprises in consumer markets have 
leveraged cloud computing’s open and interconnected 
resources to aggressively challenge traditional IT in 
industry markets. A key challenge for traditional IT is its 
inability to keep pace with today’s fast-paced industry 
markets. Traditional IT build-outs and management 
models face several inherent obstacles, including inflex-
ibility, low resource utilization, high energy consumption, 
prolonged time frames for systems going live, and high 
software and management costs. Unlike the early days 
of IT, merely expanding hardware equipment is no longer 
sufficient to overcome these challenges.
The evolution from traditional IT to ICT has signifi-
cantly changed the IT landscape. For example, data 
centers based on document storage were once at the 
heart of traditional IT. In today’s ICT era, cloud comput-
ing based on interactive sessions has replaced traditional 
data centers. Other aspects of traditional IT have also 
shifted. For example, although traditional IT was con-
cerned with data security, today’s ICT security focus 
has shifted to user privacy. Traditional IT also required 
people to adapt to systems, but today’s systems are 
designed to cater to people’s needs, instead of the other 
Figure 1: ICT sector revenues and growth rate, US$ million
Source: Huawei Technologies.
Cloud: Internet services, broadcast 
services, telecommunications  
value-added services
Pipe: Traditional telecommunications 
network, Internet data communication 
network, cable network
Device: Personal electronic devices, 
telecommunications premise, home 
entertainment boxes Personal
Family
Industry
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  37 
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies 
IT CT WEB
Microsoft
Cisco
HP
Dell
Oracle
Huawei
Cisco
Ericsson
Alcatel-Lucent
Nokia Siemens Networks
Amazon
Apple
Facebook
Google
Salesforce
Figure 2: The convergence of IT, CT, and web capabilities
Source: Huawei Technologies.
Figure 3: Dynamic connections of ICT services
Source: Huawei Technologies.
RECORD ENGAGEMENT SESSION
IT
DATA-CENTERED
Command execution • 
Document-based •  
storage 
Transaction-based • 
 data 
Data security •
People adapting •  
to systems 
Structured data •
ICT
USER-CENTERED
• Interaction & 
collaboration
• Session-based 
storage
• Interactive 
data
• User privacy
• System catering 
to people’s needs
• Non-structured 
data
Real-time video •
 
Consistent mobile • 
experience 
Content • 
perception 
CT
NETWORK-CENTERED
• Real-time voice 
• Mobile roaming 
• Bit transmission
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies
38  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
way around. Similarly, structural data were replaced as a 
main concern for traditional IT with ICT’s large amounts 
of semi-structured or unstructured data.
Like traditional IT, the traditional CT industry needs 
to make further changes to realize the many benefits 
offered by ICT convergence. However, numerous busi-
ness models, services, and individualized requirements 
emerging from the Internet are overwhelming today’s 
communications industry. With the help of new technolo-
gies, this industry can continue to use its switching ca-
pabilities for a while longer. But if it does not keep pace 
with ICT convergence, traditional CT could find itself in 
the dark when it comes to communications control and 
monitoring. Alone, the communications industry is not 
knowledgeable enough about content exchange and 
does not know how to apply data control. In the era of 
ICT convergence, where cloud computing delivers data 
to any device anywhere, the pipes of the communica-
tions industry can no longer fully reflect its business 
value.
From a user’s perspective, cloud computing blurs 
the lines between IT and CT to deliver superior and con-
sistent experiences based on the ANY–ANY–ANY con-
cept illustrated in Figure 4. The widespread use of smart-
phones and tablets has made user demand increasingly 
prominent for access from any device at any time using 
any service provider. Traditional IT or CT technologies 
alone cannot provide such an experience, which is why it 
is time to restructure these technologies.
Cloud computing has reshaped the IT industry. The 
new cloud model for computing storage and network 
resource management uses a distributed computing 
architecture to reshape the traditional single-server com-
puting architecture. This new computing model adopts 
two key technologies—distribution and virtualization—to 
decouple software and service and help move data cen-
ters and services into the cloud. Resource sharing in the 
cloud increases the utilization and flexibility of resources, 
significantly accelerates service deployment, and im-
proves processing capabilities.
 Cloud computing also points CT in a new direction 
that goes beyond pipes to exploring the value of broad-
band for handling the large datasets that cloud comput-
ing can store and transmit. We think of the cloud as an 
information factory that is now overturning the traditional 
business models of software, hardware, and media to 
transform user focus from purchasing products to pur-
chasing services. Not only is cloud computing desirable 
from a user’s perspective, but it also enables IT and CT 
to enhance and transform each other (Box 1).
PIPE: IP+OPTICAL IS THE FUTURE OF PIPE 
INTEGRATION
For many years, telecommunications networks have 
been evolving into all-IP networks. This evolution has 
significantly reduced the cost of network operations 
(e.g., the cost of per-bit data transmission has dropped 
dramatically). All-IP networks have also accelerated the 
convergence of fixed with mobile telecommunications 
Figure 4: Cloud computing from a user’s perspective
Any device Any access Any provider
ANY
ANY
ANY
Source: Huawei Technologies.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  39 
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies 
networks. Currently, tremendous progress has been 
made in the all-IP model. The next objective is likely to 
be the IP+Optical network model.
On future networks, the majority of traffic will be 
video, which will increase the volume of data traffic 
dramatically. Optical technology will alleviate the pressure 
caused by large-capacity demands, whereas IP technol-
ogy will make networks more flexible and ease intercon-
nection. The IP+Optical model will significantly improve 
efficiency and reduce total cost of ownership. A joint 
article by BT and Huawei analyzing the economy of net-
works notes that when data traffic increases 6.5 times, 
the IP+Optical solution will reduce network construction 
costs by about 30 percent, diminish the area required 
for equipment rooms by 50 percent, and help decrease 
power consumption by about 55 percent.1
Cost is the primary driver for the convergence of 
multiple networks, including telecommunications net-
works, the Internet, broadcasting networks, and even 
electric power networks. For consumers, converging 
services have reduced charges and improved services. 
For carriers, IP technologies have lowered operating 
costs. As an example, look at the transmission networks 
of mobile carriers several years ago. At that time, mo-
bile carriers often leased E1 channels, which are used 
to connect to medium and large companies, from fixed 
carriers for their mobile backhaul networks. Mobile carri-
ers also employed non-IP technologies. As a result, they 
paid very high leasing fees. After IP backhaul technology 
was adopted, the cost to the carrier in many places went 
down by as much as 80 percent and the pressure from 
increased traffic was adequately addressed. More im-
portantly, all-IP technologies have gradually standardized 
products and decreased network construction costs.
A seamless user experience is the second driver for 
the convergence of multiple networks. Separating net-
works from services leaves many users dissatisfied and 
leaves many carriers unable to address their own service 
convergence needs. The direction in which pipes de-
velop has nothing to do with services, as all services can 
run in the same pipe. This means that networks of the 
future will become increasingly flattened and simplified.
Quality of service and quality of experience are the 
primary factors that need to be resolved in converged 
pipes, especially for converged Internet and traditional 
telecommunications networks. After the convergence 
of these two network types, multi-play carriers that 
combine mobility, video, Internet, and voice telephone 
services need to consider how to use carrier-class 
network capabilities to ensure a high quality of experi-
ence for these communications services, which tradition-
ally required separate networks. The multi-play quality 
of experience solution must be end-to-end and must 
ultimately improve the consumer experience. This may 
mean end-to-end centralized strategy control centered 
on users and services at the network resource layer, or 
fast troubleshooting and self-healing capabilities at the 
network layer, or redundancy backup and hot swapping 
for key components at the equipment layer. In any case, 
multi-play carriers must ensure that consumers have a 
perfect carrier-class quality of experience while enjoying 
diversified multi-play services.
As Internet videos and Internet protocol television 
(IPTV) become popular, video services will constitute 90 
percent or more of the services provided by future net-
works. Video usage, sharing, and storage trends will rap-
idly drive up traffic, which will place tremendous pressure 
on networks. A content distribution network (CDN) will 
effectively solve this problem. The Pareto principle (also 
known as the 80–20 rule) often applies when analyzing 
the proportion of traffic that users allocate to the con-
tents they like. In other words, 80 percent of user traffic 
involves 20 percent of user content. Statistics show that 
80 percent of peer-to-peer video content is transmitted 
via backbone networks. Therefore, many problems can 
be resolved if important video content is smartly cached 
via the CDN.
However, the CDN cannot resolve all problems. 
Gigantic data traffic makes it hard for some traditional 
technologies and architectures to sustain satellites, mi-
crowaves, and traditional routing architectures. The opti-
cal network will be an effective solution for large-capacity 
transmission. But the bearer mode adopted by traditional 
optical networks is too rigid to allow adequate flexibility in 
service provisioning and cross connections. Previously, 
Internet services used traditional Internet routers, which 
Box 1: Cloud computing will reshape IT and CT
•	 IT and CT will enhance each other to produce a con-
sistent experience across any device, any time, any 
where.
•	 The telecommunications and IT industries will integrate 
services and adopt common standards to:
 —drive down costs;
 —facilitate development; and
 —help cloud services cater to governments, industries, 
and enterprises.
•	 The IT computing model will change from a traditional 
single-server computing architecture to a distribution 
computing architecture that helps move data centers 
and services to the cloud.
•	 The CT model will shift from its focus on real-time 
voice services to accommodate increased multi media 
content through integrated mobile networks and 
broadband.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies
40  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
were too flexible and reduced efficiency. If users clicked 
a movie link via the Internet, for example, the down-
load often went through many routers. The IP+Optical 
model uses optical networking to reduce the number of 
hops for the routers and increase transmission speed. 
Therefore, the synergy of IP and optical networks has 
created a viable new solution.
From a service-bearing perspective, the IP+Optical 
model will make IP over dense wavelength division mul-
tiplexing (DWDM) a practical option for services requir-
ing high bandwidths. In this way, data packages can be 
transmitted directly via relatively cheap optical networks, 
which will reduce the number of routers used and help 
conserve energy while also reducing the space required 
for equipment rooms. In addition, the combined effect of 
IP+Optical networks at the service protection, network 
management, and maintenance layers will make this 
solution highly feasible (Box 2).
THE DEVICE: SMART DEVICES WILL USE THE 
CLOUD TO EVOLVE INTO PERSONAL MEDIA 
CENTERS
Up to now, mobile phone usage has centered around 
conventional communications functions. This will change 
with the convergence of IT and CT services, which has 
been helped along by the wider use of smart devices. 
Since consumers are craving a variety of impressive 
applications, we believe that in the future smart devices 
will become deeply intertwined with the cloud to sup-
port popular services and applications. As the situation 
stands today, users often have a bad experience be-
cause of disconnects between devices and the cloud, 
dispersed applications, and unstable service quality. 
Closely interweaving devices with the cloud will give con-
sumers a better user experience while also accelerating 
widespread use of industry applications.
Integration of home devices
Gradually, devices used inside and outside of the home 
are becoming increasingly integrated. Users who con-
nect mobile phones, flat-panel television sets, and per-
sonal computers (PCs) with the Internet via broadband 
or Wi-Fi networks can better leverage the capabilities 
of each device to make phone calls, watch movies and 
television programs, play games, or access information 
online. Thanks to advancing ICT technologies, con-
ventional television sets that once used analog signals 
now use digital signals. This transformation has turned 
television sets into smart devices that are able to serve 
as open platforms for smartphones and PCs. The large 
high-definition display on these smart television sets 
vividly projects the full complement of smart applications 
that users are running on mobiles phones and PCs.
Compared with using just a mobile phone or televi-
sion set, integrated home devices deliver an enhanced 
user experience that is customized to the individual 
tastes of each member of the household. This integration 
allows users to enjoy a fuller and more animated experi-
ence when watching movies and television programs or 
playing games than they can have by merely watching a 
conventional television.
Integration of industry devices
Like home devices, industry devices are becoming 
integrated amid the widespread use of ICT technologies. 
The integration of industry devices promises to gradually 
disperse the boundaries between industries. Adding to 
this trend is the ever-growing convergence of multiple 
networks (including broadcasting networks, telecommu-
nications networks, and the Internet). This convergence 
allows IT, television programming, the Internet of Things, 
gaming, and other technologies to be incorporated into 
each of the integrated devices.
With the advancement of telecommunications in-
frastructure networks and the arrival of the era of high-
speed mobile communications, network-supported 
functions can become increasingly versatile. Consider an 
example from the automotive industry, which wants to 
cater to today’s consumer demand for smarter vehicles. 
It is because of this demand that integrated automotive 
devices—including automotive global positioning sys-
tems (GPSs) and mobile communications devices—have 
been developed for consumer markets. Through inte-
gration, automotive devices can deliver more versatile 
and easily accessible functions. These functions may 
include navigation services provided by call centers that 
specialize in the automotive domain; automotive security 
services; and Internet-based provisioning of communica-
tions, entertainment, and lifestyle resources.
As mobile devices become integrated on a large 
scale, people require data both in higher frequency 
and in massive amounts. To keep up with this inte-
gration trend, cloud computing solutions are coming 
Box 2: Converging pipes with IP+Optical 
networks
•	 IP technology:
—makes networks more flexible and eases intercon-
nection,
—reduces the cost of network operations, and
—accelerates convergence of fixed and mobile net-
works.
•	 Optical technology:
—increases transmission speed for large-capacity 
transmissions (video), and
—uses IP over DWDM to reduce operating and capital 
expenditures for high bandwidth transmissions.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  41 
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies 
into widespread use for more and more mobile de-
vices (Box 3). With the help of cloud computing, users 
can acquire, store, and use data more efficiently and 
cost-effectively.
ICT CONVERGENCE IMPACTS CONSUMERS, 
INDUSTRIES, AND GOVERNMENTS
The rapid convergence of ICT has significant meaning 
for consumers, enterprises/industries, and governments. 
Consumers and enterprises are benefiting from this 
transformation, and governments are in a position to 
facilitate this transformation.
ICT convergence and consumers
The mobile Internet is one of the most important sectors 
of the ICT industry. In many places around the world, 
mobile Internet users (e.g., 3G, or third-generation, mo-
bile phone subscribers) outnumber fixed Internet users 
(e.g., PC users). In Africa, for example, the number of 
mobile phone subscribers has exceeded 500 million, and 
there are far more users who access the Internet with 
their mobile phones than those who access the Internet 
with their PCs. In Japan, users of devices powered by 
mobile communications networks also outnumber PC 
users.
 By taking advantage of burgeoning mobile com-
munications networks in the United States, 58 percent 
of US adults are using mobile network applications, 
such as mobile email, image downloading, and map 
searching. Moreover, the increasing popularity of mobile 
phones and widespread network deployments have 
given rise to new businesses, such as mobile phone–
based shopping and payment. About one-sixth of the 
population in Kenya uses mobile phone–based banking 
functions to get financial services. In China, 46 percent 
of mobile phone subscribers surveyed said that they 
have purchased something using the access services 
provided by their mobile phones.2 The sky is the limit as 
we learn to leverage the full potential of integrated smart 
devices, the full complement of peripheral devices, ubiq-
uitous networks, and robust cloud data centers.
 Raising the levels of integration will allow users to 
easily upload documents, photos, songs, and videos 
recorded on their smart devices to the cloud or to freely 
download data from the cloud. Life becomes much more 
convenient with this type of cloud-powered accessibility 
and back-end backup. Users will also be able to access 
the network with their smart devices while on weekend 
getaways or extended road trips to directly view satellite 
maps and real-time traffic conditions, get recommenda-
tions from online friends about scenic spots and nearby 
restaurants, or easily reserve hotel rooms. In addition, 
users will be able to play content, such as music, stored 
in their smart devices on their automobile’s sound sys-
tem to make driving more enjoyable.
Giving full play to the power of this integration 
will impact users in all aspects of their lives (Box 4). 
Consumers will be able to use smart devices to search 
for sales of their favorite clothes at nearby shopping 
malls; they will be able to improve their diets by using 
smart devices to check the calorie content of their favor-
ite foods and decide whether they have the nutrition their 
bodies need.
Combining smart devices and peripheral devices 
leads to a smarter lifestyle. Linking a smartphone to a 
conventional television set through an interface device 
allows users to effortlessly transfer songs, photos, and 
videos stored in their smartphones to their television 
sets. This capability not only revolutionizes the function-
ality of a conventional television set, it gives users a fresh 
new experience.
Integrating smart devices with compatible medical 
peripheral devices creates mini smart medical devices. 
The peripheral devices capture basic vital signs—such 
as cardiopulmonary status, oxygen saturation, tempera-
ture, and pulse—while the built-in applications of the 
smart devices analyze these signs and then upload them 
to the cloud. By using smart devices this way, users can 
analyze their overall health locally and keep an eye on 
trends in their data. Health professionals can use these 
data to update personal health records stored in the 
cloud and to make suggestions for preventative care.
ICT convergence and enterprises/industries
One huge advantage that ICT convergence introduces 
is cloud computing for businesses, which allows em-
ployees to work anywhere that has network coverage 
rather than merely in their offices (Box 5). By connecting 
devices, such as mobile phones and PCs, to the cloud, 
employees can handle urgent tasks at home, on-the-
go during business trips, or even on a beach during 
Box 3: The future of smart devices
•	 Smart devices will use the cloud to support popular 
services and applications.
•	 Interweaving devices with the cloud will offer a better 
user experience and accelerate the widespread use of 
industry applications:
 —Integration of home devices (mobile phones, flat-
panel television sets, PCs) with the Internet delivers 
an enhanced, customized user experience.
 —Integration of industry devices and the convergence 
of multiple networks (broadcasting, telecommunica-
tions, Internet) are gradually merging the boundaries 
between industries.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies
42  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
vacation. The access to resources and the manageability 
of the deliverables are similar to being physically present 
in the office.
Another advantage of ICT convergence for enter-
prises is that employees can boost their production 
efficiency by leveraging collaborative tools that synchro-
nously deliver intense functions, such as instant mes-
saging, audio and video communications, data sharing, 
whiteboard sharing, and interactive polling. This applica-
bility allows multinational enterprise teams to cooperate 
across geographic regions while slashing communica-
tions costs. Having virtual teams across the world that 
work as “one world, one team” is no longer just a dream.
In addition to location-independent accessibility and 
a boost in production efficiency, ICT convergence also 
provides high-definition videoconferencing solutions that 
enable attendees to meet with others in a virtual environ-
ment that simulates talking face to face. Attendees on 
both sides can see each other in real-life proportions 
and pick up on each other’s facial expressions, body 
language, gestures, and even eye expressions. This 
functionality minimizes the need for senior management 
to travel frequently for meetings, which substantially 
decreases the time and cost for the enterprise.
ICT convergence promises positive impacts on 
product applications by allowing any industry a greater 
degree of customization. For example, education, medi-
cine, finance, and government can all benefit from ICT 
convergence.
In traditional education, students trained primar-
ily in physical classrooms. This method of education 
does not satisfy the constant need for new expertise 
that keeps people competitive in a knowledge-based 
economy. Among the drawbacks of traditional educa-
tion methods are inadequacies in teaching resources, 
constraints on time and locations, repetition of effort, 
lack of consideration for individual learning modes, a 
potential for out-of-date knowledge, and an inability to 
meet stiff requirements for collective or off-the-job train-
ing. By capitalizing on such comprehensive technologies 
as cloud computing, cooperative communications, and 
high-definition videoconferencing, the modern distance 
education system turns small classrooms scattered 
around the world into one huge classroom or virtual 
community. Isolated schools can share resources, and 
numerous students can attain access to lessons taught 
by excellent teachers.
Another example of product advancement through 
ICT convergence comes from the medical industry. 
Healthcare opportunities vary significantly from one 
region to another around the world and are usually quite 
low in rural areas. ICT convergence can help people in 
less-developed areas gain access to superior healthcare 
resources. Once connected and linked up to converged 
networks, high-definition video equipment and medical 
apparatuses can transmit complete and vital data (such 
as onsite operation data, electrocardiogram data, moni-
toring equipment data, computed tomography data, and 
patient medical records) in real time to medical experts 
located hundreds or thousands of miles away. Medical 
experts can even diagnose patients by observing such 
visible indicators as skin tone and physique.
ICT convergence also offers financial institutions a 
competitive edge in attracting customers by present-
ing an alternative to waiting in long lines for banking 
services. Mobile banking systems and multifunctional 
self-service devices, which converge both IT and CT 
technologies, can extend the scope of banking services 
beyond business center networks and offer customized 
financial services 24/7.
Government agencies can use ICT convergence 
to build safer cities by fully leveraging smart monitoring 
devices, highly reliable transmission networks, large data 
storage capacity, and smart analytics. It is possible for 
government authorities to use a daily work platform to 
see how a city looks in real time and rapidly respond to 
various emergencies—including fires, car accidents, and 
floods—to minimize loss of life and financial loss.
ICT convergence and government policy
As the convergence of IT and CT gains momentum, so 
does the role of governments in facilitating the evolution 
of ICT. Governments can encourage ICT convergence 
in three key ways. First, they can reform policies and 
regulations to remove investment barriers and create a 
Box 4: Implications of ICT convergence for 
consumers
Raising integration levels between smart devices, peripheral 
devices, ubiquitous networks, and robust cloud data centers 
allows consumers to:
•	 upload documents, photos, songs, and videos from 
smartphones to the cloud;
•	 download data from the cloud;
•	 use smart devices on trips to access maps and traffic 
reports or find hotel rooms;
•	 play content from smart devices on automobile devices 
for enjoyable driving;
•	 search for local sales;
•	 check calorie count of favorite foods;
•	 transfer songs, photos, and videos to television for a 
fresh experience; and
•	 track and analyze vital signs for better preventative 
healthcare.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  43 
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies 
level playing field for competitors. Next, they can offer 
financial incentives to firms that deploy advanced ICT 
services. Finally, they can support and accelerate ICT 
convergence by directly investing in infrastructure and 
services.
Responding with effective regulations
With ICT industries already subject to volatile technologi-
cal and market changes, it is important for regulators of 
the telecommunications, IT, and broadcasting network 
industries to respond to changing conditions. By ef-
fectively enabling ICT convergence, government regula-
tions can act as catalysts for network and economic 
development. For example, to build a national broadband 
network, government agencies need to provide ad-
equate spectrum so the ICT industry can deploy mobile 
broadband networks that enable rural area residents to 
benefit from national initiatives. However, the spectrum 
in many countries is a scarce resource mainly used by 
the military, broadcasting, telecommunications, and IT 
industries. This lack of broadband spectrum availability 
restricts services, ICT convergence, and opportunities 
for economic development. One way to maximize this 
scarce resource is to allocate spectrum resources based 
on industry efficiency.
Switzerland’s long-term evolution (LTE) auction 
provides an example of a regulatory action that drives 
network and economic development for multiple stake-
holders. LTE is a wireless communication standard for 
high-speed data for mobile devices and data terminals. 
Switzerland offers an 800 MHz spectrum auction to 
encourage mobile telecommunications development as a 
universal access and service tool. The local regulator of 
this auction established the rule that the auction’s winner 
would be responsible for providing mobile broadband 
services for rural residents. The regulator allocated the 
800 MHz spectrum to the mobile industry for two rea-
sons: the 800 MHz band helps mobile operators deploy 
LTE networks, and mobile technology is more efficient 
than IT or broadcast. By adding mechanisms to manage 
the radio-frequency spectrum, Switzerland helped accel-
erate ICT convergence for multiple stakeholders.
Several countries have reformed their policy and 
regulatory frameworks to enable convergence while 
simultaneously focusing on market forces. Kenya 
and Singapore, among others, have moved toward 
technology-neutral licensing regimes that allow service 
providers the flexibility to deploy the most efficient 
networks. Some countries—such as Malaysia, the 
Republic of Korea, and the United Kingdom—have 
restructured their entire legal and regulatory frameworks 
to align with convergence and allow multiple players 
without restriction. There is also an emerging trend in 
Finland, Japan, and Moldova that simplifies licensing for 
some services.
Policymakers today have the opportunity to promote 
competition as they undertake policy reform. Creating 
a competitive market for a variety of different service pro-
viders has been recognized as the most effective means 
to drive growth and encourage efficiency in ICT while 
reducing prices and improving quality. One way govern-
ments can encourage new market entry and subsequent 
investment in ICT is to remove restrictions on foreign 
ownership of licenses. This is particularly true in develop-
ing countries, where capital availability may be limited. In 
fact, foreign license regulations can impede ICT conver-
gence. For example, when the Spanish telephone com-
pany Telefónica attempted to acquire a stake in Brazil’s 
pay television provider Way TV, regulatory approval took 
about six months because of foreign ownership issues.
Some countries are introducing new regulatory tools 
to encourage network investment by smaller market 
players. Ireland, for example, has found that rather than 
imposing national broadband rollout and coverage obli-
gations on large-scale operators, it can achieve greater 
success by allowing wireless broadband providers to 
enter small local service areas. This has led to a signifi-
cant rise in new broadband subscribers in non-urban 
areas.3
Traditionally, countries have been very protective 
of access to government land by private industry. By 
streamlining and standardizing the application process 
for access to pole attachments and railway, electrical 
grid, and road rights-of-way, governments can stimulate 
the development of broadband infrastructure.
Box 5: Implications of ICT convergence for 
industry
•	 Extend employee productivity with location-indepen-
dent access to resources.
•	 Boost production efficiency across dispersed teams 
with collaborative tools.
•	 Minimize executive travel with high-definition videocon-
ferencing.
•	 Customize products for specific industries:
 —Education industry: Improve access to education 
with modern distance education systems.
 —Medical industry: Transmit real-time data and vital 
signs to distant medical experts for better healthcare 
access in less-developed areas.
 —Finance Industry: Attract customers with 24/7 cus-
tomized financial services.
 —Governments: Build safer cities with monitoring 
devices, reliable transmission networks, large data 
storage capacity, and smart analytics.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies
44  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Offering financial incentives
In addition to reforming policies, governments can ac-
celerate ICT convergence by providing incentives to firms 
that deploy advanced ICT services. The government of 
Japan, for example, provided interest-free credit, subsi-
dies, preferential tax rates, competition-enhancing rules, 
and other measures to promote the deployment and use 
of fiber optic broadband networks.4 This helped Japan 
lead the world in fiber optic home subscriptions, with 
more than 8 million homes connected in 2007.
In 2010, the European Commission (EC) exchanged 
its old regulatory framework for one that recognized the 
need to stimulate large-scale fiber investments differ-
ently.5 In the new regulatory framework, governments 
are allowed to subsidize the rollout of fiber networks in 
rural and unprofitable areas, and operators can adapt 
pricing regimes to different market contexts in different 
geographical areas. The EC expects commercial play-
ers to invest in more densely populated urban areas 
and public authorities to support development in more 
rural areas. Government can help cut commercial costs 
by (1) mapping suitable infrastructure, (2) ensuring that 
civil engineering projects involve potential investors and 
exploit synergies among all network infrastructures, and 
(3) clearing rights of way.
Investing in infrastructure
Finally, some countries facilitate ICT convergence 
by directly investing in infrastructure and services. 
Government investment can provide a significant ad-
vantage during the early stages of convergence and 
serves to make the government’s policy stance clear 
to stakeholders (Box 6). One study demonstrated that 
connecting homes with fiber optic networks is financially 
feasible in cities only if more than 25 percent of homes 
subscribe, mainly because of the high costs of deploy-
ment.6 Direct investment in community initiatives to 
provide broadband access can help cities defray deploy-
ment costs and jumpstart development.
As part of their investment in ICT convergence, gov-
ernments can lead the development of advanced net-
works or create an open-access infrastructure to attract 
private investment. By 2008, 65 percent of households 
in France had broadband service,7 and multiple service 
providers had benefited from the unbundling of the 
incumbent France Telecom network. Now national and 
local governments are investing in the rollout of open-
access fiber networks that private service providers will 
pay to use. Included in this plan are opening sewers and 
conduits to allow competitive service providers to lay 
their fiber optic cables within already-existing networks. 
According to one estimate, this will reduce costs of net-
work deployment by up to 60 percent.8
In 2007, the Australian federal government initiated 
the National Secondary School Computer Fund to en-
sure that students in grades 9 through 12 had access 
to school computers.9 Other initiatives by the Australian 
government include a commitment of A$81.9 million over 
three years to fund the Vocational Education Broadband 
Network, which will create a single high-speed broad-
band network for post-secondary school training and 
further education.
Direct government investment in ICT includes risks 
and challenges. For example, a government’s preferential 
treatment of one or more service providers could distort 
the market and potentially reduce competition. To ad-
dress this issue, the EC created rules requiring justifica-
tion for state intervention and an analysis of the impact of 
aid on competition in the market. In areas where com-
peting private operators are present, the EC can prohibit 
state investment if intervention could crowd out existing 
or future investments by market players.10
Box 6: How governments can facilitate ICT 
convergence
•	 Reform policies to promote competition and remove 
investment barriers:
—remove restrictions on foreign ownership of licenses;
—adopt rules to provide for infrastructure sharing of 
towers, ducts, and support facilities;
—add mechanisms for managing radio-frequency 
spectrum;
—encourage wireless broadband providers to enter 
small local service areas;
—streamline the process for accessing rights of way 
and pole attachments; and
—monitor dominant operators.
•	 Provide government incentives to firms that deploy 
advanced ICT services, such as:
—interest-free credit;
—subsidies, attractive loans to compensate providers 
who deploy networks in unprofitable areas; and
—preferential tax rates.
•	 Invest in infrastructure and services:
—fund the construction of open-access fiber optic 
networks;
—fund digital education initiatives;
—include network conduits in road projects or incor-
porate cable arrays in new electrical grids; and
—support local community initiatives to provide broad-
band access.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  45 
1.2: The Convergence of Information and Communication Technologies 
CONCLUSION
Several factors have contributed to the rapid conver-
gence of IT and CT, including widespread mobile phone 
penetration, innovations in smart devices, and the advent 
of cloud computing. As ICT convergence gains momen-
tum, multiple networks will continue to converge, using a 
combination of IP and optical technology to drive down 
costs and improve the user experience.
Technology innovations at the level of cloud, pipe, 
and device are stimulating new industries to meet the 
expectations of consumers and enterprises for integrated 
services. As ICT convergence advances, integrated 
smart devices will gain prominence in homes and en-
terprises. These devices will use the cloud to support 
popular services and applications. Consumers will inter-
act with each other and access information in new ways, 
providing the impetus for new businesses such as mo-
bile phone–based shopping and payment services. ICT 
convergence will free employees from the office setting 
and boost production efficiency with collaborative tools 
such as videoconferencing that allow widely dispersed 
employees to come together as a single team.
Governments can play a key role in facilitating ICT 
convergence by creating a framework that promotes 
competition and innovation. New policies and the re-
moval of regulatory restrictions can help stakeholders 
of all sizes expand their opportunities while improving 
access to information for residents in remote regions. 
Beyond policy reform, governments can stimulate in-
vestments through financial incentives. They can even 
directly invest in infrastructure and services as a way to 
empower their citizens and remain competitive with other 
countries. This three-stage process—reform policies, 
provide incentives, invest in infrastructure and services—
provides a roadmap to economic development by en-
couraging technological innovation and meeting market 
demand.
NOTES
1 He et al. 2009.
2 See the ITU Statistics Newslog: Mobile Applications at http://www.
itu.int/ITU-D/ict/newslog/CategoryView,category,Mobile%2Bapplic
ations.aspx.
3 ITU 2006.
4 Dow Jones International News 2000, available at www.dowjones.
com.
5 Beardsley et al. 2011.
6 Sigurdsson 2007.
7 Paul Budde Communication, 2009, available at http://www.budde.
com.au/.
8 Paul Budde Communication 2008.
9 See details about this program at http://www.deewr.gov.au/
Schooling/DigitalEducationRevolution/ComputerFund/Pages/
NationalSecondarySchoolComputerFundOverview.aspx.
10 Papadias et al. 2006, p. 13.
REFERENCES
Beardsley, S., L. Enriquez, M. Güvendi, and S. Sandoval. 2011. 
“Creating a Fiber Future: The Regulatory Challenge.” In The 
Global Information Technology Report 2010–2011. Geneva: World 
Economic Forum. 99–108.
The Broadband Commission. 2010. A 2010 Leadership Imperative: The 
Future Built on Broadband. ITU/UNESCO. Available at http://www.
broadbandcommission.org/Reports/Report_1.pdf.
Paul Budde Communication. 2008. France: Fibre and Wireless 
Broadband Insights. Online report. Available at http://www.budde.
com.au/Research/France-Fibre-and-Wireless-Broadband-Insights.
html.
Budde, P., with J. Burgess, J. Ponder, Y. Lozanova, and the Broadband 
Commission Secretariat team. 2011. Broadband: A Platform 
for Progress: A Report by the Broadband Commission for 
Digital Development. ITU/UNESCO. Available at http://www.
broadbandcommission.org/Reports/Report_2.pdf, 2011.
He, J., A. Lord, H. Xu, and M. Wade. 2009. “Using Holistic Methodology 
to Build Scalable Networks.” Paper presented at the National Fiber 
Optic Engineers Conference, San Diego, March 22. OSA Technical 
Digest. Paper JThA68, Optical Society of America.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2006. Trends in 
Telecommunication Reform 2006: Regulating in the Broadband 
World. Geneva: ITU.
———. Various dates. ITU Statistics Newslog: Applications. Available at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/newslog/CategoryView,category,Mobil
e%2Bapplications.aspx.
Papadias, L., A. Riedl, and J. G. Westerhof. 2006. “Public Funding for 
Broadband Networks: Recent Developments.” Competition Policy 
Newsletter 3 (Autumn 2006): 13–18. Available at http://ec.europa.
eu/competition/publications/cpn/2006_3_13.pdf.
Sigurdsson, H. M. 2007. “Techno-Economics of Residential Broadband 
Deployment.” PhD dissertation, Center for Information and 
Communication Technologies, Technical University of Denmark, 
Copenhagen.
Singh, R. and S. Raja. 2008. “Nothing Endures but Change: 
Thinking Strategically about ICT Convergence.” Paper 
prepared as part of the analytical work program of the World 
Bank Global Information and Communication Technologies 
Department. Available at http://siteresources.worldbank.org/
EXTINFORMATIONANDCOMMUNICATIONANDTECHNOLOGIES/
Resources/282822-1208273252769/Nothing_endures_but_
change-policy_responses_to_convergence.pdf.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  47 
CHAPTER 1.3
Emerging Issues for our 
Hyperconnected World
PHILLIPPA BIGGS  
with contributions by  
TOBY JOHNSON 
YOULIA LOZANOVA  
NANCY SUNDBERG 
ITU
The Internet is changing. From narrowband to broad-
band, from kilobits to gigabits, from talking people to 
talking things—our networked world is changing forever. 
In future, we shall no longer just be connected, we shall 
be hyperconnected: enjoying super-fast connectivity, 
always-on, on the move, roaming seamlessly from net-
work to network, wherever we go—anywhere, anytime, 
via any device.
This vision of our future hyperconnected world builds 
on the connectivity and functionality made possible by 
converged next-generation networks (NGNs), but extends 
the concept of NGN in several ways—through embed-
ded ambient intelligence, automated machine-to-machine 
(M2M) traffic, and the sheer size and scale of the “Internet 
of Things” (Figure 1). Today, connected humans are 
already in the minority of Internet users. According to 
industry forecasts, the number of networked devices 
overtook the global population in 2011 and will reach 15 
billion connected devices as early as 2015 (Intel‘s projec-
tion in 2009),1 or a milestone to be achieved as late as 
2019 (Google’s later forecast, made in 2011),2 potentially 
exploding to 50 billion by 2020 (Ericsson’s prediction, 
dating from 2010)3—by which time connected devices 
could outnumber connected people by a ratio of six to 
one, transforming our concept of the Internet forever. This 
chapter explores some of the technologies and standards 
necessary for realizing this vision of our hyperconnected 
world and its consequences for regulation.
REALIZING OUR HYPERCONNECTED WORLD
The concept of a hyperconnected world embraces ele-
ments of the Internet of Things,4 M2M,5 ambient intel-
ligence, embedded computing, and mesh networks.6 
Cisco identifies four key enablers of multi-tasking and 
passive networking, which it asserts comprise “the two 
key pillars of hyperconnectivity”: 7 (1) the growing pen-
etration of high-speed broadband; (2) the expansion of 
digital screen surface area and resolution; (3) the prolif-
eration of network-enabled devices; and (4) increases in 
the power and speed of computing devices.
In the ITU Internet Report on the Internet of Things, 
ITU notes that the development of the Internet of Things 
and the hyperconnected world encompasses a set of 
technological developments in different fields—wireless 
and mobile connectivity, miniaturization, nanotechnol-
ogy, radio-frequency identification (RFID), and smart 
technologies.8 Although the Global System for Mobile 
Communications (GSM) is currently the most widely 
used technology for M2M, the World Bank suggests 
that Wi-Fi is likely to play an important role in the future 
Internet of Things,9 with Wi-Fi chips embedded in por-
table computers and smartphones able to operate on a 
This chapter reflects the views of its authors only and in no way reflects 
the views of ITU or its membership.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
48  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
license-exempt (unlicensed) basis,10 and with the majority 
of upgrade costs lying with consumers rather than with 
the operators. Reportedly one in ten people around the 
world now use Wi-Fi.11 Advances in these technologies, 
taken together, will help realize a miniaturized, embed-
ded, automated Internet of connected devices communi-
cating constantly and effortlessly (Figure 2).
Applications of the Internet of Things are far-reach-
ing, especially when combined with other technologies 
such as sensor technologies, nanotechnology, or pay-
ment systems in the retail sector. Traditional appliances 
and devices—such as home appliances, vehicles, energy 
meters, and vending machines—are now entering the 
network. Perhaps future directions for our hypercon-
nected future are most readily illustrated with some 
practical examples.
In security and surveillance, commercial security 
cameras, nannycams, and petcams could transform the 
way in which objects and premises—as well as people, 
patients, and pets—are monitored. In the medical and 
healthcare sector, connecting up patients is being priori-
tized alongside connecting up digital health records that 
are accessible by different specialists, pharmacies, or 
associated health establishments. In the inventory, trans-
port, and fleet management sectors, tracking and status 
applications are paramount for monitoring the location, 
status, and condition of stock and food shipments.
Another significant growth area is retail. Besides 
the integration of mobile banking services or credit card 
services into mobile phones, various wireless payment 
and special “contactless” technologies have been devel-
oped, which can now be embedded into mobile hand-
sets.12 For example, mobile operators in Japan and the 
Republic of Korea have integrated special circuit chips 
installed into mobile phones to provide payment systems 
for a number of years now.13 Some phones also have 
near field communications (NFC) chips that can be pro-
grammed to transfer small sums of money to contactless 
cash registers.14
EXPLOSIVE GROWTH OF DATA
It is no longer the device or the connection that is most 
important—the data themselves are the new currency 
of our networked future. Data are now growing expo-
nentially (Figure 3), with both stored and transmitted 
data showing strong expansion. According to some 
estimates, more data were created between 2008 and 
2011 than in all history prior to 2008. The research 
consultancy IDC considers that, in 2010, the amount of 
data transmitted around the world exceeded 1 zettabyte 
for the first time, while estimating that the size of the 
digital universe now doubles every two years.15 Cisco 
is not so sure, and predicts that annual global IP traffic 
will only reach the zettabyte threshold (966 exabytes, or 
nearly 1 zettabyte) in 2015 (Figure 3).16 Of note, Cisco 
projects that traffic from wireless devices will exceed 
Internet traffic from wired devices by 2015—in the hands 
of end-users, the future Internet looks wireless, mobile, 
0
10
20
30
40
50
2010 201920182017201620152014201320122011 2020
Figure 1: Projected estimates of the number of Internet-connected devices
Sources: Compiled by ITU, for Intel: Higgenbotham, 2009; for Ericsson: Higgenbotham, 2010; for Google: Malas, 2011; for Cisco: Cisco, 2010; for GSMA: Mobile World Live, 
2011.
Ericsson
Google
Intel
GSMA
Cisco
Nu
m
be
r o
f c
on
ne
ct
ed
 d
ev
ic
es
 (b
ill
io
ns
)
Upper limit
Lower limit
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  49 
and portable, even if fiber networks remain essential in 
the transport layer of the Internet to accommodate such 
growth in data.
Factors driving this growth in data include the 
greater availability of hardware, falling marginal costs 
of digital reproduction (which are now close to zero), 
automation, and easier digital delivery, with digital assets 
enjoying an extended lifespan online.17
In fact, unless investment in networks can keep 
up, we risk being overwhelmed by a data deluge: as 
one leading industry executive puts it, the current gen-
eration is the first generation where more data are not 
Mainframe
PCs
Mobile phones/
smart cards
Smart things
Time
Co
st
 o
f p
ro
du
ct
io
n 
pe
r u
ni
t 
Ex
ab
yt
es
 p
er
 m
on
th
2003
Consumer internet surpasses business internet.
2010
Internet video surpasses P2P as the largest 
consumer Internet video traffic category.
2012
Internet video reaches 50% consumer Internet traffic.
The number of households generating >1 TB per month hits the 1 million mark.
2014
1/5 of consumer Internet video 
now originates from non-PC devices
2015
The annual run rate of total IP traffic reaches the zettabyte threshold.
Internet traffic from wireless devices exceeds Internet traffic from wired devices.
The number of networked devices is double the size of the entire global population.
2011
The screen surface area of all consumer 
devices reaches 1 sq. foot per capita.
The number of networked devices equals 
the size of the entire global population.
2010 201520052000
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
80
90
Figure 2: Miniaturizing and multiplying: Getting smaller and more numerous
Figure 3: Explosive growth in data
Source: ITU, 2005a.
Source: Cisco, 2011.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
50  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
necessarily good.18 In any case, it is clear that significant 
new investments are needed in many forms of informa-
tion infrastructure. For example, Gartner predicts that 
global hardware spending on data centers (including 
servers, storage, and enterprise data center network-
ing equipment) will surpass US$126.2 billion in 2015, up 
from US$87.8 billion in 2010.19
Given such rapid growth in data traffic, in order to 
continue providing adequate levels of quality of service, 
telecommunications operators and service providers are 
adopting more stringent network management practices 
that include data restrictions, traffic throttling, filtering, 
and/or the use of data caps or thresholds. Once the 
cap is exceeded, a subscriber must purchase additional 
download volumes, or their access speed is reduced or 
service terminated for that month. Such practices have 
influenced debates over “net neutrality.” These issues are 
increasingly likely to come to the fore if data traffic con-
tinues to grow at current rates.
Along with network and infrastructure investments, 
networked technologies are evolving rapidly to accom-
modate such massive growth in data. The most obvious 
development is perhaps in speed, with fixed fiber-to-the-
home now capable of up to 100 Mb/s for consumers 
and up to 1 Gb/s for business. High-capacity wireless 
technologies have historically managed to achieve data 
rates and capacities of up to a tenth of the fastest equiv-
alent wireline technology, with the latest data rates for 
LTE amounting to some 5–12 Mb/s download, and some 
2–5 Mb/s upload. Its theoretical maximum download 
speeds are much higher, at 300 Mb/s download and 
upload speeds of 75 Mb/s (Figure 4).
However, measuring technological progress in terms 
of speed and data capacity alone is too simplistic—tech-
nological progress is transforming the way we live.
REGULATORY CONSEQUENCES
The impact of the Internet of Things promises to be 
more pervasive and far-reaching than merely convenient 
wireless payment systems, smart gadgets, and Internet-
enabled devices (Box 1). The embedded Internet will 
blur boundaries between economies, societies, and 
industries. Many industries (including energy, transport, 
financial services, healthcare, and media) now rely on 
integrated information technology (IT) systems and infra-
structure to monitor, control, manage, and deliver their 
services. Integrating Internet connectivity into devices 
and things opens up new risks that information will be 
unintentionally put into the hands of people who should 
not have access to it. These risks—as well as opportuni-
ties—arise in determining who exactly knows what, who 
can access what, and who can communicate with which 
device, as well as the dissemination and use of different 
data across different sectors. This section goes on to 
review the changing role of regulators, as well as some 
of the key regulatory consequences of a hyperconnected 
0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Figure 4: Growth in theoretical throughput speeds and capacity, Mb/s
Source: ITU, with representative speeds cited from various sources: ITU (http://www.itu.int/dms_pub/itu-t/oth/1D/01/T1D010000040003PDFE.pdf); GSMA  
(www.gsmamobilebroadband.com/about/); Cisco (Pinola and Pentikousis 2008).
Notes: Throughput speeds converted using log to the base 10. ADSL = Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line, several versions; EV-DO = Evolution Data Only, several releases; 
HSDPA = High-Speed Downlink Packet Access; HSPA = High-Speed Packet Access; LTE = Long-Term Evolution; VDSL = Very-High-Bit-Rate Digital Subscriber Line;  
WiMAX = Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access.
Lo
g 
(d
ow
nl
oa
d 
sp
ee
d)
, M
b/
s
LTE
VDSL2
VDSL
HSPA
WiMAX
EV-DO Rel.B
EV-DO Rel.A
EV-DO Rel.0
ADSL
ADSL2
ADSL2+
HSDPA
Log (upload speed), Mb/s
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  51 
ICT environment in open access and infrastructure-shar-
ing, technical numbering and address issues, switching 
and roaming requirements, and net neutrality.
The changing role of regulators
Perhaps the greatest overall impact of the hypercon-
nected world lies in transforming the role of regula-
tors in a converged telecommunication environment. 
Establishing a separate telecommunication/ICT regulator 
has been the basis of the sector reform process in many 
countries. By the end of 2011, 158 separate regulators 
had been established worldwide, in around four-fifths of 
all countries around the globe. Every year, ITU hosts a 
Global Symposium for Regulators (GSR) to debate the 
issues transforming the ICT environment and to con-
sider their impact on the regulatory environment, and 
publishes the outcomes of the GSR in the form of best 
practice guidelines.20
In recognition of the technological convergence 
taking place between infrastructure and content, many 
telecommunication regulators are now moving to adopt 
growing responsibilities over the regulation and monitor-
ing of content and broadcasting (Figure 5). Some other 
countries have also moved to expand the mandate of the 
regulator to include information technology, broadcasting 
content, and/or spectrum management.
In 2010, 16 percent of all telecommunication/ICT 
regulators worldwide included regulation over broadcast-
ing content within their mandate (with a few sharing that 
responsibility with a ministry). Although Internet content 
is not regulated in more than 44 percent of countries 
worldwide, regulation of Internet content lies within the 
mandate of some 13 percent of telecommunication/ICT 
regulators. Thirty percent of regulators include IT in their 
mandate; they share this responsibility with the minis-
try or other government bodies in 12 percent of these 
cases.21
As the Internet becomes embedded in many more 
everyday objects, some observers suggest that the role 
of ICT regulators in a converged ICT environment will be 
far more pervasive and touch on many more facets of 
our hyperconnected lives than just competitive market 
structure, network interconnection, pricing, and con-
sumer protection. The advent of high-speed networks 
and new kinds of content creates an important leader-
ship role for government policymakers and ICT regulators 
in stimulating the demand for broadband and in promot-
ing investment in infrastructure.22 In fact, ICT regulators 
may become indirectly involved in many more spheres of 
influence, reflecting the involvement of ICT infrastructure 
and services in many aspects of our daily lives.
Open access and infrastructure sharing
Open access approaches and infrastructure shar-
ing are likely to be the foundations for future network 
growth.23 Various different approaches have been 
adopted by national governments. A number of coun-
tries (e.g., Australia, Malaysia, Qatar, and Singapore) 
have embarked on the creation of entirely new national 
broadband networks (NBNs), which deploy fiber optic 
technology throughout the core network and, crucially, 
in the access networks that extend to end-customers. 
Investments in these networks are huge (e.g., Australia’s 
NBN will cost $A 43 billion, or US$45 billion), which has 
led to the re-nationalization of infrastructure in some 
countries in order to obtain economies of scale and 
preferential government borrowing rates.
Other countries (e.g., in Europe) are trying to work 
within existing regulatory frameworks to find means of 
improving investment incentives for network operators 
while maintaining competitive supply.24 These strategies 
involve lightening the regulatory requirements on domi-
nant operators (or those with significant market power) 
as a support or reward for the development of ubiquitous 
broadband networks.
Developing countries that lack the public funds 
to support a full NBN, as well as those with no exist-
ing privately owned fixed network infrastructure, can 
pursue various hybrid solutions (e.g., Tanzania and 
Mozambique). These initiatives usually involve public 
investment (typically in the form of low-interest loans) in 
a fiber backbone network, coupled with various forms of 
support and encouragement for privately funded ac-
cess networks using a range of technologies (such as 
W-CDMA or Wideband Code Division Multiple Access 
Box 1: Contactless payments: Near field 
communication payments in Turkey
The World Bank’s ICT 4 Development Report 2012 (forth-
coming) underlines the notion that growth in mobile money 
systems is built on a complex ecosystem spanning the 
mobile, retail, and financial sectors that are comprised of 
banks, mobile operators, the retail sector, policymakers, 
regulators, and consumers.
This is a point illustrated by the growth of near 
field communication (NFC) in Turkey. Turkish banks have 
embraced NFC enthusiastically as a form of wireless pay-
ment. With support from the Ministry and the Government of 
Turkey, and in conjunction with retailers, Turkish banks and 
mobile operators have promoted NFC as a quick, easy, and 
convenient way to pay for purchases. Operators and banks 
have launched consumer awareness campaigns to promote 
the advantages of this form of payment. They have been 
rewarded by consumer enthusiasm for the new technol-
ogy, which has been deployed in many modern commercial 
shopping centers in large Turkish towns. It remains to be 
seen whether the success of NFC in Turkey can be repli-
cated to the same extent elsewhere.
Source
World Bank, forthcoming; BBC 2011.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
52  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Evaluation; HSDPA, or High-Speed Downlink Packet 
Access; and WiMAX, or Worldwide Interoperability for 
Microwave Access, for example).
Whichever strategy is adopted, open access usually 
means that all suppliers, whether in horizontal or vertical 
markets, are able to obtain access to the new network 
facilities on fair and equivalent terms. The definition of 
open access varies from country to country, depending 
on the regulatory model adopted; the terms and condi-
tions of access clearly vary. Nevertheless, open access 
is essential to avoid monopolistic frameworks and is gen-
erally required wherever there are economic bottlenecks 
preventing competitive supply. However, open access is 
progressively less important moving up the infrastructure 
layers, provided that it is available at the lower layers and 
there is sufficient incentive in its regulation to encourage 
investment in infrastructure.25
Numbering and addressing issues
Given the massive growth forecast for connected de-
vices, numbering and addressing issues could become a 
major concern in providing all these network-enabled de-
vices with their own addresses. In a future where many 
consumer equipment and electronic devices will need 
connectivity and hence their own identifiers (although not 
necessarily their own Internet addresses), some stake-
holders envisage a need for greater and better number-
ing resources (others argue that this is not a problem at 
present, as most M2M applications currently use GSM).
Potential shortages in address space through full 
allocation (but not necessarily use) of Internet Protocol 
version 4 (IPv4) addresses (for example, triggered by the 
allocation of the two last blocks of remaining IPv4 ad-
dress space on February 1, 2011) could be averted in 
the long run by the transition to Internet Protocol version 
6 (IPv6).26 Introducing IPv6 will take the address space 
from around 4 billion (232 or 4,294,967,296 addresses) 
to 128-bit addresses, so the new address space sup-
ports 2128 or a total of 3.4 × 1038 addresses, enough 
for a trillion tags to be assigned every day for a trillion 
years. Opinions are divided about how much of a prob-
lem shortages in IPv4 address space are likely to pose. 
Some observers see this as a major issue that requires 
transition to IPv6 as a matter of urgency; others argue 
that greater use of network address translation (NATing) 
and more efficient use of IPv4 address space (e.g., such 
as recovering unused IPv4 addresses) will permit con-
tinued expansion of the IPv4 space, including for mobile 
devices.27
However, some countries and some regulators are 
not yet making adequate investments in capacity build-
ing or preparedness for the IPv6 transition, while mobile 
networks may not yet be IPv6-enabled (and they are un-
likely to be so for some time yet). According to Detecon, 
this could amount to the digital equivalent of a fault line 
running through the future Internet of Things, between 
its wireline and wireless halves. Detecon identifies four 
possible options for resolving this issue: (1) extending the 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
EuropeCISAsia-PacificArab StatesAmericasAfrica
Figure 5: Converged regulation: The mandates of regulators, 2010
Source: ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Regulatory Database; ITU, Forthcoming.
n ICT/telecommunications only
n ICT and postal services
n ICT and utilities
n ICT and broadcasting
n Other
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  53 
existing mobile numbering range; (2) using a new mobile 
numbering range; (3) using an international mobile num-
bering range; and (4) using internal network numbers.28
Significant issues surround access and digital iden-
tity management more broadly. Today’s secure number-
ing system means that, bar an erroneous wrong number, 
callers can be relatively confident that a message left on 
an answering machine should reach the intended recipi-
ent. In connecting up objects such as webcams, we may 
be confident we have accessed the right webcam to 
monitor our children at school or doing their homework 
at home remotely, but who else may also be able to ac-
cess it?
Switching and roaming issues
Various issues arise with regard to switching and roam-
ing. With regard to switching, M2M applications are often 
bound to a mobile operator for the device lifetime, mainly 
because: (1) M2M terminals are currently mainly based 
on GSM technology; (2) only operators can get E.212 (or 
international mobile subscriber identity—IMSI) numbers; 
and (3) regulators do not require the portability of IMSIs. 
This means that the mobile operator is at an advantage 
when clients want to negotiate a switch from one opera-
tor to another, or even in negotiating new rates. For large 
numbers of devices distributed all over a country (region 
or continent), switching subscriber identity module (SIM) 
cards to migrate devices from one mobile operator to 
another is simply not an option (Box 2).
With regard to roaming, many M2M applications 
(e.g., wireless payment systems) rely on full international 
mobile coverage. Providers cannot always negotiate 
competitive regional or global roaming solutions (for both 
the M2M application provider and the mobile operator) 
and often use intermediaries. This leaves intermediar-
ies in a stronger negotiating position (regarding rates, 
etc.) than either the M2M application provider or mobile 
operator. There is a potential role for regulators here 
in considering whether intervention is necessary, and 
potentially in negotiating roaming requirements and rate 
interventions.
Net neutrality
Given the explosive growth in data, regulators are likely 
to become increasing concerned with traffic manage-
ment practices. The ITU GSR11 Discussion Paper “Open 
Access and Regulation in the Digital Economy” identifies 
the main aspects of net neutrality as traffic manage-
ment, transparency, non-discrimination, and potential 
differentiation between price and quality of service in 
traffic management.29 Currently, many regulators are 
launching public consultations and investigations into 
traffic throttling practices, but many have stopped short 
of intervening, with most regulators content to call for 
greater transparency and disclosure in the industry’s 
best interests to safeguard consumers. For example, 
the European Commission (EC) policy on net neutral-
ity published in April 2011, The Open Internet and Net 
Neutrality in Europe,30 calls for greater disclosure of 
traffic management practices to ensure that consumers 
are well informed (Table 1). The EC recognizes that traffic 
management is necessary to ensure the smooth flow of 
Internet traffic, particularly when there is network con-
gestion—which looks increasingly likely to arise, given 
current growth rates in data traffic.
With regard to data, the assets at risk in a smart 
society include not only the networks, but also data and 
information assets (including customer identities and 
records). For example, the Ponemon Institute estimates 
that the cost of a data breach rose from US$6.8 million 
in 2009 to US$7.2 million in 2010, with the average cost 
per compromised record in 2010 reaching US$214,31 
up 5 percent from US$204 in 2009.32 Information will 
be abundant and everywhere, but can we learn to live 
with such abundance—are we information-rich or infor-
mation-overloaded? If we can learn to live with the data 
deluge, the prospects of personalized services tailored 
to customers and their search behavior offer tantalizing 
possibilities.
It is not just data breaches that are of concern: the 
data we willingly give away about ourselves are of equal 
concern in the web that never forgets—where instant 
status updates, sharing via retweets, and cascading 
distribution of information in online feeds are common. 
The speed with which we work and communicate is 
accelerating, while the scale and distribution of our 
Box 2: M2M applications in the Netherlands
In 2010, Logica was commissioned by the Dutch Ministry of 
Economic Affairs to examine the technical solutions to the 
problem of migrating M2M providers for clients with large 
numbers of M2M devices. This poses a major logistical 
problem, where the thousands or tens of thousands of M2M 
devices are distributed all over the country, sometimes in 
hard-to-reach places.
After extensive study, Logica concluded that number 
portability does not work for SIM cards, because the first 
five or six digits of an IMSI number (which conforms to ITU 
numbering standard E.212) are operator-specific, so in 
order to change operators, the IMSI numbers would have 
to change. Logica suggests that remotely updating IMSI 
numbers on SIM cards is another technical possibility, but 
there are no standardized solutions for this, only propri-
etary ones.1 Instead, Logica identified a regulatory solution 
whereby large-scale M2M deployments could use their own 
SIM cards carrying their own IMSI and cryptographic param-
eters, so it is no longer necessary to change the data on the 
SIM-card, the solution used by some Mobile Virtual Network 
Operators (MVNOs) today.
Source
van der Berg, 2010.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
54  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Table 1: Status of net neutrality initiatives in selected countries
Stage in process Position along the spectrum (least to most stringent) Country
No consultation Considered net neutrality, but found no problems requiring a 
consultation and subsequent rule; will continue to monitor
Denmark
Germany
Ireland
Portugal
Non-binding neutrality guidelines Norway
In consultation stage Information gathering on current practices to potentially 
establish rules
Italy
Transparency/disclosure rules proposed, but no traffic 
management
United Kingdom
Transparency/disclosure rules and traffic management/ 
non-discrimination rules proposed
Brazil
Sweden
Rules/legislation adopted Transparency/disclosure rules but no traffic management/ 
non-discrimination rules
European Commission
Transparency/disclosure rules and traffic management/ 
non-discrimination rules
Canada
Chile
France
Netherlands
United States
Source: Telecommunications Management Group, Inc., quoted in World Bank and infoDev, 2011.
real-time communications are growing. It seems unlikely 
that separate models of regulation for telecommunication 
and data protection can be sustained in our converged 
era—how can regulation evolve to keep up? The debacle 
over the launch of Google Buzz and ongoing concerns 
over privacy settings on Facebook are already highlight-
ing gaps in a converged regulatory environment.
STANDARDS AND INTEROPERABILITY IN A 
NETWORKED WORLD
In a hyperconnected world of so many networked de-
vices, identification, interoperability, performance stan-
dards, and communication protocols are clearly essential 
to ensuring that different devices and systems can com-
municate across different networks.
The Internet of Things will contain billions of objects 
that must be uniquely identified, a challenge for which 
there is, so far at least, no internationally agreed solution. 
A unique identification scheme is probably the biggest 
challenge of the Internet of Things. Some identification 
schemes for identifying objects are based on bar codes. 
Other schemes are under development to address 
the needs of specific applications. ITU has launched 
an Internet of Things Global Standards Initiative, en-
abling experts to come together physically to conduct 
standards-based development work. For example, ITU-T 
Study Groups 11 and 13 are studying architectures 
and testing requirements for networks using tag-based 
identification, while ITU-T Study Group 17 is study-
ing the security and privacy of tag-based identification 
mechanisms.
One of the biggest issues in identity management 
today is that identifiers used in one network might not 
be understandable or usable in another network. In the 
Internet of Things, consumers are likely to want to use 
different objects across multiple kinds of heterogeneous 
networks, which will need the identities of things to be 
“federated” or capable of being translated accurately and 
recognized by different networks.
The solution to this challenge does not necessarily 
involve a single global identity for a device on a network. 
Rather, a “zoo” or collection of associated identities—
as exists today—may continue. For example, in some 
domains, an identity may be just an email address. In 
other areas, such as social networks, an identity is far 
more complex and more loaded. It may include a real 
name and links to other people. Some identities may 
be created temporarily (such as those used for tracking 
people at a conference, for example, or those used for 
contractors working within companies). Mapping identi-
ties like these together to make them interoperable, while 
accommodating privacy and security concerns, is a vital 
part of identity management.
Indeed, connecting up many different kinds of 
object to the Internet may present one of the great-
est standardization challenges yet. Sectors likely to be 
touched by the need for standardization include e-health, 
e-government, automotive, geo-information, remote 
sensing, home networking (including home automation), 
e-commerce, and even the mitigation of climate change.
As with any new area of standardization, one of the 
first important steps is to agree the scope of the work 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  55 
and standard terminology, so experts from across dif-
ferent disciplines can all use the same language. ITU’s 
Internet of Things Global Standards Initiative aims to  
develop a work plan for Internet of Things standardiza-
tion and the detailed standards or Recommendations 
necessary for the deployment of the Internet of Things 
on a global scale, taking into account the work done 
in other standards development organizations in areas 
such as M2M, network aspects of identification (NID), 
ubiquitous sensor networks (USN), machine-oriented 
communication, and the web of things, among other 
areas.
CONCLUSIONS
We are moving toward an era of an embedded, ubiqui-
tous, and invisible Internet. A hyperconnected world of 
communicating devices has consequences for us all in 
the way we live, as more and more of the everyday real 
world around us becomes reflected online. Status up-
dates, location updates, changes in status or conditions: 
these will all become part either of what we know, or of 
what is known—or knowable—about us.
The outcome for our hyperconnected world might 
not necessarily be Big Brother, but it might not be far off 
either. Regulators and policymakers have a vital role to 
play at this point in time in establishing the mores and 
norms for the online world—in what is and is not ac-
ceptable and in developing principles and best practices 
going forward, so that the risks and opportunities of our 
hyperconnected world are managed appropriately to 
protect both consumers and citizens.
NOTES
1 Higgenbotham 2009.
2 Malas 2011.
3 Higgenbotham 2010.
4 The concept of the Internet of Things was first referred to by Mark 
Weiser in his 1991 paper, “The Computer for the 21st Century.” 
ITU has adopted the following working definition of the Internet 
of Things (as of August 2011): “In a broad perspective, the IoT 
can be perceived as a vision with technological and societal 
implications. From the perspective of technical standardization, 
the IoT can be viewed as a global infrastructure for the information 
society, enabling advanced services by interconnecting (physical 
and virtual) things based on, existing and evolving, interoperable 
information and communication technologies. Through the 
exploitation of identification, data capture, processing and 
communication capabilities, the IoT makes full use of things to 
offer services to all kinds of applications, whilst maintaining the 
required privacy.”
5 ITU has recently established a new Focus Group on M2M service 
layer aspects at its TSAG. See ITU 2012; ITU-T. N.D.
6 ITU describes mesh networks as “A way to route data, voice and 
instructions between nodes. It allows for continuous connections 
and reconfiguration around blocked paths by ‘hopping’ from node 
to node until a connection can be established” in the glossary of 
ITU-D’s Trends in Telecommunication Reform 2009. See ITU-D 
2009.
7 Cisco 2010, p. 3.
8 ITU 2005a, 2005b.
 9 World Bank and infoDev 2011.
 10 ITU has designated the 2450 MHz and 5800 MHz bands for 
industrial, scientific, and medical (ISM) applications that “must 
accept harmful interferences.” This is often interpreted to mean 
that they are considered unregulated. See Frequently Asked 
Questions on the ITU-R website, available at http://www.itu.int/
ITU-R/terrestrial/faq/index.html.
 11 Wi-Fi Alliance N.D.
 12 World Bank, Mobile Trends report, forthcoming, written by Michael 
Minges.
 13 Terri and Hayashi 2007.
 14 Perez 2011.
 15 IDC 2011.
 16 Cisco 2011.
 17 See Denton 2011.
 18 Google Think Quarterly 2011.
 19 Telecompaper 2011.
 20 See ITU’s regulatory website, http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/index.
html, for details of the latest Global Symposium for Regulators, 
GSR-2011 (http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/Events/Seminars/GSR/
GSR11/index.html), as well as previous GSR events, http://www.
itu.int/ITU-D/treg/Events/Seminars/GSR/index.html.
 21 ITU 2011a.
 22 ITU 2011b.
 23 This section is extracted from Rogerson 2011.
 24 Rogerson 2011.
 25 Rogerson 2011. D. Rogerson, taken from his speech at the GSR 
2011.
 26 See, for example, Middleton 2011.
 27 See, for example, Arbor Net’s discussion of IPv6 in relation to 
World IPv6 Day sponsored by the Internet Society (ISOC) in Malan 
2011.
 28 Detecon presentation on M2M, “Machine-to-Machine 
Communications (M2M) Creating a business enabling environment 
for one of the most promising growth markets.” Personal 
communication.
 29 Rogerson 2011.
 30 European Commission 2011.
 31 Messmer 2011.
 32 Messmer 2010.
REFERENCES
BBC. 2011. BBC Click, November. Available at http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/
hi/programmes/click_online/default.stm.
Cisco. 2010. “Hyperconnectivity and the Approaching Zettabyte Era.” 
Cisco White Paper, June 10. Available at http://www.cisco.com/
en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/
Hyperconnectivity_WP_e-book.pdf.
———. 2011. “Entering the Zettabyte Era.” Cisco©Visual Networking 
Index, June 10. Available at http://www.cisco.com/en/US/
solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/VNI_
Hyperconnectivity_WP.html .
Denton, A. 2011. “Intellectual Property Rights in Today’s Digital 
Economy.” GSR11 Discussion Paper. Geneva: ITU. Available at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/Events/Seminars/GSR/GSR11/
documents/05-Intellectual-property-E.pdf.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.3: Emerging Issues for our Hyperconnected World
56  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
European Commission. 2011. Communication from the Commission to 
the European Parliament, The Council, The Economic and Social 
Committee and The Committee of the Regions: The Open Internet 
and Net Neutrality in Europe (“Open Internet Report”). April 
19. Available at http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/
ecomm/doc/library/communications_reports/netneutrality/comm-
19042011.pdf.
Higgenbotham, S. 2009. “Intel Inside Becomes Intel Everywhere.” 
GigaOM, March 2. Available at http://gigaom.com/2009/03/02/
intel-inside-becomes-intel-everywhere/.
———. 2010. “Ericsson CEO Predicts 50 Bn Connected Devices by 
2020.” GigaOM. Available at http://gigaom.com/2010/04/14/
ericsson-sees-the-internet-of-things-by-2020/.
Google Think Quarterly. 2011. The Data Issue, March. Available at http://
www.slideshare.net/ibrahimcesar/think-quarterly-the-data-issue.
IDC. 2011. The 2011 Digital Universe Study: Extracting Value from 
Chaos. Available at http://www.emc.com/collateral/demos/
microsites/emc-digital-universe-2011/index.htm.
ITU. 2005a. ITU Internet Reports 2005: The Internet of Things. 
Geneva: ITU. Available at http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/publications/
internetofthings/.
———. 2005b. ITU Internet Reports 2005: The Internet of Things, 
Executive Summary. Geneva: ITU. Available at http://www.itu.int/
osg/spu/publications/internetofthings/InternetofThings_summary.
pdf.
———. 2011a. Trends in Telecommunication Reform 2010/11. Geneva: 
ITU. Available from http://www.itu.int/pub/D-REG-TTR.12-2010
———. 2011b. “Effective ICT Regulation Is Critical to Economic Growth.” 
Press Release, March 31. Available at http://www.itu.int/net/
pressoffice/press_releases/2011/07.aspx.
———. 2012. “ITU Establishes Focus Group on Machine-to-Machine 
Service Layer.” ITU-T Newslog, January 16. Available at http://
www.itu.int/ITU-T/newslog/ITU+Establishes+Focus+Group+On+M
achinetoMachine+Service+Layer.aspx.
———. Forthcoming. Trends in Telecommunication Reform 2011/12. 
Geneva: ITU.
ITU-D. N.D.a. Global Symposium for Regulators (GSR). Available at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/index.html.
———. N.D.b. 11th Global Symposium for Regulators (GSR11) & 4th 
Global Industry Leaders’ Forum (GILF). Available at http://www.itu.
int/ITU-D/treg/Events/Seminars/GSR/GSR11/index.html.
———. N.D.c. Global Symposia for Regulators: The History. Available at 
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/treg/Events/Seminars/GSR/index.html.
———. 2009. Trends in Telecommunication Reform 2009. Geneva: ITU. 
Available from http://www.itu.int/pub/D-REG-TTR.11-2009.
ITU-T. N.D. Focus Groups. FG M2M “Focus Group on Machine-to-
Machine (M2M) Service Layer.” Available at http://www.itu.int/en/
ITU-T/focusgroups/m2m/Pages/default.aspx.
Malan, R. 2011. “World IPv6 Day: Final Look and ‘Wagon’s Ho!’“ 
ARBORSERT. DDoS and Security Reports: The Arbor Networks 
Security Blog, June 9. Available at http://ddos.arbornetworks.
com/2011/06/world-ipv6-day-final-look-and-wagons-ho/.
Malas, N. 2011. “Google Sees 15bn Connected Devices in Next Five 
to Eight Years.” total telecom, March 3. Available at http://www.
totaltele.com/view.aspx?ID=463304.
Messmer, E. 2010. “Data Breach Costs Top $200 per Customer 
Record.” NETWORKWORLD, January 25. Available at http://www.
networkworld.com/news/2010/012510-data-breach-costs.html.
———. 2011. “Corporate Data Breach Average Costs Hits $7.2 
million.” NETWORKWORLD, March 8. Available at http://www.
networkworld.com/news/2011/030811-ponemon-data-breach.
html.
Middleton, J. 2011. “More Machines than Man, Now . . . ” telecoms.
com, interview with Axel Pawlik, April 12. Available at http://
www.telecoms.com/26419/more-machines-than-man-
now%E2%80%A6/.
Mobile World Live. 2011. “Study: 24B Connected Devices by 
2020 Creates US$1.2 Trillion Revenue Opportunity.” 
Mobile Business Briefing, October 11. Available at http://
www.mobilebusinessbriefing.com/articles/study-24b-
connected-devices-by-2020-creates-us-1-2-trillion-revenue-
opportunity/18105/.
Perez, S. 2011. “Getting Ready for Google Wallet, Sprint Switches on 
Nexus S 4G’s NFC Chip.” ReadWriteWeb, July 11. Available at 
http://www.readwriteweb.com/archives/google_wallet_coming_
with_sprint_nexus_s_4g_update.php.
Pinola, J. and K. Pentikousis. 2008. ”Mobile WiMAX.” Internet Protocol 
Journal 11 (2), June. Available at www.cisco.com/web/about/
ac123/ac147/archived_issues/ipj_11-2/112_wimax.html.
Rogerson, D. 2011. “Open Access Regulation in the Digital Economy.” 
GSR11 Discussion Paper. Geneva: ITU. Available at http://www.
itu.int/ITU-D/treg/Events/Seminars/GSR/GSR11/documents/02-
Open%20Access-E.pdf.
Telecompaper. 2011. “Data Centre Hardware Spending to Hit USD 99 
Bin in 2011.” October 14. Available at http://www.telecompaper.
com/news/data-centre-hardware-spending-to-hit-usd-99-bln-
in-2011.
Terri, B. and F. Hayashi. 2007. “Complex Landscapes: Mobile Payments 
in Japan, South Korea, and the United States.” Payments 
System Research Briefings, September. Available at http://www.
kansascityfed.org/Publicat/PSR/Briefings/PSR-BriefingSept07.pdf.
van der Berg, R. 2010. “Logica Report on Switching Costs for M2M.” 
Logica. Available at http://www.prepaidmvno.com/2010/09/21/
logica-report-on-switching-costs-for-m2m-rudolf-van-der-berg/.
Weiser, M. 1991. “The Computer for the 21st Century.”Scientific 
American 265 (3): 94–104.
Wi-Fi Alliance. N.D. Organization. Available at www.wi-fi.org/
organization.php.
World Bank. Forthcoming. Information and Communications for 
Development Report 2012. Washington DC: World Bank.
World Bank and infoDev. 2011. Broadband Strategies Handbook. 
Washington DC: International Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development/World Bank. Available at http://www.infodev.org/en/
Publication.1118.html.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  57 
CHAPTER 1.4
Network Neutrality: An 
Opportunity to Create 
a Sustainable Industry 
Model
SCOTT BEARDSLEY
YAVUZ DEMIRCI
LUIS ENRIQUEZ
MEHMET GUVENDI
STAGG NEWMAN
SERGIO SANDOVAL
MALIN STRANDELL-JANSSON
OLEG TIMCHENKO
WIM TORFS
McKinsey & Company
Network neutrality is the principle that inhibits telecom-
munications network operators from discriminating 
among different kinds of Internet content, applications, 
and services traveling across their networks. Advocates 
of network neutrality argue that the principle underpins 
the Internet’s explosive growth: if any and every kind of 
content, service, and application can be distributed over 
the Internet, then there is no limit to the innovations that 
Internet companies will invent for consumers to choose 
from. But network neutrality has, arguably, become the 
victim of its own success. Internet traffic has grown 
faster than network operators’ related revenues, and they 
are now struggling to invest in the new network infra-
structure needed to support more Internet traffic.
Not surprisingly, network operators are also trying 
to manage traffic volumes. Some are even deploying 
sophisticated network management technologies, such 
as deep packet inspection, which examine the nature 
and content of the traffic to identify possible sources of 
harm to network performance and also to protect the 
networks and consumers from increasingly sophisticated 
attacks and abuse. But as soon as network operators 
start scrutinizing the content of Internet traffic, edge play-
ers—providers of content, applications, and services as 
well as aggregators—worry that network neutrality may 
be infringed, limiting their will to innovate. Both consum-
ers and regulators also worry about maintaining the 
confidentiality of consumer data.
At the same time, major edge players are building 
their own Internet traffic “pipes” or using the dedicated 
content distribution networks (CDNs) of companies to 
preempt possible network capacity constraints and 
avoid the performance limitations related to the speed of 
transmission and delay if their traffic traverses the tra-
ditional backbone of the public Internet. By by-passing 
the backbone of the public Internet, the edge players 
ensure that the immense volume of traffic they generate 
reaches consumers’ Internet service providers (ISPs) at 
top speeds. In fact, the majority of the traffic destined 
for residential end users from edge players now flows 
over these specialized backbone networks. This situation 
can be seen as putting a different kind of strain on net 
neutrality: smaller edge players, unable to make similar 
investments, may not be able to match the larger play-
ers’ performance, though whether this represents dis-
crimination or simply a competitive disadvantage is open 
to debate. Policymakers can argue that even though 
small edge players may not be disadvantaged, network 
neutrality regulations need not extend to the backbone 
providers, including the CDNs, because backbone trans-
port in almost all countries operates in a competitive 
The views expressed in this article correspond to those of the authors and 
not those of McKinsey & Company.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
58  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
market. Moreover, the development of CDNs and private 
backbone transport has greatly benefitted the evolution 
of the Internet by the flow of new private capital that has 
greatly increased both performance and capacity.
However, the evolution of the backbone of the 
Internet from traditional Internet protocol (IP) interconnec-
tions to specialized networks to provide higher  
performance foreshadows the critical net neutrality 
issues vis-á-vis access networks with which policymak-
ers must wrestle. The edge players that offer services 
demanding high performance or capacity such as 
video-rich content, gaming, and two-way multimedia 
conferencing will increasingly want differentiated service 
from where their traffic enters the access network to the 
end user in order to provide high-quality service. Unlike 
the competitive backbone market between edge provid-
ers and Internet access providers, access providers are 
positioned in the network where they do have unique 
market power since each end user typically is connected 
to only one access provider. Access providers need to 
invest capital to provide the differentiated services and 
increased capacity needed by edge players and end 
users. But the access providers will not invest this capital 
if they cannot earn reasonable returns. However, offering 
such differentiated services between edge players and 
end customers may be a departure from the pure “best 
effort” open-access principles of the Internet.
This is definitely a very complex picture for the tele-
communications industry, and involves multiple angles. 
From an economic perspective, it is a debate on how to 
finance the new wave of infrastructure investments and 
who would incur the costs—for example, should edge 
players contribute? From a regulatory perspective, it 
involves complex regulatory issues covering both traffic 
and access management. Although network neutrality 
appears mainly as a discussion of traffic regulation, since 
it is closely related to capital expenditure funding deci-
sions, there is also a strong link to access regulation. 
Thus, one cannot assess the network neutrality rules in 
any given country without understanding the status of 
that country’s access regulation. Despite all these com-
plexities, we believe, as we show in this chapter, there 
are some key industry messages that are starting to 
become clearer:
•	 Network neutrality is not an immediate major issue 
in the fixed-line industry. Despite decreasing num-
bers of fixed lines and revenues, the fixed-line 
sector has managed to successfully increase aver-
age revenues per line from its conventional, mainly 
copper-based access network in the past few years 
by successfully rebalancing in spite of the impact 
of applications such as voice over Internet protocol 
(VoIP). The issue in the fixed-line sector, however, 
is how to increase investments in fiber optic net-
works—particularly access—that are under current 
regulatory constraints. Once these networks are in 
place, capacity constraints will not have as great an 
effect on the content going through them.
•	 Network neutrality does matter for the mobile indus-
try. Increasing capacity demands caused by new 
and heavy applications and an inability to re-price its 
services have meant that the industry will be under 
great pressure to deliver the future investments that 
are required for growth. We believe this industry, 
unlike the fixed-line industry, will constantly require 
network upgrades to keep up with capacity. Over-
the-top (OTT) players (e.g., Skype, Netflix) also offer 
a fundamental challenge to mobile players because 
VoIP- and IP-based messaging applications have 
cannibalized traditional revenues.
•	 Traffic management issues will affect small edge 
players that leverage the “public Internet” to pro-
vide their services more than large edge players 
that more and more frequently use the competitive 
CDNs networks to provision their services.
•	 Network neutrality poses large risks for telecommu-
nications operators, consumer privacy, and even—
potentially—national security in general in the form 
of disclosure, adjudication, and discrimination.
•	 Regulators are caught in the middle of these com-
plex and quickly evolving developments, and have 
largely been opting for a cautious approach.
This chapter sets out the background of the current 
issues affecting network operators’ revenue and capac-
ity as well as measures taken thus far by the industry 
to address those issues, and discusses current regula-
tory positions on network neutrality. It then proposes a 
set of aims that all industry players—network operators, 
companies offering Internet services and applications, 
and regulators—can pursue that will balance growing 
industry revenues to fund infrastructure investment with 
safeguarding network neutrality, and so release the next 
wave of services and applications over the Internet, with 
all the economic and societal benefits they promise.
THE INTERNET’S SUCCESS IS STRETCHING 
NETWORKS’ CAPACITY AND REVENUES
The principles of an open Internet based on network 
neutrality developed at a time when facility-based 
Internet service providers could meet the demands of 
Internet traffic without straining their capital expendi-
ture budgets. Similarly, Internet services and applica-
tions did not challenge the core revenue streams of the 
companies providing the Internet’s physical transport 
infrastructure. Today the industry is quite different: ex-
plosive growth in Internet traffic has put operators under 
intense pressure to increase communications network 
capacity. This is expensive: estimates for upgrading fixed 
infrastructure to next-generation network in the EU-15 
countries range between €200 billion and €250 billion. At 
the same time, operators are facing downward pressure 
on their revenues and profits, particularly from services 
offered “over-the-top” of the Internet by edge players, 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  59 
making further investment at current levels of price and 
cash flow both difficult and unattractive.
Internet traffic has grown by 13,000 percent, or 63 
percent a year, in the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) countries over the 
past decade. It now dominates traffic on wireline net-
works, where it continues to grow at a compound annual 
growth rate of 40 percent.1 Internet traffic will soon domi-
nate wireless networks too: wireless Internet traffic is 
expanding in developed countries by 100 percent a year 
or more. Recent proliferation in movie-streaming services 
and connected home gaming systems is accelerating 
consumer demand for more bandwidth. These video-
oriented applications represented more than 37 percent 
of total global consumer Internet traffic in 2010.
However, at the same time, some OTT Internet ap-
plications—such as VoIP—are eroding operators’ exist-
ing revenue streams and cash flows. Although content 
providers continue to grow their businesses quite rapidly, 
McKinsey analysis in North America suggests that tradi-
tional telecommunications industry players, both mobile 
and fixed, lost around US$30 billion of revenue between 
2005 and 2010 to OTT applications that substitute for 
existing revenue streams.
REGULATORY RESPONSES CONCERNING 
NETWORK NEUTRALITY
So far, we have seen how rapid and profound changes in 
the Internet landscape appear to be straining the prin-
ciple of network neutrality. Telecommunications regula-
tors around the world take a variety of approaches to the 
issue, which is appropriate given the variety of interests 
at stake. These stakeholders include the content pro-
viders and aggregators, who fiercely support the open 
Internet; telecommunications executives, who argue that 
more beneficiaries of an expanding Internet—such as 
Internet search engines, video content providers, and so-
cial networks—must share more of the heavy burden of 
network capacity expansion; and consumer advocates, 
who call for more privacy protection and transparency.
Examining the main regulatory approaches to 
network neutrality followed in the United States, the 
European Union, and Asia reveals some positions that 
will need to be refined to enable the successful co-
existence of telecommunications operators and content 
providers. Current regulations tend to equate protect-
ing network neutrality on its own as the best means of 
promoting competition in the provision of Internet infra-
structure and services. But this approach bears the risk 
of some unfortunate unintended consequences.
The US approach
The US regulator, the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), has cautiously promulgated the fol-
lowing network neutrality principles:
•	 Transparency: Telecommunications operators must 
disclose their network management practices, per-
formance characteristics, and terms and conditions 
in a clear way so that consumers and edge provid-
ers can make appropriate informed decisions.
•	 No blocking: Fixed operators may not block law-
ful content, applications, services, or non-harmful 
devices. In the same manner, mobile broadband 
providers may not block lawful websites or block 
applications that compete with their voice or video 
telephony services.
•	 No unreasonable discrimination: Fixed broadband 
providers may not unreasonably discriminate in 
transmitting network traffic as long as it is lawful.
The US approach recognizes that translating these 
principles into practice is challenging, to say the least, for 
the rapidly evolving Internet industry. Therefore the FCC 
encourages the industry to follow these principles while 
inviting potential aggrieved parties to file complaints, 
allowing a “case law” to develop that will inform more 
detailed regulations in the future. Despite their caution, 
the rules are already being challenged in the courts by 
Verizon and other service providers. The challengers 
argue that market forces are working fine on the Internet: 
there is no need for more regulation since existing anti-
trust laws provide sufficient protections.
While assessing the status of regulations in the 
United States, one should keep in mind that the country 
has two competing fixed-infrastructure operators and the 
US regulatory authorities relieved network operators of 
the obligation to unbundle their networks. Together these 
give some immunity to operators, especially to fixed-line 
players, against the potential side effects of network neu-
trality regulation.
The EU approach
The European Union (EU) follows a “flexible in principle 
yet cautious” approach in its initial policies regarding net-
work neutrality, which were adopted in April 2011. These 
policies enshrine the following principles:
•	 Reasonable network management allowed: Both 
fixed-line and mobile operators are allowed to man-
age traffic on their networks.
•	 Transparency: Consumers and content providers 
should be notified of network management policies.
•	 Minimum quality requirements: National regu-
latory authorities can impose “minimum quality 
requirements” for network transmission services 
concerning both performance and content to ensure 
that end users have access to comprehensive, com-
parable, and user-friendly information.
•	 Close scrutiny: The European Commission will 
keep a close eye on the behavior of operators to see 
whether they are complying with these principles. 
The Body of European Regulators (BEREC) is cur-
rently finalizing a report on their compliance so far, 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
60  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
which will inform further EU policies, if necessary, on 
network neutrality.
Individual countries in the European Union are inter-
preting the principles in different ways. For instance, the 
Netherlands has recently passed a law strictly enforcing 
network neutrality and forbidding any blocking of Internet 
services, the use of deep packet inspection to track cus-
tomer behavior, and any other filtering or manipulation 
of network traffic. Italy, in contrast, takes a more laissez-
faire approach. Its government has set up a regulatory 
roundtable including industry executives to review the 
topic in greater detail, from which no firm conclusions 
have yet emerged.
At the EU level, however, current thinking tends to-
ward using network neutrality as a tool to promote com-
petition among Internet providers. The EU Commissioner 
for the Digital Agenda, Neelie Kroes, stated recently that 
“If measures to enhance competition are not enough to 
bring Internet providers to offer real consumer choice, 
I’m ready to prohibit the blocking of lawful services or 
applications.”2
The Asian approach
In Asia, some regulators take the view that network 
neutrality should be maintained by market power and 
anti-competition rules, allowing more flexibility in Internet 
markets.
For example, in Hong Kong, the Office of the 
Telecommunications Authority (OFTA) issued a discus-
sion paper on net neutrality in April 2009 setting out its 
view that net neutrality mainly concerns anti-competitive 
and discriminatory conduct. OFTA believes that its exist-
ing regulations addressing market power issues and dis-
criminatory activities are adequate to safeguard against 
anti-competitive and discriminatory actions that threaten 
net neutrality.
Implications of imposing net neutrality
Implementing policies to protect net neutrality, with-
out making any other changes in the current Internet 
environment, risks triggering a number of unintended 
consequences concerning disclosure, adjudication, and 
discrimination.
•	 Disclosure: Will carriers that disclose their network 
management practices to satisfy transparency rules 
enable “the bad guys” to hack into their network, 
jeopardizing privacy of information or even national 
security? If so, who will be liable—the regulator, the 
carriers, or someone else? And will disclosing per-
formance characteristics entail disclosing sensitive 
competitive information?
•	 Adjudication: First, who will determine what is a 
non-harmful device and how? To illustrate, a “chat-
ty” wireless device that powers down frequently to 
save battery life can cause heavy signaling conges-
tion on a 3G network, denying other users access. 
Can a carrier prohibit such a device for being 
“harmful”? And will a carrier be allowed to require 
device manufacturers to test devices for compliance 
in the carrier’s own laboratories, to protect its net-
work from harm? Second, who determines what is 
lawful concerning content and network practice and 
performance?
•	 Discrimination: Will a policy of no unreasonable 
discrimination inhibit investment in additional capac-
ity and/or services and/or applications? Consider 
the extreme case, promoted by some consumer 
advocates, in which operators are allowed no price 
discrimination between different types of content 
and no usage-based pricing. For operators to meet 
the likely volume of demand for new services or 
applications fostered by such a non-discriminatory 
business model would require massive new capital 
investment with a high risk of no or negative return 
on investment, which rational operators would be 
unlikely to make.
THE INDUSTRY RESPONSE
Pressures on the physical capacity of the public Internet 
have prompted operators to look for ways to prioritize 
traffic. They have also prompted some larger edge 
providers to invest in their own high-speed Internet 
infrastructure or use content distribution networks. Both 
responses raise questions concerning network neutrality.
To make further capacity investments, telecommuni-
cations operators and edge providers alike need robust 
income streams and manageable investment costs. 
One priority for the industry therefore must be to enable 
both mobile and fixed-line operators to migrate to more 
sustainable business models. In this shifting competitive 
context, fixed-line players have made some progress on 
re-pricing, while mobile players are still behind, particu-
larly in the European Union. Both fixed-line and mobile 
players need to work with regulators to develop policy 
that balances the need for growing revenues to fund 
investment with network neutrality. In particular, given 
the current dynamics of the industry, policy concerning 
revenue must recognize the critical need to stimulate 
investment in the network infrastructure.
Different types of capacity investment for different 
parts of the Internet
Physically, the Internet today comprises a network of 
IP-enabled networks in three parts that require different 
types of investment to increase capacity: backbone net-
works interconnecting all the Internet access networks; 
fixed high-speed Internet access links—using digital 
subscriber line (DSL), fiber, cable coax, or fixed-wireless 
technology—connecting individual residential or business 
customers to the backbone networks; and mobile ac-
cess links that do the same for customers—via a sec-
ond-, third-, or fourth-generation (2G, 3G, or 4G) cellular 
infrastructure.
Fixed-line operators need to make a major capital 
investment to add each new customer—the fixed access 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  61 
line. However, once in place, this line needs no further 
investment whatever the customer’s level of usage, un-
less the customer wants much higher speeds. A mobile 
operator’s principal capital investment is its radio access 
network. But as mobile customers increase their usage, 
the operator must invest in extending the radio access 
network’s capacity, both in radio frequency (RF) interface 
and backhaul, in order to maintain performance.
Both fixed and mobile access links are supported 
by backbone networks. But using the public IP network 
of networks’ backbone can impede edge players’ per-
formance and add extra costs. Major edge players—the 
content providers and the service and applications 
providers—need to achieve higher levels of performance 
more cost effectively than public IP backbone networks 
can support. So they either build their own high-speed 
fiber networks to connect directly to fixed and mobile 
Internet access providers or use CDNs, whose specialty 
is providing backbone pipes.
Progress toward sustainable business models
Huge increases in consumers’ bandwidth requirements 
coupled with the loss of traditional voice revenues to 
VoIP services have prompted both fixed-line and mobile 
operators to protect revenues by re-pricing services. 
Although fixed-line players have so far done a better job 
of maintaining average-revenue-per-user metrics, among 
mobile operators a structural mismatch has emerged 
between mobile broadband pricing and bandwidth con-
sumption (Figure 1). Some regulators around the world 
are also adopting measures encouraging operators to 
invest in network capacity, for instance, by allowing 
pricing flexibility or offering direct subsidies. Meanwhile, 
edge players are advancing in building their own Internet 
backbones, trying to by-pass network capacity con-
straints and increase quality of service. However, this 
creates challenges for the business models of smaller 
edge players.
Re-pricing to increase resilience
Fixed-line players are generally doing better than mobile 
access providers at charging more for faster connec-
tions. In Sweden, for example, the whole market has 
succeeded in migrating customers from slower-speed 
asymmetric digital subscriber line (ADSL) packages to 
higher-speed connections over time. Sweden’s telecom-
munications operators even managed to increase prices 
from 2009 to 2010, because consumers are recognizing 
the advantages of faster connections and will pay for 
them (Figure 2).
Re-pricing in fixed-line operators: However, fixed-line 
operators following the kind of re-pricing approach ad-
opted in Sweden will not generate the amount of money 
they need to upgrade their telecommunications networks 
to meet future demand. Pressure to invest in fiber optic 
lines is rising: our analysis of current bandwidth usage 
patterns across Europe indicates that average house-
holds are on course to push the limits of bandwidth that 
can be delivered by copper wires by 2015. We estimate 
that upgrading the fixed-line telecommunications net-
works to fiber across the EU-15 is likely to cost between 
€200 billion and €250 billion, as noted above. Fixed-line 
network operators are unlikely to make this long-term 
investment with no expectation of meeting or exceeding 
their cost of capital. They need to cultivate a supportive 
regulatory environment, just as regulators need to de-
velop careful strategies promoting infrastructure invest-
ment by operators, to enable the next wave of Internet 
use.
Re-pricing in mobile operators: Over the past four 
years, as people have used more mobile data services 
and therefore greater bandwidth, the unlimited data 
plans offered by some mobile carriers have begun to 
erode customer value. Unlimited data plans are effective 
tools for acquiring customers but unsustainable in the 
long term, since the performance of radio access net-
works, which account for the vast bulk of mobile opera-
tors’ capital expenditure, is very sensitive to increased 
demand. In many mobile markets, data traffic is growing 
at a compound annual growth rate of 80–150 percent 
with the explosion of smart phones, tablets, dongles, 
and new video applications.
Mobile operators in some markets are managing 
to re-price. For example, in the United States opera-
tors have introduced tiered pricing for mobile data and 
moved to fixed monthly voice plans. Customers who 
use more bandwidth pay for the privilege. In Russia, one 
company offers pricing bands for data dongles, with 
users paying a fee proportional to usage. In Germany, 
an operator sells data plans as bolt-ons (or add-ons) to 
voice services, allowing customers to purchase blocks of 
mobile bandwidth each month. There are other models 
mobile operators can follow to rebalance their prices as 
a competitive reaction toward the shifting of their tradi-
tional services to IP. One option is for operators to bun-
dle mobile voice service with different mobile data pack-
ages that, if priced correctly, can preserve their mobile 
average revenue per user (ARPU) levels and offset the 
risk of losing existing voice and short message service 
(SMS) revenues. Another more familiar option could be to 
mimic most fixed-line players and introduce access fees 
while significantly reducing pricing based on usage. This 
method worked well for fixed-line players, where prices 
of fixed-line calls converged to termination rates, or zero 
in the case of a full VoIP call, a trend that may easily 
occur with mobile pricing as well.
Financing the new wave of infrastructure 
investments
The new wave of infrastructure will require different 
types of investment incentives for fixed-line and mobile 
operators.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
62  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
2011
(estimated)
201020092008
Fi
xe
d 
br
oa
db
an
d,
 in
de
xe
d
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
2011
(estimated)
20102009
M
ob
ile
 b
ro
ad
ba
nd
,*
 in
de
xe
d
30
35
40
2011
(estimated)
201020092008
Fi
xe
d 
br
oa
db
an
d,
 in
de
xe
d
20
25
30
35
40
2011
(estimated)
201020092008
M
ob
ile
 b
ro
ad
ba
nd
,*
 in
de
xe
d
1b: Data consumption vs. access speed:  
Mobile broadband
Figure 1: Fixed-line vs. mobile: ARPU levels and consumption growth
1a: Data consumption vs. access speed:  
Fixed broadband
 Number of users
 Average access speed/user
 Average data consumption/user
1c: Pricing schemes:  
Fixed broadband ARPU, Western Europe
1d: Pricing schemes:  
Mobile broadband ARPU, Western Europe
Source:  McKinsey & Company analysis.
Notes: ARPU = Average revenue per user. The vertical axes used indexed units, which means that different metrics are converted to a common scale starting at one.
* Small and big screen users
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  63 
Fixed investment incentives: Studying markets that have 
already invested in fiber networks on a significant scale 
reveals two regulatory models that seem successful: one 
laissez-faire and one based on subsidies.
•	 Laissez-faire model: This model, followed in the 
United States, encourages operators’ infrastruc-
ture investments by guaranteeing them attractive 
financial returns by relieving them of the obligation 
to unbundle their networks. In essence, this model 
provides regulatory certainty that benefits from 
investing in fiber infrastructure can be captured by 
those making the investment. This seems to be one 
reason why Verizon has invested more than US$18 
billion in the last five years in a fiber-to-the-home 
network that currently covers 14.5 million residences 
in the United States. However, the model does 
not incentivize operators to roll out infrastructure 
in unprofitable areas and may need in future to be 
complemented by some sort of subsidy model. 
Moreover, the United States is unusual in that the 
majority of fixed-line Internet access is provided 
by cable operators that can increase capacity at a 
small fraction of the investment needed by telecom-
munications operators, which use DSL infrastruc-
ture, to do the same.
•	 Subsidy model: This is used mostly in Asian coun-
tries such as Singapore, Malaysia, and, to some 
extent, Japan, to promote broadband access for 
all. It offers network operators either indirect sub-
sidies, through tax incentives, or direct subsidies 
for deploying fiber networks. Some countries—for 
example, Australia and New Zealand—have gone 
further and separated out a neutral (government-
owned) entity from the incumbent’s network through 
which to channel the public infrastructure invest-
ments. This entity then provides wholesale Internet 
access pipes at regulated prices to retail Internet 
service providers, and functions like any other regu-
lated utility.
Mobile investment incentives: Regulators control many 
aspects of mobile networks that affect costs and returns 
from their network investments, and can therefore make 
investment more attractive. For example, regulators can 
allow operators to share parts of their networks and so 
lower their costs. They can also set economically viable 
network coverage requirements, make more spectrum 
available at an affordable cost, and maintain a reason-
able degree of competition in the mobile arena through 
licensing and access regulations. The appropriateness 
of such measures will vary from market to market. At a 
minimum, regulations need to give mobile operators the 
freedom to re-price (Figure 3).
Contribution from edge players
The continued explosive growth in Internet applications 
and services and the traffic they generate has forced 
important changes in the architecture of the Internet. 
Major edge players today, as noted above, are already 
addressing physical Internet capacity constraints and 
performance limitations by investing in private backbone 
networks or by using CDNs, which transport content 
from the edge to the destination Internet access provid-
ers. As a result, consumers are enjoying better perfor-
mance and lower costs for many Internet applications 
0
20
40
60
80
100
201020092008
363627
58
55
56
610
17
M
eg
ab
yt
es
 p
er
 s
ec
on
d
Figure 2: Access-speed pricing and the fixed-investment case: The shift of fixed customers from low-speed 
packages to higher-priced high-speed packages
Source: McKinsey & Company analysis. 
Notes: Data in this figure are from Sweden. These prices do not include inflation, but that is so low that the effect can be dismissed.
Prices of different speeds  
(Telia ADSL), Swedish kroner
Speed 2008 2009 2010
2 Mb/s 264 249 257
> 8 Mb/s 314 299 314
> 20 Mb/s 364 349 364
Note: Inflation rate: –0.3 percent in 2009; 1.3 percent 
in 2010.
 Mb/s 
n <2
n 2–10
n >10
CAGR 
–41%
+2%
+15%
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
64  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
VoIP 2011Post VoIP 2011Pre VoIP 2005
2.70
1.00
0.47
1.72
Eu
ro
s 
ce
nt
s/
m
in
ut
e
0
10
20
PostPre
13.89 15.86
Eu
ro
s/
m
on
th
Source: McKinsey & Company analysis.
Note: PSTN = Public switched telephone network; black bars indicate the cost of VoIP (termination fee).
Figure 3: Re-pricing: Fixed-line industry after VoIP and mobile industry
3a: Price rebalancing: PSTN international call access 
fees, EU average
0
3
6
9
12
VoIPPost VoIPPre VoIP 2008
12
1
5
?
To
ta
l f
ix
ed
-li
ne
 tr
af
fic
 (p
er
ce
nt
)
3b: Mobile voice pricing, euro cents/minute
Need for rebalancing:
•  Introduce access fees
•  Bundles 
0
5
10
15
20
20102006
4
16
Eu
ro
 c
en
ts
/m
in
ut
e
0
5
10
15
20
2016
(estimated)
2011
n/a
16
Vo
IP
 s
ha
re
 (p
er
ce
nt
)
3c: Fixed-line traffic: Share of VoIP, percent 3d: Mobile traffic: Share of VoIP, percent
Access fees 
through rebalancing
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  65 
and services. Some consumer advocacy groups believe 
this development may skew net neutrality and harm 
smaller edge players, but it could also simply reflect a 
legitimate scale advantage achieved by larger players, 
which ultimately benefits consumers.
The complexity of the network neutrality pricing 
issues among Internet access and backbone providers 
and the edge players that generate the traffic is illus-
trated by recent discussions about the peering and tran-
sit agreement that determines the pricing of Internet traf-
fic exchanged between the companies. Internet peering 
and transit agreements are signed between ISPs—both 
access and backbone providers—and determine pay-
ments for Internet traffic exchange. Traditionally, smaller 
players pay larger players to transport their traffic, and 
players of equal size exchange traffic without charging 
each other fees. However, the recent increase in video 
downloads is creating an asymmetric flow of traffic be-
tween backbone companies using CDN technology and 
Internet access providers, and creating new disputes 
with requests for regulators to intervene. Whether this 
development undermines principles of net neutrality is 
the subject of much industry discussion. Thus far, how-
ever, the FCC, for example, has not regulated peering 
and transit agreements: it considers these to be busi-
ness contracts between private parties and has declined 
to get involved in commercial disputes.
We believe the way to resolve such debates is to 
foster collaboration between edge players and access 
providers and thus create a win-win solution.
A COLLABORATIVE SOLUTION?
To prevent regulators from implementing policies that 
could discourage investment or have other unintended 
consequences, we believe that network operators; the 
major content, service, and application providers; and 
regulators need to come together to develop mutually 
beneficial solutions on net neutrality. If operators are al-
lowed to manage traffic transparently while at the same 
time all industry actors collaborate to create conditions 
enabling further investment in network infrastructure, 
then the Internet can move into its next wave of growth. 
Principles that could assist in this endeavor include:
•	 Allow operators to manage traffic with high lev-
els of transparency toward customers. First, net-
work owners should be allowed to manage traffic on 
their networks so as to protect networks from harm 
and handle congestion effectively, but they must be 
more transparent about network management, ser-
vice levels, and all relevant terms and conditions for 
consumers. Operators’ policies concerning data col-
lection, retention, and privacy should also be trans-
parent. Future innovation and growth in Internet ser-
vices and applications depend on preserving both 
openness and support for privacy on the Internet.
•	 Incentivize investments by lowering input costs 
and/or providing favorable regulatory environ-
ment:
 – Make more inputs available at lower cost. 
Given the need for increased massive expansion 
of the Internet, regulators should consider imple-
menting approaches that lower the cost of inputs 
controlled by government policies, such as the 
cost of spectrum and rights of way. In addition, 
regulators should exercise their power to make 
more of these critical inputs available. For exam-
ple, governments could ensure that construction 
companies dig trenches for installing fiber cables 
when they build or restore highways, or that 
government-owned roofs can be used for cell 
towers. Allowing site sharing is another means of 
increasing network capacity. Such measures will 
allow operators to expand their networks faster 
and at lower cost. The appropriateness of these 
measures will vary from market to market.
 – Allow operators pricing flexibility. Operators 
need to price services flexibly to achieve the lev-
els of cash flow that will allow them to make the 
infrastructure investments required to meet surg-
ing demand. Regulators should create a favorable 
environment supporting infrastructure invest-
ments, such as granting regulatory holidays to 
fiber investments.
 – Allow operators to provide differentiated ser-
vices to edge players that share the same 
physical infrastructure. These services will 
provide edge players with additional higher per-
formance to support new innovation. Operators 
will be able to recoup their investment in improved 
performance and capacity from both traditional 
Internet access revenues and new differentiated 
services, thus being able to earn a return on 
investment that justifies continued investment. 
Operators must offer these services in a transpar-
ent, non-discriminatory manner.
•	 Require operators to provide a high-quality 
best-effort service with minimal speeds. This 
service is the baseline service that provides global 
interconnectivity and open access. This baseline 
provides for the continued innovation that has fueled 
the spectacular growth in Internet services and 
applications.
A formal net neutrality policy with these principles in 
place would be a win-win outcome: operators would be 
encouraged to invest in their networks, Internet players 
would be free to innovate and deliver services to a global 
user base, and governments would benefit from the im-
pact of upgraded networks on the economy and society 
in general. Negotiating rules based on these principles 
will not be easy, however. For instance, achieving trans-
parency without triggering any of the unintended conse-
quences outlined above will take thoughtful discussion 
among all the parties involved. But countries that suc-
ceed will foster a continued virtuous cycle of investment, 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.4: Network Neutrality: An Opportunity to Create a Sustainable Industry Model
66  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
innovation, and demand for new services and applica-
tions that will bring benefits to their consumers and 
across their information and communications sectors.
NOTES
1 Global Internet Traffic database; OECD – Cisco – 1984–2009.
2 Kroes 2011.
REFERENCES
Akamai. 2008–11. State of the Internet Report. Q4 reports. Akamai. 
Available at http://www.akamai.com/stateoftheinternet/.
BEREC (Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications). 
2011a. “Draft BEREC Guidelines on Net Neutrality and 
Transparency: Best Practices and Recommended Approaches.” 
BoR (11) 44, October. Available at http://erg.eu.int/doc/berec/
consultation_draft_guidelines.pdf.
———. 2011b. Questionnaire on traffic management, December 13. 
Available at http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/ecomm/
doc/current/ec_berec_tm_questionnaire.xls.
Bode, K. 2011. “Will FCC Act On Level3 Comcast Dispute? Level3 Tells 
Us They Still Hope So, But Signs Point to No.” Broadband DSL 
reports.com, February 18. Available at http://www.dslreports.com/
shownews/Will-FCC-Act-On-Level3-Comcast-Dispute-112808.
Cisco. 2009–11. Visual Networking Index. Available at http://www.cisco.
com/en/US/netsol/ns827/networking_solutions_sub_solution.html.
EC (European Commission). 2010. Europe’s Information Society 
Thematic Portal: Open Internet and Net Neutrality. Available at 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/ecomm/library/
public_consult/net_neutrality/index_en.htm.
———. 2011a. Digital Agenda for Europe: Digital Agenda Scoreboard. 
Available at http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/digital-
agenda/scoreboard/index_en.htm.
———. 2011b. “The Open Internet and Net Neutrality in Europe.” 
Brussels: Communication from the Commission, /COM/2011/222 
final. April 19, Available at http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/
LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2011:0222:FIN:EN:PDF .
EDPS (European Data Protection Supervisor). 2011. “A Serious Policy 
Debate on Net Neutrality Must Effectively Address Users’ 
Confidentiality of Communication.” Press Release, October 7. 
Available at http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?refere
nce=EDPS/11/10&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLan
guage=en.
FCC (Federal Communications Commission). 2011a. “Preserving the 
Open Internet: Final Rule.” FCC, Federal Register, Volume 76, 
Number 185, Friday, September 23. Rules and Regulations. 
Available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-2011-09-23/
html/2011-24259.htm.
———. 2011b. “Local Telephone Competition: Status as of December 
31, 2010.” Washington DC: FCC. Available at https://prodnet.www.
neca.org/publicationsdocs/wwpdf/10711ltc.pdf.
Garside, J. 2011. ”Verizon Challenges New US Rules on Net Neutrality.” 
London Guardian, October 2. Available at http://www.infowars.
com/verizon-challenges-new-us-regulations-on-internet-neutrality/.
Google and Verizon Joint Submission on the Open Internet. GN 
Docket No. 09-191; WC Docket No. 07-52. Letter of January 
14, 2010. Available at http://apps.fcc.gov/ecfs/document/
view?id=7020378826.
Kroes, N. 2011. ”The Internet Belongs to All of Us.” Speech delivered 
at a Press Conference on Net Neutrality Communication, 
SPEECH 11/285, April 19, Brussels. Available at http://
ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/cf/itemdetail.
cfm?item_id=6906&utm_campaign=isp&utm_medium=rss&utm_
source=newsroom&utm_content=tpa-46.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 
2011. OECD Communications Outlook. Paris: OECD.
Office of the Telecommunications Authority, Hong Kong. 2009a. 
“Network Neutrality.” RAAC Paper No. 2/2009. Hong 
Kong: Regulatory Affairs Advisory Committee, Office of the 
Telecommunications Authority.
———. 2009b. Minutes of the Second Meeting Held on Thursday, 
23 April 2009, Item 4, May. Hong Kong: Office of the 
Telecommunications Authority.
Pyramid Research. 2011. “Fixed Communications Forecast.” Products: 
Growth Strategy Experts, September. Available at http://www.pyr.
com/fcfcst.htm.
Schmidt, E. and L. McAdam. 2009. “Finding Common Ground on an 
Open Internet.” Google Public Policy Blog, October 21. Available at 
http://googlepublicpolicy.blogspot.com/2009/10/finding-common-
ground-on-open-internet.html.
Strategy Analytics. 2011. “Wireless Operator Strategies,” November 
9. Available at http://www.strategyanalytics.com/default.
aspx?mod=saservice&a0=7#0.
Telecompaper. 2011. ”FCC Open Internet Rules Published, Verizon Plans 
Appeal.” Telecompaper News: Internet, September 26. Available 
at http://www.telecompaper.com/news/fcc-open-internet-rules-
published-verizon-plans-appeal.
Working Group on Network Neutrality, MIC (Ministry of Internal Affairs 
and Communications), Japan. 2007. Report on Network Neutrality. 
September. English translation December 1, 2007. Tokyo: 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. Available at 
available at http://www.soumu.go.jp/main_sosiki/joho_tsusin/eng/
pdf/070900_1.pdf.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  67 
CHAPTER 1.5
Mobile Broadband: 
Redefining Internet 
Access and Empowering 
Individuals
WILLIAM BOLD
WILLIAM DAVIDSON
Qualcomm
With more than 6 billion connections worldwide and 
US$1.3 trillion in annual revenue,1 mobile telephony 
has become the largest information and communica-
tion technology (ICT) in history. Mobile connects four 
times as many people as landline telephony because 
of its better reach, convenience, and functionality and 
its lower costs.2 Mobile telephony also surpasses the 
landline Internet by more than 3.5 billion users,3 while 
driving economic growth and important societal benefits, 
as documented in the World Economic Forum’s Global 
Information Technology Report 2008–2009: Mobility in a 
Networked World and other research.
While the global scale of mobile telephony and its 
economic impacts are well understood by ICT industry 
participants and governments today, we envision that 
mobile broadband—with its ability to connect people to 
the Internet in an ultra-personal and pervasive manner—
will have a far greater impact.
Mobile broadband, or high-speed access to the 
Internet and other data services over mobile networks, 
is already changing the way people across the globe 
access the Internet. It promises to drive even stronger 
economic growth than mobile telephony alone and to 
fundamentally change the way in which we live, learn, 
work, and collaborate. This in turn is driving seismic 
shifts across the communications and computing in-
dustries. Perhaps most importantly, it provides unprec-
edented opportunities to empower individuals across all 
socioeconomic classes.
In this chapter, we will discuss this view within the 
framework of two fundamental shifts, or tipping points, 
and related trends that underscore how mobile broad-
band is changing the way people access the Internet 
and, in turn, how the Internet itself is changing. We will 
also explore some of the transformative opportunities 
these shifts create in areas such as healthcare and 
education, as well as some key steps stakeholders can 
take to both enable and take advantage of these new 
possibilities.
TIPPING POINT: MOBILE BECOMES THE PRIMARY 
WAY PEOPLE ACCESS THE INTERNET
Not only has mobile broadband emerged over the past 
decade to meaningfully extend the reach of the Internet, 
it has actually become the primary method of access 
for people around the world. By the end of 2010, the 
number of broadband Internet subscriptions over mo-
bile technologies surpassed the number of broadband 
subscriptions over fixed technologies (see Figure 1). 
This tipping point indicates that mobile is the first, and 
perhaps only, way people in emerging regions access 
the Internet. But it also substantiates the notion that the 
Internet itself is shifting from a desktop experience to an 
“on-the-go” experience for developing and developed 
nations alike. This shift provides unprecedented opportu-
nities and benefits that will be explored in this chapter.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
68  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Before discussing some of the underlying trends 
that have driven mobile broadband’s dramatic growth, 
we provide a more detailed definition of mobile broad-
band and review its key enabling technologies.
Mobile technologies deliver true broadband rates
For the purposes of this chapter, mobile broadband is 
defined as any mobile (or cellular) technology that de-
livers minimum data rates in the hundreds of kilobits 
per second (kb/s) to end users and peak rates in the 
Megabits per second (Mb/s). This aligns well with defini-
tions offered by the GSM Association and other industry 
bodies, as well as the 256 kb/s minimum data rate set 
out by International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
to qualify fixed broadband services. In more practical 
terms, once mobile technologies were capable of deliv-
ering these minimum rates, all major notebook manufac-
turers decided to embed them in their products. In short, 
these minimum rates represent the starting point for 
delivering meaningful mobile broadband experiences.
Today, newer third-generation (3G) and fourth-
generation (4G) mobile technologies easily surpass these 
minimums and provide the majority of mobile broadband 
connections worldwide. Key 3G and 4G technologies 
include HSPA,4 EV-DO,5 LTE,6 and their evolutions. The 
latest HSPA+ and LTE commercial deployments now 
support peak data rates greater than 42 Mb/s, with typi-
cal user rates registering well above 1 Mb/s.
The wide majority of mobile operators have 
launched 3G services; a significant number are launch-
ing 4G services. As of January 2012, more than 451 op-
erators had launched commercial HSPA networks, 270 
had launched EV-DO networks, and 49 had launched 
LTE networks.7 Combined, these networks serve more 
than 1 billion mobile broadband subscribers globally.8
Forecasts are even more telling. By 2016, more 
than 80 percent of broadband connections will be 
mobile.9 And with an estimated 1 million connections 
being added every day, 3G is fueling most of them (see 
Figure 2).
Data traffic surpasses voice over mobile networks
The rapid emergence of mobile broadband is tied to the 
global scale, interoperability, and ongoing investments 
made by mobile operators and an ecosystem of compa-
nies that are working to further technological innovations. 
Large-scale mobile networks were initially deployed for 
voice services. Operators have since been reinvesting 
revenues from their voice services to upgrade their net-
works, which now also form the backbone for delivering 
advanced mobile broadband services.
Accordingly, mobile network traffic has been shift-
ing from voice to data, and in December 2009, data 
traffic exceeded the volume of voice calls across the 
world’s mobile networks for the first time.10 Global mo-
bile data traffic continues to grow at a staggering rate. 
It more than doubled in 2010,11 achieving volumes three 
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
2016201520142013201220112010
3,703
866
Figure 1: Global broadband subscriptions: Mobile at 80 percent by 2016
Sources: Industry analyst firm forecasts. For mobile broadband subscriptions: HSPA, EV-DO, TD-SCDMA, and LTE subscribers: Wireless Intelligence Database, February 2012; 
for WiMax: ABI Database, February 2012; for fixed broadband subscriptions: Informa Telecoms & Media (WBIS) Database, February 2012.
Note: Mobile broadband technologies include EV-DO, HSPA, TD-SCDMA, LTE, WiMax, and their respective evolutions.
Su
bs
cr
ip
tio
ns
 (m
ill
io
ns
)
 Mobile broadband subscriptions
 Fixed broadband subscriptions
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  69 
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
times larger than all the data traffic generated by the 
entire global Internet (both fixed and mobile) in 2000.12 
As mobile broadband networks are increasingly able to 
deliver rich Internet access and data services, mobile 
data traffic will continue its phenomenal growth. In 2014, 
monthly mobile data traffic is predicted to exceed mobile 
data traffic for all of 2008.13 Overall, mobile data traffic 
is expected to grow 10 to 12 times between 2010 and 
2015.14
Operators have a number of tools to help them 
meet this rapidly growing data demand. They are acquir-
ing spectrum in new bands, migrating subscribers to 
the most efficient 3G and 4G technologies, employing 
technologies that reduce interference, and they are also 
deploying smaller cells that can more dynamically supply 
capacity to users in specific locations.
Mobile drives broadband Internet access in 
emerging regions
Mobile broadband growth is particularly accelerating in 
emerging countries, rising from 61 percent of all broad-
band connections in these regions in 2011 to 84 percent 
in 2016 (see Table 1). At this pace, emerging regions will 
surpass the developed world in terms of the number of 
mobile broadband connections in first half of 2013.
Unlike fixed broadband services, which have limited 
reach and high capital expenditures—particularly when 
compared with the available consumer spending in many 
emerging regions—mobile broadband offerings provide 
Table 1: Broadband connections in emerging regions
 2011 2016 
 Connections Connections 
 (millions) (millions)
Mobile broadband in emerging regions 415 2,366
Total broadband in emerging regions 676 2,826
Mobile broadband (as a % of total) 61% 84%
Sources: Mobile broadband: Wireless Intelligence Database, February 2012; fixed 
broadband: Informa Telecoms & Media (WBIS) Database, February 2012.
significant economies of scale and a more affordable 
means of reaching mass markets.
While mobile broadband services provide better 
reach and lower costs, personal computer (PC) penetra-
tion remains quite low in most emerging regions. Mobile 
broadband–enabled PCs (either through USB modems 
or embedded notebook solutions) have been success-
ful in the market, but smartphones will have far greater 
impact, providing the first and primary way that people 
access the Internet in many regions.
In India, for example, mobile broadband became 
available in late 2009. Less than 18 months later, the 
number of subscriptions over mobile broadband net-
works surpassed the number of fixed broadband sub-
scriptions. Usage has been with mobile devices rather 
than PCs.
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
201620152014201320122011
 Figure 2: Growth in mobile broadband subscriptions fueled by 3G 
Sources: Subscriptions for HSPA, EV-DO, TD-SCDMA, and LTE technologies: Wireless Intelligence Database, February 2012; subscriptions for WiMax: ABI Database,  
February 2012.
Note: Mobile broadband subscriptions are expected to grow at approximately 29 percent CAGR from 2011 to 2016, led by 3G and its evolution.
Su
bs
cr
ip
tio
ns
 (m
ill
io
ns
)
n HSPA family
n EV-DO family
n TD-SCDMA
n LTE
n WiMax
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
70  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Mobile broadband delivers economic impact
Growth of mobile broadband services affects the eco-
nomic activity of wireless operators, their suppliers, and 
the workers they employ. It also influences the economic 
activity of organizations, households, and individuals 
who use the new networks as well as the overall eco-
nomic competitiveness of countries.
Although systematic correlations between more tra-
ditional mobile telephony and GDP levels across geog-
raphies have been made by the World Bank and others, 
mobile broadband has grown so quickly that these same 
measures are not yet widely available. There is, however, 
a small sampling of country-specific studies that find 
strong, positive economic impacts.
Studies assessing the direct and indirect impact of 
mobile broadband in economies such as India; South 
Africa; Nigeria; Taiwan, China; and the United States 
show that a 10 percent increase in mobile broadband 
penetration is likely to yield an impact of between 1 and 
1.8 percent in GDP.15
More specifically, Analysys Mason estimates that 
for India, every 10 percent increase in mobile broadband 
penetration will generate incremental revenue growth of 
1,622 billion Indian rupees, or 1.1 percent of the entire 
Indian GDP. This impact is forecasted to build to 1.5 
percent of Indian GDP in 2015, based on 12.5 percent 
mobile broadband penetration that year.16 A 2009 LECG 
study found that an investment of US$20 billion in 3G 
networks over the next five years will benefit India’s 
economy by more than US$70 billion and create up to 14 
million jobs.17
Similar assessments have produced analogous find-
ings for other countries. In South Africa, mobile broad-
band and related industries could generate about 28,000 
new jobs and 1.8 percent of GDP by 2015 if sufficient 
spectrum is allocated.18 In Nigeria, mobile broadband 
could contribute over 1 percent of GDP (and 1.7 percent 
of non-oil GDP) in 2015, supporting diversification of the 
country’s economy.19
The positive economic impact is not limited to 
emerging regions. In Taiwan, China, a developed region 
that is core to the manufacturing of computing and 
consumer electronics, mobile broadband technolo-
gies are predicted to contribute US$11.6 billion to the 
economy by 2015, an equivalent of 1.8 percent of GDP.20 
Furthermore, a recent Deloitte study focused on the 
United States identified a GDP growth opportunity of 
US$73 billion to $151 billion and an estimated 371,000 to 
771,000 new jobs as a result of 4G technologies.21
These figures compare quite favorably with the 
economic impacts associated separately with mobile 
telephony and fixed Internet penetration. According to 
the World Bank, a 10 percent increase in mobile phone 
penetration correlates to a 0.8 percent increase of per 
capita GDP, while a 10 percent increase in Internet 
penetration increases per capita GDP by 1.4 percent in 
developing countries.22
We have discussed how mobile broadband 
has emerged as the primary way in which the world 
Box 1: Mobile broadband and healthcare: Providing access to information for South African nurses
In South Africa, healthcare providers are challenged to deliver 
adequate care to large populations, especially those with 
infectious diseases. Providing healthcare to the poorest pop-
ulations increasingly falls on the nurses.
Many nurses in South Africa lack Internet access. They 
are unable to share information with the global health com-
munity on rare and complex medical cases, keep abreast of 
the latest information on epidemics, or obtain information in 
real time for patient evaluation.
The Mobile Health Information System (MHIS) project 
leveraged 3G wireless technology to enable nurses to provide 
better care. The MHIS began as a collaborative effort involv-
ing the Eastern Cape Department of Health, Port Elizabeth 
Hospital Complex (PEHC), MTN-South Africa, and the Nelson 
Mandela Metropolitan University. The pilot phase provided 
nurses at PEHC with smartphones that were pre-loaded with 
a library of pertinent resources, enabling the nurses to access 
locally relevant, reliable, and accurate clinical information at 
the point of care.
Nurses integrated the smartphones into their daily activi-
ties. They reported using the newly accessible information 
to update their clinical knowledge, diagnose and treat and 
provide accurate information to patients, teach students, and 
share information with colleagues.
Rochelle Gelandt is a registered nurse at Livingstone 
Hospital Wellness Clinic, a comprehensive care and manage-
ment facility for adults and children infected with HIV/AIDS. “I 
found the device most valuable when we did not have a doc-
tor for months at a time in our clinic,” she said.
“As some of the clients have chronic conditions such 
as hypertension, diabetes and epilepsy, I used the device to 
check if prescribed chronic medication is not contraindicated 
(causing adverse side-effect or risk due to precondition) when 
using ARVs (antiretroviral drugs). On many occasions I have 
had to advocate for patients regarding drugs prescribed by 
our doctor who was new to the HIV program.”1
Note
1 Interview with nurses in the Eastern Cape in the fall of 2010. See 
also WIPO 2011.http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2011/03/
article_0004.html.
Source
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™ Project, available at http://www.
qualcomm.com/citizenship/wireless-reach/projects/health-care.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  71 
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
accesses the Internet, how it is becoming the first and 
only Internet experience in emerging regions, and how it 
drives potential economic impacts. Mobile broadband is 
also driving the rapid growth of smartphones and other 
mobile broadband devices, as evidenced in the next 
tipping point.
TIPPING POINT: MOBILE BECOMES THE LEADING 
COMPUTING PLATFORM
The global scale and rapid growth of mobile broad-
band is driving another important trend within the 
mobile space: the emergence of mobile computing. 
Smartphones represent the newest wave of mobile 
phones and now comprise the largest segment of mo-
bile broadband shipments. The installed base of smart-
phones exceeded that of PCs in 2011 and is growing 
more than three times faster than PCs.23 Looking for-
ward, approximately 4 billion smartphones are expected 
to ship between 2011 and 2015,24 clearly establishing 
them as the most pervasive computing and Internet ac-
cess device today and in the future (see Figure 3).
Today’s smartphones deliver increasingly rich ex-
periences, including full web browsing and computing 
capabilities, high-definition video, 3D gaming that rivals 
fixed game consoles, access to social networks, and 
many other compelling services. They are our most 
personal device since they are always on, always con-
nected, and are always with us. They offer all-day bat-
tery life and, with GPS and other proximity technologies 
integrated inside, are location-aware and able to deliver a 
compelling array of new personalized services that build 
on these capabilities.
In many respects, today’s smartphones are more 
powerful computers than PCs were just a few years ago. 
The computational power of smartphones has increased 
exponentially over the past decade. In the early 2000s, 
mobile phones ran in the tens of MHz in terms of pro-
cessing power. In 2008, they surpassed 1 GHz (1,000 
MHz) for the first time. Solutions on the near horizon 
will support dual- and quad-core processors with clock 
cycles up to 2.5 GHz—more powerful than many note-
books in use today. These processors, built with mobile 
in mind, are also driving today’s tablet computers and 
other forms of consumer computing devices.
Smartphones already play an important role in 
providing access to the Internet. In the United States, 
more than one-quarter of mobile phone owners use their 
smartphones rather than a PC to access the Internet.25 
The success of smartphones extends beyond developed 
regions. In Brazil, for example, the smartphone’s share in 
monthly 3G handset sales rose from 45 percent in May 
2010 to 76 percent in May 2011—tripling in terms of unit 
volumes during the same period.26
A pilot project in South Africa (see Box 1) demon-
strates how smartphones and mobile broadband tech-
nologies can be leveraged by nurses to improve access 
to healthcare within underserved communities.
Merging the best of both the computing and mobile 
worlds, advanced smartphones and tablets represent 
a new, highly personalized, rich computing experience 
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
201520142013201220112010
Figure 3: Smartphones: The newest wave of computing
Source: Strategy Analytics, September 2011; December 2011.
Notes: Smartphones installed base is the total number of functioning and active cellular handsets with a high-level operating system at year’s end. Total PCs include only 
IP-network enabled desktop, notebook, and netbook PCs and exclude PCs without connectivity.
 Smartphones
 Total PCs
In
st
al
le
d 
ba
se
 (m
ill
io
ns
)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
72  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Holdings–based architecture, which are found in 
nearly every smartphone today.
We have discussed two fundamental tipping points 
to help underscore our view on mobile broadband and 
its growing impact: first, the emergence of its networks 
and services as the primary way we access the Internet; 
and second, the rise of its devices, specifically smart-
phones, as our primary computing platform. These 
factors in turn are redefining the way we interact with the 
Internet, with each other, and with the world around us. 
We now bring the Internet with us wherever we go rather 
than go to a place to access it. We now have real-time 
access, all the time. And because smartphones are our 
most personal device, they provide us highly personal-
ized experiences, tailored to our needs and interests.
But the benefits delivered through these tipping 
points can become truly transformational once we exam-
ine what they can do to reshape areas such as health-
care, education, and, more generally, the empowerment 
of individuals.
THE TRANSFORMATIVE EFFECT OF MOBILE 
BROADBAND: THE POTENTIAL TO IMPROVE 
SOCIETIES AND EMPOWER INDIVIDUALS
Mobile broadband has the potential to impact impor-
tant aspects of societies such as healthcare, education, 
and different socioeconomic groups. Combine this with 
highly personalized and pervasive experiences enabled 
by mobile smartphones and other always-on, always-
connected devices, and the opportunity exists to em-
power individuals in transformative ways that were hard 
to imagine even just a few years ago.
Transforming access to healthcare
Within the healthcare sector, mobile broadband tech-
nologies can improve access to health services, enhance 
self-care, address rising costs, increase productivity, and 
help address the increasing demands of chronic disease 
and an aging population.
Mobile health solutions—whether used to automate 
electronic health records or treat chronic diseases—en-
able governments to more easily, quickly, and cost-
effectively bring the benefits associated with access to 
comprehensive healthcare services to their citizens (see 
Box 2).
Mobile remote monitoring devices and services 
that transmit information about the condition of patients 
and applications that remind patients when to take their 
medications will allow many more people to lead health-
ier, more independent lives. A recent McKinsey study 
for the GSM Association estimated that remote monitor-
ing through mobile devices can save US$175 billion to 
$200 billion in annual healthcare costs for managing 
chronic diseases in OECD and BRIC countries alone.31 
Accordingly, a recent Juniper Research study forecasted 
that we take with us wherever we go. This is driving both 
consumer demand and important shifts within the indus-
try. Technology companies previously associated with 
PCs and fixed Internet experiences—such as Amazon, 
Apple, Facebook, Google, and Microsoft—are now 
focused heavily on mobile. A few points help illustrate the 
strength of this focus:
•	 Smartphones and tablets are driving two-thirds of 
semiconductor industry revenue growth through 
2013, according to Gartner.27
•	 According to Facebook, more than 250 million peo-
ple actively use Facebook through mobile devices 
and are twice as active on Facebook as non-mobile 
users.28
•	 Google reported that mobile access of Google 
Maps was higher than desktop usage for the first 
time during the 2010 Christmas holiday season.29
•	 In addition, Gartner reported in May 2011 that total 
downloads of mobile applications reached 8 billion 
in 2010 and should surpass 100 billion by 2015.30
•	 Microsoft’s next PC operating system, Windows 8, 
is being designed to run on processors using ARM 
Box 2: Mobile broadband and healthcare: 
Detecting cardiovascular diseases in China
According to the World Health Organization, chronic dis-
eases such as cardiovascular diseases (CVDs) place a 
grave economic burden on countries. In fact, China will 
lose US$558 billion between 2005 and 2015 in national 
income as a result of heart disease, stroke and diabetes.1
CVD is the leading cause of death in China, claiming 
about 3 million lives a year.2 A pilot project involving Life 
Care Networks and the Community Health Association of 
China uses mobile broadband technologies to address the 
prevention and care of CVDs in underserved communities.
China’s Wireless Heart Health project is deploying 
a 3G-enabled cardiovascular screening and monitoring 
system among resource-scarce community health clinics. 
The system includes smartphones with built-in electrocar-
diogram (ECG) sensors. The smartphones send patient 
heart data to cardiac specialists at a 24-hour call center in 
Beijing. As part of the service, doctors can provide real-
time feedback to their patients via text or phone call.
This project demonstrates how 3G mobile broadband 
can extend the reach of specialized physicians into under-
served areas and enable community health clinics to treat 
more patients effectively.
Notes
1 WHO 2005.
2 China National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases 2010.
Source
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™ Project, available at http://www.
qualcomm.com/citizenship/wireless-reach/projects/health-care.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  73 
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
remote patient monitoring using mobile networks to be a 
US$1.9 billion market by 2014.32
These solutions improve the reach, productivity, 
and outcomes within the healthcare sector. But more 
importantly, mobile broadband can empower people to 
participate more actively in understanding and managing 
their own health and wellness, and thus improving the 
quality of their lives. Better health education and informa-
tion, real-time measurements of vitals through sensors, 
and closed-loop communications between patients and 
healthcare professionals can be achieved in a more pro-
active, preventive, and personalized manner.
Transforming education
Mobile broadband is also changing the way people 
learn and share information. While the use of always-on, 
always-connected mobile devices is providing access 
to resources previously not available to students in the 
developing world, it also transforms educational methods 
to improve educational outcomes in the developed world 
(see Box 3).
Empowering socioeconomic groups
There is evidence that socioeconomic groups are also 
empowered by mobile broadband. According to an 
August 2011 Pew Internet report on smartphones in 
America, 78 percent of under-30, non-white, low-income, 
and less-educated smartphone owners use their phones 
to access the Internet; and 38 percent of them use their 
handsets as their primary means of doing so. These 
rates are notably higher than in the average population.33
And in developing regions where people who lack 
Internet access are cut off from educational tools, ac-
cess to mobile broadband helps them develop the skills 
to compete in the 21st century and provide new eco-
nomic opportunities. A project in Indonesia (see Box 4) 
shows how mobile broadband economically empowers 
the underserved—particularly women.
Although mobile phone ownership has soared in 
recent years, there are 300 million fewer female than 
male subscribers. This means a woman is 21 percent 
less likely to own a phone than her male counterpart. 
The figure rises to 23 percent in Africa, 24 percent in the 
Middle East, and 37 percent in South Asia.34
Mobile phone ownership benefits women with im-
proved access to educational, healthcare, and business 
opportunities. Women surveyed in low- and middle-
income countries said they believe that owning a mobile 
phone helps them lead more secure, connected, and 
productive lives. Up to 41 percent of respondents said 
they increased their incomes or professional opportuni-
ties because of their mobile phones.35
In order to bridge the digital divide, governments 
and institutions have traditionally focused on fostering 
fixed Internet connections. However, mobile broadband 
provides a more pervasive, personal, and cost-efficient 
Box 3: Mobile broadband and education: 
Improving educational outcomes for at-risk 
students in the United States
Smartphones and mobile broadband connectivity are 
creating new ways for at-risk students in North Carolina to 
learn mathematics.
Project K-Nect was launched in 2008 to determine 
whether smartphones with digital algebra I content and 
24/7 connectivity could improve educational outcomes of 
students who scored poorly in math.
Qualifying students received 3G-enabled smart-
phones to wirelessly connect to supplemental math 
content aligned with their teachers’ lesson plans, relevant 
web-based resources, and online collaboration tools. The 
devices also enabled students to communicate with their 
teachers and engage in peer learning.
As schools educate the next generation of society, 
mobile technology provides students a more efficient and 
convenient way to engage with their learning materials and 
each other 24/7. Mobile devices provide unprecedented 
access to learning resources, peers, and advisors—inside 
and outside the classroom, regardless of their location—at 
school, on the bus, or at home.
For four years running, Project K-Nect students have 
continued to outperform their peers, with students partici-
pating in Project K-Nect increased their proficiency rates by 
at least 30 percent on the State of North Carolina’s End of 
Course exam, compared with classes not in Project K-Nect 
but taught by the same teacher.1 Of those students, 50 
percent reported a greater interest in attending college and 
one-third reported a greater interest in pursuing a degree 
and a career that uses their math skills.
Based on positive results from Project K-Nect, the 
Department of Defense Education Activity granted a par-
ticipating school district $2.5 million to expand the reach of 
mobile learning to all algebra I students in Onslow County, 
North Carolina. In 2011, the US Federal Communications 
Commission chose Project K-Nect as one of 20 pilot proj-
ects to demonstrate the use of off-campus broadband 
as part of their Learning On-The-Go wireless pilot proj-
ect. Today, Project K-Nect has expanded to three states 
and now reaches more than 4,500 students in grades 8 
through 12.
Project K-Nect leverages the full capability of mobile 
broadband technologies and devices to help transform 
learning. The global reach of mobile broadband and the 
growing proliferation of smartphones will enable educa-
tional innovations using mobile devices for learning to 
expand to other countries.
Note
1 Project K-Nect Evaluation Report July 2007, available at http://
www.tomorrow.org/docs/Project_k-Nect_Evaluationreport_
Final_Jul7.pdf.
Source
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™: Project, available at http://www.
qualcomm.com/citizenship/wireless-reach/projects/education.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
74  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
way to connect the unconnected. Smartphones, in 
particular, allow people to take matters into their own 
hands and find effective ways to engage the knowledge 
economy.36
THE PATH FORWARD
To ensure the ongoing success of mobile broadband 
and its economic and societal benefits, governments and 
other stakeholders around the world have an important 
role in ensuring the availability of the tools and incentives 
that are needed to spur innovation, new technologies, 
and new products:
•	 Spectrum is crucial for mobile communications. Its 
allocation is a key area where cooperation between 
governments and industry is critical. Although the 
latest mobile broadband technologies use spectrum 
much more efficiently than their predecessors, they 
are approaching the theoretical limits of spectral effi-
ciency. This, combined with the phenomenal growth 
in mobile broadband, is resulting in a new challenge 
to find additional spectrum to support the tremen-
dous growth in data usage. The benefits of mobile 
broadband depend upon the availability of adequate 
and appropriate spectrum that is harmonized to the 
greatest extent possible across borders. Industry 
must continue to innovate and find more effective 
ways to utilize spectrum while governments need to 
allocate and assign spectrum to the highest-value 
use, such as for commercial mobile broadband. 
Close cooperation between governments and indus-
try is critical to finding solutions that will ensure that 
advanced services can continue to grow.
•	 A core driver of innovation and growth within the 
mobile broadband sector is the commitment by 
public and private institutions to establish and invest 
in the infrastructure and technological capacity 
required to meet the demand of the various services 
described in this chapter. Today, mobile phones 
and services provide greater quality, reliability, and 
functionality than ever before. And they do this often 
at a price that is lower than that of earlier, less-
advanced, wireless technologies introduced just a 
few years ago. 
 
This could not have been realized without large 
investments in research and development and an 
intellectual property system that ensures protection 
of those inventions. Government policy and funding 
can play an important role in the early successes of 
the mobile broadband industry by providing incen-
tives to spur innovation, technologies, and new 
products and by establishing a system that is able 
to examine, evaluate, and respond to these fast-
moving market dynamics in a timely manner that 
leads to the development of high-quality inventions. 
 
It is important that policymakers take into account 
innovative technology opportunities when develop-
ing regulations and avoid arbitrarily stifling market 
opportunities that have great promise for provid-
ing societal, environmental, and economic value. 
Moreover, these policies must maintain technology 
neutrality to ensure an open and dynamic environ-
ment for innovation.
To better account for the full impact that mobile 
broadband is having around the world, we also propose 
that the 2012 and future Global Information Technology 
Reports (GITRs) include two additional Network 
Readiness Index (NRI) indicators at the country and 
global level:
•	 A mobile broadband connectivity metric, as part of 
the overall broadband Internet access indicators, 
that will help us more fully understand how many 
people in a given country are accessing the Internet 
and participating in the networked society. Current 
GITR metrics reflect only fixed Internet connections.
•	 A separate personal Internet connectivity metric 
that more precisely measures how many people 
are experiencing the new, hyperconnected Internet 
through personal devices that are always with us 
and always connected to real-time services deliver-
Box 4: Mobile broadband and gender parity: 
Giving female entrepreneurs new tools for 
success
In Indonesia, the world’s fourth most populous nation, 
underserved residents—many of whom are women—use 
mobile technology to access unique business opportuni-
ties and gain the skills needed to lift themselves out of 
poverty.
The Grameen Foundation, along with partners from 
private and public sectors and its Application Laboratory 
(AppLab) initiative, is establishing a multi-tier suite of data 
services that use existing SMS technology and increasingly 
available 3G technologies built on a mobile platform.
Designed to increase incomes of the nation’s poor, 
these services can be accessed through two distribution 
channels:
•	 Village Phone Operators (VPOs), a social network of 
women entrepreneurs who own and operate mobile 
micro-franchise businesses, and
•	 commercially available phones available in collaboration 
with Bakrie Telecom.
For example, AppLab’s Jual Pulsa (Top Up) applica-
tion allows the poor to become entrepreneurs by selling 
airtime to customers. The Info Kerja (Day Job Search) 
application connects the poor to job opportunities, thus 
increasing the chances of stable income for their families.
As of January 2012, over 10,000 entrepreneurs have 
served more than 1 million unique customers. An esti-
mated 47 percent of the entrepreneurs who stay in the 
portfolio for more than four months have moved above the 
poverty line, which the World Bank defines as US$2.50 per 
day. Currently, more than 83 percent of the businesses are 
owned by women and 100 percent are profitable.
Source
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™ Project, available at: http://
www.qualcomm.com/citizenship/wireless-reach/projects/
entrepreneurship#indonesia---village-phone.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  75 
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
Box 5: Three examples of public-private collaborations using mobile broadband
This box provides examples of broadband solutions from 
three very different parts of the world.
Wireless Wireless Access for Health in the 
Philippines
In Tarlac Province in the Philippines, a project that began in 
2009 has been implemented in 16 rural health units in order 
to reduce the time required for reporting and to improve 
access to accurate and timely patient information. The 
Wireless Access for Health project is made possible through 
collaboration between the Philippines Department of Health, 
the provincial government of Tarlac, Philippine universities, 
and private industry.1 It uses 3G to build on and strengthen 
an existing electronic medical records system developed by 
the University of the Philippines, Manila. As of December 
2011, approximately 150,000 patient consultations have been 
recorded through the program, patient care has improved, 
and patient visits are more efficient. Patient information is 
now fed electronically into the Philippine Field Health Service 
Information System—the government’s major resource for 
managing public health data in order to collate reports for 
policy planning and analysis, which had traditionally taken a 
year to compile. Meanwhile, the recording of clinic-level infor-
mation is enabling the health units to manage drug supplies 
and identify human resource needs, while municipal-, district-, 
regional-, and provincial-level information is helping to identify 
disease outbreaks and inform decision makers about the 
most efficient allocation of resources. Because of the success 
of the pilot project, the Tarlac provincial government has com-
mitted staff and financial resources to replicate the project 
in all 38 health clinics in the province; the pilot will serve as a 
model for other health units across the country.
National Broadband Plan in the United States
In the United States, the Federal Communication 
Commission’s (FCC) National Broadband Plan provided a 
comprehensive analysis of the ways in which broadband in 
general and mobile broadband in particular has the potential 
to change many facets of American life, including health-
care, energy consumption, public safety, and education. 
The FCC has begun implementing one important aspect 
of its plan to support the use of mobile broadband for pri-
mary and secondary school students. Since passage of the 
Telecommunications Act of 1996, the FCC’s e-rate program 
has been used to wire schools for fixed broadband and 
to fund wireless use on school grounds. As a result, the 
FCC has begun to extend this program to subsidize mobile 
broadband off school grounds to provide students with 24/7 
connectivity. The E-rate Deployed Ubiquitously 2011 Pilot 
Program (EDU2011) is enabling 35,000 students at 14 schools 
in 20 states to get low-cost mobile broadband connectivity 
when they are away from school to support anywhere, any-
time learning. EDU2011 is an important step toward achieving 
21st century primary and secondary education in the United 
States through the use of mobile broadband connectivity, 
devices, and software learning applications offered by the 
mobile communications industry.
Connected Brazil
In Brazil, the telecommunications sector government agen-
cies have a long-standing and active engagement with 
industry, utilizing mechanisms such as public consulta-
tions and keeping an ongoing dialogue on key issues. The 
Ministry of Communications and ANATEL, the National 
Telecommunications Agency, are very active in key interna-
tional policy and regulatory organizations that are working to 
address mobile communications. By including industry in the 
decision-making process, the results better reflect the needs 
of both the government’s objectives and the private sector’s 
interests. ANATEL is an example of a regulator that has pro-
actively taken steps to manage spectrum in order to maximize 
frequency harmonization at the international level and lever-
age economies of scale. In addition, some of the objectives 
of Brazil’s National Broadband Program (PNBL), Connected 
Brazil, are to create opportunities, speed up economic 
and social development, promote social inclusion, reduce 
social and regional differences, and promote job creation 
and capacity building for the population to use information 
technologies.2 The Connected Brazil Forum is composed of 
almost 60 institutions from diverse sectors, public and private, 
and directly linked with broadband program goals. Mobile 
communications will play a pivotal role in fulfilling PNBL’s 
theme of a “fast Internet for all of Brazil” and aid in accelerat-
ing mobile broadband access and adoption, increasing local 
applications development, and decreasing device and service 
costs.
Notes
1 Qualcomm Wireless Reach™ Project: Health Care: Philippines – 
Wireless Access for Health, available at http://www.qualcomm.
com/citizenship/wireless-reach/projects/health-care#philippines.
2 PNBL (Plana Nacional de Banda Larga): Brasil Conectado, 
available at http://www4.planalto.gov.br/brasilconectado/pnbl/.
ing social and environmental information about the 
world around us.
CONCLUSION
For people in many parts of the world, mobile broadband 
offers the first-ever means of accessing the Internet. 
And for many, particularly in emerging regions, mobile 
broadband will likely be their only means of access. At 
the same time, it is rapidly becoming integral to modern 
life for people in more developed countries, continually 
opening up new Internet experiences and unlocking new 
opportunities. In short, mobile broadband has become a 
force for change across all socioeconomic levels and in 
every corner of the globe. In many profound ways, this 
technology is an economic development tool for the 21st 
century.
While mobile broadband leverages the ubiquitous 
nature and scale of mobile telephony, it is positioned 
for a far greater impact if challenges such as secur-
ing appropriate spectrum and establishing policies and 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
76  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
systems that encourage and protect technical innova-
tion are addressed. And, for reasons discussed in this 
chapter, it will also likely have far greater impact than the 
traditional Internet does today.
We have already begun to see the benefits of public 
and private collaborations that utilize mobile broadband 
solutions to bring services to citizens (Box 5).
Mobile broadband not only allows people to connect 
to one other, but it also provides unprecedented access 
to highly personalized Internet and computing experi-
ences. There is significant opportunity on the horizon for 
many more people to participate in those experiences 
and benefit from those opportunities. Mobile broadband 
uniquely provides this potential to empower individuals 
across the world as never before.
NOTES
1 Chetan Sharma Consulting 2011.
2 ITU 2011.
3 Internet World Stats: Usage and Population Statistics. March 31, 
2011, available at http://www.internetworldstats.com/.
4 HSPA refers to high-speed packet access, standardized by 3GPP 
as an evolution of UMTS/WCDMA networks.
5 EV-DO refers to evolution-data optimized, standardized by 3GPP2 
for CDMA2000 networks.
6 LTE refers to long-term evolution, standardized by 3GPP and 
deployed by both UMTS/WCDMA and CDMA2000 operators.
7 See CDMA Development Group (CDG), available at http://www.
cdg.org/resources/cdma_stats.asp, and Global Mobile Suppliers 
Association (GSA), available at http://www.gsacom.com/news/
gsa_fastfacts.php4 (accessed January 2012).
8 Wireless Intelligence database, Q4 2011, available at https://www.
wirelessintelligence.com/home/.
9 Wireless Intelligence database, February 2012, available at http://
www.wirelessintelligence.com/analysis/.
10 Ericsson 2010.
11 Strategy Analytics Quarterly Research: Mobile Broadband Trends 
Q2 2011 (Prepared for Qualcomm), Strategy Analytics, July 2011.
12 Cisco 2011.
13 ABI Research 2009.
14 Strategy Analytics, July 2011.
15 See notes 16–21.
16 Analysys Mason 2010a.
17 LECG 2009.
18 Analysys Mason 2010b.
19 Analysys Mason 2011a.
20 Analysys Mason 2011b.
21 Deloitte 2011.
22 Qiang et al. 2009.
23 Strategy Analytics, September 2011 and December 2011.
24 This figure is the average of data on worldwide mobile devices 
for 2008–15, from Gartner, 2011a, Q3 Smartphone Forecast 
Database; Strategy Analytics, 2011, Quarterly Forecast Database; 
and IDC, 2011, Quarterly Forecast Database.
25 Pew Internet, survey sample of 2,277 people, July 2011.
 26 See GfK Retail and Technology, July 2011, available at www.gfkrt.
com.
 27 Gartner 2011b.
 28 Digital Stats 2011.
 29 See http://www.bgr.com/2011/03/13/google-vp-marissa-mayer-
dishes-google-mobile-stats-150m-mobile-users/, March 2011.
 30 Gartner 2011c.
 31 McKinsey & Company and GSMA 2010. OECD countries are those 
in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development; 
the BRIC countries are Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, and 
China.
 32 Juniper Research Press Release, April 13, 2011.
 33 Pew Research Center 2011.
 34 GSMA et al. 2010.
 35 GSMA et al. 2010.
 36 Hood 2011.
REFERENCES
ABI Research. 2009. Mobile Data Traffic Analysis. ABI Research Report, 
July.
Analysis Mason. 2010a. “Assessment of Economic Impact of Wireless 
Broadband in India.” December. Report prepared for the GSMA. 
Available at http://www.gsma.com/documents/india-wireless-
broadband-economic-impact/19659/.
———. 2010b. “Assessment of Economic Impact of Wireless Broadband 
in South Africa.” November. Report prepared for the GSMA. 
Available at http://www.gsma.com/documents/south-africa-
wireless-broadband-economic-imact/19660/ .
———. 2011a. “Assessment of the Economic Impact of Wireless 
Broadband in Nigeria.” July. Report prepared for the GSMA. 
Available at http://www.gsma.com/documents/nigeria-economic-
impact-of-wireless-broadband/19626/.
———. 2011b. “Assessment of the Economic Impact of Wireless 
Broadband in Taiwan.” July. Report prepared for the GSMA. 
Available at http://www.gsma.com/documents/taiwan-economic-
impact-of-wireless-broadband/19625/.
Chetan Sharma Consulting. 2011. State of the Global Mobile Industry: 
Half Year Assessment, July.
China National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases. 2010. China CVD 
Report 2010. Beijing: Ministry of Health. Available at http://news.
xinhuanet.com/society/2011-08/12/c_121852777.htm.
Cisco. 2011. Cisco Visual Networking Index: Global Mobile Data Traffic 
Forecast Update, 2010–2015. February 2011. Available at http://
www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/
ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-520862.html,
Deloitte. 2011. “The Impact of 4G Technology on Commercial 
Interactions, Economic Growth, and U.S. Competitiveness,” 
August. Deloitte. Available at http://www.deloitte.com/us/
impactof4g.
Digital Stats. 2011. “There Are More than 250 Million Active Users 
Currently Accessing Facebook through their Mobile Devices,” April 
19. Available at http://digital-stats.blogspot.com/2011/04/there-
are-more-than-250-million-active.html.
Ericsson. 2010. “Mobile Data Traffic Surpasses Voice.” Press Release, 
March 23. Available at http://www.ericsson.com/news/1396928.
Gartner. 2011a. Market Share: Mobile Communication Devices by 
Region and Country, 3Q11. November 14. Available at http://www.
gartner.com/id=1847315.
———. 2011b. “Gartner Says Worldwide Semiconductor Industry to 
Grow 5.1 Percent in 2011 with Revenue Reaching $315 Billion.” 
Press Release, June 21. Gartner Newsroom. Available at http://
www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id=1728614.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  77 
1.5: Mobile Broadband: Redefining Internet Access and Empowering Individuals
———. 2011c. “Forecast: Mobile Application Stores, Worldwide, 2008–
2015.” May 18. Available at http://www.gartner.com/id=1688314.
GSMA Development Fund, the Cherie Blair Foundation for Women, 
and Vital Wave Consulting. 2010. Women & Mobile: A Global 
Opportunity, February 2010. London: GSMA London Office. 
Available at http://www.cherieblairfoundation.org/uploads/pdf/
women_and_mobile_a_global_opportunity.pdf.
Hood, L. 2011. “Smartphones Are Bridging the Digital Divide.” The Wall 
Street Journal, August 29.
Internet World Stats: Usage and Population Statistics. 2001. March 31. 
Available at http://www.internetworldstats.com/.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2011. Measuring the 
Information Society 2011. Geneva; ITU.
LECG. 2009. “3G Mobile Networks in Emerging Markets: The 
Importance of Timely Investment and Adoption.” LECG analysis 
for GSMA, January 26. Available at http://www.gsma.com/
documents/lecg-report-on-3g-mobile-networks-in-emerging-
markets/19831/ .
McKinsey & Company, Inc, and GSMA. 2010. mHealth: A New Vision 
for Healthcare. Available at http://www.mobilehealthlive.org/
publications/reports/mhealth-a-new-vision-for-healthcare/1219.
Pew Research Center. 2011. Americans and their Cell Phones. 
Washington DC: Pew Research Center. Available at http://
pewInternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2011/Cell%20Phones%20
2011.pdf.
PNBL (Plana Nacional de Banda Larga): Brasil Conectado. Available at 
http://www4.planalto.gov.br/brasilconectado/pnbl/
Qiang, Z.-W. C. and C. M. Rossotto, with K. Kimura. “Economic 
Impacts of Broadband.” In Information and Communications for 
Development 2009. Washington DC: World Bank. 35–50.
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™. Project: Health Care: China. Available 
at http://www.qualcomm.com/about/citizenship/wireless-reach/
projects/health-care.
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™. Project: Health Care: Philippines – 
Wireless Access for Health. Available at http://www.qualcomm.
com/citizenship/wireless-reach/projects/health-care#philippines.
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™. Project: Education: United States. 
Available at http://www.qualcomm.com/citizenship/wireless-reach/
projects/education.
Qualcomm Wireless Reach™. Project: Entrepreneurship: 
Indonesia Mobile Microfinancing. Available at http://www.
qualcomm.com/about/citizenship/wireless-reach/projects/
entrepreneurship#indonesia---village-phone.
Strategy Analytics. 2011. Strategy Analytics Quarterly Research: Mobile 
Broadband Trends Q2 2011. Customer report prepared for 
Qualcomm.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2005. “Rethinking ‘Diseases of 
Affluence’: The Economic Impact of Chronic Diseases.” Facing the 
Facts #4. Available at http://www.who.int/chp/chronic_disease_
report/media/Factsheet4.pdf
WIPO. “Wireless Technologies: Making a Difference.” WIPO Magazine, 
June 2011. Available at http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/
en/2011/03/article_0004.html
World Economic Forum. 2009. The Global Information Technology 
Report 2008–2009: Mobility in a Networked World. Geneva: World 
Economic Forum.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  79 
CHAPTER 1.6
Reaching the Third Billion: 
Arriving at Affordable 
Broadband to Stimulate 
Economic Transformation 
in Emerging Markets
CHRIS S. THOMAS
FREDERICO CARVALHO
Intel Corporation
Direct correlations can be made between the affordabil-
ity of broadband connectivity and the ability of an individ-
ual or country to successfully transform itself through the 
utilization of ICT capabilities. Advocating reaching more 
people by paying “less for less,” strategies employed in 
many different countries aim to close the affordability 
gap.  In short, these countries are employing business 
and deployment strategies similar to those of the pre-
paid mobile phone market that enabled it to successfully 
reach the majority of the world’s population.   
An International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
study recently indicated that Internet users have now 
surpassed the 2 billion mark worldwide.1 This is signifi-
cant because access to the Internet is clearly a major 
enabler of economic growth. Accessing information and 
education, facilitating the creation and reach of busi-
nesses, streamlining the costs of engaging with govern-
ments, and obtaining healthcare are all cited as benefits 
of access to the Internet.
As we celebrate the progress and begin to experi-
ence the individual, economic, and social transformation 
of surpassing 2 billion Internet users, we turn our atten-
tion to the more than 70 percent of the world’s popula-
tion yet to experience the benefits derived from broad-
band Internet access. How do we accelerate access as 
we move toward reaching the next billion users?
As with many things related to technology and com-
munication, reaching the third billion is centered on the 
three major pillars of access, affordability, and awareness. 
Each country and situation calls for the development of 
unique, creative programs that can address these three 
elements successfully and meet the challenges of ex-
tending the reach and impact of broadband services.
THE IMPORTANCE OF INTERNET ACCESS: THE TIME 
FOR BROADBAND
In the past decade, almost 75 percent of the world’s 
population has obtained an unprecedented level of 
basic connectivity through the almost viral proliferation 
of mobile phone technology.2 Fueling the vibrant images 
of mobile phones sold in rural marketplaces—alongside 
fruits, vegetables, and other necessities—has been the 
communication industry’s ability to reach new customers 
with creative and affordable service options. The most 
notable of these has been the prepaid phone service. 
In developing countries, prepaid voice services are the 
choice of most people,3 reaching up to 97 percent of the 
users in Africa—allowing virtually everyone to choose the 
level of communication they can afford while avoiding an 
ongoing commitment.
This ubiquity of affordable telecommunications has 
led to a wave of new and innovative services that go well 
beyond staying in touch with family or friends. Affordable 
voice and text connections have become business and 
economic enablers.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
80  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Although the world has reason to marvel at the 
benefits achieved with this first wave of wireless commu-
nication options, a second wave is hovering in the wings, 
waiting to become a driver of even greater economic 
impact. In this second wave, broadband technologies 
are extending the opportunities offered by data com-
munications. It is easy to visualize the music, video, 
and multimedia experiences extended by broadband 
communications along with the business and economic 
opportunities that broadband makes possible. This 
makes encouraging the rapid proliferation and adoption 
of broadband crucial to those attempting to enter a local, 
national, or global market.
This was clearly stated in a World Bank study:
Over the past decade, developing countries 
have seen rapid but uneven growth in infor-
mation and communication technologies 
(ICT) access and use. Progress has been 
noteworthy in mobile telephony, where the 
gap between developing and developed 
countries is narrowing rapidly. . . . But outside 
mobile telephony, there are large and widen-
ing gaps in high-speed Internet access and 
Broadband connectivity, the development 
of local information technology (IT) indus-
tries, and of ICT applications; that is, the dif-
fusion and use of ICT in business, services, 
and government—the areas where ICT can 
deliver the largest developmental impacts.4
Those charged with promoting the benefits of 
ICT and broadband can draw upon many examples. 
Research and implementations around the world have 
repeatedly shown that ICT investments can have a 
positive impact on jobs, productivity, GDP growth, and 
innovation. The demonstrated effects of investment in 
the ICT infrastructure include:
1. the creation of high-skilled, high-paying jobs;
2. improved international competitiveness;
3. a spillover effect, which can create opportunities 
in many other industries;
4. a better quality of life through enhanced  
education, healthcare, and so on; and
5. stronger and more competitive small and medium 
businesses.
US Federal Communications Commission (FCC) 
Chairman Julius Genachowski highlights the impact of 
these effects, as reported in a recent Reuters article:
No infrastructure matters more for job cre-
ation and economic growth in the 21st 
century than broadband internet. . . . While 
the new “hyperconnected world” means 
some 20th century jobs may never return, 
Genachowski said studies show that broad-
band-related industries create 2.6 jobs for 
[every] one lost. He pointed to Facebook, 
which employs 2,600 people but has led 
to the creation of another 182,000 jobs. 
. . . And while eBay and Amazon employ 
50,000 people, they provide a sales plat-
form for up to 1 million entrepreneurs.5
Most countries are increasingly working hard to help 
their citizens adopt technology to improve their nation’s 
competitiveness. We consider several of these national 
efforts here.
Content
256 kilobits  
per second (kb/s)
2 megabits  
per second (Mb/s)
10 megabits  
per second (Mb/s)
100 megabits  
per second (Mb/s)
Google home pages (160 kb) 5 seconds 1 second Instant Instant
Music track (5 MB) 2 minutes,  
36 seconds
20 seconds 4 seconds Instant
Video clip (20 MB) 10 minutes,  
25 seconds
1 minute,  
20 seconds
16 seconds 2 seconds
CD / low-quality movie (200 MB) 6 hours, 4 minutes,  
35 seconds
46 minutes,  
40 seconds
9 minutes,  
20 seconds
56 seconds
DVD / high-quality movie (4 GB) 34 hours, 43 minutes,  
20 seconds
4 hours, 26 minutes,  
40 seconds
53 minutes,  
20 seconds
5 minutes,  
20 seconds
Source: ITU calculations with rounded values.
Table 1: Broadband speed comparisons: Time needed to download content at different connection speeds
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  81 
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
In 2010, the Malaysian government spearheaded ac-
tivities aimed at reaching 50 percent of households with 
personal computers (PCs) and Internet access. They are 
utilizing Universal Service Funds to subsidize 1 million 
netbooks for students and connectable rural low-income 
families and to establish projects to improve broadband 
coverage across specific underserved areas of the coun-
try.6 The program at launch targeted a 1 percent rise in 
GDP and the creation of 135,000 jobs.
Perhaps the most prominent government-driven 
program for broadband Internet access is Australia’s 
National Broadband Network (NBN) project. Here the 
government has recognized the economic potential of 
high-speed Internet connectivity and is engaged in a 
project (costing 43 billion Australian dollars) to bring 100 
Mb/s fiber to every Australian home and business. The 
program emphasized the inclusion of the country’s more 
rural regions to ensure that all citizens have comparable 
access to the network. This forward-looking project rec-
ognizes the ever-increasing importance of connectivity to 
national competitiveness.
A recent article in telecoms.com highlighted re-
search released by Arthur D. Little, Chalmers University 
of Technology, and Ericsson that shows that doubling 
broadband speed can yield growth in excess of 0.3 per-
cent GDP and quadrupling broadband speed can yield 
0.6 percent growth in GDP. 7 They credit the positive ef-
fects of the increased speed to automated and simplified 
processes, increased productivity, and better access to 
basic services such as education and healthcare. The 
study also showed that for every 10 percent increase in 
broadband penetration, a country’s GDP increases by 1 
percent.
The anticipated traffic of a truly connected society 
will continue to require higher bandwidths. As noted in 
the Cisco© Visual Networking Index, “In 2010, 3 million 
tablets were connected to the mobile network, and each 
tablet generated 5 times more traffic than the average 
smart phone. In 2010, mobile data traffic per tablet was 
405 MB per month, compared to 79 MB per month 
per smart phone. There were 94 million laptops on the 
mobile network in 2010, and each laptop generated 22 
times more traffic than the average smart phone” and 
515 times the traffic of a regular “not so smart” phone.8
Table 1 provides some clarity on what different 
throughputs could mean in terms of the user experience 
(wait time).
It is important to determine what size is required for 
a data plan to be adequate for an individual to be able to 
participate in global and/or local business environments. 
The AT&T calculator helps calculate how much service is 
needed based on expected utilization (see Table 2).9
The example workloads in Table 2 indicate what 
might be possible at different download quantities. It is 
important to note that a satisfactory level of communi-
cation can be obtained from lower-volume data plans. 
Heavier use of richer media is, however, relegated to 
higher-volume plans.
Around the world, countries have been recognizing 
the need for high-speed Internet to be available to every 
Table 2:  Data usage comparisons
Type of traffic
ENTRY-LEVEL  
USER  
300 megabytes
STANDARD  
BUSINESS  
1 gigabyte
HEAVY BUSINESS  
AND LEARNING  
2 gigabites
PERSONAL  
MEDIA USER   
5 gigabytes
Basic email (20,000) 1,400 emails 2,500 emails 4,000 emails 2,000 emails
•	With attachment (300,000) •	 100 emails •	 200 emails •	 300 emails •	 500 emails
•	With photo (1 MB) •	 40 emails •	 100 emails •	 100 emails •	 300 emails
Web pages  
(300,000)
1,500 pages 2,000 pages 2,700 pages 5,500 pages
Social media with photos  
(500,000)
20 n/a 400 posts 10,000 posts
Streaming video  
(60 seconds = 3 MB)
n/a 1 hour 4 hours 10 hours
Application/game  
(download = 15 MB)
n/a n/a n/a 10 applications, 
20 games
Music download n/a n/a n/a 50 songs
Source: Example workloads are derived from AT&T workload data.
Notes: Data refer to the number of emails, web pages, and so on that a user “consumes” per month. n/a = nonapplicable.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
82  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
citizen, even in the most remote areas. They are deploy-
ing internal fiber networks, licensing spectrum, and using 
Universal Service Funds and other financial vehicles to 
support the efforts of providing affordable ubiquitous 
Internet access to their constituents. Like the progress 
experienced with the innovative use of voice and text 
services enabling supply lines with previously unobtain-
able knowledge, affordable broadband connections are 
fast becoming the business and economic enablers that 
make possible business and customer service opportu-
nities previously too difficult to coordinate.
AFFORDABILITY: MAKING THE EXPENSIVE 
AFFORDABLE TO THE NEXT WAVE OF USERS
Recent studies published by ITU reveal that broadband 
penetration is directly related to its cost, relative to an 
average family income, as well as to the availability of 
products and services that accommodate the general 
population’s purchasing ability.10 For example, as the 
annual cost of broadband drops below 3 percent of 
a family’s annual income, its use begins to increase 
dramatically. For developed countries, this relative cost 
has already been achieved, but for at least 34 countries 
worldwide, the cost of broadband remains higher than 
the average annual family income and thus it remains 
entirely out of reach.
Extending the penetration of broadband to reach 
the next billion users becomes more complex because 
the ability of people in developing countries to afford 
more advanced technology and communications lessens 
dramatically. Of the approximately 5 billion people world-
wide who remain without broadband access, the third 
billion represents those poised or preparing to achieve 
an income level capable of technology consumption. The 
challenge becomes one of establishing viable models 
that make this possible.
Affordable broadband programs are starting to 
emerge in countries such as Sri Lanka and India, with 
service providers offering connectivity solutions starting 
as low as US$2 per month. This level of affordability is 
making it possible for people to step up their learning, 
skills preparation, and service delivery levels by opening 
up their access to a larger quantity of Internet services 
and PC applications. Internet access services, coupled 
with computing devices that can range from entry-level 
netbooks to higher-performing laptops, are having a pos-
itive impact in these communities while providing choice. 
Many of the offerings are linked to financing options that 
further reduce the entry barriers to lower-income Internet 
entrants.
Those working hard to bridge the digital divide have 
tried to reduce these costs and barriers to entry for new 
users. Significant focus is put on the cost of specific 
Internet access devices, especially PCs, but looking into 
the total cost of ownership for a citizen of the rapidly de-
veloping economies—BRIC+TIM countries11—(Figure 1) 
shows that most of the family / individual income in-
vested in getting connected to the Internet is actually 
spent on connectivity.
Some governments have realized that incentivizing 
technology adoption is much more lucrative than over-
taxing the initial technology purchase. This realization 
has resulted in reducing the cost of devices through 
Broadband VAT 
13%
Broadband price 53%
PC VAT 4%
PC interest 4%
Entry PC price 26%
Figure 1: Average personal computer plus broadband solution costs, BRIC+TIM countries
Source: ITU, 2010a.
Note: Data projected for next four years (based on current day).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  83 
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
subsidies and reducing or removing some of the taxes 
such as import duties and value-added tax (VAT).
For instance, Turkey’s temporary VAT reductions 
have proven very effective in this regard.12 By examining 
its economic data,13 the Turkish government determined 
that a reduction on the VAT on PCs would have signifi-
cant benefit. TUBISAD, a local nongovernmental organi-
zation, pointed out an important reason for the govern-
ment to expand its consideration to the ICT industry: on 
average, in Turkey it takes US$61,000 to create a new 
job in a traditional sector such as the auto industry, com-
pared with just US$5,000 for a new job in the ICT sector. 
Turkey’s ICT economic model projected that:14
1. a 10 percentage point reduction on VAT would 
increase PC sales by 10.3 percent;
2. the tax reduction program has a net present value 
of US$279 million over a five-year period;
3. the VAT reduction would lead to an additional 
14,000 to 15,000 jobs in PC manufacturing and 
retailing industries over a five-year period, and
4. each dollar lost on VAT revenue returns US$1.31 
to the government in other taxes.
In the end, the Turkish government provided 
US$100 million in financial support to small and medium 
businesses for ICT purchases, in addition to reducing 
the VAT on PCs from 18 percent to 8 percent for three 
months. In the three months after the VAT was reduced, 
the benefits predicted by the ICT economic model were 
evident, and included:
1. increased nominal tax revenue for the govern-
ment;
2. increased demand for ICT-related purchases 
caused by a favorable public response to the VAT 
reductions; and
3. greater local PC production, which increased 4.3 
percent in April 2009.
Shortly after the initial three-month period expired, 
the policy’s success convinced the government to ex-
tend the VAT reduction an additional three months.
Turkey’s ICT economic model is now being used to 
evaluate other stimulus-program options such as provid-
ing cash rebates to first-time PC buyers and subsidizing 
the cost of broadband for PCs purchased by teachers.
IS AFFORDABLE BROADBAND INTERNET ACCESS A 
VIABLE BUSINESS?
Frequently, employing successful models for increasing 
broadband utilization requires identifying how to maintain 
telecommunications service provider solvency while add-
ing a large volume of new users.
As noted earlier, broadband becomes affordable to 
a substantially larger percentage of the population when 
it approaches 3 percent of annual family income. A large 
percentage of developing and emerging nations find 
themselves in between (Figure 2).
As seen in Figure 3 and Table 3, Brazil, Russia, 
India, China, Turkey, Indonesia, and Mexico (BRIC+TIM 
countries) could grow their available market by 860 mil-
lion people by reducing the cost of entry for broadband 
Figure 2: Three percent of family income: Entry point for broadband adoption
1st  and  
2nd billion
Broadband costs  
average $30/month
($18/month BRIC+TIM)
3rd billion
$2–9/month available for 
 broadband
Capped  & prepaid plans 
Paying less for less, 
Extending broadband affordability, 
Very low income: $0–2/month
Worldwide population
Source: Intel calculations based on Euromonitor statistical data and Intel field intelligence.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
84  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
by about 50 percent. Short of dropping prices, lower-
cost and lower-speed or prepaid data packages can 
allow broadband providers to find new avenues to 
new customers by reducing the barrier to broadband 
adoption.
From a business perspective, a high-level calculation 
can approximate the potential business opportunity for 
a whole industry in terms of revenue and GDP growth: 1 
billion new users × US$10/month x 12 months can repre-
sent up to US$120 billion revenue per year of opportunity 
over the course of the next several years.
Well-managed use of prepaid and capped offer-
ings is enabling people to benefit from Internet access 
at lower speeds and cost entry points. Creative ap-
proaches to obtaining large quantities of data—such 
as pre-loading content on devices, utilizing free public 
Internet access, and transporting data via USB storage 
and other portable memory devices—can facilitate using 
lower speeds and cost entry point plans with experi-
ences, learning content, and applications comparable to 
higher bandwidth options.
Telecommunications companies, governments, 
and vendors of technology are starting to understand 
the opportunities of reaching the third billion. Affordable 
data plans are beginning to emerge. Affordable con-
nectivity bundled with computers, software, and content 
are being offered by several service providers around 
the world. Government-sponsored programs to equip 
educators, students, and lower-income families are also 
becoming a priority for many countries.
To take the example of Kenya, family income levels 
mean that only about 7 percent of the population can af-
ford a service that offers uncapped monthly broadband 
access for US$20 per month. A prepaid broadband ac-
cess service capped at 200 MB of data for US$5, how-
ever, could be within the reach of more than 60 percent 
of the Kenyan population. Realizing these affordability 
levels, Safaricom, the largest Internet service provider 
in Kenya, launched a segmented prepaid broadband 
offer in the end of 2009 targeted at different income 
levels. With most new broadband users also needing 
to acquire a PC, the PC market grew in the country as 
Figure 3: Affordability levels
Table 3: Affordability levels
–2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
0%
2%
Broadband as a 
percent of GNI  
PPP per capita
Population  
that can afford 
(millions)
Percent of 
population
< 3 731,911 22.38
>3 – <6 860,138 26.30
> 6 – < 10 533,277 16.31
> 10 – < 40 1,145,132 35.01
3,270,458*
Source: Intel calculations based on Euromonitor statistical data and Intel field intel-
ligence. 
Note: BRIC+TIM countries have 50 percent of the world’s population; 80 percent of 
those in BRIC+TIM countries cannot afford broadband at the 3 percent GNI PPP 
income threshold.
B
ro
ad
b
an
d
 a
s 
p
er
ce
nt
 o
f 
in
co
m
e
732 million pop., 3% of income, US$18/month
Number of people who can afford broadband Number of people who cannot afford broadband
860 million pop., 3% of income, US$9/month
533 million pop.
1,145 million pop.
Source: Intel calculations based on Euromonitor statistical data and Intel field intelligence. 
Note: BRIC+TIM countries have 50 percent of the world’s population; 80 percent of those in BRIC+TIM countries cannot afford broadband at the 3 percent GNI PPP income 
threshold.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  85 
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
well: in 2010, the Kenyan PC market grew more than 100 
percent (compared with 2009) versus an average PC 
market growth in Africa of only 3 percent, according to 
International Data Corporation (IDC) period Q1’10–Q1’11.
In Egypt the telecommunications provider Mobinil is 
currently offering a netbook with six months of Internet 
access for US$300.15 The broadband service is capped 
at 110 MB per month, at which time the high-speed ser-
vice degrades. The service can be upgraded at various 
increments to a high-speed data package of 1.5 giga-
bytes (GB) for approximately US$8.50, so a large major-
ity of the population can thus afford to be connected.
In many cases, although affordable offerings be-
come available, those who could benefit most are not 
aware of this opportunity. The challenge becomes find-
ing new ways to reach the new customers with new 
value propositions.
AWARENESS: PROMOTING BROADBAND ACCESS
Making new customers aware of the value and availabil-
ity of broadband services can be difficult, and different 
approaches are being deployed by service providers to 
reach customers. Government programs as well as pri-
vate ones are helping telecommunications providers and 
other technology vendors reach beyond their traditional 
marketing and sales promotions.
Learning from modeling and other economic data, 
many countries—including Australia, Brazil, Portugal, 
and Turkey—have made strategic investments in the ICT 
industry. These investments are designed to create new 
jobs, increase revenue for the government, and provide 
more stable overall economies.
In 2007, the government in Portugal launched a 
national program called Magalhães (Magellan) to provide 
subsidized laptops with 3G connectivity to all secondary 
students and teachers in the country using funds from 
the auction of 3G licenses. In 2008 this initiative was ex-
tended to primary school students, and it reached more 
than 1.3 million students and teachers over a period of 
three years. The cost of broadband was as low as 5 
euros for 2 GB of data per month (with a 36-month con-
tract) and laptops including an external 3G USB modem, 
commonly known as 3G USB dongle, would cost a 
maximum of 150 euros.16 This program was widely mar-
keted and publicized both by the government and private 
partners, thus ensuring that the entire society was aware 
of the program, its benefits, and the conditions under 
which one is eligible. The outcome was clear: two years 
after the start of the program, most of the students and 
teachers in Portugal had acquired their own laptops.
Vietnam’s PC for Life program provides a good 
example of an extensive public-private partnership where 
a well-articulated communications campaign is reach-
ing a large proportion of the population.17 The govern-
ment teamed up with telecommunications companies, 
computer vendors, content providers (including those 
providing English-learning software), and bank financing 
options, combining these various functions into multiple 
waves of programs. The fixed broadband packages from 
VNPT, which is running the program, include free instal-
lation; special pricing for students and teachers starts at 
US$4.30/month instead of the standard US$10/month. 
The Vietnamese mobile operator Viettel is offering a 3G 
data plan starting at US$6/month for unlimited data as 
well as a free service capped at 500 MB for students 
aged 14 to 22. The bundles offer choices of entry-level 
and higher-end laptops and netbook devices as well as 
add-ons from a variety of companies. The program has 
a strong national marketing campaign complete with 
songs and icons. Consistent with participants in other 
programs that provide several options, those offered dif-
ferent choices by Vietnam’s PC for Life program typically 
stretch to try to buy the best capabilities they can afford.
Argentina’s Conectar Egualdad program has chosen 
a different approach and is actively promoting the na-
tion’s rollout of PCs in their schools.18 The nation is in the 
middle of a massive rollout of 3 million computers with 
the aim of providing a computer for all secondary school 
students and teachers. They have established a website 
and links through social networking sites that enable all 
citizens to watch and experience the rollout: http://www.
conectarigualdad.gob.ar/. The program has established 
technology as part of the country’s educational system, 
and includes courses, teacher training, learning con-
tent, and services as well as security. The computers 
can function both at school and outside the classroom. 
Broadband connectivity is provided in the schools.
Many other countries are starting to follow suit, 
identifying the results they want to achieve by including 
broadband in their ICT investment. The most success-
ful programs clearly define their objectives and broadly 
communicate their existence to civil society.
THE EXAMPLE OF SRI LANKA
To illustrate what such a program could look like, we 
look at Sri Lanka’s stated objectives, extracted directly 
from the Information and Communication Technology 
Plan for Sri Lanka 2011–2016:19
The following economic and social targets 
will mainly be focused at in the initial stage:
a. Drive ICT industry up to the level of 
US$1.0 billion industry by 2016 (US$2.0 
billion industry by 2020)
b. Create 100,000 new employment related 
to ICT industry and ICT enabled indus-
tries by 2016 (250,000 new employment 
by 2020)
c. Increase level of ICT literacy up to 75% 
by 2016
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
86  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
d. Facilitate the use of ICT by citizens for 
fulfilling the needs of everyday life
e. Promote ICT education and Human 
Resources Development and ensure 
quality and standard of ICT education 
and training
f. Ensure availability of high quality and 
standard ICT Hardware and use of qual-
ity and legitimate software
g. Increase availability and use of high 
speed Broadband and network connec-
tivity for economic and social activities
h. Strengthen the legal framework, provide 
secure environment for use of ICT and 
control computer crimes
Further, the Government has realized that 
the promotion of ICT usage in all business 
and industries would result in significant 
enhancement of the competitiveness of 
Sri Lanka over the other countries in the 
region. Presently, there are international-
ly accepted indexes set out by agencies 
functioning under the United Nations and 
other reputed global institutions to mea-
sure the relative advantages of a country 
over other courtiers of the world. Rising 
up in the ladder of indexes is one of the 
best approaches to attract more invest-
ments which would pave the way for more 
employment opportunities, better quality 
of life and finally rapid economic growth 
of the country. Therefore, it is expected to 
achieve minimum 20–30% growth related 
to the following globally accepted indexes 
during the next six years by injecting ICT into 
business, industry and the public sector.
a. eGovernment Readiness Index  
(Rank: 111 out of 192 countries in 2010)
b. Network Readiness Index  
(Rank: 72 out of 133 countries in  
2009-10)
c. Global Competiveness Index  
(Rank: 62 out of 139 countries in  
2010-11)
d. Ease of Doing Business Index  
(Rank: 102 out of 183 countries in  
2010-11)
The process of implementation of the plan will 
be fundamentally based on Government’s 
leadership, commitment of resources and 
smart partnerships. Furthermore, it is 
essential to have the collaboration of cit-
izens, Government and the private sec-
tor to achieve the objectives of this plan.
The Sri Lankan plan has its roots in several suc-
cessful years of proactive stimulus. Since 2009, the 
country has reduced its taxation of ICT products and 
services. As a consequence, broadband adoption has 
been growing at a rate of 100 percent year over year. 
In practical terms, the number of people capable of 
affording broadband went from approximately 3.5 mil-
lion to over 13 million in 18 months. The availability of 
prepaid offerings that cost approximately US$2 per 300 
MB was a principal method of making broadband more 
affordable.
Different countries have different priorities; some 
governments have decided to focus on specific seg-
ments of the population, such as teachers or students. 
All programs, however, employ one or more of the ac-
cess, affordability, and awareness catalysts mentioned 
previously to establish their momentum. We consider 
two additional examples to see how this comes together.
Through South Africa’s Teacher Laptop Initiative, a 
program managed by the country’s Education Labour 
Relations Council, “Qualifying teachers will receive a 
monthly allowance of 130 South African Rands (R130.00) 
(taxable) and are required to fund the difference between 
the allowance (R130.00) and the monthly repayments of 
the package. Most of the packages from the provision-
ally accredited suppliers cost between R250.00 and 
R390.00 per month. The repayments are spread over a 
period of five years. The packages consist of appropri-
ate hardware with prescribed minimum specifications, 
school administration, national curriculum and other 
software, as well as Internet connectivity, insurance, and 
finance. . . .”20
In Kenya, according to the country’s ICT Board, 
“The laptop initiative is funded by the World Bank and 
implemented by The Kenya ICT Board under the Kenya 
Transparency and Communications Infrastructure 
Project (TCIP), as part of a component to implement the 
Computers for the Communities Initiative. This laptop ini-
tiative is known as ‘Wezesha’; a Swahili word that means 
‘to enable’. . . . The incentive per registered student will 
be approximately fifteen (15%) and thirty three (33%) 
percent of the actual price of a laptop, depending on 
whether the student will prefer a lower-end or higher-end 
model.”21
CONCLUSION
We can enjoy and applaud the success of some of the 
programs noted above for reaching a significant percent-
age of their country’s population. However, many coun-
tries have yet to incorporate affordable broadband strat-
egies as part of their national growth plans, and many 
telecommunications companies have not yet realized the 
potential of establishing new program offerings that can 
significantly extend their business by reaching a much 
broader customer base.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  87 
1.6: Reaching the Third Billion
Exploring programs that actively address the issue 
of broadband adoption as an enabler of national prog-
ress, we find three principal mechanisms or channels 
that prove consistently useful:
1. telecommunications providers willing to package 
and market prepaid and subscription (post-paid) 
broadband offerings with limited speed or data 
packages at a lower cost;
2. an excited local ecosystem offering creative, 
affordable bundles and/or financing; and
3. government and regulatory incentives, sponsor-
ship, and alignment to national broadband and 
overall ICT objectives.
The third billion represents the next wave of the 
world’s population that is close to being able to afford 
Internet connectivity through a PC. Creative approaches 
to making technology and connectivity solutions afford-
able and accessible are starting to facilitate these peo-
ple’s capacity to contribute to and benefit from economic 
growth.
Fortunately, those tasked with improving the market 
penetration of broadband can benefit from the success 
of prepaid voice services. Utilizing the same, or similar, 
business models, government and private industry lead-
ers are starting to see the value, as well as the necessity, 
of finding ways to bring more and more of the population 
into the information age. Developing programs that re-
duce the cost of access through tax reductions, prepaid 
services, creative financing, and entry-level offerings that 
approach 3 percent of a family’s annual income can have 
a tremendous impact, more than doubling the population 
contributing to the economy by utilizing and innovating 
with ICT.
NOTES
1 ITU 2010a.
2 ITU 2010a.
3 Wireless Intelligence 2011.
4 IEG 2011.
5 Voskamp 2011.
6 Universal Service Funds, also called Universal Service Access 
Funds, are the funds that governments collect as a tax from 
telecommunications operators to whom they have allocated 
spectrum, with the goal of making supporting investments in 
infrastructure and access to voice and data in the parts of the 
country where commercial operators would not be able to justify a 
sustainable business model.
7 Middleton 2011.
8 Cisco 2011.
9 See http://www.att.com/standalone/data-calculator/.
10 ITU 2010a.
11 BRIC+TIM is the acronym that represents Brazil, Russia, India, 
China plus Turkey, Indonesia, Mexico.
12 Intel 2009a.
13 Today’s Zaman 2009.
 14 Intel 2009b.
 15 See the company’s promotional website at http://www.mobinil.
com/whatsnew/BuySamsungnetbookN150withMobinilUSBmodem.
aspx.
 16 Information about the Portuguese Magalhães program is available 
at www.e-escola.pt.
 17 Information about the Vietnamese PC for Life program is available 
at http://www.pcguide.vn/pc4life/.
 18 Information about Argentina’s Conectar Egualdad program is 
available at http://www.conectarigualdad.gob.ar/.
 19 Ministry of Telecommunication and Information Technology (Sri 
Lanka) 2011.
 20 Information about this program is available at http://www.teacher-
laptop.co.za/#.
 21 Kenya ICT Board 2010.
REFERENCES
Cisco. 2011. “Cisco©Visual Networking Index: Forecast and 
Methodology, 2010–2015.” June 1. White Paper, Cisco Public 
Information. Available at http://www.cisco.com/en/US/solutions/
collateral/ns341/ns525/ns537/ns705/ns827/white_paper_c11-
520862.html.
ELRC (Education Labour Relations Council). Teacher Laptop Initiative. 
Available at http://www.teacher-laptop.co.za/#.
IEG (Independent Evaluation Group). 2011. Capturing Technology for 
Development: An Evaluation of World Bank Group Activities in 
Information and Communication Technologies. Washington DC: 
Independent Evaluation Group, The World Bank Group.
Intel. 2009a. “The Economic Benefits of Strategic ICT Spending.” Intel 
Low Touch White Paper. Available at http://www.intel.com/Assets/
PDF/whitepaper/Economic_Benefits_of_ICT_Spending.pdf.
———. 2009b. “The Economic Benefits of Strategic ICT Spending.” 
White Paper. Intel.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2010a. Measuring the 
Information Society 2010, version 1.01. ITU-D. Geneva: ITU.
———. 2010b. World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2010. 
Available at http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/statistics/.
Kenya ICT Board. 2010. “About Wezesha (Phase1),” November 10. 
Available at http://www.ict.go.ke/index.php/digitalinclusion/
wezesha/about.
Middleton, J. 2011. “Broadband Boost Linked to Economic Growth.” 
www.telecoms.com, September 27. Available at http://www.
telecoms.com/33619/broadband-boost-linked-to-economic-
growth/.
Ministry of Telecommunication and Information Technology (Sri Lanka). 
2011. Information and Communication Technology Plan for Sri 
Lanka 2011–2016. Ministry of Telecommunication and Information 
Technology, January 1.
Today’s Zaman. 2009. “Tax Reductions Succeed in Boosting 
Revenues, Economy.” June 17. Today’s Zaman with Wires, 
Ankara. Available at www.todayszaman.com/tz-web/detaylar.
do?load=detay&link=178295.
Voskamp, P. 2011. “FCC’s Genachowski: Broadband Development 
Good for U.S. Job Growth.” September 27, TheWrap. 
Available at http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/09/27/
idUS101472730520110927.
Wireless Intelligence. 2011. “Radical New Pricing Strategies Required 
to Support Future Mobile Growth in Africa.” Atlanta: Wireless 
Intelligence. Available at http://www.wirelessintelligence.com/
analysis/2011/11/radical-new-pricing-strategies-required-to-
support-future-mobile-growth-in-africa/.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  89 
CHAPTER 1.7
Harnessing the Power 
of Big Data in Real Time 
through In-Memory 
Technology and Analytics
SAP AG
Companies today have more data on hand than they 
have ever had before. It is estimated that an average 
Fortune 500 company has between seven and ten years 
worth of customer data—data that are often underuti-
lized. In addition, the volume of these data has been 
growing tremendously. A recent study by the Economist 
estimated that humans created about 150 exabytes of 
information in the year 2005;1 in 2011, this is projected to 
be 1,200 exabytes. Similarly, the research firm IDC esti-
mates that digital content is doubling every 18 months.2 
Gartner projects that, in the future, as much as 80 per-
cent of enterprise data will be unstructured, spanning 
both traditional and non-traditional sources.3
THE EMERGENCE OF BIG DATA
The massive explosion in data is creating manageability 
issues for companies around the world, particularly in 
the context of mergers and acquisitions. For some spe-
cialized applications, such as telecommunications call 
data records, data can quadruple in 18 months. At the 
same time, tighter regulations involving the tracking of 
financial transactions and customer data have expanded 
the responsibility of businesses so that they must main-
tain these data and their accessibility for years on end. 
Meeting these data-volume challenges can be costly, 
as companies must purchase and maintain hardware to 
handle the load. Multiple data warehouses and transac-
tion systems add up to a high total cost of ownership 
and require constant oversight.
So what are companies to do with the huge amount 
of data, often called big data? As many a shrewd execu-
tive realizes, there could be a real business advantage 
to gaining some quick insight on this issue and moving 
ahead of competitors.
Until recent advances—such as in-memory technol-
ogy, which we will address later in this chapter—this was 
easier said than done. Physical limits of computing—the 
speed of accessing data from relational databases, pro-
cessing instructions, and so on—meant that a complex 
calculation or search of data could not be accomplished 
in real time. At best, such an operation would take a few 
hours; at worst, it would take a few days.
Around the world today, there is an overwhelming 
demand for tools that could help organizations access, 
analyze, govern, and share information. Big data are 
everywhere, and, as mentioned, they are mostly unstruc-
tured data outside the database. Gartner’s 2011 Hype 
Cycle predicts that big data are maturing quickly and 
rising to the peak of “inflated expectations.”4 Big data 
dictate a need for advanced information management 
and processing. Speed is a key requirement, but speed 
For more information about this chapter, please contact Saswato Das at 
Saswato.Das@SAP.com or +1 212 653 9571.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.7: Harnessing the Power of Big Data
90  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
alone is not useful without context. Companies not only 
want faster access to their data, they also want to under-
stand quickly what the information means and what they 
can do with it.
Ultimately, the goal for the technology providers 
of any business is to create a true, real-time enterprise 
where new insights in big data can be made available 
at the speed of thought to improve decision making, 
accelerate performance, and improve productivity and 
efficiency.
The challenges
Intimately linked to the growth of big data are such tech-
nology trends as the growth of mobile technology and 
wireless devices, the emergence of self-service chan-
nels, the wide adoption of cloud-based services, and the 
expansion of social networking and remote collaboration.
But even before big data assumed their present 
volume, there was business analytics: the analysis of 
business data to gain insight. This has been around for 
at least the last 15 years. Originally called “decision sup-
port,” its name evolved into “business intelligence” (BI). 
Over the years, technologies such as business report-
ing, self-service BI, BI dashboards, budgeting, planning, 
data integration, and others were consolidated into larger 
enterprise portfolios offered by software vendors such as 
SAP. In effect, business users got a taste of the insight 
they could get from data—but that worked only until the 
recent explosion of data volumes, preventing any real-
time analysis.
We now look a little more closely at the challenges 
of organizing big data and the demands of the market-
place. Corporate users—typically business analysts—
want to be able to run reports themselves instead of 
through their information technology (IT) departments. 
They also want to be able to customize their requests, 
and they want analytic solutions that are easy to use and 
accessible without the extensive involvement of IT, since 
users feel that a reliance on IT dramatically slows down 
their work day.
Users also want data visualization, since it seems 
now more than ever that organizations and consumers 
expect high-impact visualizations associated with data—
not only in the form of charts, graphs, and heat maps, 
but also in forms customizable to design preferences. 
Information design also goes beyond merely displaying 
the data in graphic form; it includes contextualizing the 
data with other sources and content to ensure they are 
relevant in a real-world context and to ensure also that 
they are updated in real time.
Data points and clear answers are valuable, but 
today’s analytics must go beyond data input and output 
and maintain relevance to the real world. This means 
transforming the data into actionable information by 
coupling them with appropriate additional data from 
social media analysis, geolocation, customer relationship 
management systems, and so on. “Contextual engage-
ment” employs feedback data from users and con-
sumers to prioritize the information that a specific user 
considers most important, cutting through extraneous in-
formation and permitting smarter decisions to be made. 
Providing proper context is becoming more feasible with 
access to new data sources, such as social media and 
location and time information, as well as sources that 
may not be proprietary but may still prove useful (e.g., 
cell phone information, publically available government 
data, event streams, images).
Users also want to analyze the information that is 
coming through social media. There is, of course, the 
analysis of unstructured text from blogs, Facebook, 
Twitter, and other websites—an activity presently domi-
nated by small start-up vendors rather than big players. 
There is also the application of social media–like func-
tionality and processes to team sharing in a business 
context (e.g., StreamWork, Chatter). For example, many 
influencers—industry and business analysts—describe 
“crowdcasting” capabilities that might help teams pri-
oritize analytic reports and data points by allowing indi-
vidual users to “like” them once they are shared across a 
team network.
The true potential of mobile applications is just be-
ginning to be realized—and the current extent of mobile 
analytics is less far-reaching than might be expected. 
When referring to analytics and mobility, influencers 
often are referring to the ability to develop analytics that 
draw on the behavior of device users in real time (e.g., 
for advertising and other targeted purposes), rather than 
mobile analytic applications. Although mobile analytic 
applications will become increasingly useful, especially to 
companies with large mobile workforces, the analysis of 
mobile device usage is now also highly valuable to orga-
nizations across multiple industries—especially those in 
healthcare. Several influencers have noted that the ideal 
mobile application would include data, information, and 
location.
The need for industry-specific analytic solutions 
has been discussed by both the media and analysts, 
with a focus on solutions in healthcare, energy, sustain-
ability, and the public sector. There has also been a 
push for analytics that can utilize sensor networks or 
data drawn from the monitoring of road networks, air 
traffic, railroads, and so on. It is estimated that, in the 
next five years, the volume of sensor data will surpass 
the volume of unstructured data collected from social 
media. Growth in these sectors is often linked to mobile 
analytics. In healthcare, mobility provides doctors and 
other health professionals with the ability to diagnose 
patients by using an iPad to see relevant information 
or to remotely monitor patients in real time. Big data 
testimonials are often associated with these industries, 
because big data often involve managing years of his-
torical data. Organizations in fields such as healthcare 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  91 
1.7: Harnessing the Power of Big Data
and government customarily collect and store massive 
amounts of information.
Although the analysis of unstructured data and 
natural language processing are not the same thing, 
IBM’s Watson—the computer that can compete on the 
game show Jeopardy!—has catapulted both into the 
mainstream media, resulting in the terms being used 
somewhat interchangeably.5 Although not always de-
scribed in these terms, an intense interest has emerged 
in the unstructured data associated with social media 
content, with a multitude of vendors racing to offer 
“comprehensive” solutions or suites to address the issue. 
Additionally, natural language processing was listed as 
a “Technology Trigger” on Gartner’s 2011 Hype Cycle,6 
with early adopters investigating its applications.
Another challenge: Building a real-time business
In addition to these issues, business itself is now being 
transacted at an incredible rate. Businesses increasingly 
need to react faster to the events that affect their opera-
tions. They must be able to identify trends and patterns 
to improve their planning and forecasting, to reduce their 
response time to customer requests and complaints, 
and to provide their sales forces with the information 
needed to close deals in a timely manner.
To achieve these goals, businesses must be able 
to assess transactional information as events occur, 
without waiting to extract those data from data ware-
houses. However, the volume of available operational 
data often exceeds the capacity of traditional disk-based 
systems and data warehouses to process within a useful 
timeframe. Companies today need to be able to answer 
questions on the fly based on real-time data.7
IN-MEMORY TECHNOLOGY AND BIG DATA
The use of in-memory technology marks an inflection 
point for enterprise applications, especially in dealing 
with big data (Figure 1). The availability and capacity per 
dollar of main memory have increased markedly in the 
last few years. This growth has led to a rethinking of the 
way mass data should be stored. Instead of using me-
chanical disk drives, it is now possible to store a primary 
database in silicon-based main memory, resulting in an 
orders-of-magnitude improvement in performance and 
enabling the development of completely new applica-
tions. This change in the way data are stored is hav-
ing—and will continue to have—a significant impact on 
TODAY
Discrete Integrated
TOMORROW
In-memory
Flash memory
HARDWARE SOFTWARE
Multi-core architecture
Massive parallel scaling
64-bit address space
Up to 2 TB main memory
100 GB/s data throughput
10 × compression 
Massively parallel 
     processing 
Virtually unlimited size
Fast prefetch
Volatile and/or persistent
Partitioning
No aggregate tables
Insert only on delta
Compression
Row and column store
Memory
Cache
Disk
+
+
+
+
+
Figure 1: The inflection point: In-memory computing
Source: Plattner and Zeier, 2011, pp. 102, 110, 139.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.7: Harnessing the Power of Big Data
92  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
enterprise applications and, ultimately, on the way busi-
nesses are run. Having real-time information available 
at the speed of thought provides decision makers with 
insights that have not previously been available.
In-memory technology represents a significant 
milestone for large-scale IT systems. It is the technology 
that will launch a new era of business management, one 
in which managers can base their decisions on real-time 
analyses of complex business data.
Some of the advantages that can be associated 
with this groundbreaking innovation are:
•	 tremendous improvements in data-processing 
speed and volume, linked to the improvements that 
make processing faster by a factor of 143, seen in 
individual central processing units since 1990;
•	 in-memory’s ability to handle increasing volumes of 
information—the consequence of improvements in 
speed of access on an order of 10,000 times (on-
disk technology is unable to handle such volumes); 
and
•	 technological advances that result in better price-
performance ratios, making real-time analysis cost 
feasible and ripe for mass adoption—the outcome of 
significant reductions in the cost of central process-
ing units and memory cost in recent years, com-
bined with multi-core and blade architectures.
In a traditional, disk-based system, information is 
pulled from operational systems; it is then structured in 
separate analytical data warehouse systems, which can 
respond to queries. This means that operational applica-
tions are disconnected from the analytical environment, 
resulting in significant lag time between the gathering of 
data and the process of generating insights into those 
data.
However, with the availability of in-memory technol-
ogy, operational data are held in a single comprehensive 
database that can handle all the day-to-day transactions 
and updates, as well as analytical requests, in real time. 
In-memory computing technology allows for the pro-
cessing of massive quantities of transactional data in the 
main memory of the server, thereby providing immediate 
results from the analysis of these transactions. Since in-
memory technology allows data to be accessed directly 
from memory, query results come back much more 
quickly than they would from a traditional disk-based 
warehouse. The time it takes to update the database is 
also significantly reduced, and the system can handle 
more queries at one time.
With this vast improvement in process speed, query 
quality, and business insight, in-memory database man-
agement systems promise performance that is 10 to 20 
times faster than traditional disk-based models.
The elements of in-memory computing are not new, 
but they have now been developed to a point where 
common adoption is possible. Recent improvements in 
hardware economics and innovations in software have 
now made it possible for massive amounts of data to  
be sifted, correlated, and updated in seconds with in-
memory technology. Technological advances in main 
memory, multi-core processing, and data manage-
ment have combined to deliver dramatic increases in 
performance.
HOW DO BUSINESSES BENEFIT?
In-memory technology promises impressive benefits 
in many areas. The most significant are cost savings, 
enhanced efficiency, and greater immediate visibility of a 
sort that can enable improved decision-making.
Cost savings
Business of all sizes and across all industries can benefit 
from the cost savings obtainable through in-memory 
technology. Database management currently accounts 
for more than 25 percent of most companies’ IT bud-
gets. Since in-memory databases use hardware systems 
that require far less power than traditional database 
management systems, they dramatically reduce hard-
ware and maintenance costs.
In-memory databases also reduce the burden on 
a company’s overall IT landscape, freeing up resources 
previously devoted to responding to requests for reports. 
And since in-memory solutions are based on proven, 
mature technology, the implementations are non-
disruptive, allowing companies to return to operations 
quickly and easily.
Increased simplicity and efficiency
Any company with operations that depend on frequent 
data updates will be able to run more efficiently with in-
memory technology. The conversion to in-memory tech-
nology allows an entire technological layer to be removed 
from a company’s IT architecture, reducing complexity 
and infrastructure that traditional systems require. This 
reduced complexity allows data to be retrieved nearly 
instantaneously, making all teams across the business 
more efficient.
In-memory computing allows any business user 
to easily carve out subsets of BI for convenient depart-
mental usage. Workgroups can operate autonomously 
without affecting the workload imposed on a central data 
warehouse. And, perhaps most importantly, business 
users no longer have to call for IT support to gain rel-
evant insight into business data.
These performance gains also allow business users 
on the road to retrieve more useful information via their 
mobile devices, an ability that is increasingly important 
as more businesses incorporate mobile technologies into 
their operations.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  93 
1.7: Harnessing the Power of Big Data
Improved visibility to facilitate better business 
decisions
In-memory technology makes it easier for organizations 
to compile a comprehensive overview of their business 
data, instead of being limited to subsets of data that 
have been compartmentalized in a data warehouse. 
With this improved visibility, businesses can shift from 
after-event analysis to real-time decision-making—and 
make their business models predictive rather than 
response-based.
When combined with easy-to-use analytic solu-
tions on the front end, anyone in the organization can 
build their own queries and dashboards with very little 
expertise.
IMPACT ON LINES OF BUSINESS
Businesses also benefit from in-memory technology 
because it allows for greater specificity of information, 
so that the data are tailored to both the customer and 
the business user’s individual needs. A particular depart-
ment or line of business may have a specific need that 
can be addressed. This affects account executives, sup-
ply chain management, and financial operations.
Customer account management
With in-memory technology, customer teams can com-
bine different sets of data quickly and easily to analyze 
a customer’s past and current business conditions, 
either in the office or from the road via mobile devices. 
Because business users can now interact with the data 
directly, they can experiment with them to create more 
insightful sales and marketing campaigns. Sales teams 
have instant access to the information they need, lead-
ing to an entirely new level of customer insight that can 
maximize revenue growth by enabling more powerful 
up-selling and cross-selling.
Supply chain management
With traditional disk-based systems, data are processed 
in nightly operations that can result in businesses being 
late to react to important supply alerts. With in-memory 
technology, businesses have full visibility into their supply 
and demand chains on a second-by-second basis. They 
gain insight in real time to changing business condi-
tions—for instance, in the form of an early warning to re-
stock a specific product—and can respond accordingly.
Finance
Financial controllers are hit particularly hard by increased 
data volumes. Because of slow data-response times, 
they can be forced to limit their analysis timeframes to 
several days, rather than more useful months or quar-
ters. This can lead to a variety of delays, particularly at 
the closing of financial periods. In-memory technology, 
large-volume data analysis, and a flexible modeling 
environment can result in faster-closing financial quarters 
and better visibility into detailed finance data across 
extended time periods.
IMPACT ACROSS INDUSTRIES
In-memory technology has the potential to help busi-
nesses across industries operate more efficiently, from 
consumer products and retailing to manufacturing and 
financial services.
Consumer products companies can use in-memory 
technology to manage their suppliers, track and trace 
products, manage promotions, provide support in com-
plying with US Environmental Protection Agency stan-
dards, and perform analyses on defective and under-
warranty products. Retail companies can manage store 
operations across multiple locations; conduct point-of-
sale analytics; perform multi-channel pricing analyses; 
and track damaged, spoiled, and returned products. 
Manufacturing organizations can use in-memory technol-
ogy to ensure operational performance management, 
conduct analytics on production and maintenance, and 
perform real-time asset utilization studies. Financial 
services companies can conduct hedge fund trading 
analyses such as managing client exposures to curren-
cies, equities, derivatives, and other instruments. Using 
information accessed from in-memory, they can conduct 
real-time systematic risk management and reporting 
based on market trading exposure.
CHANGING THE WAY BUSINESS WORKS: EXAMPLES 
OF IN-MEMORY TECHNOLOGY IN USE
In-memory technology is already being adopted to 
deliver impressive results. Examples of use that support 
this paradigm vary across industries and lines of busi-
ness. For example, a large global consumer products 
company can leverage in-memory computing to process 
and analyze large volumes of point-of-sale data during 
a countrywide trade promotion. The company can col-
lect data on every sale of every product in its portfolio. It 
knows the average sales history of a particular product 
for a particular store in any given week, and can make 
year-over-year comparisons. However, using conven-
tional computational methods—batch process–based 
analysis that makes calls to relational databases—it 
takes a minimum of 4 hours to get a particular result. 
The usual time is 6–12 hours. With in-memory technol-
ogy, the company can get analysis times that are, on 
average, 20 times faster. Furthermore, the retailer has 
reduced shelf turnaround time from five to two days (if 
a particular product is not doing well, it can be pulled). 
Moreover, it has eliminated any out-of-stock problems 
during the promotion—the bane of a retailer. The com-
pany can analyze social media feeds and sentiment in 
real time, as well as improve stock predictive analysis, 
product affinity insights, and the sales forecast.
In just one example, Yodobashi, a leading retailer 
in Japan, utilized an in-memory database to calculate 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.7: Harnessing the Power of Big Data
94  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
loyalty card points for 5 million members.8 This process 
used to take three days on a traditional database; it 
was performed once a month, as a batch process, to 
calculate and mail the reward points to customers. With 
in-memory, this calculation can be now done reliably in 
two seconds, turning a batch process into a real-time 
process, where loyalty points can be calculated as and 
when needed. For example, it can be computing on 
demand, when a customer enters the store, and the cus-
tomer can be provided real-time offers based on loyalty 
status and specific store inventory, thereby altering the 
business process fundamentally to be more customer 
oriented and innovative.
NongFu Spring is a leading provider of bottled water 
and other beverages in China.9 For NongFu Spring, the 
ability to have real-time visibility into data was critical 
for the company to grow and to improve efficiency and 
reduce costs. The ability to move bottled water from 
bottling plants to points of consumption is very important 
for cost savings; however, because of the large volume 
of data produced in its supply chain, it took more than a 
day for Nongfu Spring to work with its point-of-sale and 
channel sale data to display business insights and take 
action. Executives realized that they would gain signifi-
cant advantages from having a real-time view into the 
business, so they looked for in-memory computing to 
reduce data latency and improve data query and busi-
ness logic processing speed.
Patrick Hoo, Chief Information Officer at Nongfu 
Spring, said that the company was able to replace 
its data mart based on a relational database with in-
memory technology and “achieved three goals: fast data 
display, highly efficient business logic operations and 
real-time data synchronization.” He pointed out that the 
same script with in-memory technology was returning 
results 200 to 300 times faster than it was when run 
on a relational database, and “this query performance 
improvement was consistent across our 150 reports. We 
are seeing smooth operations, accurate data and fast 
performance in our production environment.”10
For Nongfu Spring, freight calculation procedures 
and functions that previously took 24 hours to execute 
were completed in as little as 37 seconds using in-
memory, which enabled the company to reduce its ac-
count reconciliation process by one day. Additionally, the 
in-memory platform enabled NongFu Spring to bypass 
the traditional IT maintenance and data latency issues 
by synchronizing data from heterogeneous data sources 
into the in-memory platform instantly.
Another use of in-memory technology is that of 
Centrica, a large utility company in United Kingdom.11 
Energy markets are deregulated in the United Kingdom, 
and it is important for utilities to differentiate themselves 
by offering superior services to their business and resi-
dential customers. Centrica is rolling out smart meter 
technology across the United Kingdom. It is collecting 
information every 15 minutes from each smart meter, 
and has fine-grained information on consumption pat-
terns across homes and businesses. This information 
can be utilized to better segment customers and offer 
customized pricing plans and energy conservation ser-
vices to better appeal to different needs. It used to take 
Centrica three days to do pricing simulations on vast 
amounts of energy data; these simulations can now be 
done in seconds. The company also finds that it can 
perform an instant analysis of huge volumes of data 
generated by smart meters at any level of granularity. 
This capability allows the utility to do energy efficiency 
benchmarking that compares customers with their peer 
groups and both share that information with customers 
as well as deliver targeted energy management services. 
In-memory technology has improved the design of elec-
tricity rates and improved load forecast accuracy. It has 
also decreased customer churn rates.
Wireless provider T-Mobile turned to in-memory 
when the company set out to implement an aggres-
sive marketing initiative.12 The goal was to deliver highly 
targeted offers to more than 21 million customers via 
channels such as retail stores, customer care centers, 
and eventually text messages. Such a campaign would 
require rapid analytical capability so that offers could be 
fine-tuned on the fly for improved customer adoption, 
profitability, and retention.
“We recognized that being able to respond to the 
needs of our customers in real time would give us an 
incredible competitive advantage and improve the qual-
ity of the customer experience,” said Jeff Wiggin, vice 
president, Enterprise Information Technology, T-Mobile 
USA, Inc. “In order to deliver that kind of experience, 
we needed an underlying platform behind our sales 
and marketing efforts, allowing us to uncover customer 
insights and then act on those insights in minutes, not 
weeks.”13
In-memory technology delivered just that and, in 
three months, T-Mobile shifted 2 billion customer records 
to an automated system. This allowed the company to 
run the necessary reports with an average response 
time of just five seconds. Additionally, the wireless pro-
vider is now able to scan 24 months worth of customer 
records, up dramatically from the three months previ-
ously available, thus providing a much larger sample and 
a more accurate picture of how customers respond to 
incentives.
CONCLUSION
Continuing advances in technology—from touch-based 
smartphones and tablets to search engines and social 
networks—have changed people’s perceptions of tech-
nology and how it can be harnessed. These expecta-
tions apply not just to the consumer world, but to the 
workplace as well. The increasing demand for an “instant 
results” experience is driving many trends today. And 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  95 
1.7: Harnessing the Power of Big Data
with massive amounts of new data coming online every 
moment, people expect a way to search and sift through 
it all meaningfully.
In-memory technology offers the best available 
alternative to slow, costly disk-based data management 
systems. For those who move first to in-memory technol-
ogy, the resulting boost in business insight, increased 
efficiency, and reduced IT costs will provide a true com-
petitive advantage.
According to one estimate, approximately 30 per-
cent of enterprises will have one or more critical applica-
tions running on an in-memory database in the next five 
years; by 2014, 30 percent of analytic applications will 
use in-memory functions to add scale and computational 
speed.
Almost three decades ago, Jim Gray defined the 
“five-minute rule,” which demonstrated that any data that 
was touched with a frequency of five minutes or less 
could more cost-effectively be stored in active memory 
rather than on disk.14 That was when main memory cost 
over $5,000 dollars per gigabyte. Today it costs less 
than one penny. Boards that effectively contain more 
than 1,000 cores are on the horizon; they should be 
operational within the next 24 months. Taken together, 
these two trends—declining memory costs and the 
ascendency of massively multi-core processor architec-
tures—are as transformative to enterprise software as 
the move to a client-server model was a generation ago. 
As was done in the client-server revolution of the early 
1990s, software needs to be fundamentally redesigned 
to exploit these hardware innovations. In-memory tech-
nology does that.
One of the main benefits of in-memory is speed. 
In addition to the benefits of speed, in-memory offers 
significant performance improvements regarding the 
“reach” of the information that is stored in back-end sys-
tems. Reach can essentially be defined as the number of 
people who can access and use these data, multiplied 
by the scope of usage scenarios that are available to 
them. Another important benefit derived from the raw 
performance of in-memory computing is responsiveness.
Additional value is derived by enabling IT organiza-
tions to rethink how they deliver services and capabili-
ties to their internal stakeholders. The enterprise data 
warehouse (EDW) is an almost universal component of 
most enterprise BI deployments. As part of the EDW ap-
proach, data are copied, transformed, aggregated, and 
tuned across a supply chain that starts with transactional 
applications such as enterprise resource planning and 
ends with business information query and analysis tools.
One of the core functions performed by this supply 
chain is performance optimization. For queries to run 
fast, the underlying data model needs to be designed, 
optimized, and maintained for query performance. As 
a result, when a line of business needs to change the 
scope or types of data to be analyzed, they have to 
appeal to IT. At a large, data-intensive company, this 
process can take weeks. With in-memory computing, 
performance tweaks and complex views are no longer 
required to deliver high-performance solutions to busi-
ness problems. Users can now access and work with 
data without IT assistance. The result of enabling the 
business lines is a great reduction in time between 
identifying and solving a problem. At the same time, IT 
no longer has to spend valuable time staffing the EDW 
supply chain and can focus on more strategic tasks.
In-memory computing allows a company to run ex-
isting scenarios much more quickly and cost effectively 
than traditional, on-disk technology. Even more compel-
ling is the fact that in-memory can enable completely 
new activities and processes. Delivering on this vision 
requires new applications that are built from the ground 
up around an in-memory, real-time design center.
In the coming years, we will see more and more 
such applications in all fields as organizations learn to sift 
through big data in real time. The world has just begun 
to learn how to cope with big data, and in future we will 
see how organizations tap big data and use it to their 
advantage.
NOTES
 1 The Economist 2010, 2011.
 2 IDC 2011.
 3 Gartner 2011.
 4 Gartner 2011.
 5 See IBM Watson, available at http://www-03.ibm.com/innovation/
us/watson/index.html.
 6 Gartner 2011.
 7 Sviokla; Manyika et al. 2011.
 8 Yodobashi, internal communication.
 9 SAP AG 2011a.
 10 SAP AG 2011a.
 11 SAP N.D.
 12 SAP HANA N.D.
 13 SAP AG 2011b.
 14 Gray and Putzolu 1987.
REFERENCES
The Economist. 2011. “Building with Big Data.” The Economist: 
Schumpeter, May 26. Available at http://www.economist.com/
node/18741392/print.
———. 2010. “The Data Deluge.” The Economist, February 25. Available 
at http://www.economist.com/node/15579717.
Gantz, J. and D. Reinsel. 2001. “Extracting Value from Chaos.” IDC 
iView. June. Framingham, MA: IDC Go-to-Market Services. 
Available at http://www.emc.com/collateral/analyst-reports/idc-
extracting-value-from-chaos-ar.pdf.
Gartner. 2011. Hype Cycles 2011: Special Report. Available at http://
www.gartner.com/technology/research/hype-cycles/.
Gray, J. and G. R. Putzolu. 1987. “The 5-Minute Rule for Trading 
Memory for Disk Accesses and the 10-Byte Rule for Trading 
Memory for CPU Time.” SIGMOD Record 16 (3): 395–98.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.7: Harnessing the Power of Big Data
96  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
IDC. 2011. The 2011 Digital Universe Study: Extracting Value from 
Chaos. June. iView. Multimedia content available at www.emc.
com/digital_universe.
Manyika, J., M. Chui, B. Brown, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, C, Roxburgh, and 
A. Hung Byers. 2011. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, 
Competition and Productivity. McKinsey Global Insitute. Available 
at http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/Productivity_
Competitiveness_and_Growth/Growth_and_renewal_in_the_US.
Plattner, H. and A. Zeier. 2011. In-Memory Data Management: An 
Inflection Point for Enterprise Applications. Heidelberg, Dordrecht, 
London, New York: Springer.
SAP. N.D. “Centrica Line of Business Smart Metering Video (Hana).” 
Available at http://www.sap.com/demos/richmedia/media/
centrica-line-of-business-hana-smart-meter-video.epx.
SAP AG. 2011a. “China’s Largest Bottled Water Producer Joins 
Growing Number of SAP Customers Achieving Dramatic Results 
on SAP HANA™ Platform: Nongfu Spring Deploys SAP HANA™ 
to Optimize Business With Real-Time Big Data Processing.” 
September 13. Available at http://www.sap.com/corporate-en/
press.epx?PressID=17486.
———. 2011b.”Sap Hana™ Opens Up to Wider Industry and Partner 
Adoption: Growing Customer and Partner Successes Illustrate 
the Openness and Impact of SAP HANA™ Across Enterprise 
Software.” December 13. Available at http://www.sap.com/
corporate-en/press.epx?PressID=18063.
SAP HANA. N.D. “T-Mobile: Empowering Marketing with Deep 
Customer Insight.” SAP Customer Segmentation Accelerator: 
Customer Testimonials. Available at http://www.sap.com/hana/
customer-segmentation-accelerator/reviews.epx.
Sviokla, J. 2009. “Swimming in Data? Three Benefits of Visualization.” 
HBR Blog Network, Harvard Business Review, December 4. 
Available at http://blogs.hbr.org/sviokla/2009/12/swimming_in_
data_three_benefit.html.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  97 
CHAPTER 1.8
The Wisdom of the Cloud: 
Hyperconnectivity, Big 
Data, and Real-Time 
Analytics
MIKAEL HAGSTRÖM
NEENA GILL
SAS
In a hyperconnected world, transactions and commu-
nication do not happen in a vacuum. Every message, 
every purchase, every sensor reading, web click, lab 
test, highway toll, quick response (QR) code scan, mo-
bile-phone location, credit card transaction, and inven-
tory movement is captured and stored at a granular level 
in databases throughout the world. And, increasingly, 
savvy leaders are recognizing that these data are interre-
lated and interconnected through previously undetected 
relationships and patterns. The data may be collected 
and stored in silos, so analyzing them in discrete ways 
can be a challenge. A holistic, integrated approach that 
mirrors how organizations think, operate, and respond 
is the most appropriate way to tap that resource. One 
cell carrier’s call-completion rate feeds not only revenue 
analysis but also quality metrics and regulatory reports. 
It also drives marketing retention and churn-prevention 
campaigns. In fact, 15 of the top 17 industry sectors in 
the United States have more data stored per company 
than the US Library of Congress (which has collected 
235 terabytes of data).1
COLLECTIVE KNOWLEDGE: THE WISDOM OF THE 
CLOUD
What many have failed to recognize is that the rapid 
accumulation of massive data volumes—by itself—is a 
fairly uninteresting proposition. Adding to the data is not 
so important; it is what you take away from the data that 
matters.
All the data are there, and they are useful if we can 
assemble them in the right ways to increase our collec-
tive knowledge. But without analytics, we will not be able 
to close the gap between what the data know (collective 
knowledge) and what we know. Organizations therefore 
must develop and deploy new technologies that integrate 
the data and provide smarter tools for analysis, visual-
ization, and distribution of these massive data volumes. 
With the convergence of hyperconnectivity, “big data,” 
and next-generation analytics, we can turn the “wisdom 
of the crowd” into a transformational “wisdom of the 
cloud.”
Many claim that data usage merely amounts to an 
infringement of privacy. Although some skepticism and 
concern is entirely appropriate, we cannot escape the 
fact that big data offer meaningful social and economic 
benefits that mitigate these legitimate concerns because 
of the hugely favorable social and/or economic impact 
they impart—on private commerce, international econo-
mies, and economic development. Certainly data secu-
rity issues are important, but if big data are to become 
the currency of the future, we need governance, trans-
parency, and security, as opposed to reactionary plans 
to lock up the data and throw away the key. As with any 
currency, suppression is not a sustainable way forward.2
With proper tools and processes, companies and 
governments can unlock important benefits from these 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.8: The Wisdom of the Cloud
98  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
massive data stores. The result is more productivity and 
greater competitiveness that create substantial economic 
and social value for companies, governments, and con-
sumers (see Box 1). Ultimately, the promise of big data 
will be realized only with more open data that allow more 
people to analyze and find value in them. For example, 
opening government or public-sector data up to others 
to sift through should engage more eyes and ideas to 
spot potential value.
As we will see, this new trend in analyzing large, 
hyperconnected data sources ultimately allows us to 
close the gap between how much knowledge is available 
and how much a single person or organization is able to 
comprehend alone and without assistance.
SOCIAL MEDIA: THE NEW BIG-DATA SOURCE
Interestingly, social media is the big-data trend that did 
not start in the enterprise. It has been driven by hyper-
connected individual users—hundreds of millions of 
them from almost everywhere in the world. Whether the 
individual medium is Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, YouTube, 
blogs, wikis, or other media, people—and, increasingly, 
sophisticated companies—are engaging in literally bil-
lions of conversations and interactions. Twitter recently 
crossed the threshold of 50 million tweets in a year; 
Facebook has more than 500 million users worldwide, a 
number that many expect to double within the next year. 
The average amount of time consumers spent on social 
networking sites increased 82 percent last year.3
Social media offer an unprecedented plethora of 
opportunities for corporations and government agen-
cies to engage—immediately, in real time—with millions 
of people around the world, around the clock. They are 
sending out messages, experimenting with offers, and 
strengthening their brands. But, perhaps far more im-
portant, effective social media are about listening, un-
derstanding, and responding. Consumers can now talk 
to each other, criticize or recommend products, share 
feedback with their chosen providers, and generally 
shape the nature and scope of their preferred brands.
But unlike standard, structured data—with its neat 
rows and columns and tables, fixed fields, and predict-
able, validated formats—social media present their data 
in loosely structured formats, making it far more chal-
lenging for public- and private-sector organizations to 
tap into the undeniably large value it holds. Ad hoc inter-
actions and responses are a dead end. Instead, compa-
nies need systematized ways to capture, analyze, and 
respond to the mountains of social media data sources 
that are rightfully taking their place alongside traditional 
structured data.
Of course, the real value comes when these new, 
unstructured data sources can be combined with tradi-
tional data to help make decisions that will benefit the 
organization, its stakeholders, and the broader global 
economy (see Box 2).
LEVERAGING UNSTRUCTURED DATA FOR 
EXPONENTIAL BENEFIT IN KEY SECTORS
Who will benefit from the collective knowledge in this 
new hyperconnected world? Virtually every sector of the 
global economy will see changes and improvements, but 
we anticipate some of the largest benefits to be gained 
within healthcare, the public sector, and consumer-facing 
businesses.
Re-engineering healthcare
Our hyperconnected world—driven by a broader set of 
data sources, including text-based safety data and clini-
cal progress notes—has rewritten the rules for patient-
centric healthcare from diagnosis through treatment to 
payment. These new systems create cost efficiencies, 
but they also empower the patient to take control of 
life-threatening diseases through accessibility to support 
networks and better understanding the nature of their 
ailments. The technology components enabling such  
a system are the remote sensors, videos, doctors’  
virtual access to patient medical records, high-quality 
diagnostic images, and other connectivity services such 
as social media. It is no exaggeration to assert that there 
has been a massive data explosion in the medical field 
that has significant implications for patients, providers, 
and payers.
Consider, for instance, the “fog of war” that can 
overtake epidemiologists when confronting a fast-
moving, lethal virus that can have a profound public 
health impact before it is recognized, understood, and 
responded to. While Hollywood thrillers might over-
dramatize the scenarios, it is safe to say that the threat is 
best described as a massive and diverse data challenge. 
Bio-surveillance involves data that reach well beyond 
government health departments.
Using SAS Analytics technology and consulting with 
experts, the National Collaborative for Bio-Preparedness 
Box 1: Data: How valuable are they?
How much value is hidden in the world’s existing data 
sources? Consider these facts:
•	 US$300 billion is their potential annual value to US 
healthcare.
•	 €250 billion is their potential annual value to Europe’s 
public-sector administration.
•	 US$600 billion is their potential annual consumer sur-
plus from using personal location data globally.
•	 60 percent is their potential increase in retailers’ oper-
ating margins possible with big data.
Source
Taken from Manyika et al., 2011.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  99 
1.8: The Wisdom of the Cloud
(NCB-P) in the United States has demonstrated the 
ability to perform such analyses. By combining actual 
data from an outbreak with data from sources such as 
poison control, agricultural livestock and crops, food 
supply chain, weather and climate, veterinary databases, 
and others, they can increase situational awareness and 
detect a syndrome, no matter where in the biosphere it 
first appears.
Bio-surveillance means capturing and text-mining 
the first responder’s notes and 911 telephone transcripts 
to zero in on spikes in chatter about certain symptoms. 
It means overlaying data with maps to visualize disease 
outbreaks. For instance, a rise in influenza-like symptoms 
in emergency medical technician notes and 911 calls 
in a cluster of ZIP codes can indicate the onset of a flu 
epidemic.
Hyperconnectivity is revolutionizing health systems 
all over the world by improving the collective knowl-
edge about the patient and the disease. There is a vast 
amount of structured and unstructured data and images 
being stored in hyperconnected healthcare systems. 
Analytics is the key to drawing insights and actionable 
intelligence from these data.
Total health expenditures in the United States has 
reached US$2.5 trillion, which translates to US$8,086 
per person, or 17.6 percent of the nation’s GDP.4 If US 
healthcare could use big data creatively and effectively to 
drive efficiency and quality, McKinsey pegs the potential 
value to be more than US$300 billion every year, two-
thirds of which would be in the form of reducing national 
healthcare expenditures by about 8 percent.5
One of the keys to that efficiency is simply obtaining 
knowledge about what other clinicians and researchers 
are doing. Today a far greater level of coordination is 
needed to share results, prevent overlapping research, 
and build on synergistic opportunities.
Successful examples abound. A research hospital in 
Canada is automating the gathering, management, and 
updating of critical research data and applying analyt-
ics to speed childhood cancer research. In Denmark, 
healthcare providers are using predictive health systems 
with advanced telemetry to monitor elderly patients in 
their homes and share data instantly. And in the United 
States, a new initiative enables individuals and families to 
store and track their health information and stream data 
from medical devices.
For the Stockholm County Council (SCC), Sweden’s 
second-largest health system, patient safety is a top 
priority. The SCC has implemented a text-mining sys-
tem that lets medical staff automate a systemic medical 
review that sifts through both structured and unstruc-
tured data to review charts, search for specific triggers, 
or locate indicators of adverse events. Since its inception 
in January 2010, the program has spread across the 
country. Today regulators are planning to award bonuses 
based on patient safety quantified by these reviews. If 
the results at the SCC are duplicated countrywide, the 
system could slash annual healthcare injury costs in 
Sweden by SEK 2 billion and reduce deaths caused by 
injuries by up to 50 percent.6
The Public Health Agency of Canada is another 
interesting example of hyperconnectivity. Its Global 
Public Health Intelligence Network is an Internet-based 
early warning system that gathers preliminary reports 
of public health significance in nine languages, around 
the clock. It relies on news aggregators to scour 20,000 
media sources—from wires to websites to blogs. Every 
15 minutes, its software pulls articles and assigns them a 
relevancy score based on keywords and syntax. Expert 
analysts further parse the material, which ranges from in-
fectious diseases to natural disasters and product safety.
Is privacy a concern? It certainly has to be front 
and center with respect to virtually any effort connected 
to healthcare data. However, some experts are gradu-
ally adopting a somewhat contrarian view on this topic, 
believing that our society must move past the fear of 
data and privacy breaches. Many technological innova-
tions that have revolutionized medicine might not have 
been possible without sharing data. Any data—electronic 
or paper-based—are vulnerable. But here, too, hyper-
connectivity will enable new tools to fight crime, fraud, 
and abuse.7 Yet those who are suffering from dreadful 
diseases are the least concerned about their data being 
combined in aggregate with other data sources to find 
health-related answers. They are much more interested 
Box 2: 10 ways organizations can benefit from 
social media data
The natural question arises: are social media data—with 
their soft measurements and difficult-to-quantify charac-
teristics—somehow inherently less valuable than traditional 
data? On the contrary, they comprise a trove of unscripted, 
often unfiltered information on all aspects of an organiza-
tion’s operations. They constitute feedback that can be 
highly influential in a market, making it imperative for the 
organization to understand and respond to them. Social 
media can help an organization in multiple ways. For start-
ers, it can help:
•	 protect a brand,
•	 engage the most influential voices in a market,
•	 understand what trends lead to sales,
•	 identify an untapped market,
•	 enhance market research,
•	 understand the impact of industry changes,
•	 gather competitive intelligence,
•	 improve warranty analysis,
•	 create a better customer experience, and
•	 manage a crisis.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.8: The Wisdom of the Cloud
100  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
in finding cures than in protecting the privacy of their 
data. But one does not need to be sacrificed for the 
other (see Box 3).
Pharmaceutical makers are also interested in find-
ing cures, and leaders in this industry have realized the 
power of social media in a hyperconnected world. Many 
prominent pharmaceutical companies use social net-
working for branding, marketing, and advertising. They 
have also started to communicate directly with the public 
to engage in conversations on wellness, address unmet 
medical needs, and explain prospective new medicines 
and treatments.
Pfizer, for example, has strong presences on 
Facebook, YouTube, and LinkedIn to bring together 
patients and clinical researchers studying a particular 
condition, creating reciprocal relationships where tailored 
information is used to establish deeper bonds. Patients 
find others who share the same condition and can share 
tips and techniques and support to improve their clinical 
outcomes.
The same is true for Eli Lilly and several other phar-
maceutical companies. Online user-group comments 
can become a sort of parallel trial that can bring to the 
surface more rapidly various side effects, treatment 
responses, and other “soft” results that can nonetheless 
heavily influence a clinical trial. Using hyperconnectivity 
to enable preventive care holds great promise as well, 
and is a use that will result in a marked improvement in 
the quality of life.
As indicated by the NCB-P example mentioned 
earlier, governments too can benefit from hypercon-
nected systems to increase awareness about healthcare 
initiatives and seek feedback from their citizens. They 
can also use the health/disease data streaming from the 
remote corners to run disease and drug surveillance pro-
grams. For instance, India uses weekly healthcare data 
from more than 600 districts to run an integrated disease 
surveillance program that acts as an early warning sys-
tem to prevent and control disease outbreaks.
During the H1N1 outbreak in 2010, the Internet famously 
played a starring role by illustrating how the epidemic 
was spreading. Today, a group including researchers 
from City University London, the European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC), and Britain’s 
National Health Service are teaming up ahead of the 
2012 London Olympics to develop ways to detect and 
respond to epidemics via Twitter.8
Transforming the public sector
Seeking citizen input and collaboration to solve prob-
lems is not new to government. But today the scale and 
reach of social media are transforming those processes. 
Good governance demands greater transparency and 
improved collaboration and participation. Successful 
government policy and operations depend on public per-
ception and sentiments. At a time when public finances 
are under tremendous strain, hyperconnectivity, big data, 
and analytics are well positioned to drive innovation and 
improve the value returned to taxpayers.
According to Charles Leadbetter of Demos, a 
British think tank, social media make it easier than ever 
for people to voice their views, connect to others, learn 
to see the world from new vantage points, and gather 
information on their own terms, creating what he calls 
“a civic long tail”: a mass of loosely connected, small-
scale conversations, campaigns, and interest groups that 
occasionally coalesces into a mass movement. As more 
conversations between citizens and government move 
online, masses of data on citizens’ views and prefer-
ences will be created. The civic long tail creates big data 
to make government more intelligent and responsive.9 
The impact of social media on public-sector governance 
can take numerous forms.
Thanks to hyperconnectivity, the Hong Kong gov-
ernment, for example, connects with citizens in real time, 
addresses complaints, and responds to public inquiries. 
The Hong Kong Efficiency Unit, the government’s inter-
face for public inquiries, gathers insights about the social 
messages hidden in the data, so that various depart-
ments can respond before they become serious issues. 
This also helps the government determine priority areas 
for citizens. The Efficiency Unit uses robust, powerful 
text processing and mining solutions to uncover trends, 
patterns, and relationships inherent in the complaints.10
The general elections in Singapore in May of 2011 
saw social media play a major role. Analysts counted 
more than 40,000 topical blog posts, tweets, and 
Facebook updates during the month before the election 
because some candidates used social media to reach 
the masses, making a compelling business case for gov-
ernments to integrate social media in their campaigns. 
Social media analytics can help governments and can-
didates understand the likes, dislikes, and positions of 
citizens regarding housing, healthcare, the environment, 
and other major issues.
The US Geological Survey’s Twitter Earthquake 
Detector gathers real-time Twitter updates during seismic 
activities—faster than scientific equipment can be tapped 
Box 3: Five ways to balance customer intimacy 
and data privacy
1. Create symmetry of information between customers 
and institutions.
2. Treat the customer as a whole person.
3. Incentivize employees on positive customer interac-
tions.
4. Understand the trade-off between data and judgment.
5. Use caution when using customer data.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  101 
1.8: The Wisdom of the Cloud
for more precise measurements and alerts. These data 
report on earthquakes at an anecdotal level—not to 
replace but to complement scientific analysis.11
Government also has a duty to be the best possible 
steward of taxpayer monies by rooting out fraud, waste, 
and abuse in various government programs. In one 
program, the Washington State Department of Labor 
& Industries has deployed a comprehensive system to 
review the thousands of unemployment and disability 
claims it processes each month. The system displays 
graphical reports that compare data over various time 
periods. It even scours social media sites and platforms 
to detect fraud. For instance, one disability claimant was 
nabbed after he posted a video on YouTube showing 
himself atop Mt. Rainier.12
Likewise, a federal tax-collection agency uses a 
fraud-detection system to detect, resolve, and prevent 
criminal and civil non-compliance and reduce issuances 
of fraudulent tax refunds. A scoring database examines 
structured and unstructured data using a hybrid scoring 
model that combines standard rules, predictive analytics, 
anomaly detection, and social-network analysis to sup-
ply answers within a 24-hour processing window. During 
peak periods, the system can examine as many as 15 
million personal and business returns in a single day. 
The result is a reduction in fraudulent refunds, the ability 
to discover new fraud patterns, and an increase in tax 
collections.
In another example, text mining of unstructured data 
is used to increase value-added tax collections in the 
Philippines by collecting short message service (SMS) 
texts from the public, promoted by a state lottery.
CREATING INTELLIGENT INTERSECTIONS BETWEEN 
BUSINESSES AND CONSUMERS
We turn now from healthcare and public-sector pro-
grams to consider how the private sector too can utilize 
the hyperconnected world to benefit corporations and 
customers alike. By combining and analyzing multiple 
data sources—including social, text-based, and point-
of-sale data—companies in every sector are seeking 
to understand the needs of customers and meet those 
needs in real time. This section provides examples of 
ways real-time analytics from the retail, telecommunica-
tions, and banking sectors are yielding transformational 
insights.
Massive data volumes comprise both threat and 
opportunity for marketers and retailers, depending 
on whether the organization can draw timely benefits 
from its growing mountain of big data. There are more 
sources, more attributes, more unstructured data—and 
more questions—than ever before. Fortunately, hardware 
processing power has largely kept pace with this growth, 
meaning that marketers have access to new generations 
of sophisticated tools to answers to questions before 
those questions themselves are obsolete.
Today, a business analyst, corporate controller, or 
divisional vice president cannot wait for weeks or even 
days to process terabytes of data to answer key ques-
tions. They need answers in minutes—or no more than a 
couple of hours—not next month. For instance, Catalina 
Marketing, the company that provides targeted coupons 
at the grocery check-out lane, performs high-speed ana-
lytics on 2.5 petabytes of consumer data to provide the 
right coupon for every customer at thousands of grocery 
stores—a stunning achievement in real-time analytics 
that would not be possible without the massive improve-
ments in processing power and software design.13
The fact is that companies should not be settling 
for less-sophisticated analysis just because they have 
more data. If the size of the data is choking the analytics 
tools, the problem is not too many data, but an inad-
equate analytics environment, and analytics deserves 
an IT environment supported by a full platform or suite 
of integrated technologies for data access, integration, 
analytics, and reporting. In other words, real-time analyt-
ics is more than simply running analyses faster (although 
that is certainly a desired outcome). It is also concerned 
with analyzing problems that simply were not solvable 
before. This understanding opens up a wide array of new 
possibilities and enables organizations to unleash analyt-
ics on previously untouchable challenges.
For instance, a large insurer might want to 
strengthen its fraud detection by analyzing all of its data-
sets, instead of analyzing random samples of the data. 
After all, a mere sample of claims data may not show 
all the anomalies that indicate potential fraud. Since 
traditional computing techniques might require days to 
analyze all of those data, without real-time analytics on 
the full dataset the insurer settles for samples and de-
creased accuracy, and pays fraudulent claims.
In another example, a well-known online shoe/cloth-
ing retailer is a leader in using social media for sales and 
customer service. The challenge was simple and daunt-
ing: they were being overwhelmed by the amount of data 
from customer interactions. In a typical day, customer 
service representatives faced 6,000 phone calls, 400 live 
chats, and 1.1 million social networking site interactions. 
From all these data, the company was able to under-
stand only a fraction of what was being said about its 
products, services, and brand.
With a social media analytics solution, this company 
can now understand its customers’ shopping experi-
ences, using data that extend far beyond its basic web-
site metrics (e.g., page views and transactions). Analysts 
now have real-time analysis of what current and potential 
customers are expressing about the company’s brand, 
products, and services through various social media 
outlets (Facebook, Twitter, etc.). The result is a compre-
hensive understanding of what customers are saying, the 
sentiment behind their messages, and emerging trends 
and preferences. This deeper customer insight allows for 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.8: The Wisdom of the Cloud
102  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
far more effective marketing campaigns and strategies. 
It is timely knowledge that allows for real-time, individual-
ized interactions, bringing Web 2.0 to life.
Like retailers, telecommunications companies are 
also finding ways to increase profits and better under-
stand customers by analyzing hyperconnected and 
text-based data sources. One of Japan’s largest tele-
communications services providers noticed that better 
results could be achieved through community marketing 
and by “influencing the influencer.” Specifically, it saw 
that customers were several times more likely to turn to 
a different provider in the weeks after a friend switched. 
To combat this dynamic, the company sought to analyze 
relationships and lifestyles in the communities created 
by customers in order to refine its one-to-one marketing 
efforts and its customer-retention program. That meant 
combining unstructured social data, musical tastes, and 
self-defined customer profiles. The company initiated 
behavioral targeting of its higher usage/higher influence 
customers with digital content—such as its “new art-
ist content campaign,” which garnered a response rate 
that was 250 percent higher than that of similar/typical 
campaigns.
The value lies in being able to act quickly through 
trial campaigns and capitalize on positive discussions. 
It is a superb example of using social network analysis 
to drive product innovation and create immediate re-
sponses to any competitive threat or trend.14
Sometimes, the challenge of real-time analytics lies 
not in combining different types of data, but in integrat-
ing traditionally separate types of analytics to find an-
swers that benefit the business. For example, one large 
European retail banking subsidiary wanted to integrate 
enterprise-wide risk analysis with single-customer-view 
capabilities. To integrate all three areas—risk, customer 
insight, and finance systems—the bank built a next- 
generation analytical risk and banking platform.
This single view of the risk and the exposure across 
all organizational units and risk types eliminates the 
problem of fragmented views of data from different 
sources. It also enables the bank to score each indi-
vidual customer and generate the risk-weighted perfor-
mance for each customer—scanning 10 million records 
in 55 seconds as opposed to three months. The result is 
a unique competitive advantage: instant credit approvals. 
Instead of waiting 24 to 48 hours, a customer gets a de-
cision in seconds. Company executives estimate the sav-
ings from fraud alone could reach hundreds of millions of 
British pounds. The system enables sales and marketing 
to work off of the same data, so employees can develop 
stronger relationships with their 25 million customers 
while reducing risk and fraud at the same time.
CONCLUSION
Regardless of industry sector, it is clear that the integra-
tion of unstructured data with traditional structured data 
opens up a range of powerful possibilities for organiza-
tions of all sizes and stripes. Reflecting on the many 
examples discussed in this chapter, we see that the 
wisdom of the cloud—the combination of hyperconnec-
tivity, big data, and powerful analytics—benefits patients, 
citizens, governments, businesses, and consumers in 
three key ways:
•	 The ability to know. Although an almost limitless 
amount of knowledge is available in these massive, 
fast-growing data stores, there is a gap between the 
brain’s ability to linearly absorb/synthesize informa-
tion and the data that are available. Sophisticated 
analytics and data mining let companies know 
more than ever before about market trends, eco-
nomic factors, competitors, customers, and more. 
Likewise, doctors can learn more and know more 
about their patients and ask better questions as 
they pursue treatments and offer specific recom-
mendations.
•	 The ability to dialogue. Hyperconnectivity means 
not just knowing things post-facto, it means engag-
ing in real-time dialogue with the audience. Social 
media has been at the forefront of this movement, 
helping healthcare patients, government con-
stituents, and business customers get their voices 
heard.
•	 The ability to innovate. Companies can apply 
their newfound knowledge and insights from their 
dialogues toward faster, more effective action, 
thus changing their operations and processes and 
improving their results.
As unstructured data—such as the vast pools of 
data from hyperconnected social media platforms like 
Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube—continue to grow, they 
represent a critical source of meaningful information that 
can augment and complement our world’s traditional 
databases and files, along with our traditional ways of 
gaining insight. This new big data source offers a new 
way to tap into the wisdom of the cloud by filling in the 
gaps, uncovering new insights, making new connections, 
and identifying unseen patterns.
When we can all draw from that knowledge—citi-
zens, governments, and companies alike—the benefits 
to society are clear. Individually, we are all limited in what 
we can know, but together hyperconnectivity makes it 
possible to overcome those individual limitations and 
mine different types of data to find insights that will 
improve our health, increase the efficient use of public 
resources, best serve the needs of customers, and help 
drive the innovation needed to maintain strength and 
profitability in our global economies.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  103 
1.8: The Wisdom of the Cloud
NOTES
1 US Library of Congress, available at http://www.loc.gov/
webarchiving/faq.html.
2 See Hagstrom 2011 for more on this debate.
3 Harvard Business Review Analytic Services 2010, p. 2.
4 See https://www.cms.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/
highlights.pdf.
5 Manyika et al. 2011.
6 SAS Institute 2011.
7 Hagstrom 2011.
8 Parr 2008; Red Orbit 2010.
9 Leadbetter 2011.
10 SAS Institute N.D.
11 Recovery.gov, available at http://recovery.doi.gov/press/
us-geological-survey-twitter-earthquake-detector-ted/.
12 Hammersburg 2010.
13 Henschen 2011.
14 SAS Institute 2010.
REFERENCES
Hagstrom, M. 2011. “Q4 2011 Intelligence Quarterly: The Battleground 
for the Future.” The Corner Office, November 21. Available 
at http://blogs.sas.com/content/corneroffice/2011/11/21/
battleground-for-the-future/.
Hammersburg, C. 2010. “Nailed: A Fraud Prevention and Compliance 
Blog.” August 17. Available at http://nailed.lni.wa.gov/
post/967374960/we-are-building-a-state-of-the-art-employer.
Harvard Business Review Analytic Services. 2010. “The New 
Conversation: Taking Social Media from Talk to Action.” Harvard 
Business Review Study sponsored by SAS. Available at http://
www.sas.com/resources/whitepaper/wp_23348.pdf.
Henschen, D. 2011. “Catalina Marketing Aims for the Cutting Edge  
of “Big Data’.” techweb, September 13. Available at http:// 
www.techweb.com/news/231600833/catalina-marketing-aims- 
for-the-cutting-edge-of-big-data.html.
Leadbetter, C. 2011. The Civic Long Tail. London: Demos. Available at 
http://www.demos.co.uk/publications/theciviclongtail.
Manyika, J., M. Chui, B. Brown, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, C. Roxburgh, 
and A. H. Byers. 2011. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, 
Competition and Productivity, May. McKinsey Global Institute. 
Available at http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/Research/
Technology_and_Innovation/Big_data_The_next_frontier_for_
innovation.
Parr, B. 2009. “HOW TO: Track Swine Flu Online.” April 29. Available at 
http://mashable.com/2009/04/25/track-swine-flu/.
Recovery.gov. July–September 30, 2011. Track the Money. Available 
at http://recovery.doi.gov/press/us-geological-survey-twitter-
earthquake-detector-ted/.
Red Orbit. 2010. “Could Twitter Provide Early Warnings for 
Epidemics?” April 14. Available at http://www.redorbit.com/
news/health/1849564/could_twitter_provide_early_warnings_for_
epidemics/index.html.
SAS Institute. N.D. “Text Mining Improves Hong Kong Government’s 
Ability to Anticipate and Address Public Complaints.” Customer 
Success. Available at http://www.sas.com/success/hongkongeu.
html.
———. 2010. “KDDI Chooses SAS to Advance Customer Analytics.” 
Press Release, August 10. Available at http://www.sas.com/news/
preleases/kddi-pblshk.html.
———. 2011. “Identifying and Measuring Injuries in Health Care.” 
Intelligence Quarterly: Journal of Advanced Analytics Q1 (11): 
35–38.
Smith, T. 2011. “Contagion: Wash Hands after Reading.” State and 
Local Connection, October 25. Available at http://blogs.sas.com/
content/statelocalgov/2011/10/25/contagion-wash-hands-after-
reading/.
US Library of Congress. Web Archiving. Available at http://www.loc.gov/
webarchiving/faq.html.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  105 
CHAPTER 1.9
On the Value of Digital 
Traces for Commercial 
Strategy and Public Policy: 
Telecommunications Data 
as a Case Study
ROB CLAXTON, British Telecommunications plc
JON READES, Centre for Advanced Spatial Analysis, 
University College London
BEN ANDERSON, Centre for Research in 
Economic Sociology and Innovation, University 
of Essex, Colchester
Just as information and communication technologies 
(ICT) and the digital economy are transforming everyday 
life, so they are transforming our ways of knowing about 
everyday life. The breadth of social practices that are 
mediated by digital infrastructure, and thus recorded 
by digital traces, has not gone unnoticed in the social 
sciences.1 Coupled with technological and methodologi-
cal advances in large-scale data capture, storage, and 
analysis, transactional data on communication, con-
sumption, leisure, health, work, and education are now 
routinely collected and can, in principle, be employed for 
a wide range of analyses.
Clearly, the increased traceability of social networks 
can enhance our ability to extract actionable insight by 
analyzing their form, distribution, and structure through 
digital media. Consequently, an enormous potential to 
generate important insights and innovation exists within 
the social sciences through an improved understand-
ing of spatialized social networks (i.e., place-based 
analyses of social network structures over time). As we 
will show, these networks have applications in—at the 
very least—regional development, market research, and 
infrastructure planning because the structure and spatial 
distribution of social networks underpins demand (and, 
consequently, supply or provisioning) as well as provides 
indicators of well-being, integration, and cohesion.
Of course, the analysis of social networks has been 
a key part of the sociological and social psychological 
analysis of group behavior as well as resource and op-
portunity identification since at least the 1970s.2 Social 
interaction has also been implicated in both the diffusion 
of innovation and the distribution of power and hierarchy 
within groups.3 To date, however, such analyses have 
typically involved a number of individuals or groups 
that is tiny compared with the general population and 
with the magnitude of newly available data from digital 
sources.
However, the marriage of “big data”—datasets con-
taining billions of records—to social science is enabling 
us to examine social and economic relationships in a 
new light, leading to the emergence of what some re-
searchers have termed a computational social science.4 
Although Rogers foresaw this direction of travel back 
in the 1980s,5 until recently social science has largely 
lacked the tools to perform this type of research: what 
had been missing were the tools that had been tested on 
meaningfully large volumes of data and could be applied 
in a range of analytic domains.
Thanks to its tractability, telecommunications data 
are now starting to play a crucial role in the emergence 
Ben Anderson and Jon Reades wish to acknowledge the support 
of British Telecommunications plc for components of this research. 
Additionally, Jon Reades acknowledges the support of the EPSRC (Grant 
#EP/I018433/1) and of the European Commission
(Complexity-NET/FP6 ERANET).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.9: Digital Traces for Commercial Strategy and Public Policy
106  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
of these tools. Researchers have, for instance, used mo-
bile and fixed-line telephone calls and Instant Messaging 
logs, as well as Twitter and Facebook data, to speculate 
on “universal laws” of human friendship and mobility.6 
In this chapter we present results from four studies of 
British telephone usage that offer a sense of the ways in 
which computational social science can be used to ex-
pand our understanding of social and economic activity.
We begin with a study of UK regions, comparing the 
“geographies of talk” to their administrative counterparts, 
before turning to the ways in which social networks 
reflect underlying problems of deprivation and of access 
to opportunity. We will then examine derived indicators of 
globalization from the United Kingdom’s most economi-
cally vibrant area, Greater South East England, before 
finally discussing early work on real-time data-driven 
household classification systems.
ANALYSIS
Advances in ICT give us more choice about how, when, 
and where to interact with one another. In particular, 
these technologies support increasingly complex forms 
of communication at a distance—voice has been supple-
mented by video, the letter by email, the local pub or 
restaurant by Facebook and Twitter. This is, arguably, 
giving rise to more flexible and extensive forms of so-
cial and economic interaction. It is not that space has 
ceased to be relevant—reports of the “death of distance” 
have proven wildly exaggerated—but that the traditional 
ways in which space was categorized, delineated, and 
managed by governments and firms as “commuting 
zones” or “sales regions” appear unable to keep pace 
with the increasingly fluid ways in which people are 
choosing how and where to work, play, or purchase 
goods and services.
Dynamic and permeable boundaries: Regions and 
communities
By analyzing the connections among people, house-
holds, and firms, we can derive boundaries that bet-
ter reflect their interactions with the environment—for 
instance, we can determine whether people living in 
Northern Wales interact more with their linguistic cohorts 
in Central and Southern Wales, or with their English 
compatriots in the larger cities on the “other” side of 
Offa’s Dyke. For government, this is hardly a trivial issue 
because social interaction will be reflected in other forms 
of exchange as well: should economic development in 
North Wales focus on building links with Manchester or 
with Cardiff? Should transportation planners prioritize 
East-West or North-South infrastructure investment? Or 
should planners work against the trend and try to disrupt 
the entrenched geographic ties that might reinforce a 
region’s structural weaknesses?
Clearly, it is not within our remit to answer such 
questions directly, but social network analysis provides 
us with an important tool with which to investigate the 
dynamics in play. Ratti et al. built just such a network,7 
deriving 86 million links among more than 20 million 
numbers made anonymous from an original database 
of some 8 billion telephone calls. We then examined the 
resulting network to see if natural communities could be 
identified in the data, where a community is character-
ized by relatively dense within-group links and propor-
tionally fewer out-group connections. For example, many 
social networks fall naturally into two “communities”: a 
group of work colleagues, many of whom will know one 
another; and a group of friends, many of whom will also 
know one another, with relatively little overlap between 
the two.
Our research scaled this approach up to the level 
of the entire country. The findings appear to capture 
both deep historical continuities dating back hundreds 
of years as well as more recent changes in mobility and 
economic development (see Figure 1). Simply by virtue 
of its size, the network region that is coterminous with 
Scotland is particularly visible, but the Devon/Cornwall, 
Kent, East Anglian, and North East regions are also no-
table for their overlap with existing administrative regions. 
But these results are largely to be expected: geography 
alone dictates that people at the extreme northern and 
southern ends of the United Kingdom will tend to interact 
more intensively with others who also fall within these 
traditional regions. As geographers have often noted: 
“everything is related to everything else, but near things 
are more related than distant things.”8
More intriguing, because they are altogether less 
expected, are the regions in Wales and in the vicinity of 
London. Figure 1b highlights areas of overlap: rather than 
neat lines around geographical or social features, the 
figure emphasizes areas where these networks seem to 
pull in more than one direction. The wide belt surround-
ing London—to which we return later in this chapter—ac-
centuates the extent to which families and firms in these 
areas are an integral element of a wider “London” that is 
not visible on administrative maps. The figure also un-
derlines the challenges, faced by the local authorities in 
these areas, of having one foot in a major world city and 
the other in a semi-rural economy.
The division of Wales into three distinct subregions, 
each of which is anchored to a major urban center, 
further underscores the importance of economic activ-
ity and proximity to socioeconomic networks. Thus, 
although Wales itself has a strong linguistic and cultural 
heritage, in social network terms it seems to be rela-
tively more important to Northern Wales that it interact 
with Liverpool and Manchester than with Cardiff, far off 
in the South. The same applies to Central Wales and 
Birmingham. In this case, we see little of the “mixing” 
that exists in the area around London, where several 
regions overlap geographically. The results for Wales 
line up nicely with those of Nielsen and Hovgesen,9 who 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  107 
1.9: Digital Traces for Commercial Strategy and Public Policy
Edinburgh
Bristol London
Newcastle
Liverpool
Birmingham
Glasgow
Figure 1: Regions of the United Kingdom: Different views 
1a: Historical regions 1b: Social network regions
Source: This work is based on data provided through EDINA UKBORDERS with the 
support of the ESRC and JISC and uses boundary material which is copyright of 
the Crown. Additionally, the OAC Classification used is subject to Crown Copyright 
protection.
Note: This shows the centers of non–Countryside Output Areas to give a sense 
of how population is distributed across Great Britain. The black boundary lines 
denote the official Government Office Regions.
Source: Based on Ratti et al., 2010.
Note: The shading denotes the core regions of the United Kingdom arising from 
analysis of communication interactions.
used ward-level commuting data in a similar type of 
analysis and found clearly demarcated regions whose 
boundaries were connected both to the accessibility of 
infrastructure such as the main East-West routes (A5 and 
A458) and to major employment centers.
Deprivation and opportunity
We know that social interaction forms the backbone 
of social and economic life: from finding a good film to 
landing a deal, who we know and how we know them is 
a crucial determinant of success. And although the map 
presented in Figure 1b suggests a strong link on a re-
gional, or even national scale, early work by Granovetter 
had already established this connection at the individual 
level.10 Granovetter’s finding—which is self-evident only 
with hindsight—was that we do not usually uncover novel 
information through interaction with our close friends. 
Awareness of a crucial job opportunity or innovation is 
much more likely to come from acquaintances and those 
with whom we are only weakly connected.
The simplistic explanation for this weak-ties effect is 
that we already interact intensively with our close friends 
and colleagues, and so we come to share the same 
background knowledge, the same awareness of oppor-
tunities, and, ultimately, the same view of the world. This 
shared perception can blind us to emerging threats—to 
the firm, community, or country; it can also deprive us 
of chances to forge new connections and make new 
discoveries. In contrast, our acquaintances often know 
people who are not part of our circle of friends; they 
offer us informational diversity because we are now 
connected to people who are much less like us socially, 
economically, and even spatially.
Of course, this is not to suggest that strong ties are 
less meaningful: they are thought to constitute a major 
mechanism for social support in hard times. Indeed, 
the strength of community ties might well be a crucial 
factor in personal happiness and fulfillment.11 Eagle et 
al. sought to test this seemingly simple idea—that the 
structure of our social interactions can be correlated 
Leeds
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.9: Digital Traces for Commercial Strategy and Public Policy
108  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
with deprivation and opportunity—on a national scale.12 
Granovetter could test his hypothesis only by using data 
gathered painstakingly on just two Boston neighbor-
hoods, but with a database of telephone calls encom-
passing nearly all of the United Kingdom we can exam-
ine whether this relationship holds universally or has only 
local applications for policymaking.
We developed a composite measure of the diversity 
of calling to and from an area that could be correlated 
with existing socioeconomic deprivation measures. The 
results in Figure 2 strongly bear out Granovetter’s original 
work: the wider we cast our social net, the less likely we 
are to live in a deprived community. More recent work 
using a much simpler “local-ness” measure—the ratio 
of local to national calls made from a neighborhood—
seems to show a similar effect.13 Thus it appears that in 
all cases diversity is correlated with opportunity.
Of course, in reality the picture is a little more com-
plicated because we cannot easily untangle the direction 
of causality: it is unclear whether people are more de-
prived because they have less diverse social networks, 
or they have less diverse social networks because they 
live in more deprived communities. To put it another way: 
is it that people who live in deprived areas tend to have 
made, or have been forced to make, life choices that in-
hibit their acquisition of more diverse networks, whereas 
those who live in less deprived areas have been able to 
take life paths (such as non-local higher education and 
employment) that tend to lead to more geographically 
dispersed social networks?
The essential importance of the social dimension 
makes the answer to this question vital to the planning 
of appropriate policy interventions. For instance, if it is 
merely opportunity that is lacking, then we might naively 
suggest that all that is needed is a job-seekers’ forum for 
enabling introductions. But if the problem is, as seems 
likely, more deeply rooted in the constrained life-path 
choices available, then the appropriate policy response is 
more structural in nature and is unlikely to deliver “quick 
wins” in the short-term, a circumstance that creates 
challenges for policymakers looking for 12- to 24-month 
returns on policy investments.
GLOBALIZATION AND INDUSTRY
As the previous sections have made clear, economic 
activity is tightly bound up in social interaction. Within the 
contemporary multi- or transnational firm, these interac-
tions are increasingly global in scope, which indicates 
the increasingly complex nature of both global supply 
chains and also knowledge flows between workers in 
widely separated offices. In order to understand these 
dynamics in more depth, we need to be able to see the 
knowledge economy in action, and telecommunications 
networks remain the best lens through which to do so.
To get at the globalization of knowledge by busi-
nesses, we can compare the level of international calling 
for some small area to the overall level of activity in the 
region of which that area is a part. The telecommunica-
tions quotient—named after the classic tool of spatial 
economic research, the location quotient14—is a relative 
measure of globalization that gives us a way to compare 
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
–2 0–4 2 4
100
Figure 2: Diversity of communications and deprivation 
Source: Eagle et al., 2010.
So
ci
oe
co
no
m
ic
 p
er
ce
nt
ile
Composite measure of diversity
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  109 
1.9: Digital Traces for Commercial Strategy and Public Policy
different parts of a city or region with one another. And 
by filtering out individuals, households, and small busi-
nesses from the dataset, we can here focus on me-
dium- and large-sized businesses with divergent levels of 
engagement with the global economy.
The telecommunications quotient is a simple-to-
calculate ratio that captures the relative intensity of 
international calling for a small area within a larger region; 
it is anonymous, aggregate, and allows us to determine 
whether an area makes more or fewer calls than we 
would expect, given the overall behavior of the surround-
ing region. Thus a quotient of 1 means that the area 
is “normal” in its international calling behavior, while a 
quotient of 8 would mean that an area places eight times 
more international calls than expected from the regional 
average.
This approach enables us to identify differences 
of behavior both between firms operating in the same 
industry and between areas with strong specializations 
in different industries. For example, it is clearly expected 
that the City of London, which is home to global financial 
services firms, will be highly internationalized in its calling 
activity; and it is. But after removing household calling, 
Figure 3a reveals the rather surprising fact that towns 
such as Reading, Slough, Sandwich, and Bracknell 
Forest can match, or even exceed, the city’s telecommu-
nications quotient.
Merging the telecommunications quotient results 
with employment data collected by the government al-
lows us to better understand why this is the case: these 
smaller cities are home to world-class ICT and defense 
firms that employ telecommunications to coordinate the 
activities of developers, designers, and executives in the 
United Kingdom and the United States. This pattern is 
rooted in the historical connection between these indus-
tries and government procurement, and today the region 
is an essential part of the United Kingdom’s internation-
ally competitive, high-skill service sector.
Figure 3b suggests that, even for finance, there are 
attractions to moving out of the City: there are back-
office sites with extremely high levels of relative inter-
national calling visible to the South of Greater London. 
It is not only highly skilled work in the computing sec-
tor—both in software and hardware design—that has 
left the traditional urban core, but a good deal of work in 
the media industry has also left Soho to set up around 
the BBC’s facilities in White City. Similarly, in the logis-
tics center, global calling activity is closely tied to major 
international airports, all of which are located well outside 
London’s core. Most dispersed of all, however, is re-
search and development, with pharmaceutical and high-
tech manufacturing lacking any real geographical con-
centration; major sites are scattered across the region 
and can be found in smaller towns such as Cambridge, 
Royal Tunbridge Wells, and—until recently—Sandwich 
(where Pfizer’s facility closed in 2011).
The ability to distinguish between globally and 
locally interacting industries heralds a step change in 
our ability to understand the impact of globalization on 
regional development. The financial industry, because 
of its effect on government, tends to draw our attention 
toward the traditional downtowns of Manhattan and the 
City of London. But our findings point toward the impor-
tance of what we could call the “new industrial districts” 
of the knowledge economy, of which finance is only a 
part, and their much wider spatial distribution.
CLASSIFICATION AND CODIFICATION: TOWARD A 
REAL-TIME CENSUS
And yet, even as government and industry face increas-
ing challenges from globalization and mobility, there is 
increasing pressure to reduce the cost of data collec-
tion while accelerating the timeliness of its provision. For 
example, in the United Kingdom—as in other countries 
that maintain the practice—the next population census 
is expected to cost nearly £500 million and to require 
many thousands of hours of labor to collect and pro-
cess, with the results taking many months to reach end 
users. Consequently, the UK Office for National Statistics 
is already engaged in a program of research to assess 
whether the data needs of the national and local policy 
communities, as well as nongovernmental and commer-
cial actors, can be met by integrating existing administra-
tive, commercial, and imputed/modeled data.15
Recently, the number of innovative approaches to 
this problem has exploded. One of the more notable 
used names from electoral rolls, telephone books, and 
related datasets to infer ethnic and demographic charac-
teristics of populations.16 These characteristics can then 
be mapped on to neighborhoods with a view to updating 
a socio-demographic profile whenever someone regis-
ters to vote or leaves a forwarding address.
To the extent that this type of data can be collated 
and quickly associated with people, households, or 
firms, it provides us with the ability to characterize them 
at any given point in time, and not just every five or ten 
years. Thus, in addition to being able to provide a form of 
automated census on specific dates, the data also offer 
us the potential to understand the flow of life events sur-
rounding an individual or group as well as the changing 
characteristics of an area. Changes in the telecommuni-
cations interactions of an individual, household, or neigh-
borhood could, therefore, act as an early warning system 
of transitions—such as increased in-migration or chang-
ing patterns of work—with significant policy implications.
To illustrate this approach, we surveyed about a 
thousand households and, with their permission, associ-
ated more than a million call records to their responses 
in order to assess the possibility of classifying house-
holds according to their calling networks.17 The results 
suggest that some dimensions of social interaction can 
serve as reasonable predictors of whether a household 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.9: Digital Traces for Commercial Strategy and Public Policy
110  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Oxford
Norwich
Warwick
Reading
Brighton
Cambridge
Maidstone
Chelmsford
Southampton
High Wycombe
Milton Keynes
Figure 3: Industrial signatures: The international telecommunications quotient
Source: Data compiled by authors.
Oxford
Norwich
Reading
Cambridge
Maidstone
Chelmsford
Southampton
High Wycombe
Milton Keynes
Brighton
Warwick
Source: Data compiled by authors.
International 
telecommunications quotient
< 0.53
0.54–0.61
0.62–0.92
0.93–2.11
2.12–6.71
High telecommunications quotient areas
Financial services 
telecommunications quotient
0.25–0.50
0.51–1.00
1.01–2.00
2.01–4.00
4.01–6.00
6.01–8.00
8.01–10.0
3a: All business areas calling
3b: Financial services areas calling
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  111 
1.9: Digital Traces for Commercial Strategy and Public Policy
is comprised of “Alone, over 56,” “Couple, both aged 
over 55 with no cohabiting children,” or ”Couple, with 
children aged under 12.” However, it has so far proved 
less effective at predicting other household types.
Although these are only preliminary results, it sug-
gests that research into linked data has the potential 
to develop templates that could be applied to flows of 
telecommunication data in order to provide estimates of 
the local prevalence of different groups at very low cost 
and with extremely low latencies. One can easily imag-
ine a future in which network operators would supply a 
government’s statistical body with summary metrics that 
track month-to-month change at the neighborhood level 
for the entire country.
CONCLUSIONS
In this review we have endeavored to demonstrate that 
the insights to be gleaned from the marriage of telecom-
munications data and network-oriented research span 
the nature of community, the challenges of deprivation, 
the growth of knowledge-based industry, and the ad-
ministration of regional economies. However, the real 
power of this approach to understanding individuals and 
communities—in their proper context—lies not only in its 
unprecedented breadth and depth, but also in the radi-
cal improvement of the speed with which such data can 
be collected and processed, and the results delivered to 
policymakers and strategic planners in both the public 
and private sectors.
We began by demonstrating one way in which social 
network analysis could supplement our understand-
ing of regions and large communities. The results from 
this work suggest that, although many socioeconomic 
regions are well aligned with administrative units, in 
others—Wales, for example—the geography of human 
interaction appears to be diverging from long-standing 
historical boundaries, suggesting a new dynamic in play 
on the national scale.18 This approach to regional delin-
eation could ultimately be used as a monitoring as well 
as a modeling tool: long-term changes in these patterns 
could be connected to changes in accessibility or com-
petitiveness, while also permitting planners to simulate 
the likely effects of social, economic, and infrastructural 
interventions.
From the bigger picture of regions, we then nar-
rowed our focus to the neighborhood and saw how 
social network data could be used to investigate depriva-
tion, cohesion, and access to opportunity. We therefore 
suggest that telecommunications data could provide 
a timely proxy for multiple aspects of well-being, ad-
dressing an increasingly important dimension of govern-
ment policy. It may well be that by understanding the 
individual’s or group’s unique mix of tie strengths, we 
become able to locally tune policy interventions to suit 
the community structure, delivering targeted, measurable 
impacts on the ground.
Our third section examined how a telecommunica-
tions quotient can give us a new way to explore the 
complex web of informational linkages among industrial 
actors: using a simple, anonymous metric it becomes 
possible to assess the degree to which firms in a given 
area are engaged in international communication. In 
other words, the big data approach to telecommunica-
tions allows us to examine the fine-grained variations 
in how companies interact with one another, and with 
suppliers or clients around the world. In addition to high-
lighting important dependencies, we anticipate that this 
approach will help both firms and governments to moni-
tor a rapidly changing regional economic landscape.
Finally, we noted that the ultimate promise of a 
real-time census is an environment in which crucial 
data about people and place are collected regularly and 
inexpensively, offering governments and researchers new 
ways to see change on a fine scale, without losing track 
of dynamics on the scale of cities, regions, or countries. 
Moreover, when combined with other measures—such 
as a telecommunications quotient generated from data 
filtered so as to contain only households, for example—
it may also become possible to derive migration and 
country-of-origin data that could shed further light on 
neighborhood dynamics with a lag of days or weeks, 
rather than months or years.
With this as background, we can outline some pre-
liminary opportunities for the private, public, and nongov-
ernmental sectors:
•	 the collection of transactional data by telecommuni-
cations operators not only for the purposes of billing 
and system engineering but also explicitly for their 
aggregation and statistical re-use;
•	 citizen-data auction services for private citizens to 
aggregate and manage personal data with options 
for sale of access to commercial analysts—what 
Pentland called “a new deal on data”;19
•	 new approaches to the local, regional, or national 
assessment of policy interventions through an analy-
sis of changes in local/neighborhood communica-
tions behavior over time; and
•	 the provision of aggregated small area societal well-
being indicators by telecommunications service 
operators for a future real-time census.
Of course, it is early days yet for the emerging com-
putational social science industry, and there remain sig-
nificant obstacles to the field’s success. First, there are 
reasons to be concerned with data quality and integrity, 
since a great deal of time and money may ultimately rest 
on assumptions about the validity of the data that have 
yet to be systematically verified. Second, as yet there is 
no mature working model of how industry (which typi-
cally generates and collects this type of data) and gov-
ernment can collaborate successfully in a manner that 
is also trusted by citizens. And third, individuals are right 
to be concerned about the impact that this emerging 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.9: Digital Traces for Commercial Strategy and Public Policy
112  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
area might have on their own expectations of personal 
privacy: although the existing protections appear robust 
enough for one-time work, this dynamic would change 
with ongoing, linked data transfers to third parties. These 
questions must be addressed by all stakeholders—in-
dustry, government, and citizens alike—if the potential of 
this field is to be realized.
NOTES
1 Savage and Burrows 2007.
2 Granovetter 1973.
3 Scott 2010.
4 Lazer et al. 2009.
5 Rogers 1987.
6 cf. Gonzalez et al. 2008; Leskovec and Horvitz 2008.
7 Ratti et al. 2010.
8 Tobler 1970.
9 Nielsen and Hovgesen 2008.
10 Granovetter 1973.
11 Putnam 2000.
12 Eagle et al. 2010.
13 Anderson and Vernitski 2011.
14 Florence 1948.
15 Office for National Statistics 2011.
16 Mateos et al. 2011.
17 Anderson and Vernitski 2011.
18 Ratti et al. 2010.
19 Pentland 2009, p. 79.
REFERENCES
Anderson, B. and A. Vernitski. 2011. “On the Social Scientific Value of 
Transactional Data.” Talk presented at an Invited Seminar, July 25. 
Cambridge Computer Laboratory, Cambridge.
Eagle, N., M. Macy, and R. Claxton. 2010. “Network Diversity and 
Economic Development.” Science 328: 1029–31.
Florence, P. S. 1948. Investment, Location, and Size of Plant. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gonzalez, M. C., C. A. Hidalgo, and A. L. Barabasi. 2008. 
“Understanding Individual Human Mobility Patterns.” Nature 453: 
779–82.
Granovetter, M. 1973. “The Strength of Weak Ties.” American Journal of 
Sociology 78: 1360–80.
Lazer, D., A. Pentland, L. Adamic, S. Aral, A.-L. Barabási, D. Brewer, N. 
Christakis, N. Contractor, J. Fowler, M. Gutmann, T. Jebara, G. 
King, M. Macy, D. Roy, and M. Van Alstyne. 2009. “Computational 
Social Science.” Science 323: 721–23.
Leskovec, J. and E. Horvitz. 2008. “Planetary-Scale Views on a 
Large Instant-Messaging Network.” In Proceedings of the 17th 
International Conference on World Wide Web. New York: ACM.
Mateos, P., P. A. Longley, and D. O’Sullivan. 2011. “Ethnicity and 
Population Structure in Personal Naming Networks.” PLoS ONE 6 
(9): e22943.
Nielsen, T. A. S. and H. H. Hovgesen. 2008. “Exploratory Mapping of 
Commuter Flows in England and Wales.” Journal of Transport 
Geography 16 (2): 90–99.
Office for National Statistics. 2011. Beyond 2011. Available at http://
www.ons.gov.uk/ons/about-ons/what-we-do/programmes---
projects/beyond-2011/index.html.
Pentland, A. 2009. “Reality Mining of Mobile Communications: Toward a 
New Deal on Data.” In The Global Information Technology Report 
2008–2009. Geneva: World Economic Forum. 75–80.
Putnam, R. D. 2000. Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of 
American Community. New York and London: Simon & Schuster.
Ratti, C., S. Sobolevsky, F. Calabrese, C. Andris, J. Reades, M. Martino, 
R. Claxton, and S. H. Strogatz. 2010. “Redrawing the Map of 
Great Britain from a Network of Human Interactions.” PLoS ONE 5 
(12): e14248.
Rogers, E. 1987. “Progress, Problems and Prospects for Network 
Research: Investigating Relationships in the Age of Electronic 
Communication Technologies.” Social Networks 9 (4): 285–310.
Savage, M. and R. Burrows. 2007. “The Coming Crisis of Empirical 
Sociology.” Sociology 41: 885–99.
Scott, J. 2010. “Social Network Analysis: Developments, Advances, and 
Prospects.” Social Network Analysis and Mining 1: 21–26.
Tobler, W. R. 1970. “A Computer Movie Simulating Urban Growth in the 
Detroit Region.” Economic Geography 46: 234–40.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  113
CHAPTER 1.10
The Promise and Peril 
of Hyperconnectivity 
for Organizations and 
Societies
JOHN FREDETTE 
REVITAL MAROM 
KURT STEINERT 
LOUIS WITTERS 
Alcatel-Lucent
Within living memory, telephone service has cut its link 
to the wires overhead. Computers have moved from the 
climate-controlled environments of enterprises to devices 
in our pockets. Video has moved to the same devices 
from our living rooms. Social media have trumped tra-
ditional media. Most recently, the cloud has appeared 
virtually overhead, making massive amounts of data and 
applications available anywhere there is a broadband 
connection.
THE ATTRIBUTES OF HYPERCONNECTIVITY
The result of this increasingly accelerated communica-
tions evolution is that today we are faced with the phe-
nomenon of hyperconnectivity. The term refers not only 
to the myriad means of communication and interaction, 
but also to its impact on both personal and organiza-
tional behavior.
Hyperconnectivity has several key attributes. It is:
•	 Always on: Broadband and ubiquitous mobile 
devices enable people to be connected to family, 
work, friends, avocations, obsessions, and more 
24/7.
•	 Readily accessible: A universe of mobile devices 
and personal computers links people and organiza-
tions together; these connections are increasingly 
available at any time and in any location.
•	 Information rich: Websites, search engines, social 
media, and 24-hour news and entertainment chan-
nels ensure that information—from the strategic to 
the banal—is always on hand, beyond anyone’s 
capacity to consume.
•	 Interactive: Hyperconnectivity ensures that every-
one can offer input on just about everything.
•	 Not just about people: Hyperconnectivity includes 
people-to-machine and machine-to-machine com-
munications, supporting the development of what 
has been termed the Internet of Things.
•	 Always recording: Service records, virtually unlim-
ited storage capacities, miniaturized video cameras, 
global positioning systems, sensors, and more—
combined with people’s desire to document their 
own activities—ensure that a large portion of every-
one’s daily activities and communications are part of 
a semi-permanent record. 
The cumulative effect of hyperconnectivity is that the 
limitations of time and space have largely been over-
come. Experience is virtualized. You no longer need to 
be in the same room, or even the same country, as your 
colleague, your teacher, or your doctor to accomplish 
what used to require face-to-face contact.
Hyperconnectivity confronts us with both benefits 
and challenges. It can be a powerful tool for collabora-
tion that drives global alignment, increased efficiency, 
and material development. At the same time it has very 
rapidly changed the way many tasks are performed, and 
people are expected to accommodate those changes. 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
114  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity 1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity
All of that information and all of that access also present 
risks of misuse.
Those who have not yet felt the impact of hypercon-
nectivity probably soon will. Statistics indicate that it is a 
burgeoning phenomenon:
•	 Worldwide fixed broadband subscribers totaled  
503 million at the end of 2010, with 48 million sub-
scribers added in the fourth quarter of 2010 alone;1 
this figure is expected to reach 674 million in 2014.2
•	 In 2010 there were estimated to be 7.8 billion global 
mobile connections.3
•	 The number of cellular mobile broadband subscrib-
ers jumped almost 60 percent in 2010 to reach 558 
million worldwide; this number should top 2 billion 
by 2015.4
HOW HYPERCONNECTIVITY IS CHANGING THE 
LANDSCAPE OF SOCIAL AND PROFESSIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONS
For institutions and organizations (i.e., corporations, 
industries, governments, and academic and research 
institutions in a variety of fields), hyperconnectivity is driv-
ing monumental shifts in terms of impact on their work 
styles, functions, and missions in a variety of realms.
Neo-urbanization
As a concept, neo-urbanization encompasses several 
different types of development that are taking place 
simultaneously. It refers both to the reclaiming of post-
industrial spaces in existing cities for new uses as en-
vironments in which to live, work, and play and to the 
rapidly urbanizing development in emerging economies. 
The term takes in the blurring of the boundaries between 
traditional definitions of urban, suburban, rural, and even 
regional, introducing new concepts such as corridors 
and megacities, and refers to the rapid growth of smaller 
cities, which will increasingly be able to deliver many of 
the amenities and services that characterize larger met-
ropolitan regions.5
Hyperconnectivity offers some obvious benefits in 
this realm, such as improved standards of living in re-
mote areas—the result of increased availability of tech-
nology (e.g., in healthcare, education, and entertainment). 
This is expected to encourage migration back to the rural 
areas and slow the movement of the populace to cities. 
Similarly, the growing connectedness of rural areas will 
lead to more jobs outside existing urban centers, thus 
delivering substantial economic growth to neo-urbanized 
rural areas.6
Although hyperconnectivity provides the opportunity 
to live a connected life in remote areas, demographic 
studies clearly demonstrate that large numbers of people 
are continuing to migrate to cities. Some communities 
are being built from scratch and are conceived as true 
cities of the future, with sustainability engineered into all 
aspects of life. Hyperconnectivity is an engine for much 
of that planned sustainability. But in the 21st century, 
most urban dwellers will live in traditional cities and the 
phenomenon of the megacity is expanding, particularly in 
Asia and Africa. As millions and millions of people gather 
together in environments of dense cohabitation, hyper-
connectivity could be added to the list of quality-of-life 
attributes like adequate shelter, electricity, and plumbing 
that separate the relatively few haves from the multitudi-
nous have-nots.
However, it is possible that—as access to commu-
nication technologies becomes ever cheaper and more 
available—hyperconnectivity could become a primary 
tool for governments and other institutions to address 
the shifting needs of city residents. Better access to 
government services, education, and healthcare could 
substantially improve the quality of life for many. We will 
discuss those possibilities below.
Government
On the political front, governments and other political in-
stitutions are coming under pressure to review their role 
and function because the availability of connectivity any-
where and at any time makes government’s actions as 
well as the consequences of those actions more visible. 
Hyperconnectivity enables governments to improve com-
munication with their constituents by sharing information 
more quickly and transparently. Simultaneously, it makes 
it easier for constituents to contact their government 
representatives and to access government services, 
regardless of where they live or work. In this way, hyper-
connectivity has the potential to restructure the relation-
ship between governments and those they govern.
At a minimum, hyperconnectivity can make vari-
ous government services more readily available. We are 
already seeing a rapid move toward open-format pub-
lication of government information on websites, along 
with constituent engagement in processes and services 
through the use of social media, particularly in more 
developed democratic societies. The past decade has 
seen a shift from services delivered by employees at the 
counter toward greater self-service or interactive voice 
response—a consequence of the increased connected-
ness of government officials and government employ-
ees. Smart governance7—that is, an administration that 
applies and integrates information, communication, 
and operational technologies to address the challenge 
of planning and managing operations across multiple 
domains—is becoming a key architectural component 
in most governmental operational models. Governments 
of all shapes and sizes, just like their corporate counter-
parts, rely increasingly on technology to monitor, store, 
and analyze different kinds of information, with the goal 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  115
1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity 1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity
of delivering more sustainable services and operations 
as well as a faster response to constituents’ concerns.
As a key element of smart governance, mobile gov-
ernment (or m-government)8 allows developing countries 
a relatively quick and simple means of connecting with 
their populace, since mobile broadband services can be 
cheaper and somewhat simpler to deploy than full-scale 
wired communications networks. Interactive services 
provided by governments to constituents (i.e., mobile 
government-to-constituent interactive services) focus on 
citizen convenience and increase citizen participation 
in government-related activities and inquiries. In many 
countries, m-government is becoming a new method of 
communication between government and constituents 
based on applications in which constituents are encour-
aged to report in real time about their experiences and 
the events happening around them.
That immediacy of response also carries with it 
potential ramifications of participation in government 
activity by people who are not physically located in the 
geographical domain of the government. Expatriates 
now have the ability to readily follow the issues of their 
former locales as well as comment upon and potentially 
influence developments in a place far from where they 
currently live.
Education
There has been a proliferation of online learning op-
portunities in recent years, driven in part by individual 
professional and personal development or enrichment 
needs. This trend, which has been described as “ed-
YOU-cation,” reflects the ability of technology to sup-
port anytime and anywhere connections, as well as 
individualized learning plans.9 As importantly, virtual 
education creates an environment where learning is 
more and more liberated from location- and time-specific 
constraints. It is also de-coupled from age, life stage, 
and means—people are pursuing learning opportunities 
throughout their lives, and technology is supporting this 
development. People can receive degrees from schools 
located many miles from their homes. Institutions of 
higher education that were created to serve the popula-
tions of specific and limited geographic locales now have 
alumnae who could be located anywhere and who never 
have to set foot on a physical campus to earn a degree. 
Online lessons and discussions held through message 
board postings mean that people can be anywhere and 
can participate in classes at any time from any location.
As broadband connectivity becomes more ubiqui-
tous, the use of virtual education tools to reach popula-
tions in remote areas becomes much more feasible. 
The limitations imposed by the logistics of having to 
travel great distances to attend a classroom are being 
eliminated.
Healthcare
In the realm of healthcare, hyperconnectivity is already 
proving to have huge potential.10 Machine-to-machine-
to-human (M2M2H) communications solutions—which 
are becoming a reality today—can improve patient 
care, support mobile and virtual care, and reduce travel 
requirements for both patients and physicians. With a 
hyperconnected healthcare sector, doctors and nurses 
can remotely monitor and diagnose patients continuously 
via medical applications that work with sensors discretely 
attached to the body.
The availability of remote care has the potential to 
dramatically reduce overall healthcare costs because 
more healthcare services can be offered at home instead 
of in a dedicated healthcare facility. It also allows people 
to live at much greater distances from healthcare facili-
ties without worrying that they are putting themselves 
at increased risk. Hyperconnectivity can be a tether to a 
healthcare system that allows people to pursue life when 
and where they want, and bring them into a healthcare 
provider facility if necessary for a physical exam or 
procedure.
Business
Hyperconnectivity is affecting enterprises of all sizes and 
types. In the retail sector, hyperconnectivity is already 
a pervasive force in the interactions between buyers 
and sellers. The next stage in this transformation is in 
the area of logistics—where the Internet of Things and 
related hyperconnectivity will transform the supply chain 
and connect customers, suppliers, manufacturers, and 
retailers with each other in a more efficient process.11 
With M2M2H communications, retailers, manufacturers, 
and suppliers are able to monitor supply and demand, 
manage inventory, and get products shipped when and 
where they are needed. This is accomplished by using 
tags and sensors, which reduce human intervention to 
a minimum and make supply chains faster and more 
efficient. Such efficiency can also increase the reach 
of supply chains. More precise tracking of usage—the 
movement of goods, inventory management, and so 
on—can allow for more remote distribution points aligned 
with more clearly defined requirements or expectations 
of customer demand. The more efficient distribution 
networks are, the less need there is to stockpile inven-
tory because products can more easily be delivered on 
an “as needed” basis. Less risk to the manufacturer/
distributer means, potentially, both increased profitability 
and reduced costs to consumers.
Another key concern of the 21st-century enterprise 
going forward will be its interactions with customers and 
its customer relations management. Today, the process 
of interacting with customers has the potential of spiral-
ing out of control because of the migration to the digital 
world, hyperconnectivity, and the emergence of online 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity 1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity
social networking communities where every customer’s 
criticism comes with the expectation of a direct response 
from the enterprise. Customers now have more avenues 
than ever to express their complaints and kudos, and to 
request new features and capabilities. Savvy executives 
already know that the customer lifecycle spans multiple 
channels; today a contemporary approach to customer 
care includes becoming a part of online social network-
ing communities. Corporate executives must be able to 
hear what customers are saying to each other, respond 
in a proactive manner, and communicate with customers 
through a myriad of channels.12 To be truly customer-
focused today, companies must learn how to better 
manage relationships with their customers in the hyper-
connected world. In other words, the today’s paradigm 
of customer relations and customer care demands 24/7 
interaction with customers across multiple channels, 
especially the web.
Because of the increase in hyperconnectivity, the 
economic environment is changing drastically as the 
world becomes more balanced in terms of commercial 
activities and employment opportunities. Commercial 
centers will be increasingly spread all over the world, 
while economic growth is likely to be witnessed in areas 
that are currently marginalized.
Finally, the reliability of technologies and networks 
is increasingly an outgrowth of hyperconnectivity. This 
is because increases in technology adoption, the grow-
ing connectedness of cities and towns, and the creation 
of networked cities are creating a new concept of what 
is considered to be essential infrastructure. This infra-
structure will require better-performing and more reliable 
technologies. The expectation for a growing variety of 
services is for 99.999 percent availability, at a minimum. 
Certain aspects of hyperconnectivity require technology 
and platforms that never fail.
Workforces
Given the major shifts that have taken place in the world 
outside corporate organizations, it is no surprise that 
hyperconnectivity has and will continue to have a deep 
impact on the workplace: it affects the way we work 
and connect with colleagues, customers, and suppli-
ers. Hyperconnectivity creates new business model 
opportunities and new ways of working: because of the 
proliferation of new mobile devices—from smartphones 
to tablet computers—and increasing broadband speeds, 
connecting people has never been easier. Web 2.0 social 
tools and the hyperconnected workforce are eroding 
many old work paradigms, ranging from work location 
requirements to work hours.13
Workforces are becoming more virtual, and the 
21st-century workforce will need to utilize various tech-
nologies to stay connected to one or several business 
networks. In addition, the workforce will need to utilize 
Web 2.0–like, people-centric collaboration tools and 
techniques to increase productivity and engagement. As 
more companies bring together integrated collaboration 
experiences for customers (e.g., email, instant messag-
ing or IM, chat, web conferencing), benefits such as 
enhanced productivity and improved decision making 
can be realized. The growth of so-called immersive com-
munications offers the potential of moving beyond video 
conferencing as a way of establishing a virtual presence 
with colleagues in other locations.
A hyperconnected workforce with always-on com-
munication capabilities will result in material benefits for 
the 21st-century enterprise. These include lower travel 
costs, easier and faster data and information access, 
consistent understanding, and contextual awareness.
Hyperconnectivity will also impact the organization 
of the labor force. Major structural changes will include 
shifting patterns and proportions of workers who are 
part-time, share jobs, and are self-employed; they will 
also include changes in the ease and cost-effectiveness 
of telecommuting from any location. There will be new 
ways of designing how work can be accomplished 
(e.g., crowd sourcing) to ensure continuous international 
operations as well as other workforce management chal-
lenges. There will be an increase in the phenomenon of 
non-linear career paths, with people having multi-career 
and multi-occupational working lives along with the rec-
ognition of a greater need to integrate formal educational 
periods throughout the working life and an increase, as 
well, in the number of self-managed careers.14
Web 2.0 and the emergence of the Millennial 
Generation in the workforce are already shaping the 
workplace of the future.15 The Millennial Generation is 
made up of people born between 1977 and 1997 who 
have come to rely on Web 2.0 technologies and services 
in both their personal and their professional lives. Having 
effectively been raised in a hyperconnected environment, 
this generation of workers will increasingly exert pressure 
on employers to overhaul their approach to talent man-
agement. Businesses that can attract and keep these 
talented young people could find their organizations 
transformed via increased innovation and improved cus-
tomer connectedness, and even the ability to compete 
more effectively in the global marketplace.
Research into the workplace of the future has identi-
fied the following 10 forces that will define the working 
world in 2020:
1. Demographics: The demographics of the work-
force is shifting; by 2020, there will be five genera-
tions working side by side.
2. The knowledge economy: Being conversant and 
skilled in the knowledge economy will become 
more essential to obtaining and retaining work, 
with a growing number of jobs requiring a signifi-
cantly more complex set of interdisciplinary skills.
116  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity 1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity
3. Globalization: By 2020, the globalized world will 
mean that companies will rely on the global mar-
ketplace, rather than a domestic or even interna-
tional marketplace, to fuel growth.
4. The digital workplace: The digitalized workplace 
will result in an easier way for employees to create 
and access content while securing its accuracy 
and appropriateness, especially with the growth 
of cloud computing.
5. Mobile technology: The ubiquity of mobile tech-
nology will mean that companies (e.g., Bank of 
America and Wells Fargo) will deliver corporate 
training via mobile smart phones.
6. Culture of connectivity: Hyperconnectivity will 
grow as a business tool, resulting in a connectivity 
culture in business as well as personal aspects of 
life.
7. Participation: Improved collaboration and knowl-
edge sharing will usher in a participation society, 
where it is essential to engage in societal endeav-
ors.
8. Social learning: “Learning 3.0,” or social learning, 
will incorporate social media, gaming, real-time 
feedback, and simulations.
9. Corporate social responsibility: Corporations 
will act out of social responsibility because of 
an increased cultural intelligence and a deeper 
appreciation of the relationship between business 
and society.
10. The Millennial Generation: The workforce will 
include the Millennial Generation, who have grown 
up with hyperconnectivity and embrace it as an 
inalienable part of their work culture.
Sustainability
Although it might seem counterintuitive, hyperconnec-
tivity could be a boon to sustainability. The Internet of 
Things presents an opportunity to eliminate human inter-
vention in many types of business and civil operations. 
As importantly, robust virtual environments can drive 
reductions in carbon emissions because major activities 
(e.g., education, medical care, government-related activi-
ties, and retail sales) can take place without requiring 
physical travel for the subjects involved.16
A surplus of resources in one region can be identi-
fied in advance and delivered where the need exists in a 
proactive and efficient way. Cities in the developed world 
that have lost significant percentages of their population 
because of shifts in manufacturing and demographics 
could be revitalized by members of the hyperconnected 
workforce, who can work from anywhere and are able 
to take advantage of existing housing stock and urban 
infrastructure at prices far, far below those in other 
regions. As more and more talented workers spread 
themselves around the world in search of attractive, 
reasonably priced sustainable locales in which to live and 
work, the dominance of traditional centers of commerce 
is likely to diminish.
Hyperconnectivity can be used as a tool to help 
shape and manage the environmental impact of in-
creased consumption of goods and services, which is 
reaching crisis proportions. This becomes progressively 
more important, because 800 million new consumers 
are expected to enter the market over the next 10 years. 
Designing an eco-friendly consumption pattern for con-
sumers will rely heavily on information and communica-
tions technologies (ICT) and related aspects of hyper-
connectivity. The Climate Group, a global sustainability 
initiative, estimates that appropriate applications of ICT 
can lead to the reduction of the carbon footprint of other 
sectors by nearly five times the consumption of the ICT 
sectors themselves.17 The advent of hyperconnectivity 
therefore has the potential to exert a substantial positive 
impact on climate change.
For instance, one of the biggest challenges facing 
most urban centers is vehicular traffic and transporta-
tion. Opportunities to re-envision the traveling experience 
through the use of hyperconnected transport systems 
are plentiful. Intelligent transportation systems—which 
include synchronized traffic and notification systems, 
onboard tele-metrics, and dynamic signaling—have the 
potential to encourage eco-driving, reduce congestion, 
assist with routing and journey management optimiza-
tion, and enable pay-as-you-go pricing for road usage.18 
Moreover, smart logistics solutions can enable fleet 
tracking and passenger tracking, which makes it easier 
to calibrate food and lodging needs with expected real-
time demand.
HOW CAN WE SHAPE AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF 
HYPERCONNECTIVITY?
Hyperconnectivity is arguably the single most important 
trend in today’s world, as communication technologies 
are changing so many facets of life and opening so many 
new possibilities across individual, social, and business 
spectra.19
Thus far, the global communications service provid-
ers and their networks—supported by an ecosystem of 
researchers, developers, and consumer electronics and 
equipment manufacturers and service people—have 
been the primary builders and maintainers of the infra-
structure that has enabled hyperconnectivity to flourish. 
For these organizations, hyperconnectivity is likely to be 
a key component of their business now and will almost 
certainly be central to the products and services they 
offer in the future.
Although the free enterprise model must be at the 
core of the evolution of hyperconnectivity, the service 
providers and their commercial partners alone can-
not be expected to bring it to fruition. A consortium of 
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  117
© 2012 World Economic Forum
118  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity 1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity
public-private partnerships, as well as the involvement of 
nongovernmental organizations, will be needed to ensure 
that, as a global community, we are taking the broadest 
possible view of hyperconnectivity so that it can deliver 
on its promise of economic development, more efficient 
healthcare, greater sustainability, and increased edu-
cational benefits. This broad view is necessary to craft 
and execute the coordinated plans necessary to take full 
advantage of these opportunities.
The technologies that enable hyperconnectivity can 
be harnessed, ignored, employed on an ad-hoc basis, 
or incorporated thoughtfully into a government’s strat-
egy to carry out a mission. The hyperconnectivity of our 
world has generated global wealth, but it has also made 
it possible for shocks on one side of the planet to affect 
communities on another with frightening speed. In other 
words, these technologies can be at the same time ei-
ther beneficial or harmful, empowering or dangerous, de-
pending on the context in which they are used. Recent 
events in North Africa and the United Kingdom have 
shown how communications technologies of various 
kinds and hyperconnectivity have become core to social 
movements of all types. The only thing that government 
leaders and enterprise managers cannot do with these 
technologies is make them go away.
Since these technologies and the related hypercon-
nected tools are here to stay, government leaders and 
people managers must learn how to deploy them effec-
tively to their organizations’ advantage. Policymakers and 
business leaders must surmount significant challenges 
if they are to ensure that the workforce is adequately 
trained to be able to manage the increased pressure and 
stress levels of working in an ever-connected environ-
ment.20 Careful use and tight management of these tech-
nologies has also become imperative to the responses of 
authorities on social events. The flash mobs that rioted 
across cities in the United Kingdom were coordinated—
so to speak—by text messages and by Facebook, 
Twitter, and Blackberry Messenger services. There has 
been much outcry since the UK riots, yet these were 
the same technologies that helped fuel the assembling 
of opposition groups in Tahrir Square in Cairo in 2011. 
Allowing people and cultures to connect together more 
easily is a good thing to do and should be encouraged 
by authorities at all levels. Sharing and communicating 
is how progress is made, and shaping hyperconnectivity 
allows us to fuel trends that are beneficial to daily life.
We must recognize that we are in the very early 
stages of establishing appropriate ground rules regard-
ing how we—as individuals, societies, companies, and 
government—will need to become accountable for man-
aging our relationships and responsibilities in light of the 
availability of new technologies and capabilities. The in-
creased levels of access to information, new possibilities 
for integrating and sharing formerly incompatible data 
sources, and the pervasive use of connected devices 
introduce fresh trust and privacy concerns for consum-
ers and businesses. Policymakers and business leaders 
therefore need to consider how they can best educate 
users about potential security vulnerabilities and practi-
cal solutions. Businesses will need to establish policies 
to protect their corporate assets and business-critical 
information as well as their corporate reputations.
Although hyperconnectivity is clearly a 21st-century 
phenomenon, the drive behind it—to share information 
and create a community with like-minded people—is as 
old as humankind. But the tools to fulfill that drive have 
never been so broad in scope or so widely available to 
so many people; therein lies both the promise and the 
challenge.
NOTES
 1 Blackwell and Lynn 2011. 
 2 TIA 2011. 
 3 Obiodu 2011. 
 4 Teral 2011. 
 5 See Followwill et al. 2010 for some insights into the phenomenon. 
 6 OECD 2007. 
 7 Bittinger 2011. 
 8 Eskandar et al. 2011. 
 9 See the weblog http://edyoucation.wordpress.com.
 10 For an overview of the impact of ICT on healthcare, see Media Lab 
Asia 2005. 
 11 European Commission 2008.
 12 Cole and Brillhart 2011. 
 13 Fauscette et al. 2011. 
 14 Verdon 2010. 
 15 Miller 2011; Berg 2010. 
 16 OECD 2009; Roberts 2011. 
 17 The Climate Group 2008. 
 18 The European Community has defined a common strategic 
framework to overcome many of the challenges in the 
transportation fields; see Ferreira 2011. 
 19 For the importance of connectedness in crisis situations, see 
Collins 2011. 
 20 Pedley 2011. 
REFERENCES
Berg, O. 2010. “Why the Future Workplace Will Be Hyper-Connected.” 
February 24. Content Management Connection. Available at http://
www.thecontenteconomy.com.
Bittinger, S. 2011. Hype Cycle for Government Transformation, 2011. 
Hype Cycle ID number G00214747. July 14. Gartner. Available at 
http://www.gartner.com/technology/research/hype-cycles/.
Blackwell, J. and K. S. Lynn. 2011. Broadband Subscribers Market 
Data. ABI Research. Available at http://www.abiresearch.com/
research/1002969.
Cole, P. and R. Brillhart. 2011. “Managing Customer Relationships in 
a Hyper-Connected World.” Insights & Resources. Capgemini 
.Available at http://www.us.capgemini.com/insights-resources/
publications/managing-customer-relationships-in-a-
hyperconnected-world/.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  119
1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity 1.10: The Promise and Peril of Hyperconnectivity
The Climate Group. 2008. Smart 2020: Enabling the Low Carbon 
Economy in the Information Age. A report by The Climate Group 
on behalf of the Global eSustainability Initiative (GeSI). Creative 
Commons.
Collins, S. 2011. “Conflict and Disaster Management in a Hyper-
Connected World: Cooperative, Collaborative, Real Time.” May 
19. Paper delivered at the Regional Senior Leaders Seminar, 
Cairns, Australia, May 19. Available at acidlabs.org, http://www.
acidlabs.org/2011/05/19/conflict-and-disaster-management-in-a-
hyperconnected-world-cooperative-collaborative-real-time/.
Eskandar, H., B.- C. Ubaldi, and V. Cherkasov. 2011. “Mobile 
Technologies for Responsive Governments and Connected 
Societies.” WSIS e-government workshop, Geneva, May 19, 2011.
European Commission. 2008. “ICT and e-Business Impact in the Retail 
Industry.” Impact Study No. 04/2008, Final Report, Version 4.0, 
September. A Sectoral e-Business W@tch study prepared by 
empirica GmbH on behalf of the European Commission. Bonn/
Brussels: European Commission, September 2008. Available 
at http://www.empirica.com/themen/ebusiness/documents/
Study_04-2008_Retail.pdf.
Fauscette, M., E. Traudt, and M. Wardley. 2011. “Improving Productivity 
in the Connected Enterprise Through Collaboration.” July. IDC 
Technology Spotlight. IDC #223862.
Ferreira, F. 2011. “European Commission: ICT for transport and 
Electro Mobility.” European Commission Information Society and 
Media. Slide presentation, May 23. Available at https://www.
eiseverywhere.com/file_uploads/5ac92cd3985e0d2663503808ab
8bbba2_Francisco_Ferreira_-_Comiss%C3%A3o_Europeia.pdf/.
Followwill, D., S. Singh, and A. Amarnath. 2010. “Looking Through the 
Crystal Ball: Megatrends that Will Shape the Future of the World.” 
Frost & Sullivan, Slide share discussion, December 10. Available at 
http://www.slideshare.net/FrostandSullivan/mega-trends-that-will-
shape-the-future-of-the-world.
Media Lab Asia. 2005. “ICT for Primary Healthcare: A Report.” July. New 
Delhi: Media Lab Asia.
Miller, T. 2011. “The 2020 Workplace: How Innovative Companies 
Attract, Develop, and Keep Tomorrow’s Employees Today.” Topeka 
and Shawnee County Public Library, Business and Investment 
Blog. Posted November 9. Available at http://tscpl.org/business/
the-2020-workplace-how-innovative-companies-attract-develop-
and-keep-tomorrows-employees-today/.
Obiodu, E. 2011. “Global Mobile Market Outlook: 2011–2016.” Ovum, 
September, reference code: OT00036-13. Available at www.
ovumkc.com/kc/telecoms; Press Release available at http://ovum.
com/press_releases/global-mobile-connections-to-hit-7-8-billion-
in-2016/.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 
2007. “Innovative Rural Regions: The Role of Human Capital and 
Technology.” 2007 OECD Rural Conference, Cáceres, Spain, 
March 21–23.
———. 2009. “Measuring the Relationship between ICT and the 
Environment.” July. OECD DSTI/ICCP/IE(2008)4/FINAL.
Pedley, K. 2011. “Technology and the 21st Century Worker.” GfK Tech 
Talk, May 23. Available at www.gfktechtalk.com.
Roberts, S. 2011. “ICT & the Environment, Hand in Hand.” Slide 
presentation. Available at http://www.ctu.int/download/
SophiaRoberts-ICT&theEnvironment.pdf
Teral, S. 2011. Fixed and Mobile Subscribers Market Forecast Report. 
Infonetics Research. Available at http://www.infonetics.com/
pr/2011/Fixed-and-Mobile-Subscribers-Market-Highlights.asp.
TIA (Telecommunications Industry Association). 2011. TIA’s 2011 ICT 
Market Review & Forecast. TIA. Available at http://www.tiaonline.
org/resources/market-forecast.
Verdon, J. 2010. “Stewarding Engagement, Harnessing Knowledge: 
Keeping the Future in Reserves.” Journal of Military and Strategic 
Studies 12 (4, Summer): 70–125.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  121 
CHAPTER 1.11
Maximizing the Impact  
of Digitization
KARIM SABBAGH
ROMAN FRIEDRICH
BAHJAT EL-DARWICHE
MILIND SINGH
SANDEEP GANEDIWALLA
Booz & Company
RAUL KATZ
Telecom Advisory Services LLC
Policymakers today face a different environment for 
information and communications technology (ICT) than 
the one for which they designed policies. ICT technolo-
gies are far more pervasive than they were previously: 
more people today have access to a mobile phone than 
to electricity, powering exponential growth in global data 
generation.1 With ICT access approaching ubiquity, poli-
cymakers’ next challenge is to ensure that individuals, 
businesses, and governments are making the best pos-
sible use of networks and applications. Countries that 
have achieved advanced levels of digitization—the mass 
adoption of connected digital technologies and applica-
tions by consumers, enterprises, and governments—
have realized significant benefits in their economies, their 
societies, and the functioning of their public sectors.
Previous attempts to measure the impact of ICT 
have focused primarily on assessing the economic ef-
fects of widespread access to either wireless or broad-
band technologies. But in developing a comprehensive 
methodology to measure the impact of digitization, Booz 
& Company found greater benefits linked to growing 
usage of digital technologies and applications, rather 
than access alone. We also found that benefits are 
not just economic, but encompass social and political 
spheres as well. Digitization offers incremental economic 
growth: countries at the most advanced stage of digitiza-
tion derive 20 percent more in economic benefits than 
those at the initial stage. Digitization has a proven impact 
on reducing unemployment, improving quality of life, 
and boosting citizens’ access to public services. Finally, 
digitization allows governments to operate with greater 
transparency and efficiency.
Policymakers have an important role to play in 
ensuring that their countries are progressing toward ad-
vanced stages of digitization. They need to acknowledge 
where they currently stand and recognize the benefits 
of digitization. Finally, they need to shift focus away from 
access and set into motion programs and plans that 
focus on the widespread adoption and usage of technol-
ogy. That includes elevating digitization on the national 
agenda, including the systematic planning and tracking 
of their efforts; evolving sector governance structure; 
adopting an ecosystem perspective; enabling competi-
tion; and stimulating demand.
DIGITIZATION: ICT’S NEXT EVOLUTION
The proliferation of digital technologies over the past two 
decades has been substantial, marking one of history’s 
most rapid rates of adoption of new technologies. The 
number of personal computers (PCs) in use worldwide 
surged from 100 million in 1990 to 1.4 billion by 2010. 
There were 10 million mobile phone users in the world in 
1990; today there are more than 5 billion.2 The number 
of Internet users grew at an even more rapid rate over 
the same decades, from 3 million to 2 billion.3 To put 
that into context, only two decades ago there were as 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
122  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
many Internet users in the world as people in the city of 
Madrid; today, there are as many people online as are 
living in all of Asia. The surge in ICT use has not been 
restricted to the developed world. In Africa, for example, 
more than half a billion people today connect to mobile 
networks.4
The explosive growth of ICT services is presenting 
policymakers with three key challenges. The first chal-
lenge is to establish standard performance indicators to 
measure the extent to which ICT is being assimilated in 
societies. During most of the sector’s development, ICT 
stakeholders focused primarily on access, building the 
networks that today connect much of the planet; they 
devised metrics accordingly. In a world of near ubiquity 
in terms of access, policymakers need a new way to 
look at the ICT sector.
The second challenge concerns the lack of tools 
that can determine the impact that the mass adoption of 
connected digital technologies and applications is hav-
ing on societies and economies. With practical, reliable 
tools to measure the benefits of digitization, governments 
could potentially be more ambitious in developing and 
investing in the ICT sector.
The third challenge is for policymakers to adopt new 
policy tools to accelerate digitization and reap its accom-
panying benefits. Over the past two decades, policymak-
ers established rules to enhance access to communica-
tion services—setting policies that introduce competition 
and promote infrastructure sharing, for example. Now 
they need to gain a similar understanding of the ways 
in which they can encourage adoption and boost the 
usage of digital applications by consumers, businesses, 
and public institutions.
DEFINING AND MEASURING DIGITIZATION
We believe the extent of a country’s digitization can be 
measured across six key attributes:
•	 Ubiquity5—the extent to which consumers and 
enterprises have universal access to digital services 
and applications;
•	 Affordability6—the extent to which digital services 
are priced in a range that makes them available to 
as many people as possible;
•	 Reliability7—the quality of available digital services;
•	 Speed8—the extent to which digital services can be 
accessed in real time;
•	 Usability9—the ease of use of digital services and 
the ability of local ecosystems to boost adoption of 
these services; and
•	 Skill10—the ability of users to incorporate digital ser-
vices into their lives and businesses.
To measure digitization and chart its evolution, we 
created a composite score consisting of the six criti-
cal attributes and measured these with data collected 
across 23 indicators with the aid of proxy measures (see 
Figure 1).11
Understanding digitization: The stages
We measured digitization for a sample of 150 countries 
on a scale of 0 to 100, with 100 being the most ad-
vanced, and then isolated four distinct stages of digitiza-
tion development: constrained, emerging, transitional, 
and advanced (see Figure 2). These groupings will allow 
policymakers to recognize their nation’s current level of 
digitization and provide perspective on how to progress.
Constrained economies—those with a digitization 
score below 25—face challenges in realizing basic digi-
tization building blocks such as widespread access and 
affordability. In these nations, services remain expensive 
and limited in reach.
Emerging economies—those with a score between 
25 and 30—largely have addressed the affordability chal-
lenge and have achieved significant progress in providing 
affordable and widespread access. However, the reli-
ability of services in emerging digitization nations remains 
below par and capacity is limited.
Transitional is the next digitization stage, encom-
passing those countries with a digitization score in the 
range of 30 to 40. Countries in the transitional stage 
have addressed the reliability challenge and provide 
citizens with access to ubiquitous, affordable, and rea-
sonably reliable services. Alongside the jump in reliability, 
transitional countries show minor advances in the speed, 
usability, and skill indexes.
Advanced is the most mature stage of digitization, 
achieved with a score greater than 40. These countries 
have made significant strides in addressing ICT usability 
and developing a talent base to take advantage of avail-
able technologies, products, and services while improv-
ing the speed and quality of digital services.
The accelerating pace of digitization
The pace of digitization and movement between stages 
is accelerating rapidly. Developed countries such as 
Germany, the United Kingdom, and the United States 
took nearly four years on average to move from the 
emerging to the transitional stage of digitization; now, 
developing countries such as the United Arab Emirates, 
Kuwait, and Estonia are making that same amount of 
progress in less than two years. Overall, between 2004 
and 2007, countries registered 39 stage leaps; in the 
ensuing three-year period of 2007 to 2010, 65 countries 
progressed to the next level of digitization development. 
Not only has the pace quickened, but the jump in de-
velopment has also been more marked. From 2004 to 
2007, the average growth in the digitization score was 
seven points. From 2007 to 2010, the average jump was 
ten points.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  123 
Figure 1: Key components of the digitization score
Sources: Data from ITU, Ovum, Euromonitor, Akamai, ILO (Laborsta), Global Insight, UN, WCDM, Webometrics, Bgexpert, Internet World Stats, UNESCO,   
Wireless Intelligence, and Telecom Advisory Services; Booz & Company analysis.
Digitization 
score
Component Metric
Ubiquity
Extent to which consumers and 
enterprises have universal access to 
digital services and applications
•  Fixed broadband penetration
•  Mobile phone penetration
•  Mobile broadband penetration
•  PC population penetration
•  3G mobile connection penetration
Affordability
Extent to which digital services are 
priced in a range that makes them 
available to as many people as 
possible
•  Fixed-line installation cost
•  Fixed cost per minute
•  Mobile connection fee
•  Mobile prepaid tariff
•  Fixed broadband Internet access tariff
Reliability
Quality of available digital services
•  Investment per subscriber (mobile, 
broadband, and fixed)
Speed
Extent to which digital services can 
be accessed in real time
•  International Internet bandwidth (bits/second/
Internet user)
•  Broadband speeds (peak Mb/s, average Mb/s): 
% above 2 Mb/s
Usability
Ease of use for digital services and 
the ability of local ecosystems to 
boost adoption of these services
•  Internet retail as % of total retail
•  E-government web measure index
•  % of individuals using the Internet 
•  Data as % of wireless ARPU (average 
revenue per user)
•  Domains by country per 100 inhabitants
•  IP addresses per 100 inhabitants
•  Social Network Unique Visitors per month
•  Average SMS usage per customer
Skill
Ability of users to incorporate 
digital services into their lives and 
businesses
•  Engineers per 100 inhabitants
•  % of labor force with more than secondary 
education
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
124  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Sources: Data from ITU, Ovum, Euromonitor, Akamai, ILO (Laborsta), Global Insight, UN, WCDM, Webometrics, Bgexpert, Internet World Stats, UNESCO, Wireless Intelligence, 
and Telecom Advisory Services; Booz & Company analysis.
Note: Countries are ordered from the least to the most digitized within each stage.
Le
ve
l o
f d
ig
iti
za
tio
n 
(0
–1
00
 s
ca
le
)
Stages of digitization
Figure 2: Stages of digitization, 2010 digitization levels
Constrained Emerging Transitional Advanced
150 economies
Constrained
Ethiopia
Comoros
Niger
Burkina Faso
Madagascar
Afghanistan
Lesotho
Mali
Rwanda
Yemen
Togo
Cameroon
Mozambique
Sao Tome and Principe
Benin
Burundi
Lao PDR
Senegal
Djibouti
Cuba
Nepal
Iraq
Uganda
Uzbekistan
Kenya
Vanuatu
Swaziland
Côte d’Ivoire
Vietnam
Bangladesh
Cambodia
Nigeria
Zambia
Ghana
Syria
Angola
Cape Verde
Bhutan
Morocco
Honduras
Kyrgyzstan
Bolivia
Sri Lanka
Moldova
Aruba
Namibia
Guatemala
Dominican Republic
Suriname
Pakistan
Paraguay
El Salvador
Gabon
Fiji
Egypt
India
Belize
South Africa
Guyana
Kazakhstan
Algeria
Thailand
Tunisia
Brunei Darussalam
Indonesia
Emerging
Georgia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Ecuador
China
Armenia
Trinidad and Tobago
Botswana
Antigua and Barbuda
Azerbaijan
Panama
Venezuela
Albania
Saint Lucia
Macedonia FYR
Peru
Brazil
Costa Rica
Mongolia
Lebanon
Transitional
Jordan
Seychelles
Barbados
Mexico
Turkey
Montenegro
Colombia
Bahrain
Philippines
Iran, Islamic Republic
Macao SAR
Serbia
Argentina
Oman
Uruguay
Latvia
Croatia
Bulgaria
Cyprus
Ukraine
Estonia
Kuwait
Malta
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Mauritius
Malaysia
Chile
Advanced
Lithuania
New Zealand
Slovenia
Belarus
Hungary
Poland
Greece
United Arab Emirates
Slovak Republic
Romania
Russia
Czech Republic
Netherlands
Ireland
Italy
Spain
Austria
Germany
Portugal
France
Singapore
Belgium
Australia
Finland
Sweden
United Kingdom
Japan
Denmark
Israel
Canada
Taiwan, China
Luxembourg
United States
Switzerland
Hong Kong SAR
Korea, Rep.
Iceland
Norway
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  125 
Figure 3: The framework for measuring digitization’s socioeconomic impact
Sources: Data from the World Bank, the World Economic Forum, INSEAD 2011, the OECD, Gallup Wellbeing Surveys, the UNDP Human Development Report, Transparency 
International, the UN Public Administration Network, and Telecom Advisory Services; Booz & Company analysis.
Impact of 
digitization
SubcomponentComponent
•  GDP per capita: measures total output of a country 
on a per capita basis
•  Unemployment rate: monitors level of 
unemploymentin the country
•  Global Innovation Index: evaluates progress of 
innovation readiness in countries 
GDP Growth 
Job Creation 
Innovation
Economy
Impact of digitization  
on the growth of 
economy
•  OECD Better Life Index: based on 11 areas of  
material living conditions
•  Gallup Wellbeing Thriving Index: based on a daily 
assessment of peoples’ health and well-being
•  UNDP Human Development Index (HDI): based on 
standards of living conditions
Quality of life 
 
 
 
Access to  
basic services
Society
Impact of digitization  
on the society well-
being of a country
•  Corruption Perception Index: monitors corporate & 
political corruption in international progress
•  E-government Development Index: measures digital 
interactions between government and citizens
•  Inequality-Adjusted Education Index: based on a 
subcomponent of the HDI
Transparency 
E-Government 
Education
Governance
Impact of digitization  
on public sector
Metric
This acceleration stems from a number of fac-
tors. Emerging countries now can follow the path that 
developed nations have already blazed, learning from 
their best practices. They also can take advantage of 
mature technologies and markets, and the resulting price 
reductions. Furthermore, acceleration between stages 
can stem from increased liberalization and the grow-
ing affordability and availability of digital technologies 
and skills. This hastens the implementation and usage 
of new technologies and the deployment of supporting 
infrastructure.
In sum, the whole world is moving toward an ad-
vanced stage of digitization at a rapid clip.
ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF DIGITIZATION
After developing a methodology to determine a nation’s 
level of digitization, the next step was to understand the 
contribution of digitization to economic strength, societal 
well-being, and effective governance (see Figure 3).
Economic impact
Our analysis confirms that digitization has a material eco-
nomic impact, which we assessed with three variables: 
growth in per capita GDP, job creation, and innovation. 
We analyzed 150 countries using a classical production 
function model to assess economic impact, controlling 
for a number of variables.12
We found that an increase in digitization of 10 per-
centage points triggers a 0.50 to 0.62 percent gain in per 
capita GDP. By contrast, previous studies that focused 
mainly on broadband penetration established that a 10 
percentage point increase in broadband penetration 
contributes a gain in per capita GDP of just 0.16 to 0.25 
percent.13 Thus the GDP impact from digitization is more 
than twice as large as the impact of broadband penetra-
tion (see Figure 4).
Additionally, the economic impact of digitization 
accelerates as countries transition to more advanced 
stages. Constrained digital economies realize a 0.5 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
126  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
AdvancedTransitionalEmergingConstrainedAverage broadband studies*
0.16
0.50
0.59
0.51
0.62
Figure 4: Digitization and GDP
2009–102008–092007–08
272
108
395
+45%
Source: Data from Global Insight, and Telecom Advisory Services; Booz & Company analysis.
* Average of OECD, Germany, Latin America, Brazil, Chile, and Malaysia.
4a: Contribution to GDP per capita growth of a 10 percent increase in digitization (per stage)
4b: Impact of digitization on GDP
Pe
rc
en
t
Co
ns
ta
nt
 2
00
5 
US
$ 
bi
lli
on
s
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  127 
percent increase in GDP per capita for every 10 percent 
increase in digitization, while advanced digital economies 
show a 0.62 percent increase in GDP per capita for 
every 10 percent digitization increase (see Figure 4).
Digitization also has a significant impact on job cre-
ation in the overall economy: an increase of 10 percent 
in digitization reduces a nation’s unemployment rate by 
0.84 percent. From 2009 to 2010, digitization added an 
estimated 19 million jobs to the global economy, up from 
the estimated 18 million jobs added from 2007 to 2008. 
This is an especially critical finding for emerging markets, 
which will need to create hundreds of millions of jobs in 
the coming decade in order to ensure that a booming 
population of young people can contribute to their na-
tional economies.
Finally, a 10-point increase in digitization results in 
a 6-point increase in the country’s score on the Global 
Innovation Index14—a correlation suggesting that, as a 
country progresses in its digitization development, it also 
becomes more innovative.
Social impact
Assessing the impact of digitization on societies is com-
plicated because there are no universal metrics that 
act as a barometer of societal advancement. Studies 
often tend to look at the level of inequality in a society 
(as measured by the Gini coefficient), but in emerging 
economies that are in the process of elevating millions 
from poverty, a complex relationship between economic 
growth and inequality remains. Therefore we analyzed 
societal impact on two levels: the level of quality of life 
in a society and the equality of access to basic services 
that a society requires. We used the widely published 
Gallup Wellbeing Thriving Index and the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Better 
Life Index to measure quality of life,15 and the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP)’s Human 
Development Index (HDI) to measure access to basic 
services,16 and correlated all three with the digitization 
levels of 150 countries.17
We found that increasing digitization significantly 
boosts societal well-being in a developed economy: a 
correlation run on the 34 OECD countries shows that a 
10-point increase in the digitization score results in an 
increase of approximately 1.3 points in the OECD Better 
Life Index (see Figure 5). However, the analysis reveals 
that in countries with lower levels of economic develop-
ment, the impact of digitization is not as pronounced. 
The difference appears to be that in less-developed 
economies, factors beyond digitization are more criti-
cal to quality of life: of primary importance is food; then 
housing, clothing, water, and energy; followed by health; 
and finally transportation and communication. As a 
result, it would appear that, as expected, digitization has 
an impact on quality of life only when the population has 
satisfied its basic needs.
Increasing digitization also supports better access to 
basic services, as measured by the UNDP’s HDI, which 
tracks global access to health and education as well as 
overall living standards. Our analysis indicates that, as 
countries become more digitized, all of these measures 
improve (see Figure 5). Digitization’s impact on the mea-
sures of health, education, and living standards is more 
pronounced in constrained and emerging economies, 
with a 10-point increase in the digitization score leading 
to an increase of approximately 0.13 points in the HDI. As 
economies develop, access to basic services becomes a 
given and digitization’s impact is less pronounced.
To sum up, the correlational analysis suggests that 
digitization has an impact on social well-being, partially 
as a result of the increased access to basic services. 
However, because the populations in developing nations 
are confronted with the necessity of addressing some 
basic needs—ranging from food to shelter and basic 
care—that must be satisfied before they can address 
other issues, digitization would appear to have a less 
important social contribution there than it does in more 
advanced economies.
Governance impact
The final area in which we analyzed the impact of 
digitization was government effectiveness. As for the 
analysis reviewed above, we relied on three metrics: the 
transparency of governmental activities, for which we 
used the 2010 Corruption Perception Index published 
by Transparency International;18 the delivery of e-gov-
ernment services, for which we used the e-government 
development index developed by the United Nations 
Public Administration Network (UNPAN);19 and the provi-
sioning of public education—a key government service—
for which we used the Inequality-Adjusted Education 
Index, measured by the UNDP as a subcomponent of 
the HDI.20
Our correlational analysis demonstrates that greater 
digitization enables a society to be more transparent, 
increasing public participation and the government’s 
ability to disseminate information in an accessible man-
ner: a 10-point increase in digitization increases the 
Transparency International index by approximately 1.2 
points. Digital technology gives the population more 
insight into government policies and function—an insight 
that might, in turn, lead to more active political participa-
tion and support the development of human rights.
Additionally, as expected, e-government services 
are more effective in a digitized environment. An increase 
of 10 points in digitization fosters an improvement in the 
effectiveness of e-government services (as measured on 
the UNPAN E-government Development Index) by ap-
proximately 0.1 points. Current research indicates that 
causality in this case acts both ways. Higher digitization 
contributes to more efficient delivery of e-government 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
128  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Figure 5: Societal well-being and digitization
Sources: Data from the OECD Better Life Index, Gallup WellBeing Surveys, and the UNDP HDI;  Booz & Company analysis.
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0
2
4
6
8
10
5a: Digitization and the Better Life Index (34 OECD countries)
Level of digitization (0–100 scale)
Be
tte
r L
ife
 In
de
x
y = 0.1289x + 0.095
R2 = 0.51407 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
5b: Digitization and the Wellbeing Thriving Index (67 non-OECD countries)
Level of digitization (0–100 scale)
W
el
l-b
ei
ng
 T
hr
iv
in
g 
In
de
x
y = 0.0058x + 0.0771
R2 = 0.20427
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
5c: Digitization and the Human Development Index (120 countries)
Level of digitization (0–100 scale)
Hu
m
an
 D
ev
el
op
m
en
t I
nd
ex
y = 0.2311ln(x) – 0.0684
R2 = 0.87211
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  129 
services, while better e-government services stimulate 
an increase in digitization.
Finally, digitization supports better delivery of basic 
government services, such as public education. As previ-
ously noted, digitization’s impact on the human develop-
ment indexes and subindexes is more pronounced in the 
case of developing countries, and a 10-point increase in 
digitization results in an approximately 0.17-point increase 
in the Inequality-Adjusted Education Index. However, this 
trend is projected to level out in developed countries that 
have access to such basic services.
Summary
Overall, our analysis indicates that digitization clearly 
has a positive impact on economic advancement, so-
cial well-being, and government effectiveness, although 
this impact varies according to a country’s level of digi-
tization. Digitization has an increasing impact on the 
economy and quality of life as countries advance through 
the stages of digitization, and more impact on access to 
basic services and education in countries that are just 
beginning their journey (see Table 1).
KEY POLICY IMPERATIVES
The digitization index and analysis will be an invaluable 
tool for countries to understand their current level of 
digitization and how to build on it.
In recent years, both developing and developed 
countries have invested significantly in broadband infra-
structure, ensuring that their citizens have high-speed 
access to the Internet and communications services. But 
this investment is not enough. We studied the countries 
that have made rapid advances through the four stages 
of digitization to see what measures and policies contrib-
uted to their progress and found that policymakers can 
play a pivotal role by focusing on five key imperatives.
These imperatives are critical for all countries—both 
the mature economies that have reached the advanced 
stage of digitization, and the developing economies that 
fall primarily into the constrained, emerging, and transi-
tional stages of digitization. They are:
•	 Elevate digitization on the national agenda: 
Ensure that national policy and senior government 
stewardship provide the platform for progress; cre-
ate a plan for digitization that is tracked and moni-
tored, with accountability residing at senior levels of 
government.
•	 Evolve sector governance: Segregate regula-
tory and policy roles; clarify both ownership and 
accountability for ICT and digitization.
•	 Adopt an ecosystem philosophy: Address the 
convergence of telecommunications, media, and 
information technology; develop a strategy that 
addresses all stages of the value chain in a holistic 
way; and consider the local ecosystem as well as 
export opportunities.
•	 Enable sustainable competition: Develop a com-
petitive ICT model that stimulates both innovation 
and adoption, while ensuring sector sustainability 
and investments.
•	 Stimulate demand: Invest in boosting digitization 
usage and service adoption; ensure that public  
services are available through e-channels.
Depending on their current stage of digitization, 
countries will vary in how they can implement these 
imperatives.
Table 1: The impact of increased digitization
Variable Metrics Positive Impact of Digitization
Economic GDP Growth GDP per capita: Overall 0.60%*
GDP per capita: Constrained Stage 0.50%*
GDP per capita: Emerging Stage 0.51%*
GDP per capita: Transitional Stage 0.59%*
GDP per capita: Advanced Stage 0.62%*
Society Job Creation Unemployment rate –0.84%*
Innovation Global Innovation Index 6.27 points†
Quality of Life OECD Better Life Index 1.29 points†
Access to Basic Services UN HDI: Constrained & Emerging 0.13 points†
UN HDI: Transitional & Advanced 0.06 points†
Governance Transparency Corruption Perception Index 1.17 points†
E-government E-government Development Index 0.10 points†
Education Inequality Adjusted Education Index: Constrained & Emerging 0.17 points†
Inequality-Adjusted Education Index: Transitional & Advanced 0.07 points†
* 10 percent increase in digitization; † 10-point increase in digitization.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
130  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Elevating digitization on the national agenda
To reach the advanced stage of digitization and real-
ize the wide-ranging benefits it offers, countries need 
support from the highest levels of government. National 
leaders must formulate and commit to a national digi-
tization policy, with oversight at the executive branch 
level. Governments need to play a leading role in setting 
the agenda for digitization because many participants 
are seeking to stake a claim in this fast-growing arena. 
As a result, without a coherent strategy and oversight, 
the sector may devolve into a “tragedy of commons” 
in which too many competitive stakeholders impede 
progress.
Governments also need to recognize the impor-
tance of the ICT sector for overall economic growth and 
treat it accordingly, rather than focusing on the direct 
tax revenues it can offer. Many developing countries still 
struggle to make the transition from viewing the sector 
as a source of tax revenue to understanding it as an 
enabler of socioeconomic development. But countries 
that have made that transition have been rewarded. For 
example, in recognition of its role as a vital economic 
enabler, Qatar has reduced the royalties paid by the 
telecommunications sector and as a result has incentiv-
ized investments, growing the ICT sector’s contribution 
to Qatar’s GDP by approximately 16 percent for the last 
five years and doubling Qatar’s share of total ICT activity 
in the Middle East region.
Another essential element of elevating digitization 
to the national level is to create an effective system that 
measures, tracks, and demonstrates conclusively the 
significant impact of every dollar that is invested in it. 
First, policymakers need to create a detailed national- 
and sector-level digitization plan, clearly identifying goals, 
milestones, and corresponding metrics. Second, policy-
makers need to institutionalize systems to measure and 
monitor digitization progress against those plans, while 
creating accountability for the targets defined.
Irrespective of their stage of digitization develop-
ment, most economies are still in the process of estab-
lishing the relevant metrics. Some developed countries 
have revised and refined their plans; for example, the 
United States has laid out its National Broadband Plan. 
Its six goals (ensuring high-speed Internet in 100 mil-
lion homes, providing leadership in mobile innovation, 
developing a ubiquitous and robust broadband network, 
ensuring affordable broadband service, establishing 
wireless nationwide access for first responders, and 
enabling a clean energy economy) are intended to bring 
“the power and promise of broadband to us all.”21
Evolving sector governance
Governance is another critical consideration. Countries 
need to effectively fulfill four complementary roles: policy, 
regulation, sector development, and e-enablement. Each 
role must maintain a distinct and dedicated function, yet 
must be coordinated with the others. In finding this bal-
ance, countries may choose to establish separate institu-
tions or create clearly defined roles within an umbrella 
organization. Although the separate institutional model 
initially allows better focus and enables more effective 
capabilities building, countries might opt to envelop 
all four governance functions within a single organiza-
tion to ensure synergies and efficiencies, as the United 
Kingdom and Qatar have done.
Countries’ approach to ICT governance should 
also enable close collaboration between the public and 
private sectors, through industry forums, government 
and industry policy consultations, and frameworks for 
public-private partnerships (PPPs). Developing an effec-
tive PPP model requires countries to provide incentives 
for less-attractive investments while enabling the private 
sector to target high-return investments. For example, 
governments may decide to fund broadband deployment 
in remote areas, but let the private sector target the at-
tractive urban areas.
Finally, effective governance will allow for close 
collaboration among telecommunications, media, and 
technology players, as well as the integration of the ICT 
sector with other industry verticals. Common agen-
cies—for example, entities that consider sector gover-
nance in conjunction for players in telecommunications, 
media, and information technology—can support such 
collaboration.
Most developed countries have established strong 
sector governance. Singapore, for example, has suc-
cessfully executed its digitization plan and grew the ICT 
sector by 13.6 percent between 2006 and 2008, due in 
part to its robust governance. The Singapore Infocomm 
Development Authority (IDA) is a sector regulator and 
pursues development; in addition, the Singapore Media 
Development Authority (MDA) performs the sector regu-
lator and development role in the media sector. Both the 
IDA and the MDA are coordinated through the Ministry of 
Information, Communications and Arts.22
Developing countries can accelerate development 
of their ICT sectors by establishing a policymaking func-
tion and investing early in a sector-development arm. 
Saudi Arabia, for example, advanced rapidly through the 
stages of digitization by ensuring fulfillment of all regula-
tory and oversight roles at the national level.23
Adopting an ecosystem philosophy
Governments need to recognize the changing scope and 
boundaries of the sector and make policy decisions on 
the basis of what is best for the ecosystem as a whole. 
This requires policymakers to recognize the convergence 
among the telecommunications, media, and technol-
ogy industries; the integration of the various stages of 
the value chain, from infrastructure to applications and 
usage; and the need to look beyond their local markets 
and capture potential export opportunities.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  131 
First, convergence among the telecommunications, 
media, and information technology sectors demands 
that governments address all three when formulating ICT 
policies. For example, developing markets have thus far 
focused primarily on telecommunications infrastructure, 
and as a result this sector is fairly well developed. In 
many developing markets, however, information tech-
nology is still lagging. For instance, in the United Arab 
Emirates, non-telecommunications ICT spending ac-
counts for 21 percent of total ICT spending,24 compared 
with 37 percent in developed markets such as Finland;25 
this means that there is significant untapped ICT oppor-
tunity beyond telecommunications.
Second, policymakers need to look beyond infra-
structure and shift their attention to building local capa-
bilities in creating content and applications. In Estonia, 
for example, by 2001 ICT companies had contributed to 
more than 500 million euros in annual revenues and cre-
ated more than 400,000 jobs since 1999.26 This encour-
aged Estonia to launch a Development Fund in 2007 
to further develop its knowledge economy, investing in 
resources such as ICT parks and innovation centers.
Finally, in addition to developing the local ICT eco-
system, countries should explore their ability to capture 
export opportunities. Countries targeting export oppor-
tunities will need to build fairly robust innovation capa-
bilities if they are to become international ICT players. 
Egypt, for instance, has introduced ICT into its educa-
tional system, developed e-content, created technology 
parks, encouraged the creation of small and medium-
sized enterprises focused on ICT via developing technol-
ogy incubators, and established an ICT Trust Fund that 
uses ICT to promote and enhance the performance of 
these enterprises.27 As a result, Egypt has emerged as 
one of the largest ICT exporters in the Middle East and 
North Africa region, with 27 percent yearly growth in ICT 
service exports from 2005 to 2009.28
Enabling sustainable competition
Competition in the ICT sector fosters innovation and 
drives adoption—two elements that enable countries to 
progress in their digitization efforts.
Most developing markets see liberalization as a key 
mechanism to drive competition. Policymakers have fa-
vored auctions to introduce competition, while simultane-
ously generating revenues from finite resources such as 
spectrum. In Saudi Arabia, for example, Saudi Telecom 
preparations for market liberalization led to a 9 percent 
annual growth rate in digitization between 2000 and 
2004. This spurred heavy investment in fixed and mobile 
broadband by the two main service providers, which 
in turn fueled a 17 percent annual growth in digitization 
between 2005 and 2010.
In some cases, excessive competition can backfire. 
In India, for example, excessive liberalization triggered 
aggressive competition and unsustainable returns for 
shareholders. In cases where intense competition and 
market fragmentation hinders investment and creates 
an innovation roadblock, policymakers should consider 
strategies to encourage consolidation to restore balance 
to the sector.
Developed economies are even considering 
regulated monopolies for certain telecommunications 
services, such as passive infrastructure, where they 
recognize the need for protected, utility-like returns. In 
such circumstances, regulators need to ensure that the 
monopolistic entity is well regulated and that there is 
significant service-level competition to spur innovation. 
Singapore, for example, created a regulatory framework 
for next-generation that effectively gave Opennet a 
monopoly in building and operating the country’s passive 
networks. This framework allows regulated returns on 
investment in infrastructure while ensuring competition in 
services. Similarly, in the United Kingdom, policymakers 
are encouraging consolidation of the infrastructure—as 
evidenced by the merger of Orange and T-Mobile—while 
maintaining a competitive environment in services.
Stimulating demand
As countries move beyond providing access to ICT, they 
need to encourage the adoption of connected digital 
applications by individuals, businesses, and government 
agencies. Developing markets in the early stages of 
digitization should focus on boosting demand for basic 
telecommunications services such as fixed, mobile, 
and broadband across both public and private sec-
tors. As countries move to more mature stages, gov-
ernments should focus on boosting service adoption. 
Governments can also stimulate demand by ensuring 
that all public services—such as paying taxes, renewing 
drivers’ licenses, and enrolling in school—can be per-
formed using broadband networks.
Creating demand for ICT services requires a 
high level of ICT literacy and skilled human capital. 
Policymakers therefore can invest in digitization by pro-
viding training programs and education incentives. In 
addition, they can educate the population about the 
digital services available. Finally, they can boost usage 
by promoting high-speed broadband services and en-
suring that these networks both are widely available and 
affordable.
A number of countries in advanced stages of digiti-
zation offer lessons in effectively stimulating demand. For 
instance, France has increased ICT spending at a yearly 
rate of 5 percent for the past eight years through a num-
ber of initiatives.29 Among these are the Villes Internet 
association, which works with local authorities to develop 
Internet-literate citizens;30 and the Comité interministériel 
pour la société de l’information, which was created in 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
132  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
2003 to encourage Internet usage, improve public ser-
vices via technological innovation, and strengthen the 
competitiveness of French companies.31
CONCLUSION
It has been clear to policymakers for several years that 
digitization has the potential for dramatic economic, 
social, and political improvements. Anecdotal evidence 
abounds: water utilities have installed sensors that 
reduce leakage, saving water and money; healthcare or-
ganizations send text messages to pregnant women with 
advice on prenatal care, creating a healthier new genera-
tion before children are even born; fleets of trucks use 
digital GPS devices that direct them to shorter routes, 
cutting down on their greenhouse gas emissions.
The challenge for all stakeholders in the ICT eco-
system has been to quantify the impact of digitization. 
Numerous organizations, including the World Economic 
Forum with its evolution of the Networked Readiness 
Index, are taking steps in that direction. Our hope is that 
this analysis, which illustrates the need to define and 
measure ICT beyond broadband access, can provide an 
input on such efforts.
However, realizing the opportunity that broadband 
presents will require that policymakers undergo a shift 
in their thinking. They must go beyond considering ICT 
and focus instead on digitization, with an emphasis 
on ICT usage rather than just access. They must take 
into account their current level of digitization in order to 
ensure that they are focusing on the right investments to 
advance to the next stage. And they need to look with 
fresh eyes at policies that were developed a decade ago 
to understand how they can be updated for a new era.
Policymakers are hopeful about this opportunity, 
and many are committed to action. The steps they take 
in the coming years will determine whether they can 
translate opportunity into reality.
NOTES
1 See ITU’s World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators, the World 
dataBank World Development Indicators (WDI).
2 Morgan Stanley 2009.
3 ITU’s World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators and World 
dataBank World Development Indicators (WDI), available at http://
databank.worldbank.org.
4 ITU’s World Telecommunication/ ICT Indicators.
5 This attribute is the result of a combination of several measures, 
taken from ITU’s World Telecommunication/ ICT Indicators, Hartley 
and Mackenzie 2009, and Wireless Intelligence.
6 This attribute is the result of a combination of several measures, 
taken from ITU’s World Telecommunication/ ICT Indicators and the 
World dataBank World Development Indicators (WDI).
7 This attribute is the result of a combination of several measures, 
taken from ITU’s World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators.
8 This attribute is the result of a combination of several measures, 
taken from ITU’s World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators and 
Akamai State of the Internet report, 2010.
 9 This attribute is the result of a combination of several measures, 
taken from the Euromonitor World Retail Data and Statistics, 
the UNPAN’s “E-government Web measure index,” ITU’s World 
Telecommunication/ ICT Indicators, Webometrics, Bgexpert, and 
Internet World Stats available at http://www.economywatch.com/
economic-statistics/economic-indicators/Facebook_Penetration_
Rate, Wireless Intelligence.
 10 This attribute is the result of a combination of several measures, 
taken from the UNESCO Institutes for Statistics, available at 
http://stats.uis.unesco.org/unesco/TableViewer/tableView.
aspx?ReportId=169, and ILO LABORSTA, available at http://
laborsta.ilo.org.
 11 Proxy measures were used because exact and accurate data 
were not available. For example, the overall investments in the 
telecommunications sector was used as proxy to measure the 
reliability of the underlying network; eight metrics were used to 
measure usability because of the lack of data that measure actual 
businesses online and other more indicative metrics.
 12 We developed a classic growth model to assess the impact 
of digitization on national and per capita GDP. This model 
controls for human capital and capital formation and provides an 
accurate snapshot of relative impact of digitization on economic 
development. Similarly, to assess its impact on job creation, we 
controlled for gross capital formation, foreign direct investment, 
other financial investments, and secondary school enrollment. 
In addition, we performed statistical tests on the index to ensure 
that the components and subcomponents adequately measured 
different features of the same underlying concept. We performed 
factor analysis among those tests and estimated the Kaiser-
Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy.
 13 See Koutroumpis 2009; Katz 2012; Katz et al. 2010.
 14 Given the lack of a large established set of data for historical 
analysis, this analysis was based on a simple correlation. We 
recognize that such analysis, while providing an indication of the 
relationship, does not provide a sense of causality. However, these 
results will be able to be better measured in the near future as 
more data emerge. See INSEAD 2011.
 15 The Gallup Wellbeing Thriving Index is available at http://www.
gallup.com/poll/147167/High-Wellbeing-Eludes-Masses-Countries-
Worldwide.aspx#2; the OECD Better Life Index is available at 
http://www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/.
 16 The UNDP Human Development Index, 2010, is available at http://
hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/hdi/.
 17 Again, the lack of time-series data prevented us from building a 
regression model.
 18 Corruption Perception Index 2010 results are available at http://
www.transparency.org/policy_research/surveys_indices/cpi/2010/
results /.
 19 UNPAN E-government Surveys are available at http://unpan1.
un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un-dpadm/
unpan038858.pdf.
 20 See the UNDP Human Development Index, 2010, available at 
http://hdr.undp.org/en/statistics/hdi/.
 21 See the National Broadband Plan: Connecting America, available 
at http://www.broadband.gov/plan/.
 22 See Singapore’s Ministry of Information, Communications 
and Arts (MICA) at http://app.mica.gov.sg/ and the Singapore 
Telecommunications Regulator at the IDA website at http://www.
ida.gov.sg/home/index.aspx.
 23 See Saudi Arabia’s Communication and Information Technology 
Commission, available at http://www.citc.gov.sa/.
 24 WITSA 2010.
 25 WITSA 2010.
 26 Pihl 2001.
 27 Egyptian Ministry of Communications Information and Technology, 
available at http://www.mcit.gov.eg/.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.11: Maximizing the Impact of Digitization
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  133 
28 World dataBank, World Development Indicators (WDI).
29 WITSA 2010.
30 See the Villes Internet website at http://www.villes-internet.net/.
31 CISI 2003.
REFERENCES
Broadband.Prime. 2009. “Estonia Jumps on the FTTH Bandwagon,” 
April 27. Available at www.broadbandprime.com/2009/04/ estonia-
jumps-on-ftth-bandwagon.html.
CISI (Comité interministériel pour la société de l’information). 2003 
Archives. Services en ligne: Dossiers. “Comité interministériel pour 
la société de l’information 2003,” December 12. Available at http://
www.ddm.gouv.fr/rubrique.php3?id_rubrique=70.
CITC (Communications and Information Technology Commission). 2010. 
Annual Report 2010. Available at http://www.citc.gov.sa/English/
MediaCenter/Annualreport/Documents/PR_REP_006E.pdf.
Digital Europe. 2010. “Digital Europe’s Vision 2020: A Transformational 
Agenda for the Digital Age.” White Paper. Available at http://
www.digitaleurope.org/Portals/0/Documents/vision2020/
DIGITALEUROPE_Vision2020_executive_summary.pdf.
Gallup Global Wellbeing Surveys. 2010. Gallup Wellbeing Thriving Index. 
Available at http://www.gallup.com/poll/147167/High-Wellbeing-
Eludes-Masses-Countries-Worldwide.aspx#2
Hartley, S. and M. Mackenzie. 2009. “Mobile Broadband Users and 
Revenues Forecast Pack to 2014.” London: Ovum Plc. April 2, Pub 
ID: OV2270654.
Idowua, P., D. Cornfordb, and L. Bastinc. 2008. “Health Informatics 
Deployment in Nigeria.” Journal of Health Informatics in 
Developing Countries 2 (1): 15–23. Available at http://www.jhidc.
org/index.php/jhidc/article/viewFile/11/44.
INSEAD. 2011. The Global Innovation Index 2011. Fontainbleu, France: 
INSEAD. Available at http://www.globalinnovationindex.org/gii/
GII%20COMPLETE_PRINTWEB.pdf.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2003. Broadband 
Korea: Internet Case Study, March. Geneva: International 
Telecommunication Union. Available at http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/
ict/cs/korea/material/CS_KOR.pdf.
Kamel, S. 2009. “The Evolution of the ICT Sector in Egypt: 
Partnership4Development.” Communications of the IBIMA 10 
(2009): 39–49. Available at http://www.ibimapublishing.com/
journals/CIBIMA/volume10/v10n7.pdf.
Katz, R. 2011. “The Contribution of Broadband to Economic 
Development.” In V. Jordán, W. Peres, and H. Galperin, eds., Fast-
Tracking the Digital Revolution: Broadband for Latin America and 
the Caribbean. Santiago: Economic Comisión for Latin America 
and the Caribbean. 49–79.
———. 2012. The Impact of Broadband on the Economy: Research to 
Date and Policy Issues. Geneva: International Telecommunication 
Union.
Katz, R. L., S. Vaterlaus, P. Zenhäusern, and S. Suter. 2010. “The Impact 
of Broadband on Jobs and the German Economy.” Intereconomics 
45 (1): 26–34. Available at http://www.intereconomics.eu/archiv/
jahr/2010/1/.
Koutroumpis, P. 2009. “The Economic Impact of Broadband on Growth: 
A Simultaneous Approach.” Telecommunications Policy 33 (9): 
471–85. Available at http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0308596109000767.
Lallana, E. C. 2004. An Overview of ICT Policies and e-Strategies of 
Select Asian Economies. New Delhi: UNDP ADPIC. Available at 
http://www.apdip.net/publications/ict4d/ict4dlallana.pdf.
Morgan Stanley. 2009. The Mobile Internet Report. Available at http://
www.morganstanley.com/institutional/techresearch/mobile_
internet_report122009.html .
MCIT (Egyptian Ministry of Communications and Information 
Technology). 2010. “The Evolution of Internet Usage in 
Egypt,” November (in Arabic). Available at http://www.new.
egyptictindicators.gov.eg/en/Publications/PublicationsDoc/
internet_inforeport.pdf.
———. ICT Indicators Report 2006–2009. Available at http://www.
new.egyptictindicators.gov.eg/en/Publications/PublicationsDoc/
ICT_Indicators_Report_en.pdf.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development). 
2009. “Policy Responses to the Economic Crisis: Investing in 
Innovation for Long-Term Growth.” June. Available at http://www.
oecd.org/dataoecd/59/45/42983414.pdf.
OECD Better Life Initiative. OECD Better Life Index. Available at http://
www.oecdbetterlifeindex.org/.
Pihl, T. 2001. “Analysis of Estonian IT Sector Innovation System,” 
October. Archimedes Foundation. Available at http://ev2.ioc.ee/
useful/evikings-analysis-cluster-state.pdf.
StimulatingBroadband.com. 2011. “GOP Kills Full $700 Million in Rural 
Broadband Loans Slated by USDA,” April 11. Available at http://
www.stimulatingbroadband.com/2011/04/gop-kills-full-700-million-
in-rural.html.
Telecommunications Council. 2006. “Contribution pour une Europe 
numerique,” June. Available at http://www.industrie.gouv.fr/pdf/
europnum.pdf.
TIF (Telecoms InfoTech Forum). 2007.”Singapore’s Broadband Future: 
The iN2015 Initiative.” Briefing Paper. Available at http://www.tif.
trpc.com.hk/papers/2007/jun/briefing_0706.pdf .
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2010. The UNDP 
Human Development Index, 2010. Available at http://hdr.undp.org/
en/statistics/hdi/.
WITSA (World Information Technology and Service Alliance). 2010. 
Digital Planet 2010. Vienna, VA: WITSA.
Zita, K. 2005. “Malaysia Telecom Brief.” Network Dynamics Associates 
LLC. Available at http://www.ndaventures.com/Malaysia_Telecom_
Brief.pdf.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  135 
CHAPTER 1.12
Trusting the Unknown: 
The Effects of Technology 
Use in Education
FRANCESC PEDRÓ
UNESCO
Governments have been investing in educational technol-
ogy since the early 1980s.1 The devices, services, and 
applications of this technology are constantly evolving, 
and schools and classroom arrangements continue to 
develop in order to take advantage of it. The increasing 
emphasis on personal ubiquitous access to connectivity 
for communication and information purposes, coupled 
with the evolution of technology and lower prices, con-
tribute to modifying the context in which investment 
decisions about educational technology—the technology 
policies in education—have to be made.
When reviewing these policies, it is striking how 
little is known about the effects of using technology on 
the quality of school education,2 and, more specifically, 
which particular uses of technology can result in bet-
ter student performance. If a good evidence-supported 
knowledge base existed in this domain, then the analysis 
of these effects, and the factors that determine or condi-
tion them, could be used to unveil what works and why. 
But in the absence of hard evidence, the evaluation of 
these policies remains an almost impossible endeavor 
and the whole issue of how these policy decisions are 
made remains open.
This chapter addresses two questions. First, it looks 
at what is currently known and the limitations of the 
existing knowledge base—recognizing the paradox that 
developing countries, which make comparatively bigger 
efforts in this domain, lag behind also in terms of knowl-
edge base. Second, it considers both what elements are 
missing and how the important methodological chal-
lenges required to assemble them could be met.
WHY TECHNOLOGY POLICIES MATTER IN 
EDUCATION
During the past 30 years, governments have made 
important efforts to support school technology adoption. 
Typically,3 school technology policies have involved the 
acquisition of equipment and networks; the provision of 
teacher-training programs and teacher-support schemes; 
and, lately, the development of digital content by public 
institutions, the private sector, or teachers themselves. 
There are no estimates about the total amount of these 
investments, although some data, such as the ratio of 
students per computer, can provide a very rough indi-
cation if compared internationally. No doubt, for most 
developed and middle-income countries a serious effort 
has been made; it is likely that the scale of the effort in 
low-income countries may be proportionally higher.4
The rationale for such investments relies on a num-
ber of assumptions about the role that school could 
play in key areas for economic and social development 
if technology was used in teaching and learning to a 
significant extent.5 First, from an economic perspective, 
it is assumed that the emerging model of the knowledge 
economy requires not only an increased proportion 
of digitally skilled workers, but also the development 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
136  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
and acquisition of new skills that depend on, or can be 
fostered by, technology-enhanced or supported learning 
processes.6 It is therefore expected that schools will pro-
vide adequate learning opportunities for this acquisition.
Second, from a social perspective, schools have 
always been seen as a crucial bastion in the struggle 
against the digital divide, which was originally seen as 
the gap between those who have access to technology 
and those who do not. Nowadays, the concept of digital 
divide has been expanded to include a second definition, 
according to which the real divide relates not to access 
but to the ability to benefit from use: young people with 
equal access to technology could benefit from it in differ-
ent ways according to their socioeconomic backgrounds 
and, in particular, to peer pressure. School education is 
expected to offer compensatory opportunities to per-
form better for those unable to benefit as intended from 
technology.
Third, the concept of culture itself has evolved 
dramatically because technology has not only a direct 
impact on cultural contents, by generating new forms of 
cultural expression, but also an indirect impact on the 
relationships that people have with culture, by allowing 
every individual to consume and produce, indistinctly, 
digital content. If school education is expected, among 
other things, to allow people to benefit from culture, it 
follows that schools have a role to play and therefore 
should do their best to address the issues posed by 
digital culture. And fourth, a policy perspective also 
has to be considered, because civic values are being 
challenged by technological developments and, on top 
of this, citizens are increasingly required to operate in 
contexts of e-democracy or e-administration. Schools 
can be seen in this respect as providing an environment 
where these values can be learned experientially.
Given the scale of the challenges, any of these 
assumptions would in fact suffice to justify the public ef-
forts made to incorporate technology into school edu-
cation. However, if there is one key assumption behind 
technology policies in education, it is that technology, if 
adequately used, can boost the quality of school educa-
tion. This improved quality would be the result either of a 
higher efficiency of teaching and learning or of dramatic 
changes in the nature of the processes involved, leading 
to a paradigm shift in education. To sum up, students 
would learn more, better, or even differently, thanks to 
technology.
THE EXISTING KNOWLEDGE BASE
As in many other areas of public policy, the education 
sector has been subject to an increasing public scru-
tiny in which data and indicators both play a major role. 
Policymakers can now look at an expanding knowledge 
base that allows them to make informed decisions on the 
basis of benchmarking indicators.7 They could also ben-
efit from a dedicated (sub) set of indicators in education 
that would allow to them to benchmark inputs, pro-
cesses, and outcomes in relation to technology policies 
in education, and situate all of these factors in an appro-
priate context. If the overarching policy ambition is that 
students learn more, better, or even differently thanks 
to technology, then the corresponding indicators should 
provide factual information about the extent to which this 
is actually happening; in sum, they should tell the whole 
story about the effects of technology in education—or at 
least provide useful indications.
Given the importance of the policy goals and the as-
sumptions made, it could be expected that there would 
be an ever-growing knowledge base about the effects 
of technology policies in education. Yet the reality is 
that even the most well known international sources for 
education indicators lack basic information about tech-
nology policies in education. For developed countries, 
neither the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) nor the European Commission has 
a comprehensive set of indicators (that is, one involving 
inputs, processes, and outcomes), although they both 
are increasingly improving the dataset to include, for 
instance, assessments of student performance in digital 
skills. In fact, the OECD’s Programme for International 
Student Assessment (PISA) dataset remains the most 
reliable source of information on access, use, and out-
comes in this domain,8 despite its limitations in terms 
of geographical coverage and reliability,9 and its inad-
equacy regarding current classroom practices.10
For developing countries, the situation is even 
worse. UNESCO has only recently begun some regional 
initiatives intended to provide at least a comparative 
worldwide perspective of access to computers and 
the Internet in schools, while the World Bank’s System 
Assessment and Benchmarking for Education Results 
(SABER) initiative and the Inter-American Development 
Bank are currently focusing in a compilation of detailed 
information about technology policies in education, 
mostly from a qualitative perspective. Unfortunately, nei-
ther of these initiatives has yet produced tangible results.
As has been pointed out several times—for de-
veloped countries,11 as well as developing ones12—the 
existing knowledge base is quite scattered and limited 
in scope: it covers only some of the important aspects 
related to the inputs (how many devices have been sent 
to schools, for example); it provides only very limited 
information about the processes (how many students 
per device, for example); and it is rather confusing, if not 
biased, in relation to the outcomes (the effects of tech-
nology use on student performance).
The three reasons that the knowledge base is so 
limited and scattered are each related to a different piece 
of the puzzle: inputs, process, and outcomes. The first 
reason is an overemphasis on access as a key objec-
tive of technology policies in education. The second 
reason derives from the methodological challenges that 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  137 
the investigation of the teaching and learning processes 
poses, in particular in relation to the role that technol-
ogy plays in the improvement of student outcomes. The 
final reason is the poor understanding of what the issue 
about the effects of technology in education really is and 
how to address it.
Inputs: An overemphasis on access
In many respects, the public discourse about technology 
policies in education seems to be stuck back in the mid 
1980s. Then the key policy goal was to grant access to 
emerging technologies (computers); at that time, very 
few students had a computer at home. Thus introducing 
computers into the classroom was seen as an efficient 
strategy to cope with the digital divide between the 
haves and the haves not. Although in many developed 
countries this policy goal does not apply because of the 
high level of technology equipment in homes, the public 
discourse still seems to privilege investments in equip-
ment and connectivity as an appropriate way to modern-
ize schools.
Certainly, there are policy advantages in this over-
emphasis on granting access to technology in schools. 
One is that the required investments have a high visibility: 
equipment shines—even if it is actually used only margin-
ally, if at all. Taxpayers can easily see how public money 
translates into real investments. On the other hand, 
technology equipment also has also a symbolic value 
over other possible investments in education: equipment 
talks, because it conveys the promise of modernization 
and symbolizes the commitment of public authorities to 
support quality education.
Back in the mid 1980s it made a lot of sense to set 
benchmarking indicators about access to technology in 
schools, because that was in line with the policy priori-
ties at that time. This resulted in a focus on clearing data 
about the ratios of students per computer and, more 
recently, about the percentage of schools connected to 
broadband Internet. In fact, two complementary indica-
tors are used: the number of devices or services that 
have been installed (inputs) and the ratio of students 
per each of these devices—which is, in fact, how far the 
existing indicators about educational technology can go 
in terms of process. As an example, Figure 1 presents 
the latest available data (2009) about the progress made 
in terms of access to computers in schools by reflect-
ing the evolution of the ratios of computers per student 
between years 2000 and 2009.
No doubt, in most developed countries the ratios 
have improved, sometimes dramatically, in just nine 
years. However, the significance of such a measurement 
becomes problematic because, lacking other indicators, 
access becomes overemphasized. Implicitly, the overem-
phasis on these measurements sends the public mes-
sage that reducing ratios is a relevant policy concern—
regardless of whether the effects of such a reduction on 
student outcomes are barely correlated, if not entirely 
unknown. The current problem with this overemphasis 
on access is that it diverts attention from the core issue: 
the intensity and variety of uses of technology for en-
hancing the quality of learning.
Process: The unaddressed challenge of investigating 
the role of educational technology
In the context of providing public services, school edu-
cation is very unusual because it is strongly dependent 
on the professional decisions made by the teaching 
professionals, quite often taken individually in the context 
of a particular classroom and a given subject matter. 
Obviously, the quality of the educational system cannot 
be higher than the quality of its teaching body. Yet, in 
education, policies modify the conditions under which 
teachers operate, but they hardly modify the nature of 
the processes involved—that is, teaching and learning. 
In this context, technology policies have mostly tried to 
open a window of opportunity for teachers to become 
more efficient and eventually transform the processes for 
which they are responsible. But the final responsibility of 
technology adoption has always been, and will continue 
to be, in the hands of each individual teacher. This is 
why technology policies have tended to focus solely on 
providing access to technology opportunities, assuming 
that every individual teacher would benefit from this op-
portunity in the most professionally sound way.
Interestingly, this leads to another important issue 
that goes beyond technology policies: the governance 
of school education, particularly when it comes to the 
issues driving teaching practices. In most countries, the 
education sector still lacks the kind of evaluation, sup-
port, and incentive arrangements that are already found 
in other areas of public service. How, in the absence of 
professional evaluation systems, teachers can get their 
professional development needs duly identified; can be 
provided with adequate tailored support; and, finally, can 
be rewarded for good practices remain questions open 
to policy debate internationally. The problems encoun-
tered in relation to how teachers’ technology adoption 
can be driven, monitored, and supported is an indication 
of the current weakness in policy and governance ar-
rangements in the education sector.
There are also technical issues related to measure-
ment. To begin with, it is worth considering that there 
are no well-established monitoring systems of teaching 
and learning practices. In other words, when it comes 
to analyzing predominant classroom practices, most 
educational systems are totally blind. What is even more 
important is that this missing information puts a severe 
constraint on the ability of educational systems to link 
practices with student outcomes. Clearly, this lack of 
monitoring arrangements also sets the current limits on 
what is known in relation to classroom practices with 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
138  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25
Thailand
Russian Federation
Romania
Peru
Liechtenstein
Latvia
Indonesia
Hong Kong-China
Bulgaria
Brazil
Argentina
Albania
OECD average 25
United States
Switzerland
Sweden
Spain
Portugal
Poland
Norway
New Zealand
Mexico
Korea
Japan
Italy
Israel
Ireland
Iceland
Hungary
Greece
Germany
Finland
Denmark
Czech Republic
Chile
Belgium
Austria
Australia
Figure 1: Computers-per-student ratios, 2000 and 2009
Source: OECD, 2011.
Notes: OECD average 25 is the average value for the non-OECD participating countries in this survey. Names of partner countries are italicized.
Ratio
n 2000
n 2009
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  139 
technology—to put it simply, these practices are not 
monitored at all.
The issue of measurement has a second aspect: 
the specific difficulties linked to monitoring technology 
use. Measuring access to technology is far easier than 
measuring its use, in every sector. In addition, the way in 
which access is measured in education has nothing to 
do with the intensity of access, but rather it is linked to 
the availability of resources—in particular computers and 
Internet connections—to grant teachers and students 
opportunities to use technology, whether these opportu-
nities are realized or not. Measured this way, technology 
use seems to be equivalent again to technology provi-
sion but, as a very well known essay on this issue re-
called some years ago,13 it may well be that equipment is 
oversold and underused, resulting in the paradox of high 
access but null significant use. An initial indication of this 
can be seen in Figure 2, which shows the time spent 
using computers in language-of-instruction lessons, as 
declared by 15-year-olds in PISA.
The effects: Rephrasing the question
In the domain of technology policies in education, a very 
simple question is quite often posed: does technology-
supported education make a difference? Or, more gen-
erally, does technology lead to better student results? 
When looking for a response in the existing knowledge 
base about the effects of technology in education, a 
striking fact seems to emerge: there is no conclusive 
evidence. This has been known for some years as the 
“non-significance phenomenon,”14 leading to the over-
all conclusion that, in education, technology makes 
no difference because the investments made have not 
translated into improved educational productivity,15 thus 
reasserting Solow’s productivity paradox in the educa-
tion sector.16
Although it appears that the answer to such a ques-
tion (whether technology improves students’ results or 
not) is quite intuitive, the problem is that the question is 
neither logical nor useful because it is not formulated in 
a way that takes into account the complexity of educa-
tion. Additionally, and more importantly, it does not help 
to inform policy decisions in an appropriate way, leav-
ing unanswered the issue of whether the investments in 
technology are worth the effort. Briefly, when phrased 
this way, without caution, the issue leads to confusion 
because it is ill-defined or, at least, not sufficiently de-
fined for a proper empirical assessment.
Behind all this ambiguity is a poor understanding 
between those who make the decisions about invest-
ments and those who are expected to benefit from 
them, because two different rationales are quite often 
in place. The former would like to receive a clear-cut 
response about whether or not the investments in edu-
cational technology pay off. For the decision makers, 
these investments are one possible option among many. 
Teacher training, career incentives, salary increases, or 
a decrease in class size are just some of the alternative 
options for educational investments that policymakers 
can use to improve the quality of education. To make in-
formed decisions, policymakers need cost-effectiveness 
analysis—although their final decisions could also take 
into account other factors, such as the symbolic value of 
the proposed policy. For them, the issue is straightfor-
ward: is it worth investing in educational technology?
Teachers and educationalists look at the issue 
very differently. They usually insist on the complexity of 
education—that is, on the fact that learning is not only 
a function of formal teaching activities that take place 
in the classroom but also of other, nonformal educa-
tional influences that can hardly be accounted for in 
the productivity equation of school education. Activities 
undertaken by the learner outside school—and even 
inside school—at home or with peers interact with those 
carried out during formal instruction hours. As a result, 
when learning results are measured—as in the context 
of national or international student assessments—it 
is almost impossible to isolate the role played by one 
individual teacher in one specific subject matter during 
one particular academic year.17 For the same reason, it 
is also impossible to isolate the effects of the technology 
components in learning from the most important factor: 
the strategies put in place.18
Therefore, the issue about the effects of technology 
in education has to be rephrased in a way that takes 
into account the complexity of the intervening factors in 
learning. The real question is not about whether to use 
technology or not, but about teaching and learning strat-
egies and the ways in which technology solutions can 
make them more efficient. The problem is that no data 
are available to address this question comprehensively 
as of yet.
DATA MUST INFORM POLICYMAKING
Despite the limitations of the existing knowledge base, 
there is no particular argument against a functional 
approach—one that considers inputs, processes, out-
puts, and context—in the assessment of technology 
policies in education. This simple approach provides a 
clear way to address the key questions, although it has 
been challenged by competing perspectives.19 Yet, as 
it can be seen below, these questions remain mostly 
unaddressed.
Inputs
The key questions about the inputs of technology poli-
cies in education include three different domains: (1) the 
nature of the technologies proposed and their range 
(how many different solutions are being backed), (2) the 
relative financial effort made to support them, and (3) 
the equitability of access to technology inputs. More 
specifically:
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
140  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
0 20 40 60 80 100
Japan
Poland
Croatia
Serbia
Uruguay
Ireland
Hungary
Slovak Republic
Italy
Spain
Lithuania
Israel
Estonia
Latvia
Slovenia
Trinidad and Tobago
Portugal
Belgium
Germany
Chile
Greece
Hong Kong SAR
Thailand
Qatar
Czech Republic
Iceland
Bulgaria
Austria
Panama
Singapore
Macao SAR
OECD average 29
Korea
Jordan
Russian Federation
Switzerland
Finland
New Zealand
Canada
Netherlands
Liechtenstein
Turkey
Australia
Sweden
Norway
Denmark
Figure 2: Intensity of computer use during language-of-instruction lessons
Source: OECD, 2011.
Notes: OECD average 29 is the average value for the non-OECD participating countries in this survey.
Minutes per week
n More than 60 minutes per week
n 31–60 minutes per week
n 0–30 minutes per week
n No time
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  141 
1. What is the nature and range of educational tech-
nologies put into the hands of users? Despite the 
fact that most literature still refers only to comput-
ers, there are competing technology solutions, 
some of which (such as interactive whiteboards) 
are more appropriate for teachers, while others 
(such as tablets) are more suitable for learners. 
Data about the nature and range of these solu-
tions would help to understand better what type 
of educational models are being proposed—
whether, for instance, they privilege teaching tech-
nologies (like interactive whiteboards) or learning 
technologies (as in one-to-one computing initia-
tives).
2. What is the relative size of the investment in edu-
cational technology? The answer to this question 
should provide key data about the investment in 
educational technology per user, distinguishing 
between technology for teacher and for student 
use. In addition, the resulting data could be com-
pared with other important indicators, such as 
average teachers’ salaries, to provide relevant 
information about the relative effort made and the 
comparative importance attached to educational 
technology.
3. How equitable is access to educational technol-
ogy? The issue of the digital divide is still relevant 
in most countries, although inequity of access is 
higher in developing countries. In this particular 
domain, variance across schools and territories 
can give an indication of equity of access, which 
may be linked to poorly designed technology poli-
cies (which can neglect the realities facing the 
teachers, in some cases), or to technology limita-
tions (such as weak networks).
Process
Questions about processes point to a lack of clarity 
about the purpose of educational technology and thus 
an ambiguity in its role in teaching and learning. This is 
far more difficult to measure than the inputs, because 
a single technology device or service permits multiple 
uses. Moreover, any attempt to unveil the role that tech-
nology plays in teaching and learning would require a 
degree of transparence in what is going on inside the 
classroom that currently either does not exist or can-
not easily be accepted by the teaching profession. This 
poses a methodological challenge: how to address 
the issue of how little is known about the teaching and 
learning processes. Although the challenge is currently 
on the agenda of major international assessment efforts, 
it will take a long time to obtain a clear picture of what 
teachers and students actually do in the classroom. In 
the best-case scenario, the areas to be covered are the 
following:
1. For what purposes are the different technology 
solutions being used? This is commonly known 
as the issue of the variety of ways that technol-
ogy can be used. Addressing it must take into 
account not only different subject areas but also 
different ages and educational levels of students. 
Again, it is important to distinguish between uses 
of technology by teachers and uses by students. 
In both cases, different technology solutions can 
be adopted inside the classroom and outside it—
for instance, one solution may be used to prepare 
lessons and a different solution used for doing 
homework. Thus a comprehensive approach that 
considers what the user of the technology does in 
different and multiple settings is needed.
2. How long is each technology solution being used? 
This second question relates to the intensity of the 
use of technology. As for the previous question, 
it is important to address this by considering dif-
ferent intervening factors: the type of technology, 
its purpose, the subject area, the type of user 
(teacher or student), the educational level, and the 
location in which it is used. Although some inter-
national surveys provide initial indications, existing 
measures of the intensity of use are left to the 
individual user and, as it has been already seen, 
teachers and students tend to have very different 
perceptions.
Effects on outcomes
To establish a comprehensive approach to the effects 
of technology in education, two important elements are 
missing. The first missing factor is a knowledge base 
about how technology is actually being used in the 
classroom, which in turn points to the need for a better 
understanding of the two key variables of intensity and 
variety of uses. The second missing element is an explo-
ration of the learning outcomes that, going beyond tra-
ditional subject areas, are more closely related to tech-
nology; these are widely known as “21st-century skills.” 
This is quite often seen as the million dollar question: 
which technology policies contribute most to the quality 
of education? Which uses of technology boost student 
performance in the different subject domains? Given the 
endless array of possible combinations of teaching and 
learning strategies, the only way to operationalize this 
question is to look at the relationships between variety 
and intensity of uses, on the one hand, and variations in 
outcomes, on the other.20
To know more about the contribution of technology 
to the improvement of learning results, it is necessary to 
expand the knowledge base about teaching and learning 
at large—that is, to discover what is going on inside the 
classroom. A better understanding of the strategies that 
are currently used in the classroom would not only be 
informative about the intensity and the variety of uses of 
technology, but would also be crucial for understanding 
what works in light of student outcomes and determin-
ing the added-value, if any, that educational technology 
brings to teaching and learning both in the classroom 
and outside it. Therefore, going further than the mere 
issue of access, there are clearly two areas for which 
more information is needed: the intensity and the variety 
of educational technology usage in the classroom. The 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
142  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
–100 –80 –60 –40 –20 0
 Colombia
 Chile
 Austria
 Hungary
 Poland
 Spain
 OECD average 16
 France
 Denmark
 Belgium
 Norway
 Sweden
 Iceland
 Ireland
 Macao SAR
 New Zealand
 Hong Kong SAR
 Australia
 Japan
Korea, Rep.
20 40 60 80 100
Figure 3: Proficiency of 15-year-olds in digital reading, 2009
Source: OECD, 2011.
Note: OECD average 16 is the average value for the non-OECD participating countries in this survey.
Percentage of students
 Below Level 2
n Level 2
n Level 3
n Level 4
n Level 5 and above
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  143 
40 50 60 70 80 90 100
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Figure 4: Percentage of 15-year-olds who reported using a computer at home and at school, 2009
Pe
rc
en
ta
ge
 o
f s
tu
de
nt
s 
us
in
g 
a 
co
m
pu
te
r a
t s
ch
oo
l
Percentage of students using a computer at home
Source: OECD, 2011.
Note: OECD average 29 is the average value for the non-OECD participating countries in this survey. Each economy is identified by the two-letter abbreviation used for Internet 
top-level domain names, available http://www.greenbuilder.com/general/countries.html: AT = Austria, AU = Australia, BE = Belgium, BG = Bulgaria, CA = Canada,  
CH = Switzerland, CL = Chile, CZ = Czech Republic, DE = Germany, DK = Denmark, EE = Estonia, ES = Spain, FI = Finland, GR = Greece, HK = Hong Kong SAR,  
HR = Croatia, HU = Hungary, IE = Ireland, IL = Israel, IS = Iceland, IT = Italy, JO = Jordan, JP = Japan, KR = Korea, Rep., LI = Lichtenstein, LT = Lithuania,  
LV = Latvia, MO = Macao SAR, NL = Netherlands, NO = Norway, NZ = New Zealand, PA = Panama, PT = Portugal, QA = Qatar, RS = Serbia, RU = Russian Federation,  
SE = Sweden, SG = Singapore, SI = Slovenia, SK = Slovak Republic, TH = Thailand, TR = Turkey, TT = Trinidad and Tobago, and UY = Uruguay.
OE
CD
 a
ve
ra
ge
 2
9
intensity of use refers to the amount of time and the 
sequence of use—that is, how much a particular tech-
nology solution is being used, either by the teacher or by 
individual students. The variety of use, in turn, is related 
to the vast array of uses that a particular technology 
device or service allows—again, either in the hands of 
the teacher or the student.
An exploration of the outcomes also requires ad-
dressing the growing number of calls for a wider ap-
proach to skills formation for the knowledge economy 
and society. These calls insist on the need to include 
those 21st-century skills in national and international 
student assessments. Although an international consen-
sus about what these skills are or how to assess them 
adequately is not yet in place,21 what emerges from the 
ongoing discussions is that many, but not all, of these 
new skills can be duly trained and assessed only through 
an intensive use of technology solutions. This in turn 
provides an opportunity to assess the actual benefits to 
be obtained by using technology in education. A good 
example of the relevance of this type of assessment is 
given in Figure 3, which presents the results of the first 
assessment of student outcomes in digital reading.22
To sum up, the evaluating the interaction among 
processes and outcomes should take into account two 
different types of outcomes:
1. outcomes in traditional subject areas or skill 
domains, such as literacy, mathematics, and 
science, which are those most often assessed  
in national and international student assessments; 
and
2. outcomes in new skill domains, such as those 
often considered to be part of the set of 21st-
century skills—these include digital literacy as well 
as other skills whose execution can be either sup-
ported or enhanced by technology.
In addition, it is in outcomes that the complex issue 
of equity has to be examined, by focusing on the weight 
of key variables such as gender, socioeconomic status, 
and location in determining what outcomes are actually 
achieved.
Context
 The investigation of contextual factors is critical to an 
understanding of the reasons that particular technol-
ogy solutions receive more financial support, are more 
widely used across the board, or are more closely linked 
to better student outcomes. As in other policy sectors, 
the range of contextual variables can be overwhelming 
and the right choice can be made only on the basis of 
a sound theory about educational technology use. A 
good example of the importance of contextual variables 
is offered in Figure 4, which presents the percentage of 
NL
NODK
AU LT
SE FI
ATHK
MO
QA
CZ
PA
TH
TR
UY
CL
TT
JP
SK
NZ
BG
CA
IS
CH
JO RU RS
KR
GR LT
LV
IL
EEPT
SI
IT
IE BESG
HRHU
PL
ES DE
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
144  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
15-year-olds with access to a computer both at home 
and at school. Clearly, the gap between the two uses (at 
home and in the classroom) is far from being constant 
across countries, thus indicating that intervening vari-
ables do matter more than contextual pressure.23
The analysis of the contextual variables should con-
sider three different layers:
1. The micro level: This level looks at the classroom 
and, in particular, the individual characteristics of 
teachers and students, including attachment to 
technology and views about teaching and learn-
ing.
2. The meso level: This level considers the school 
and, more specifically, the institutional policies 
concerned with educational technology, including 
technical and educational support arrangements.
3. The macro level: This level takes into account the 
technology policies in the education sector, as 
supported and enforced by the corresponding 
public authority at the system level.
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACHES AND 
CHALLENGES
There is no doubt that data gaps remain unaddressed 
because of the serious methodological challenges and 
the scale of the efforts required to address them. Rather 
than dedicated questionnaires to ministries, which can 
answer only questions about investments and access, 
what may work best is a mixed-methods approach that 
combines empirical experiments, large-scale surveys, 
and direct observations.
The challenges ahead
In the investigation of technology policies in education 
with a focus on their effects, three methodological chal-
lenges are particularly demanding. These are (1) the 
way in which teachers make decisions about the role 
attached to technology in their teaching and learning 
strategies; (2) the differences present across disciplines 
and subject areas; and (3) the growing opportunities to 
use technology from which students benefit outside the 
classroom.
First, it is essential that the professional decisions 
a teacher makes about teaching and learning strate-
gies do not consider technology components in an 
isolated way.24 Teachers, in light of their assumptions, 
professional judgments, and available resources make 
choices in the context of what can be considered to be a 
constellation of technological opportunities, with a wide 
range of possibilities that can include the blackboard 
and printed books and workbooks as well as interactive 
whiteboards, teacher computers or student laptops, and 
tablets or portable devices. Teachers do not consider 
decisions about what particular technology suits them 
more as if one technology option excluded the rest; 
instead, they consider which technology solutions (that 
is, what particular combinations of resources and tools) 
best suit their teaching and learning strategies for a given 
purpose.
Second, both intensity and variety of use have 
to be examined specifically for different subject areas 
(language, mathematics, science, foreign languages, 
social sciences, etc.) because the disciplinary cultures 
as well as the particular learning objectives set for each 
area require different teaching and learning strategies. 
Accordingly, it may be expected that different educa-
tional technology approaches will also emerge in each 
subject area.
And third, in yet another important challenge for ed-
ucation, the issue of how today’s students relate to digi-
tal devices and services in their daily lives and how much 
they rely on them for information and communication 
has to be addressed. Young people play an important 
prescribing role when it comes to families’ propensity to 
buy technological devices or services, as it can be seen 
in the difference in the percentage of homes with chil-
dren that have Internet access and those homes without 
children that have Internet access. On the other hand, 
children—adolescents in particular—tend to use technol-
ogy solutions that suit their socialization needs, leading 
to high levels of technology attachment. Although some 
experts are convinced that this reliance immediately 
translates into higher student expectations of technology 
use in the classroom—a claim that research has not yet 
been able to support—students do use technology solu-
tions to address their learning needs at home. Typically, 
they benefit from computers to do their homework and 
from the Internet to download resources and communi-
cate with peers—partially, but not only, about homework. 
Clearly, the particular way in which students benefit from 
technology solutions to learn outside the classroom has 
to be considered when trying to ascertain the effects of 
technology on student outcomes.
A mixed-methods approach
There is no doubt that a winning methodological strat-
egy to analyze the effects of technology in education will 
have to be a mixed-methods approach. Although ques-
tionnaires addressed to ministries can work relatively 
well in centralized systems to investigate the scale of the 
investments or the state of access, they hardly can be of 
any use when a more comprehensive perspective, in-
cluding processes and outcomes, is envisaged or when 
technology policies in education are decentralized—
particularly if the competent authority is each individual 
school, as seems increasingly to be the case. Empirical 
experiments, large-scale surveys, and direct observa-
tions can be used to address different research ques-
tions and, if appropriately combined, result in a holistic 
approach.
Empirical experiments serve the purpose of in-
vestigating which technology solutions result in better 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  145 
learning outcomes while keeping other intervening fac-
tors constant. Yet they pose the challenge of how to 
reach a critical mass of evidence from which clear mes-
sages can emerge, which is not yet possible. As has 
been repeatedly shown,25 different attempts to conduct 
meta-analysis provide inconclusive, if not confusing, 
messages. This is probably because existing experi-
ments have taken a piecemeal approach, using alter-
native theories that can hardly be combined into one 
theoretical body and focusing on small-scale and very 
specific interventions.26 National and international efforts 
should be made to reach scientific consensus about the 
lessons learned and the way forward.
Large-scale surveys, both national and interna-
tional, can provide basic data about the intensity and 
variety of uses of technology, although these also have 
important drawbacks. The most important problem with 
these surveys is that the perspectives of teachers and 
students have to be combined to obtain a balanced 
picture. Teachers, on the one hand, may be tempted to 
provide socially appropriate responses that suit the taste 
of the public authority on which they depend, possibly 
overstating the use of technology. Students, on the 
other hand, may not be qualified enough—because of 
their age and their lack of wide experience and mature 
judgment and expression—to properly qualify either the 
intensity or the variety of uses: hence the problems with 
surveys of primary school children. However, surveys 
have an important role to play in determining how and 
for what purpose technology is being used at the system 
level, as well as the internal variance present across ter-
ritories, schools, or subject areas. If, instead of question-
naires dedicated to technology usage, student outcomes 
assessment surveys were used, then the resulting 
knowledge base could be boosted by linking outcomes 
to intervening factors and thus setting the foundations for 
a general theory.27 Ideally, to properly address the issue 
of the effects of technology, student assessments should 
provide data about performance both in traditional 
subject matters and in the more specific domain of the 
digital skills.
And finally, direct observations are quite compli-
cated methodological exercises that frequently bring 
up questions about intrusiveness or fake behaviors. 
However, such observations are the only way to under-
stand the dynamics of technology use in the classroom. 
They are essential for understanding the reasons behind 
teachers’ professional choices, which would otherwise 
remain incomprehensible, as well as for knowing the 
rationale for students’ preferences in detail. Ultimately, 
direct observations can result in a wide array of assess-
ments of what works.28 When well documented, they 
facilitate the identification of the key factors to consider 
when replicating successful experiments and scaling up 
the lessons learned, thus setting the pace for true sys-
temic innovation.29
CONCLUDING REMARKS: HOW ARE TECHNOLOGY 
POLICIES IN EDUCATION MONITORED AND 
EVALUATED?
In the context of the issues just discussed, it is easy to 
conclude that technology policies in education are far 
from being based on evidence. The limited scope and 
scarcity of the existing knowledge base would certainly 
support this conclusion. Moreover, in the absence of 
a robust knowledge base and appropriate monitoring 
and evaluation arrangements, there is no way to inform 
policymaking with empirical evidence. As the title of 
this chapter suggests, policymakers may be trusting an 
unknown. However, they may be doing it for a reason: 
by prioritizing access to technology they convey a very 
simple message—that they are using taxpayers’ money 
to modernize schools in a way that can be actually seen 
and touched. What use schools and teachers make of 
this modernization opportunity it is a different issue that 
can be addressed only if more powerful accountability 
systems are in place.
Hopeful indications point to a transition initiated less 
than two decades ago with the emergence of national 
and international student assessments. When it comes 
to an analysis of the effects of technology in education, 
these large assessment efforts should be seen as a 
window of opportunity for investigating further the role 
that technology solutions play in improving the quality 
of education. But the right research questions must be 
asked. Because educational phenomena are quite com-
plex and multi-faceted, the right questions are not about 
whether or not to use technology at all, but about which 
technology solutions can best suit the evolving learning 
requirements that each individual teacher has to manage 
in the classroom. Equipment may shine and speak for 
itself, but unless it is properly used no educational ef-
fects will be ever seen.
NOTES
 1 In this document, a reference to educational technology is 
meant to encompass all kinds of digital devices, services, and 
applications that can be used in a school context, either by 
teachers or by students. Yet, from a historical perspective, the first 
public investments aimed at modernizing the tools at the service 
of teaching and learning can be said to have started in the mid 
1950s with large-scale rollouts of school equipments for radio and 
television.
 2 Unless otherwise stated, all the considerations made here refer 
to primary and lower secondary education only. The context and 
characteristics of vocational or higher education would require a 
different approach.
 3 Benavides and Pedró 2007.
 4 Among other things, this is because the costs of the devices are 
roughly comparable worldwide but teachers’ salaries are not. 
The ratio between the cost of a laptop computer and the monthly 
salary of a primary school teacher tends to be higher than 1 in 
many low-income countries.
 5 Pedró 2011.
 6 These are commonly referred to as 21st-century skills.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
1.12: The Effects of Technology Use in Education
146  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
7 The UNESCO Institute of Statistics (UIS) publishes in cooperation 
with the World Education Indicators. Other international 
organizations, in particular the OECD, publish their own analysis 
based on the same analytical framework, under the series title of 
Education at a Glance.
8 This is particularly evident since PISA’s inclusion of assessment 
of digital skills, such as on-screen reading. See OECD 2011. The 
International Computer and Information Literacy study (ICILS) 
is a study that will provide a more comprehensive assessment 
of digital skills in the coming years. See also the International 
Association for the Evaluation of Student Achievement, http://
www.iea.nl/.
9 The PISA information about these issues is based only on the 
declarations of students and head teachers.
10 For instance, no information about the use of interactive 
whiteboards is available, nor is information about teacher practices 
with technology.
11 OECD 2010a; Scheuermann et al. 2009.
12 Trucano 2005.
13 Cuban 2001.
14 This expression was first used to indicate that, in the particular 
case of distance education, research was unable to demonstrate 
the superiority of technology-supported courses over traditional 
arrangements of distance education. It has been later extended to 
all other areas of education. See Russell 1999.
15 Brynjolfsson 1993; Hikmet et al. 2008; Peslak 2005.
16 Triplett 1999.
17 However, different techniques related to the measurement of 
added value aim at improving the chances of isolating influences.
18 Technology components include both traditional (such as paper 
and pencil) and digital.
19 Some of these perspectives, representing the views of different 
international organizations—such as the OECD, the European 
Commission, or the Inter-American Development Bank—are 
discussed in Scheuermann et al. 2009.
20 This process assumes that all other variables remained constant.
21 Ananiadou and Claro 2010.
22 No international assessments on other digital skills are available as 
of yet.
23 This is the argument often claimed by proponents of the “digital 
natives” discourse. See Prensky 2001a, 2001b.
24 Frank et al. 2004.
25 Olofsson et al. 2011.
26 Ross et al. 2010.
27 This has been the case for developing models of technology 
acceptance that have been successfully texted empirically in the 
education sector; see Davis et al. 1989; Schwarz and Chin 2007; 
Venkatesh et al. 2007.
28 Nachmias 2004.
29 OECD 2010b.
REFERENCES
Ananiadou, K., and M. Claro. 2010. 21st Century Skills and 
Competences for New Millennium Learners in OECD Countries. 
Paris: OECD Publishing.
Benavides, F., and F. Pedró. 2007. Políticas educativas sobre 
nuevas tecnologías en los países iberoamericanos. Revista 
Iberoamericana de Educación (45): 19–69.
Brynjolfsson, E. 1993. “The Productivity Paradox of Information 
Technology.” Communications of the ACM 36 (12): 67–77.
Cuban, L. 2001. Oversold and Underused: Computers in the Classroom. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Davis, F. D., R, P. Bagozzi, and P. R. Washaw.1989. “ User Acceptance 
of Computer Technology: A Comparison of Two Theoretical 
Models.” Management Science 35 (8): 982–1003.
Frank, K. A., Y. Zhao, and K. Borman. 2004. “Social Capital and 
the Diffusion of Innovations Within Organizations: The Case of 
Computer Technology in Schools.” Sociology of Education 77 (2): 
148–71.
Hikmet, N., E. Z. Taylor, and C. J. Davis. 2008. “The Student 
Productivity Paradox: Technology Mediated Learning in Schools.” 
Communications of the ACM 51 (9): 128–31.
Nachmias, R. 2004. “Factors Involved in the Implementation of 
Pedagogical Innovations Using Technology.” Education and 
Information Technologies 9 (3): 291–308.
OECD. 2010a. Are the New Millennium Learners Making the Grade? 
Technology Use and Educational Performance in PISA. Paris: 
OECD Publishing.
———. 2010b. Inspired by Technology, Driven by Pedagogy: A Systemic 
Approach to Technology-Based School Innovations. Paris: OECD 
Publishing.
———. 2011. PISA 2009 Results: Students On Line: Digital Technologies 
and Performance. Paris: OECD Publishing.
Olofsson, A. D., J. O. Lindberg, G. R. Fransson, and T. E. Hauge. 
2011. “Uptake and Use of Digital Technologies in Primary and 
Secondary Schools: A Thematic Review of Research.” Nordic 
Journal of Digital Literacy 6 (4): 208–26.
Pedró, F. 2011. Tecnología y escuela: Lo que funciona y por qué. 
Madrid: Fundación Santillana.
Peslak, A. R. 2005. “The Educational Productivity Paradox: Studying the 
Effects of Increased IT Expenditures in Educational Institutions.” 
Communications of the ACM 48 (10): 111–14.
Prensky, M. 2001a. “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants.” On the Horizon 
9 (5): 1–12.
———. 2001b. “Digital Natives, Digital Immigrants, Part II: Do They 
Really Think Differently?” On the Horizon 9 (6): 15–24.
Ross, S. M., G. R. Morrison, and D. L. Lowther. 2010.”Educational 
Technology Research Past and Present: Balancing Rigor and 
Relevance to Impact School Learning.” Contemporary Educational 
Technology 1 (1): 17–35.
Russell, T. L. 1999. No Significant Difference Phenomenon (NSDP). 
Raleigh: North Carolina State University Press.
Scheuermann, F., F. Pedró, and European Commission, Joint Research 
Centre. 2009. Assessing the Effects of ICT in Education: 
Indicators, Criteria and Benchmarks for International Comparisons. 
Luxembourg: Publications Office of the European Union and 
OECD.
Schwarz, A., and W. Chin. 2007. “Looking Forward: Toward an 
Understanding of the Nature and Definition of IT Acceptance.” 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems 8 (4): 13.
Triplett, J. E. 1999. “The Solow Productivity Paradox: What Do 
Computers Do to Productivity?” Canadian Journal of Economics 
32 (2): 309–34.
Trucano, M. 2005. Knowledge Maps: ICT in Education. Washington DC: 
infoDev / World Bank.
Venkatesh, V., F. Davis, and M. G. Morris. 2007. “Dead or Alive? The 
Development, Trajectory and Future of Technology Adoption 
Research.” Journal of the Association for Information Systems 8 
(4): 10.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Part 2
Case Studies of Leveraging 
ICT for Competitiveness  
and Well-Being
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  149 
CHAPTER 2.1
Big Ambitions in Rapidly 
Changing World: 
Azerbaijan
RASIM ALIGULIYEV, Information Technology Institute, 
Azerbaijan National Academy of Sciences
GALIB GURBANOV, Azerbaijan Internet Society
During its 20 years of independence, the Republic of 
Azerbaijan has leveraged its position as a key oil and 
gas center in order to develop strong regional ties while 
simultaneously utilizing its revenues from these sectors 
to promote economic diversity. Such diversification has 
been a crucial part of Azerbaijan’s national strategy since 
1993. The major goals of the government for the upcom-
ing years are:
•	 maintaining prudent macroeconomic management 
and improving trade policies and institutions,
•	 strengthening Azerbaijan`s role as a regional trans-
port corridor and improving the road and highway 
system within the country, and
•	 improving the business environment to encourage 
high growth in non-oil sectors.1
In line with the government’s plans for diversifica-
tion, attracting foreign direct investment (FDI) has been 
established as a high priority. Accordingly, the govern-
ment has acted aggressively to create a favorable envi-
ronment for foreign investment in Azerbaijan. Among the 
many actions taken by the government in that regard has 
been to simplify the business registration procedures. 
In the World Bank’s Doing Business 2011,2 Azerbaijan 
positioned reasonably well in the rankings with respect 
to starting up a business, registering property, protect-
ing investors’ interests, enforcing contracts, and obtain-
ing access to credit. Progress also has been made with 
respect to the registration period for foreign companies 
through benefiting e-service applications. It is worth not-
ing that Azerbaijan has been ranked the most competi-
tive economy among the Commonwealth of Independent 
States (CIS) countries in both the 2009–2010 and 2010–
2011 Global Competitiveness Reports published by the 
World Economic Forum.3
Economic policies carried out over the last decade 
have resulted in threefold GDP growth in Azerbaijan. 
Moreover, budget revenues and expenditures increased 
by more than eight times and strategic currency reserves 
reached US$41 billion. Other economic indicators also 
show a positive trend: the unemployment rate declined 
to 5.5 percent, the inflation rate decreased to 5.1 per-
cent, and the poverty level dropped to 9.11 percent.
From 2005 to 2010, total investment in Azerbaijan’s 
economy was about US$74 billion.4 Despite the fact that 
Azerbaijan’s economy has cooled from the dizzy days 
of 34.5 percent growth recorded in 2006, the country 
has maintained double-digit growth during the years of 
the global financial crisis. Although growth has slowed in 
the oil sector, mainly because of lower oil prices in 2009, 
the non-oil sector has been able to pick up much of the 
slack, with the information and communication technolo-
gies (ICT), banking, construction, and real estate sectors 
all experiencing substantial growth.
Several state programs in various sectors—includ-
ing ICT, tourism, construction, and agriculture—gave a 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
150  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2010200920082007200620052004
0
10
20
30
40
strong boost to Azerbaijan’s economy in 2010. Non-oil 
economic growth was robust in 2010 at 7.9 percent, 
compared with 3 percent a year earlier, largely because 
of significant public investment.5 Azerbaijan’s key eco-
nomic goal for the next 10 years is to double its GDP. 
ICT is expected to play a major role in this projected 
economic development, both in its own right and by 
supporting the further development of other economic 
sectors, such as the oil and gas industry.
ICT AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
In recent years, the ICT sector has played an increas-
ingly important role in the socioeconomic development 
of Azerbaijan. In recognition of that important role, the 
government has identified ICT as one of the priority sec-
tors of the national economy, and has taken significant 
steps toward the formation of an information society and 
knowledge economy in Azerbaijan.
The strategic development of ICT in the Republic 
of Azerbaijan is defined by the National Information 
and Communication and Technologies Strategy for the 
Development of the Republic of Azerbaijan (2003–2012),6 
along with two state programs concerned with the 
development of ICT and other relevant programs of 
Azerbaijan. This strategy consists mainly of three essen-
tial pillars:
1. liberalization of the telecommunications market 
and the creation of an effective regulatory mecha-
nism;
2. development of telecommunications infrastruc-
ture; and
3. development and deployment of e-government 
and e-services.
Liberalization of the telecommunications market
The goals of Azerbaijan’s ICT liberalization and regulation 
include the following:
•	 maintaining compliance of domestic legislation with 
relevant international standards and the require-
ments of the World Trade Organization;
•	 attracting new telecommunications operators to the 
market and establishing a sound competitive envi-
ronment for market participants;
•	 ensuring the efficient, effective, and fair use of a lim-
ited number of resources and frequencies; and
•	 regulating interconnection issues and ensuring the 
implementation of advanced practices with respect 
to telecommunications licensing.
The liberalization of the telecommunications market 
and the introduction of competition have opened up 
tremendous opportunities for doing business in the ICT 
sector in Azerbaijan. As a result, and because of the 
government’s support of entrepreneurship in the sector 
US
$ 
(m
ill
io
ns
)
Gr
ow
th
 r
at
e 
(p
er
ce
nt
)
Figure 1: ICT sector revenues and growth rate, US$ million
Source: State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 ICT sector revenues, US$ millions    Growth rate, percent
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  151 
and the establishment of a sound competitive environ-
ment to ensure the proper development of the market, 
new fixed and mobile telephone network operators have 
begun operation. Currently, there are 4 mobile operators, 
7 fixed-line operators, and 35 Internet service providers. 
The same policies have helped attract ICT commodity 
equipment manufacturers and broadcasting companies 
to Azerbaijan.
These developments are reflected by the private 
sector’s share of the overall ICT market, which has 
soared from 67.3 percent in 2003 to 80.0 percent in 
2011. Moreover, all of the above-mentioned market play-
ers have been very active in investing. As a result, by 
2011 ICT-related investments had summed to US$2.0 
billion since 2004, 25 percent of which was in FDI.
Such a high volume of investment inevitably boosted 
the growth of the ICT sector in general. Azerbaijan has 
witnessed double-digit growth in the last eight years. 
During that same period, the income produced by the 
country’s ICT sector increased by 5.3 times. In 2010 
alone, ICT generated US$1.5 billion and the annual 
growth rate of the sector was 32 percent. Furthermore, 
the share of the ICT sector in non-oil GDP increased by 
7.3 percent.
ICT infrastructure development
ICT infrastructure development is crucial. A necessary 
first step in maintaining the growth of the ICT sector is 
attracting FDI and increasing the impact and share of ICT 
in the national economy. Azerbaijan has made significant 
achievements in developing fixed telephony; increasing 
broadband penetration and international Internet band-
width capacity; and improving its television, radio, and 
mobile telephony infrastructure (Table 1).
Fixed telephony infrastructure
Over the past decade, Azerbaijan’s telecommunica-
tions and information technology (IT) infrastructure has 
advanced considerably, both in its use of modern tech-
nology and with respect to its geographic coverage. 
Azerbaijan still is the only post-Soviet state where all 
residential areas are serviced by landline telephony. In 
one of the major achievements in the development of the 
country’s telecommunications infrastructure, fixed-line 
penetration reached 18.6 percent by 2011. Moreover, 
Azerbaijan’s fixed-line network has increased from 48 
percent digital in 2003 to 100 percent digital in 2011.
Broadband penetration
Azerbaijan has witnessed significant growth in broad-
band connectivity, and has a current penetration rate of 
30 per 100 inhabitants (Figure 2). In order to expand this 
connectivity, Azerbaijan has adopted a special action 
plan for increasing penetration and usage of broadband 
and Internet in 2012 and 2013. These efforts to increase 
broadband penetration will benefit from Azerbaijan’s rela-
tively high level of fixed-line penetration, which provides 
the basis for fixed broadband connections.
Television and radio infrastructure
Although Internet penetration is becoming more perva-
sive, television is still the most popular source of informa-
tion in the country. Currently, there are 25 television and 
14 radio channels available in Azerbaijan. Transition from 
analog to digital television broadcasting is the Ministry of 
Communication and Information Technologies (MCIT)’s 
priority and is expected to be completed by the end of 
2012. Meanwhile, by the end of 2011, digital television 
broadcast (a social package of 10–12 channels) was 
expected to cover 85 percent of the inhabited territory 
of the country. In addition, plans are underway to launch 
high-definition (HD) radio services in Azerbaijan in the 
near future.
Mobile telephony infrastructure
The largest FDI in the ICT sector occurs in mobile tele-
phony (Figure 3), followed by a number of companies 
with fixed-line operations, Internet, and cable television 
distribution. In 2007, the public shares in two mobile op-
erators—Azercell and Bakcell—were privatized. In 2009, 
Azerfon—the country’s newest mobile operator—signed 
a partner market agreement with Vodafone to ensure 
Table 1: Major ICT infrastructure development indicators
Indicator 2009 2010 2011
Fixed-line penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 16.0 16.2 18.6
Broadband Internet users penetration 10 15 30
Internet penetration (per 100 inhabitants) 41 50 65
International Internet bandwidth capacity (GB/s) 15 40 87
Digital television broadcast (percent of the country’s inhabited territory) 30 45 85
Mobile telephony penetration (cellular subscriptions per 100 inhabitants) 86.2 100 110
Computer penetration (computers per 100 inhabitants) 12 15 20
Source: State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan and the MCIT.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
152  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Vodafone’s local presence in Azerbaijan. Mobile broad-
band increased significantly after Azerfon was granted a 
third-generation (3G) license. Azercell and Bakcell have 
also recently been granted 3G licenses. Furthermore, 
mobile operators have begun to consider the implemen-
tation of novel fourth-generation long-term evolution (4G 
LTE) technologies. For the first half of 2011, the number 
of mobile subscriptions exceeded 10,120,000 and mobile 
cellular subscriptions per 100 inhabitants reached 110, 
which is 1.4 times higher than the world average.
E-government and e-services development
Azerbaijan’s robust ICT infrastructure not only helps 
increase the economic competiveness of the country, 
but it also enables the efficient provision of government 
services as well as healthcare, education, social ser-
vices, and so on. Thus implementation of e-services in 
different economic sectors has continued to advance 
and improve. This has also been the case with respect 
to e-government. Among the e-government services and 
activities that have been undertaken in Azerbaijan are the 
following:
•	 the establishment of unified, automatized informa-
tion exchange and management systems in a public 
management process;
•	 the development of the state registry of citizens;
•	 the performance of e-services for taxpayers;
•	 the registration of entrepreneurship units;
•	 the introduction of “one-stop-shop” for formalizing 
and monitoring customs;
•	 the expansion of automatized systems of migration 
services;
•	 the provision of electronic healthcare services; and
•	 the establishment of an education management 
information system and the ability to submit applica-
tions online for university admissions.
In order to expand this level of development, 
Azerbaijan has adopted a special action program to 
support further e-government development in 2011 and 
2012.
Out of 20 basic e-services defined by the European 
Union for citizens and businesses, 8 are already per-
formed in Azerbaijan (electronic submission of tax and 
customs declarations, electronic submission of applica-
tions for university entrance exams, etc.). The number 
of these services in Azerbaijan has steadily increased. 
Thus, in the UN’s 2010 E-government Survey, Azerbaijan 
ranked 83rd among 192 states, up from its rank of 89 in 
the UN’s 2008 report; the country was also 68th in terms 
of e-participation index among 157 participating states.7
Figure 2: Internet users per 100 inhabitants, 2000–11
0
20
40
60
80
2011201020042000
Us
er
s 
pe
r 1
00
 in
ha
bi
ta
nt
s
Sources: Data from International Telecommunication Union; the State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 Developed countries
 Developing countries
 Azerbaijan: Broadband users
 Azerbaijan: Internet users
 World average
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  153 
Improving the business environment: Developing 
e-applications and combating piracy
Based on a Microsoft solution, the national Electronic 
Digital Signature (EDS) was recently launched by the 
MCIT. Through the EDS system, a connection to an 
electronic payment system is provided in order to ensure 
the capability of making electronic payments. In addi-
tion, an e-government portal was created to organize 
and utilize electronic services based on the one-stop-
shop concept. Implementation of EDS in Azerbaijan is 
expected to have a positive impact on the development 
of e-services and the provision of information security. 
Reflecting Azerbaijan’s support for e-government and 
also the supporting legal environment that has been 
created, business and financial services are also gradu-
ally going online. Two e-payment systems are actively 
functioning in Azerbaijan and more than 100 companies 
are now utilizing online payments. However, the majority 
of business transactions still are carried out in traditional 
ways, either in person or through phone, fax, or paper-
based communications. Nevertheless, the development 
of electronic services in the country has reached a level 
that requires integration in a single system under one 
umbrella. For this purpose, the “X-road” project, which 
is based on Estonian experience and designed to unite 
existing information bases and systems built on different 
platforms, was launched and is expected to be ready in 
2012.
In 2011, the MCIT signed a formal agreement with 
Microsoft to help ensure that all government offices cov-
ered by the agreement will run legally licensed software, 
signaling a new commitment to reduce software piracy 
throughout the country. The agreement was aimed at 
addressing the piracy issue in Azerbaijan and fostering 
awareness of the increasing risks associated with non-
genuine software, such as malware and data loss.8 By 
setting a strong example for safeguarding intellectual 
property rights in the public and private sectors, the 
agreement will have a positive influence on the country’s 
national competitiveness. The MCIT also supports the 
anti-piracy program led by USAID that aims to train com-
mercial bank auditors to detect the use of unlicensed 
software in banks and businesses nationwide. Moreover, 
the project focuses on the risks that large and medium-
sized enterprises face by using pirated software. Under 
the two state programs for improving the educational 
system in Azerbaijan, 40,000 computers were sup-
plied with legally licensed software. It should also be 
noted that local software developers and integrators 
have made a significant contribution to the improve-
ment of content and system management processing in 
education.
LATEST DEVELOPMENTS IN THE ICT SECTOR
The ICT sector is growing rapidly in Azerbaijan. The lat-
est developments are particularly evident in the country’s 
Figure 3: Mobile subscriptions per 100 inhabitants, 2000–11
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
2011201020042000
Su
bs
cr
ip
tio
ns
 p
er
 1
00
 in
ha
bi
ta
nt
s
Sources: Data from International Telecommunication Union; the State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 Developed countries
 Developing countries
 Azerbaijan
 World average
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
154  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
tariff policies, the expansion of its ICT industry, and its 
satellite program.
Tariff policy
Growing competition has increased end user/consumer 
benefits and the level of satisfaction in the services 
received, in terms of both quality and price. Tariffs for 
many services have dramatically decreased over the 
last few years. For example, mobile services tariffs 
have decreased by 30 percent, while the price for a 1 
Mb/s Internet connection has decreased by 50 per-
cent. Consequently Azerbaijan managed to move from 
rank 99 to 53 among 165 countries, in terms of the 
ICT Price Basket indicator elucidated by International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU). The country was also 
ranked in the top 10 countries drawing ICT prices down.9
The national ICT industry and its expansion into 
regional markets
Azerbaijan was one of four republics that manufactured 
computers and computer chips in the former Soviet 
Union. However, the collapse and economic disintegra-
tion of the Soviet Union resulted in the total devastation 
of Azerbaijan’s ICT industry in the early 1990s.
The industry is now experiencing a re-birth. Along 
with the development and enhancement of ICT in-
frastructure, the government of Azerbaijan devoted a 
significant amount of attention to the development of IT 
applications and products. In addition to providing fiscal 
and monetary incentives, the Azerbaijani government 
has also been an efficient market driver of IT usage and 
adoption. Because of its transparent and streamlined 
public procurement processes, all IT companies have 
equal access to public resources. Such a situation has 
enabled them to produce competitive products and, by 
doing so, to open up regional and international markets.
The ICT sector in Azerbaijan has witnessed growth 
not only in services but also in the production of hard-
ware and software products. In just the last three years, 
exports of IT products have increased four times. At least 
16 large- and medium-sized companies in Azerbaijan 
produce computer hardware, making up 60 percent of 
the hardware available on the local market. In addition, 
some 27 companies, most of them small- and medium-
sized enterprises, assemble and manufacture telecom-
munications and radio equipment. There are also more 
than 40 companies developing software applications and 
systems integration and providing web-hosting and web-
designing services.10 The number of people involved in 
the ICT sector is about 60,000, which is 4.5 percent of 
total domestic employment in Azerbaijan. Currently the 
IT companies of Azerbaijan are not only participating in 
national projects but they are even engaged in the South 
Caucasus region and Central Asia. Today computers 
and ICT equipment manufactured in Azerbaijan are being 
exported to the countries of the region. Despite the 
increase of domestic ICT capacity, however, Azerbaijan 
has considerably increased its import of ICT-related 
products to meet its major requirements for telecommu-
nications equipment, computers, and computer equip-
ment and electronic devices.
FDI in Azerbaijan’s ICT sector
At present, 10 of the top 20 ICT companies in the 
world—Microsoft, Cisco Systems, Hewlett Packard, IBM, 
Apple Computer, Intel, Oracle, Google, Nokia-Siemens 
Networks, and Ericsson—are operating in Azerbaijan 
and actively participating in the implementation of vari-
ous projects. The operation of such large and world-
renowned companies in Azerbaijan is a result of the 
business- and ICT-friendly environment created by the 
government, and is a testament to the potential these 
companies perceive as existing in Azerbaijan in the ICT 
sector.
The satellite program
Another remarkable fact in the development of the 
Azerbaijan’s ICT infrastructure is its advanced satellite 
program under the direction of state-owned Azercosmos 
OJSC. The first step in that program will be the planned 
launch in 2012 of Azerspace-1—the region’s first com-
munications satellite. This satellite will upgrade the quality 
of television broadcasting and telecommunications not 
only in Azerbaijan but throughout the Eurasia and CIS  
regions, and will lead Azerbaijan to becoming a major 
relay site for signal transmission between Europe and 
Asia. The satellite’s footprint will cover Eastern Europe, 
Central Asia, and Africa. Azerbaijan itself is going to 
use only one-fourth of the Azerspace-1 capacity, while 
the rest will be available for lease. Azercosmos plans to 
launch a second satellite, Azerspace-2, in 2015, which 
will further expand Azerbaijan’s satellite communications 
capacity, and to launch a remote sensing satellite to low 
Earth orbit in the future. This remote sensing satellite 
will enhance and accelerate Azerbaijan’s capacity in the 
areas of environmental protection, agriculture, topogra-
phy, and cartography, as well as in national security and 
related areas.
SUCCESS FACTORS
The Government of the Republic of Azerbaijan, repre-
sented by the MCIT, is a driving force for ICT develop-
ment. The importance of the government’s role can 
be better understood in the context of Azerbaijan’s 
post-Communist transition, when it was coping with 
relatively weak market institutions and a still-emerging 
business sector. The government, in response to current 
global trends, was quick to realize the need for policy 
and strategic leadership going beyond just technology 
management. Adopting the National Strategy indicated 
the transition from the traditional view of ICT as an aid 
in day-to-day operations to viewing it as an important 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  155 
vehicle in overall economic development. In this regard, 
the MCIT’s leadership has operated not only as an 
implementer and provider of public policy but as a driv-
ing force and initiator, by promoting the role of ICT at all 
levels and raising awareness of its substantial benefits in 
both the public and private sectors.
Of course, there is still a lot to be done and some 
serious challenges impede the country’s ICT sector  
development. Nonetheless, Azerbaijan has made a 
considerable—and productive—effort to recognize and 
address those problems through a long-term strate-
gic approach to ICT development and deployment. 
Another important factor in its success lies in the finan-
cial domain. Rich oil and gas resources have provided 
Azerbaijan with substantial revenues that, in turn, have 
created a solid financial basis for ambitious ICT develop-
ment projects. However—as demonstrated by the lack 
of success by other states with significant revenues from 
natural resources and other factors—economic wealth 
does not guarantee a productive outcome. Sound strat-
egy and good management and leadership are critical 
to success. The ICT policy success in Azerbaijan can be 
explained by the following factors:
1. the strong political support of the MCIT from the 
Government of Azerbaijan, thereby ensuring that 
it has enough authority to enable it to perform its 
strategic management role;
2. sufficient and appropriate authority of the MCIT 
with respect to the allocation of scare resources;
3. the ability of the MCIT to successfully integrate 
its organizational strategy with various relevant 
national policies and coordinate its activities with 
other actors (public agencies, donors, businesses, 
nongovernment organizations, etc.); and
4. the ability of the MCIT to inspire other actors (pub-
lic agencies, donors, businesses, nongovernment 
organizations, etc.) to appreciate ICT development 
and acquire additional support.
All relevant state programs provide the MCIT with 
a high level of both responsibility and authority to serve 
as the focal point for the country’s ICT development. At 
the same time, the MCIT’s leadership is actively involved 
in national, regional, and international forums and policy 
discussions, and is trusted by both Azerbaijan’s execu-
tive and legislative leadership. This trust, as well as 
appropriate institutional arrangements, enables the MCIT 
to perform as a strategic leader in the field of ICT devel-
opment. The multiple initiatives and projects created and 
led by the MCIT demonstrates and confirms its important 
role in the ICT sector.
It is also worth mentioning that the MCIT—as a 
leading agency responsible for implementation of im-
portant state programs and projects mentioned in this 
chapter—has been provided with enough resources for it 
to fulfill its responsibilities. It defines and manages these 
resources and can then further allocate them where 
appropriate.
Another important factor of its success is the ability 
of the government to be engaged in open debate with 
civil society and to provide clear and readily available 
methods for receiving feedback. Communicating the 
government’s set priorities and strategies on all levels is 
crucial because there are multiple actors involved and 
all need to be clear on the implemented public policies, 
each of their roles, and the potential benefits. This also 
has been a success factor in Azerbaijan, where the MCIT 
has undertaken substantial efforts to promote public dia-
logue, raise awareness, and engage in public relations.
Transparency and openness to cooperation also 
has helped to attract international donor organizations 
and companies to actively participate in the government-
initiated programs.
CHALLENGES
Despite the above-mentioned achievements, there are 
some serious challenges that need to be addressed in 
Azerbaijan. These challenges can be summarized as 
follows:
1. individual and business readiness lag behind  
public policies,
2. a disconnect is evident between the research and 
business communities,
3. general institutional problems remain, and
4. individual and business readiness continue to be 
an issue.
The 2010–2011 Networked Readiness Index ranked 
Azerbaijan 77 out of 138 countries. Table 2 summarizes 
the major rankings, organized by market, political, and 
infrastructure environments and individual, business, 
and government readiness and usage. According to the 
Table 2: Azerbaijan in the 2010–2011 Networked Readiness Index 
Pillar Rank
Market environment 78
Individual readiness 67
Individual usage 69
Source: World Economic Forum 2011.
Pillar Rank
Political and regulatory environment 79
Government readiness 33
Government usage 56
Pillar Rank
Infrastructure environment 79
Business readiness 83
Business usage  76
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
156  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
World Economic Forum, Azerbaijan’s business usage 
and readiness scores are the lowest of these various 
rankings.
The problem is that many Azerbaijanis still access 
the Internet from shared connections at their work-
places, at universities, or in Internet cafés. The rate 
of computer ownership is low and Internet usage at 
home is moderate. Currently, almost half of the com-
puter market is served by local assemblers importing 
parts from their Asian partners. In order to increase the 
number of PC owners and also to enhance the use of 
licensed software, the MCIT, in cooperation with Ministry 
of Education, HP, and Microsoft, launched a joint project 
called National PC.
The National PC project is a successful public-
private partnership that provides computers at a dis-
count and is being implemented well in many parts of 
the country. The total cost of a computer together with 
the software offered under the project is as much as 40 
percent lower than market prices. Owing to successfully 
implemented ventures such as National PC, PC penetra-
tion in Azerbaijan has increased by 6.5 times during the 
last five years.
Along with the substantial growth of PC use in 
both the public and the private sectors is a correspond-
ing demand for accessible and sophisticated software 
systems. Investment by new companies in Azerbaijan 
and the enhancement and growth of e-services have 
increased the importance of IT specialists with back-
grounds in engineering, management, and marketing. 
However, there is a lack of qualified professionals who 
possess the necessary software development skills. 
According to The Global Competitiveness Report 2011–
2012, Azerbaijan ranked 105th in its reliance on profes-
sional management, 125th in the quality of its manage-
ment schools, and 99th in terms of math and science 
education.11 These indicators demonstrate the potential 
seriousness of a problem that would certainly under-
mine other achievements if not resolved. Moreover, in 
the same report, an inadequately educated workforce is 
identified as the 6th major problem among Azerbaijan’s 
top 15 problematic factors for doing business—follow-
ing corruption, access to finance, tax regulations, inad-
equate supply of infrastructure, and tax rates.
The good news is that these challenges are not 
being ignored but have been recognized and appreci-
ated by the government. In order to address them, in 
2007 the MCIT, in alliance with local ICT entities, initiated 
the Human Resources Foundation for the Development 
of ICT. Thus far it has provided scholarships to dozens 
of young boys and girls enabling them to study ICT in 
a number of universities worldwide. It is expected that 
future high-capacity services, including user-generated 
content and cloud computing, will provide job opportuni-
ties for these skilled graduates.
Furthermore, Azerbaijan leads the region in the 
performance of an initiative for increasing teacher and 
student access to computers. Almost all of the schools 
are computerized and 40 percent of them have access 
to broadband Internet. By 2012 the country’s secondary 
school connectivity to broadband Internet is expected to 
reach 100 percent. PC penetration in secondary schools 
has now reached 1 PC per 20 pupils.
Disconnect between research and business
The disconnect between the research and business 
communities in Azerbaijan has led to the country’s loss 
of competitive standing in this regard. According to The 
Global Competitiveness Report 2011–2012, Azerbaijan 
ranks 106th in terms of university-business collaboration 
in R&D, which is one of the worst rankings of the coun-
try with respect to its overall competitiveness ranking.12 
Moreover, the shortage of high-skilled technical labor as 
well as high custom duties creates excessive obstacles 
for the increase of export-oriented products. In order 
to solve this problem, ensure a sustainable ICT sector 
in Azerbaijan, and create alternative income sources as 
well as to increase attractiveness of local markets for 
foreign investment, the MCIT developed the concept of 
the Regional Innovation Zone. The goals of the Regional 
Innovation Zone are the following:
1. to accelerate the application of technological 
innovations in the small- and medium-sized enter-
prises;
2. to develop and train human resources and to cre-
ate an IT university;
3. to evaluate the opportunities for the creation of an 
international information resources center (a data 
center);
4. to increase new capital investment in Azerbaijan 
as well as FDI; and
5. to promote ICT export in Azerbaijan.
Institutional issues
As previously noted and recognized in respected interna-
tional reports, Azerbaijan’s economy has been flourishing 
and expanding rapidly. Nevertheless, the country still 
faces major development challenges emanating from 
various institutional problems. These problems cause 
restrictive regulations, limited access to finance, and 
monopoly and taxation issues; they also indirectly affect 
the development of the ICT sector. Finding the solution 
to these obstacles has always been a priority for the 
society. Thus, the Azerbaijani government has continu-
ally been implementing institutional reforms. In order to 
further develop the goal of institutional reform, the Law 
on Combating Corruption was adopted in 2004 and 
various independent regulators established across dif-
ferent sectors. ICT development will be a new step in 
addressing these issues and, through the development 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  157 
of e-government services, will contribute positively to the 
necessary institutional reforms.
A PATH FORWARD: FROM NATIONAL TO REGIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT
During Azerbaijan’s next stage of ICT development, 
the main target of ICT policy is the elimination of digital 
divide, as exemplified by Figure 4. This figure demon-
strates that the divide is not on the national level but 
has broader dimensions and is between various social 
layers and geographical areas. To address this issue 
many elements must be tackled, including raising the 
development level of broadband technologies to that of 
the developed countries; ensuring the establishment of 
an information society; increasing the application level of 
electronic services; and jointly utilizing the existing poten-
tial of regional states along with the country’s resources 
in the regional projects related to ICT development, thus 
allowing it to gain from the synergy of collective and 
coordinated efforts.
For this purpose, for 17 years Azerbaijan has 
hosted the annual BakuTel International Exhibition and 
Conference. BakuTel has been a venue for the regional 
IT industry, promoting new contacts and coopera-
tion, with more than 10,000 specialists attending the 
exhibition each year. The 17th BakuTel Exhibition, held 
in November 2011, was on an even larger scale than 
previous events. It brought together representatives of 29 
countries with 18 national pavilions and 250 companies. 
BakuTel provides an opportunity to demonstrate the 
newest solutions and the most advanced technologies 
and is an event that brings together Azerbaijan’s old and 
new partners from the global scientific and business 
communities. And because it attracts leading businesses 
from the global ICT market, this annual event also opens 
up investment horizons in Azerbaijan’s ICT sector.
Because of its role as the regional transportation 
hub and its leadership in the field of ICT development, 
and because it has one of the foremost economies in the 
region, Azerbaijan is a driving force in the Trans-Eurasian 
Information Superhighway initiative. This project will cre-
ate a communications backbone spanning the region, 
with multiple international access points and numerous 
points of connection among national networks. The 
network will cover many countries and as much of the 
population as possible with the shortest route, and will 
be designed in a way that allows for expansion later. It 
must be able to reach various international connectivity 
points, and its designers will have to establish more than 
one trans-Caspian route to ensure intraregional connec-
tivity and resilience/redundancy in case of interruption.
After a year of complex negotiation and high-
level collaboration, in October 2009 the 64th Session 
of the UN General Assembly adopted the Resolution 
Figure 4: Internet and broadband penetration in the Eurasian region, 2010
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
No
rw
ay
Sw
ed
en
Fi
nl
an
d
Un
ite
d 
Ki
ng
do
m
Ge
rm
an
y
Hu
ng
ar
y
Ita
ly
Ru
ss
ia
n 
Fe
de
ra
tio
n
M
ol
do
va
Tu
rk
ey
Az
er
ba
ija
n
Ka
za
kh
st
an
Ira
n,
 Is
la
m
ic
 R
ep
.
Uz
be
ki
st
an
Ky
rg
yz
st
an
Pa
ki
st
an
Ta
jik
is
ta
n
Tu
rk
m
en
is
ta
n
Ba
ng
la
de
sh Ira
q
In
di
a
Ch
in
a
Si
ng
ap
or
e
Ja
pa
n
Ko
re
a,
 R
ep
.
In
te
rn
et
 u
se
rs
 p
er
 1
00
 in
ha
bi
ta
nt
s
Fi
xe
d 
br
oa
db
an
d 
su
bs
cr
ip
tio
ns
 p
er
 1
00
 in
ha
bi
ta
nt
s
Source: International Telecommunication Union.
DIGITAL DIVIDE
 Internet
 Broadband
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
158  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
on Building Connectivity through the Trans-Eurasian 
Information Superhighway.13 The resolution welcomed 
the initiative and the readiness of Azerbaijan to coor-
dinate regional efforts aimed at realizing this initiative. 
With the leadership of the MCIT, the Secretariat of the 
Project was created with initial input from Aztelecom, 
Turktelecom, China Telecom, Rostelecom, and 
Kaztranscom; in June 2011, the advisory meeting was 
held. Going forward, the group will take necessary steps 
to provide further detail on the required infrastructure 
investment, design the operating model, and ensure the 
project’s economic feasibility.
The information highway is expected to bring broad-
band connectivity to the region, allow intra-regional/
continental networking, and strengthen international 
trade and socioeconomic development. The countries 
of the region will derive significant benefits from the 
improved infrastructure. International traffic will need to 
become more balanced—that is, it will need to exhibit 
an almost equal distribution of facilities for providing and 
consuming Internet and broadband. It will need to cater 
to increased capacity demand as the Internet “roads” 
(spectrum) get more and more congested, Internet traffic 
continues to multiply, and the supply of high-bandwidth 
Internet continues to have difficulties keeping up.
A new high-capacity fiber optic cable system, the 
Europe Persia Express Gateway (EPEG), is expected 
to play a crucial role in expanding connectivity in the 
whole region. Azerbaijan will participate as both a pri-
mary and a reserve transit route in the project, with 
one of Azerbaijan’s leading communication companies, 
Delta Telecom, along with companies from the United 
Kingdom, Russia, Iran, and Oman. The system will 
pass from Frankfurt across Eastern Europe, Russia, 
Azerbaijan, Iran, and the Persian Gulf to Barka, in Oman. 
It should be noted that Delta Telecom has been placing 
Google’s servers in Azerbaijan, leading it to become a 
regional exporter of Internet services.
By strengthening regulatory frameworks and em-
barking on strategic initiatives to expand domestic and 
international connectivity while improving citizens’ ca-
pacities to access and utilize broadband, Azerbaijan has 
the potential to create an infrastructure that supports its 
development of the knowledge-based economy and that 
helps diversify its economy. Maintaining its legacy of the 
historical Silk Road, Azerbaijan continues to play its tradi-
tional role as a transit country for a number of emerging 
opportunities for the development of the region.
LESSONS LEARNED
The Republic of Azerbaijan—a post-Soviet nation with an 
emerging resource-based economy—has been thriving, 
gaining its competitiveness in the global market despite 
all the challenges it has faced since achieving indepen-
dence in 1991. The country’s rich hydrocarbon resources 
are a mixed blessing. On the one hand, they have 
brought additional revenues and economic growth; but 
on the other hand, they have placed the country at risk 
of so-called resource dependence. However, Azerbaijan 
is in the process of addressing and overcoming these 
challenges by diversifying its economy for the long term 
through its ICT sector.
International experts expect that domestic and 
regional ICT projects—carried out in accordance with 
the programs and strategies adopted by the Azerbaijani 
government—along with the sector’s growth rate, will 
establish the economic performance of Azerbaijan’s ICT 
sector as equal to that of the oil-gas sector by 2025, with 
Azerbaijan serving as a regional ICT hub.
Thus Azerbaijan represents a useful case study 
and possible model for other emerging economies and 
natural resource–based economies willing to put in place 
national ICT development strategies to help drive long-
term growth and competitiveness.
The experience of Azerbaijan in promoting the rapid 
development of the ICT sector suggests that it is crucial 
to have in place the necessary fundamentals in order to 
attract more FDI and to develop a domestic private sec-
tor capable of further investment in ICT. Other countries 
that wish to learn from Azerbaijan’s experience should 
remember the country’s gradual change with respect to 
legislation and policies in the areas of trade and ICT lib-
eralization, human resource development, and facilitating 
broader access to technologies, while maintaining politi-
cal and macroeconomic stability. Moreover, in the case 
of the Republic of Azerbaijan, government has played 
a critical role as the strategic promoter and supporter 
of the ICT sector. Through the MCIT as the responsible 
focal point, which the government provided with suf-
ficient resources and authority, the Azerbaijani govern-
ment has developed and implemented sound long-term 
policies and made all sector stakeholders aware of 
their important roles. Those countries wishing to utilize 
Azerbaijan as an appropriate model for the development 
of their own national ICT sector should adapt and apply 
the lessons learned from Azerbaijan’s own experience 
to fit their own unique political, economic, and social 
environments.
NOTES
 1 World Bank 2010a.
 2 World Bank 2010b.
 3 World Economic Forum 2009, 2010.
 4 See the State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
 5 IMF 2011.
 6 The National Information and Communication and Technologies 
Strategy for the Development of the Republic of Azerbaijan (2003–
2012) is available at http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/
documents/untc/unpan018110.pdf.
 7 UNPAN 2008.
 8 BSA 2011.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.1: Big Ambitions in Rapidly Changing World: Azerbaijan
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  159 
9 See ITU 2011. This index is a tool used in monitoring the 
affordability of ICT services. The statistics compare 2008 and 
2010 tariffs on fixed-telephony, mobile-cellular, and fixed-
broadband Internet services.
10 Forthcoming report by Kalba International, Inc. working with 
infoDev, Assessment of the Broadband Market and Connectivity 
Gaps in Armenia, Azerbaijan and Georgia.
11 World Economic Forum 2011, pp. 106–07.
12 World Economic Forum 2011, pp. 106–07.
13 UN General Assembly 2009.
REFERENCES
BSA (Business Software Alliance). 2011. 2010 Global Piracy Study: 
Eighth Annual BSA Global Software. May. Washington DC, 
Singapore, and London: BSA. Available at http://portal.bsa.org/
globalpiracy2010/downloads/study_pdf/2010_BSA_Piracy_Study-
Standard.pdf.
IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2011.”Republic of Azerbaijan: Aide 
Memoire of Staff Visit.” Middle East and Central Asia Department, 
February 14. Available at http://www.imf.org/external/country/AZE/
RR/2011/021411.pdf.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2011. Measuring the 
Information Society. Geneva: ITU.
State Statistical Committee of the Republic of Azerbaijan. “Azerbaijan 
in Figures.” Available at http://www.azstat.org/publications/
azfigures/2011/en/020.shtml.
UN General Assembly. 2009. “Building Connectivity through the 
Trans-Eurasian Information Superhighway.” 64th Session, 
Second Committee, Agenda Item 50, October 28. Available at 
http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un/
unpan036773.pdf.
UNPAN (United Nations Public Administration Network). 2008. The UN 
E-Government Survey 2008: From E-Government to Connected 
Governance. New York: United Nations. Available at http://www.
unpan.org/egovkb/global_reports/08report.htm.
World Bank. 2010a. The World Bank Group Country Partnership 
Strategy for Azerbaijan FY 11-FY14. Washington DC: World Bank 
Group.
———. 2010b. Doing Business 2011. Washington DC: World Bank.
World Economic Forum. 2009. The Global Competitiveness Report 
2009–2010. Geneva: World Economic Forum.
———. 2010. The Global Competitiveness Report 2010–2011. Geneva: 
World Economic Forum.
———. 2011. The Global Competitiveness Report 2011–2012. Geneva: 
World Economic Forum.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  161 
CHAPTER 2.2
The Making of a Digital 
Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
KRISHNA OOLUN 
Information & Communication Technologies Authority
SURAJ RAMGOLAM 
National Computer Board
VASENDEN DORASAMI 
Ministry of Information and Communication Technology
The Republic of Mauritius, a small island state with a 
population of 1.3 million inhabitants, is nestled in the 
middle of the Indian Ocean. It has undergone major 
changes in the last four decades, following its indepen-
dence. Categorized under lower-income group countries 
in the early days of its economic development,1 with an 
economy dominated by the mono crop sugarcane, today 
the landscape has been transformed into a service-
oriented economy. In fact, recent economic indicators 
show that the services sector contributes 67 percent of 
the country’s GPD with three leading economic poles: 
tourism; the financial sector; and, recently, information 
and communication technologies (ICT).2 Although the 
tourism and the financial sectors are well anchored in its 
traditional economic setup, the ICT sector—albeit a na-
scent industry a few years ago—has recently been pro-
pelled into its new role as the third pillar of the Mauritian 
economy. ICT’s contribution to the nation’s GDP stood at 
6.5 percent in 2011, with a turnover of US$1 billion; the 
sector employs some 15,000 people, which represents 
around 4 to 5 percent of the total workforce.
The definition of the ICT sector of Mauritius con-
forms to the recommendations of the international initia-
tive Partnership on Measuring ICT for Development.3 In 
essence, this definition ascertains all the nomenclatures 
(by activity) that make up the ICT industry, thus allowing 
a scientific measurement of its output.
Several milestones have been met in the ICT sec-
tor reform of Mauritius. First, the telecommunications 
sector was fully liberalized in January 2003 pursuant 
to the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) 
commitment made by Mauritius in 1998.4 The first Cyber 
City project was conceived with the partnership and 
expertise of the Government of India as a cornerstone 
for the development of the Mauritian ICT sector. Around 
the same period, Mauritius was also connected for the 
first time to a submarine optical fiber route linking Europe 
to Asia via South Africa. In addition, legislative reforms 
were undertaken to create an enabling environment for 
the sector’s introduction and to ensure sustainability 
and predictability for the coming years. A National ICT 
Strategic Plan was first elaborated in 1998; this was sub-
sequently reviewed to respond to the structural changes 
brought about with the evolution in technology, markets, 
and users’ demands. The above initiatives are a tribute 
to the foresight of the Prime Minister who, in 1997, boldly 
created the first-ever ministry dedicated to the ICT sec-
tor. This was a turning point in paving the way toward 
the transformation of Mauritius into a knowledge-based 
economy.
In the remaining sections of this chapter we de-
scribe the major actions adopted by Mauritius along with 
their results, focusing on the challenges faced by the 
country in making the sector emerge as an important 
pillar. On the basis of the lessons learned in terms of 
strengths and weaknesses, as well as the opportunities 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.2: The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
162  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
that lie ahead, we present some strategic moves—on 
both policy and operational levels—to undertake in the 
future in order to consolidate the country’s position and 
enable the ICT/business process outsourcing (BPO) 
sector to emerge as an engine for sustained economic 
growth.
POLICY AND LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORKS
The key to the country’s ICT sector development has 
been the successive formulation of National Strategic 
Plans since 1998 and the review of the legislative frame-
work. The latest plan is the National ICT Strategic Plan 
2011–2014 (NICTSP-2014),5 which gives significant policy 
guidance to successfully embrace the knowledge econ-
omy journey and to respond to the dynamic changes oc-
curring in that sector. The Plan falls in line with the gov-
ernment’s aspirations of transforming the nation into a 
high-value economy while always ensuring inclusiveness 
in its approach. The country will continue to see more 
implementations of such initiatives as the momentum 
toward this vision of the 2014 aspiration gains speed.
The NICTSP-2014, which is built on previous plans, 
has two main objectives: first, to review projects recom-
mended in the previous ICT Strategic Plan 2007–2011; 
and second, to make recommendations to ensure that 
the ICT sector becomes a main pillar of the national 
economy and that Mauritius rightly positions itself as a 
regional ICT hub. The plan contains nine strategic areas 
of intervention that range from the development of a 
comprehensive broadband strategy for Mauritius and 
a review of the legal and regulatory ICT environment to 
an institutional overhaul, the establishment of a human 
resources strategy intended to meet the needs to the 
industry, the international promotion of Mauritius as a 
credible ICT destination, the creation of an ICT-literate 
nation, the encouragement of the adoption of ICT ser-
vices everywhere, a review of the e-government strategy, 
and the strengthening of the cyber security framework.
The government has further enhanced the regu-
latory framework to comply with international best 
practices by introducing various pieces of legislation 
such as the Computer Misuse and Cybercrime Act, 
the Information and Communication Technologies 
Act, the Electronic Transactions Act, the Independent 
Broadcasting Act, the Copyright Act, the Postal Services 
Act, and the Data Protection Act. All these legislative 
elements serve to consolidate the sector and to position 
Mauritius as a safe and secure destination for ICT/BPO 
investments.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE ICT SECTOR
It is pertinent to draw some macroeconomic observa-
tions by taking the liberalization of the ICT sector since 
2003 as a reference point with a view to obtaining 
quantitative measures. With the spotlight firmly directed 
toward ICT becoming a major pillar of the economy, it 
is crucial to confirm the importance of the ICT in the 
country’s economic landscape and establish the sector’s 
contribution to GDP and, by extension, to the socioeco-
nomic growth of the country. Figure 1 depicts the value-
added contribution of this sector.
0 20 40 60 80 100
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010 46% 11% 43%
56% 12% 32%
61% 12% 27%
66% 13% 21%
66% 10% 24%
16,941
14,851
12,994
11,714
9,858
Figure 1: Growth and size of the ICT sector, 2006–10
Value-added in the ICT sector  
(percent)
Total 
(Mauritian rupees, millions)
n Telecommunications n Wholesale and retail n  Other
Source: Statistics Mauritius, 2011.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.2: The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  163 
The ICT sector recorded an average growth rate of 
16.3 percent per annum from 2004 through 2010, while 
the country’s overall annual GDP grew by 4.5 percent 
(Table 1). The ITU Information Development Index (IDI) 
for Mauritius has improved from 3.30 in 2008 to 4.00 
in 2010. It is now being categorized as Upper Medium 
(UM) in terms of ICT development rating (the UM range is 
2.59–4.05). This is a direct result of improvements in the 
Mauritian infrastructure, accessibility, and affordability of 
ICT products and services.
The impetus for the ICT sector to grow as a strong 
pillar of the Mauritian economy has gathered even more 
momentum, especially because of its spillover effects, 
which bring in services and industries that go beyond the 
boundaries of the sector itself. This sector in Mauritius 
has, in addition to its double-digit growth, witnessed fall-
ing connectivity costs and rising employment levels, and 
anticipates an employment capability peaking to 30,000 
knowledge workers by the end of 2014.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE
In order to sustain development of the ICT sector and 
make access to the Internet a basic citizens’ right, as 
well as to establish an inclusiveness approach and make 
e-government services popular, high-quality infrastruc-
ture facilities and services along with a robust and reli-
able telecommunications network are necessary. These 
elements should not only be highly accessible but must 
also be affordable for everyone.
To assist in propelling the ICT sector as an engine 
of economic growth, the Government of India extended 
vital strategic assistance to Mauritius in the form of a 
US$100 million line of credit facility; half of that sum has 
been invested in e-government and e-education initia-
tives. In 1999, the Mauritian government, with the as-
sistance of the Software Technology Park of India, used 
half of that credit facility to construct the country’s first 
Cyber City to host ICT/BPO companies; it stands as an 
icon for ICT development in the heart of the island. This 
flagship technology park is now well known for its lead-
ing ICT/BPO companies, which symbolize the success of 
the ICT sector. All buildings in this area are connected to 
the international gateway through a gigabit-capable pas-
sive optical network–fiber-to-the-business architecture.
There is an international information infrastructure 
consisting of international circuits via fiber optic undersea 
cables (the South Africa-Fare East, or SAFE, cable and 
the Lower Indian Ocean Network cable, or LION cable) 
and as backup via satellite. The present pooled capac-
ity available is the equivalent of about 10 Gb/s from 
Mauritius to France, with two international gateways, 
and is expected to more than quadruple in the next two 
years. As such, Mauritius is acknowledged as having 
resiliency, route diversity, and enough capacity to drive 
the international connectivity requirements.
The national information infrastructure, for its part, 
consists of the high-capacity digital microwave links 
and fiber optic cable system deployment that are used 
primarily as the network’s backbone and backhaul con-
nectivity. Major business cities and residential areas are 
now being connected via fiber-to-the-building deploy-
ment. The total capacity of the local exchange for the 
network device known as DSLAM, or digital subscriber 
line access multiplexer, for broadband access caters 
to some 350,000 subscribers representing about 30 
percent of households with access to broadband facili-
ties. A new operator has recently been licensed and is 
currently deploying fiber-to-the-home infrastructure with 
a proposed minimum of 10 Mb/s download access to 
every household. Mauritius will be the first country in 
sub-Saharan Africa to have nationwide fiber-to-the-home 
technology deployment. This deployment will further 
boost broadband penetration, in particular to household 
usage, allowing it to achieve the target of having at least 
60 percent broadband connectivity by the end of 2014.
Rodrigues, one of the outer islands, is presently 
connected using satellite links; it will be connected 
through fiber during next year.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE INFORMATION SOCIETY: 
INCREASING ACCESSIBILITY
This section describes the extent of ICT’s permeation 
in Mauritian society by considering the evolution of the 
country’s telecommunications services, with particular 
emphasis on key information society indicators—notably 
fixed-line teledensity, mobile cellular penetration, and 
Internet penetration.
Fixed-line penetration
Penetration rates for standard telephone access lines 
in Mauritius have witnessed a significant increase. In 
1995, fixed-line teledensity stood at 13.2 percent; it had 
reached 30.21 percent by the end of 2010. As of Q2 of 
2011 the figure stands at 29.25 percent, which confirms 
Table 1: ICT sector growth relative to overall GDP growth, 2004–10
Indicator 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010
ICT sector growth rate (%) 22.7 18.2 12.9 14.9 12.6 13.1 13.1
GDP growth rate (%) 4.7  2.3 5.1 5.5 5.0 3.1 4.2
Source: Statistics Mauritius, 2004–10.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.2: The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
164  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
the international trend of fixed-to-mobile substitutability in 
local markets.
Mobile penetration
Mobile penetration rates have exploded from a mere 
1.05 percent in 1995 to a staggering 92.79 percent by 
the end of 2010. As of Q2 of 2011 the figure stands at 
96.78 percent. This enormous increase is the result of 
the intensive network rollout by three mobile operators—
Emtel Ltd, MTML, and Cellplus Mobile Communications 
Ltd—which has ensured almost complete coverage of 
the island. Moreover, growth in mobile cellular subscrip-
tions per hundred inhabitants is sustained in the double 
digits, suggesting that the mobile market is still some 
way from reaching its carrying capacity.
Internet penetration
The rate of Internet penetration per 100 inhabitants 
remains a key information society indicator that governs 
the progress made by a country in its transition toward a 
fully digital broadband–based economy. Figure 2 depicts 
the Internet penetration rate. It is noted that broadband 
Internet penetration has been on an exponential progres-
sion, while narrowband Internet penetration has been on 
the decline.
Although much progress has been made since lib-
eralization in 2003 in terms of overall Internet penetration, 
much remains to be done to steer the economy into the 
broadband arena, which would be expected to positively 
influence economic growth. However, the evident trend 
that broadband is increasingly becoming the preferred 
subscription approach of end users seeking to connect 
to the Internet is encouraging. Supporting this trend is 
indeed one of the main challenges facing the country.
INTERNATIONAL BANDWIDTH CONNECTIVITY: 
OUTSOURCING OPPORTUNITIES
The affordability of international connectivity is of par-
ticular relevance for the ICT/BPO sector, especially since 
Mauritius is quite far from major European and American 
markets. Over the past five years, various determina-
tions have been made by the Mauritian ICT Regulatory 
Authority regarding international connectivity. The price 
for a 2 MB international private leased circuit capacity 
is now US$3,500, compared with US$12,600 some five 
years ago. The price of Internet protocol (IP) transits has 
also been revised downward to US$600 per mb/s.
ICT CULTURE PROMOTION: ICT OUTREACH FOR ALL
The inclusiveness approach and a re-engineering of 
the e-government services toward more citizen-centric 
0
5
10
15
20
25
20102009200820072006
11.41%
13.12%
15.68%
22.22% 22.14%
4.49%
3.72% 3.32%
2.52% 2.00%
6.92%
9.41% 12.37%
19.70% 20.14%
Figure 2: Internet penetration rate
Source: Republic of Mauritius, Information & Communication Technologies Authority.
Notes: 1. Figures for subscriptions have been rounded to the nearest hundred where applicable; 2. Figures for penetration rates have been rounded to 2 decimal places where 
applicable; 3. Broadband Internet refers to connection to the Internet at a speed equal to or greater than 256 Kb/s, as the sum of capacity in both directions; 4. Narrowband 
Internet refers to connection to the Internet at a speed less than 256 Kb/s, as the sum of capacity in both directions; 5. The statistics provided are based on the best available 
estimates for the period ending 2011 at the time of disclosure; 6. In 2009, subscriptions based on mobile access network were 179,000; for the year 2010 we noted a drastic 
decrease: i.e., 177,500. This is because one of the mobile operators was been counting double in the ICTA quarterly reports.  They were reporting distinct WAP and distinct 
Web browsing users and just adding them together, leading to a double count, as web users is a subset of WAP users.
Pe
rc
en
t
n Total 
n Broadband 
n  Narrowband
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.2: The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  165 
delivery require an aggressive ICT culture promotion 
program. Mauritius fares well in ICT literacy outreach  
as a result of a comprehensive and well-thought-out 
strategy in ensuring that not only the relevant ICT  
literacy/proficiency programs are offered but also free 
ICT facilities with broadband access are made available 
throughout the country. The National Computer Board 
(NCB) has, since September 2006, implemented the 
Universal ICT Education Programme, an initiative of the 
Prime Minister of Mauritius. One of the main objectives 
of the program is to train the population in Internet and 
Computing Core Certification, the internationally ac-
knowledged computer proficiency course.
Community Empowerment Programme
The Community Empowerment Programme (CEP) is 
another citizens’ outreach initiative meant to enable the 
creation and sharing of information and knowledge for 
community development.6 It is in line with the govern-
ment’s ambition to build an all-inclusive information 
society, to improve digital literacy, and to encourage 
the development of local content and creativity. In the 
context of the CEP, the NCB has set up more than 180 
computer clubs in social welfare and community centers 
around the island in collaboration with other ministries. 
Furthermore, the NCB manages 94 public Internet ac-
cess points in all postal offices across Mauritius, set up 
with the assistance of the ICT Regulator, the Information 
& Communication Technologies Authority.
Moreover, in an attempt not to leave any citizen 
behind and for a wider outreach, three cyber caravans 
travel across the island every day to provide ICT train-
ing and computer awareness courses, particularly in 
areas where ICT facilities are not readily available and 
accessible.
In a bid to further create an Intelligent Mauritius 
and to increase broadband penetration, the installation 
of wireless fidelity (Wi-Fi) networks across Mauritius 
and Rodrigues is underway under the purview of the 
Universal Service Fund of Mauritius.
Cyber security initiative
A comprehensive and resilient cyber security strategy 
is a cornerstone that ensures the trustworthiness of 
the country’s ICT infrastructure and creates the neces-
sary confidence in all stakeholders. Mauritius is among 
the few African countries with a National Computer 
Emergency Response Team (CERT-MU). CERT-MU has 
operated under the NCB since May 2008 and was es-
tablished based on the recommendations of the National 
Information Security Strategy. CERT-MU’s mission is to 
provide information and assistance to its constituents in 
implementing proactive measures to reduce the risk(s) of 
information security incidents.
QUALIFIED HUMAN CAPITAL FOR ICT GLOBAL 
TALENT NEEDS
The world today is in a stage of globalization where 
talent and brain power are becoming the predominant 
currency.7 The Mauritian government, in recognizing 
that skills and knowledge development are strategic to 
economic growth, was one of the rare countries that 
introduced free education for all in 1976. This vision has 
today been acknowledged as the basis for enabling the 
Mauritian economy to move toward a knowledge-inten-
sive stage of evolution.
The Mauritian educational system is based on a 
6-5-2 model. This means 6 years of primary education, 
which starts at the age of 5 after pre-primary; then 5 
years of secondary education; and then an additional 2 
years of higher-secondary education. Post-secondary 
education usually starts at the age of 18. Enrollment 
is approximately 35,000 students at the primary level, 
about 30,000 at the secondary level, and about 18,000 
at the higher-secondary level. University enrollment is 
about 8,000 per year. The enrollment rate at the tertiary 
level as compared with primary intake is presently about 
25 percent. Over the last decade, the higher-education 
enrollment rate has evolved with the population’s grow-
ing interest in pursuing higher education.
Mauritius has two national universities and several 
privately owned universities. The latter have ties to for-
eign universities and deliver programs leading to qualifi-
cations with worldwide recognition. Although Mauritius 
has a limited number of graduates in the ICT sector 
compared with many other emerging nations, the quality 
of Mauritian graduates is well known worldwide, mainly 
because the country’s universities have adopted the 
same stringent standards and benchmarks as European 
universities. However, the government recognizes that 
the enrollment rate at the tertiary level is still low and 
should be improved. In this context, the Ministry of 
Tertiary Education is currently implementing an initiative 
entitled One Graduate per Family with the dual aims of, 
first, overcoming the low rate of graduates being turned 
out each year and, second, ensuring that every capable 
student of any strata of the society is given an opportu-
nity to undertake tertiary education.
English and French languages and mathematics are 
compulsory subjects for 11 consecutive years of school-
ing. This legacy of the English as well as the French 
colonies has proven to be very valuable in making the 
population bilingual.
It is to be noted that in the area of human capital 
Mauritius faces the inherent barrier of limited ICT pro-
fessionals, given the small size of the population and 
relatively small number of students who study science 
and engineering subjects. Furthermore, very few people 
have so far developed the ICT/BPO work culture; this is 
another challenge that the country needs to meet.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.2: The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
166  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
SETTING UP THE ICT CENTER OF EXCELLENCE: 
HUMAN CAPACITY BUILDING INITIATIVE
The ICT Center of Excellence has been set up taking 
into consideration that adequate human capital is one 
of the country’s most challenging factors. Transforming 
the island into a knowledge-based economy requires 
human capital of global talents capable of executing 
global tasks. It has been acknowledged officially as well 
as by international consultancy organizations in this area 
that Mauritius, with its relatively low level of graduates, 
lags behind many ICT destinations for producing a suf-
ficient number of these global talents. The government 
has therefore set up an ICT Academy, the main objective 
of which is to train school leavers in various streams of 
ICT industry–led courses. In this model, all trainees will 
undergo internationally recognized industry-led ICT certi-
fication courses such as those provided by multi national 
ICT companies such as Microsoft, Oracle, CISCO, and 
SAP. The government will also cater for courses that 
recognize prior learning for those who have extensive 
experience but who could not integrate a formal aca-
demic stream and could not secure the appropriate 
qualifications. The ICT Academy has planned to train at 
least 10,000 knowledge workers by the end of 2014 and 
is being operated as a public-private partnership, where 
the government is contributing 45 percent of the cost.
OPEN ACCESS POLICY AND DEREGULATION FOR 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
Open access is the “possibility for third parties to use an 
existing network infrastructure,” according to the Best 
Practice Guidelines for Enabling Open Access, adopted 
by the 2010 Global Symposium for Regulators. The open 
access policy allows telecommunications operators to 
enter the market on an equal footing with various local 
operators in terms of the use of common telecommu-
nications infrastructure.8 In fact, with a view to further 
stimulating competition in the ICT market, the Mauritian 
government agreed, in October 2010, to apply an open 
access policy for the operation of undersea cable land-
ing stations in Mauritius. It has also encouraged smaller 
local companies to enter the market and seeks to ensure 
that no entity can take the position of dominant market 
power. This has the short-term effect of allowing com-
petitors of the incumbent operators to offer international 
IP standards of service at rates up to 44 percent lower 
than previously available.
LESSONS LEARNED
We have presented and synthesized a number of 
economic and social benefits that countries, such as 
Mauritius, have used to leverage when favoring ICT 
investment from global companies to capitalize on 
global economic opportunities. Mauritius has witnessed 
significant improvements on all the macroeconomic 
development indicators in its ICT sector, thus surpassing 
the net African average.
However, in view of securing such business op-
portunities locally against a backdrop of the comparative 
advantage of other established outsourcing destinations, 
Mauritius faces daunting challenges. The island’s geo-
graphic location, while at times presenting itself as a safe 
ICT destination, can also be viewed as a challenge—es-
pecially as its major markets are in Europe. This unique 
situation calls for constantly adapting strategies to reflect 
the ever-changing global environment. Policymakers 
should therefore be mindful of similar economic transfor-
mations that aim to build a knowledge-based economy 
in nearby countries, and maintain a competitive advan-
tage by staying on top of human resource development 
especially.
The complex and continuous transformation of 
the Mauritian economy from a country dependent on a 
mono crop to a knowledge-based economy has required 
major reforms to ensure a smooth and needed transition. 
However, Mauritius still suffers from a long response time 
in building up the human capital required, including the 
major transformation needed to re-skill workers in the 
traditional agricultural industry for the emerging sector. 
One consequence of this transformation has been work-
ers’ resistance to adapting to the new round-the-clock 
imperatives and the new cultural environment. These 
challenges have invariably had a spillover effect on gov-
ernment policies, private-sector strategies, and existing 
institutional arrangements.
The uptake of the ICT sector and its integration into 
the global economy requires the adaption to a situation 
where protectionism, which used to provide a benefit, is 
today no longer relevant or possible. This paradigm shift 
for Mauritius has enabled the country to focus on the 
need to position technological outreach, blended with 
quality and innovation, at the center of its development 
strategies.
Clearly the transition to a more technology-intensive, 
knowledge-based economy is not straightforward. 
Success depends on a number of critical elements. 
First, a committed and visionary political leadership that 
truly believes in the adoption of emerging technologies 
is a crucial factor in realizing these objectives. Equally 
important is the provision of a broadband infrastructure 
that can adequately support and sustain the new eco-
nomic agenda. This can be realized only if the country 
has an integrated approach that incorporates the culture 
of technological development and adoption for all cross-
sections of the population. The NICTSP-2014, in fact, 
provides direction for policy to address challenges and 
ensure the attainment of the government’s objectives 
to make Mauritius a high-income economy through the 
adoption of the ICT sector as an enabler.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.2: The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  167 
Another important aspect is the adoption of e-
government services. Although the government is com-
mitted to promoting ICT culture among its citizens, many 
e-government services have not experienced a robust 
take-up rate—in fact, astonishingly, the population is 
showing some resistance. To date, many departmental 
systems are already operational; these back-office ap-
plications are a major building block of the e-government 
program. In order to address the relatively low take-up 
rate, e-government initiatives need to shift away from 
a focus on the tools and service delivery channels and 
instead adopt a citizen-centric approach to public ser-
vice development and delivery. Such a strategic shift 
would ensure that user needs and demands are met by 
government.
The refocusing of energies around citizen-centric 
e-services should be accompanied by the establishment 
of an e-government centralized coordination body. This 
body would ensure an enhanced coordination for the 
development of e-services, and hence the realization of 
e-services would be harmonized and unaligned actions 
would be decreased or eliminated.
Of the 53 online services available on the govern-
ment portal, some 12 e-services are more popular. 
The most effective is the e-filing system for tax returns, 
which reaches about 70 percent of taxpayers (around 
140,000+). To harness the full power of online service 
delivery, the government has recently made the usage of 
e-government e-services mandatory in all relevant min-
istries and departments. This directive is supported by 
a reorganization of departmental processes around the 
needs of the citizens and businesses, which have been 
established through surveys and feedback. Key per-
formance indicators such as transaction costs, conve-
nience, and user experience are being assessed to get a 
clear indication of the benefits derived both for the gov-
ernment and the end user. A complete revamping of the 
government e-services is being undertaken with a new 
government portal with interactive applications in place.
Moreover, the forthcoming formulation of an e-
government strategy will ensure that the e-services are 
demand-driven, citizen- and business-centric, and hence 
enhance the value-added of these initiatives.
THE WAY FORWARD
As we look toward the way forward, Mauritius will need 
to focus its efforts on key areas, some of which are 
described below.
Developing and implementing a National Broadband 
Policy
The National Broadband Policy 2020 sets out a strategic 
vision for an Intelligent Mauritius (branded as “i-Mauri-
tius”) and establishes national goals regarding broad-
band while elaborating specific policies to achieve those 
goals. As an immediate objective, Mauritius aspires to 
surge from a typical 1 MB Internet connectivity to at least 
a 10 MB connection by 2014. The government is fully 
aware that the National Broadband Policy formulation 
must take into consideration the short- and long-term 
national objectives within a context of ever-changing 
social, economic, political, and technological conditions. 
The salient features of this policy comprise:
•	 defining the broadband ecosystem for Mauritius;
•	 creating an environment that is conducive to attract-
ing new investments and players in the new ecosys-
tem;
•	 establishing and promoting the national broadband 
infrastructure;
•	 consolidating the regulatory and legislative frame-
works to allow the emergence of Broadband i-Mau-
ritius;
•	 ensuring the quality of service of broadband ser-
vices from “best effort” to “minimum guaranteed” 
levels;
•	 developing a broadband-handling culture for ade-
quate usage;
•	 developing a content-production culture to stimulate 
sufficient supply and demand mixes;
•	 developing efficient management strategies in the 
use of scarce resources for broadband deployment 
and monitoring thereof;
•	 providing adequate broadband services within 
accessibility, availability, and affordability ranges;
•	 promoting research, innovation, and competition for 
sustaining the broadband ecosystem;
•	 introducing adequate regulatory safety nets to 
ensure the “universalization” of broadband; and
•	 defining the institutional framework and responsibili-
ties to achieve objectives set.
Moving the value chain of the outsourcing industry
The current ICT/BPO global positioning offers important 
opportunities for high-value-added and high-income ser-
vices as long as the challenges highlighted above have 
been properly addressed. Acknowledging the strengths 
and weaknesses, the positioning of Mauritius toward 
more investment in outsourcing is anticipated to be as 
follows:
•	 Data center and infrastructure outsourcing: As the 
price of international bandwidth decreases and 
capacity becomes more abundant, service provid-
ers are seriously considering implementing high-
value-added and high-earnings projects in Africa, 
particularly in the Eastern Region where there has 
been a boom of submarine fiber optic connectiv-
ity projects in recent years. Companies are likely to 
focus on deploying more and more tier-3 elements.9
© 2012 World Economic Forum
2.2: The Making of a Digital Nation: Toward i-Mauritius
168  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
•	 Data centers in the Eastern African Region, includ-
ing Mauritius: Such a strategy would circumvent the 
inherent low number of ICT-skilled workers because 
data centers remain technology-intensive rather than 
human resource capacity–intensive. Mauritius is 
poised to be in a position to offer bandwidth capac-
ity, route diversity, redundancy, and safety for such 
activities.
•	 Diversifying product and service portfolio: Mauritius 
is traditionally known to be the preferred destina-
tion for many low-end ICT/BPO activities because it 
offers a unique amalgamation of attributes. Mauritius 
should consider catering to global knowledge pro-
cess outsourcing (KPO) needs and its high-end 
processes such as valuation research, investment 
research, patent filing, legal and insurance claims 
processing, online teaching, and media content 
supply, among others. Mauritius—with its interna-
tionally recognized pool of skilled workers (although 
limited in number), including chartered accountants, 
doctors, MBAs, lawyers, and so on—has important 
advantages in the KPO market. This pool of workers 
will increase with the operation of the ICT Academy. 
This, combined with the multilingual capabilities of 
the workforce and cost arbitrage as well as global 
partnerships, will definitely help Mauritius emerge as 
a global winner in the KPO sector.
CONCLUSION
This chapter has shown how policy and regulatory 
frameworks have evolved to continue fostering the digi-
tal economy and information society of Mauritius. It has 
addressed the challenges faced by the country in its 
relatively limited pool of natural resources and the qual-
ity of its human capital, and has presented the country’s 
strategy for ensuring that Mauritius is prepared to be part 
of the global economy.
The aligned vision and efforts of all the relevant 
stakeholders in the ICT sector at the national level will 
also clearly contribute toward asserting the visibility of 
the Republic of Mauritius on the international scene, 
especially in relation to the global ICT/BPO market. 
Therefore, continued and sustained efforts to bring down 
the costs of international connectivity, to improve the 
quality of the workforce, and to promote a business-
friendly environment will further ensure that Mauritius be-
comes a preferred platform and solutions provider in the 
global ICT/BPO realm. The solid foundations upon which 
the ICT/BPO sector is being elevated have endowed 
Mauritius with the right attributes to meet aspirations and 
challenges confidently as the country ascends the devel-
opment ladder of the new global economy.
NOTES
1 World Bank 2011.
2 Statistics Mauritius, available at http://www.gov.mu/portal/site/cso.
 3 The ICT sector of Mauritius includes manufacturing and services 
industries whose products capture, transmit, or display data 
and information electronically. It includes related activities of 
manufacturing, wholesale and retail trade, communications, and 
business services (such as call centers, software development, 
website development and hosting, multimedia, IT consulting, 
and disaster recovery). Since 2008, training in IT has been 
excluded from the definition of the ICT sector. See the Partnership 
on Measuring ICT for Development, an international, multi-
stakeholder initiative to improve the availability and quality of ICT 
data and indicators, particularly in developing countries, which 
was launched in 2004. Available at http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/
partnership/.
 4 WTO 2012.
 5 See http://www.gov.mu/portal/site/telcomit.
 6 See the NCB (National Computer Board). Available at http://www.
gov.mu/portal/sites/ncbnew/main.jsp (accessed February 24, 
2012).
 7 Cheese et al. 2008.
 8 ITU 2011.
 9 Manyika et al. 2011.
REFERENCES
Cheese, P., R. J. Thomas, and E. Craig. 2008. The Talent Powered 
Organization. Philadelphia: Kogan Page.
ITU (International Telecommunication Union). 2011. “Open Access 
Regulation in the Digital Economy.” ITU News September (7): 43. 
Available at http://www.itu.int/net/itunews/issues/2011/07/43.aspx. 
ITU (International Telecommunication Union), OECD, UNCTAD, UNDESA, 
UNESCO, World Bank, UN ECA, UN ECLAC, UN ESCAP, UN 
ESCWA, and Eurostat. 2009. Partnership on Measuring ICT for 
Development. Available at http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/partnership/.
Manyika, J., M. Chui, B. Brown, J. Bughin, R. Dobbs, C. Roxburgh, and 
A. Hung Byers. 2011. Big Data: The Next Frontier for Innovation, 
Competition, and Productivity. Report, May. McKinsey Global 
Institute. Available at http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/MGI/
Research/Technology_and_Innovation/Big_data_The_next_
frontier_for_innovation.
NCB (National Computer Board). N.D. Available at http:// www.gov.mu/
portal/sites/indicators (accessed February 24, 2012).
Statistics Mauritius. Republic of Mauritius, Ministry of Finance & 
Economic Development. Available at http://www.gov.mu/portal/
site/cso.
World Bank. 2011. Mauritius: Country Brief. Available at http://web.
worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/COUNTRIES/AFRICAEXT/
MAURITIUSEXTN/0,,contentMDK:20211139~pagePK:1497618~piP
K:217854~theSitePK:381974,00.html. Updated September 2011.
WTO (World Trade Organization). 2012. Telecommunications Services: 
List of Commitments and Exemptions. Available at http://www.wto.
org/english/tratop_e/serv_e/telecom_e/telecom_commit_exempt_
list_e.htm (accessed February 24, 2012).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Part 3
Country/Economy Profiles
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  171
ONLINE DATA PORTAL
In additon to the analysis presented in this  
Report, an online data portal can be accessed via  
www.weforum.org/gitr. The platform offers a number 
of analytical tools and visualizations, including sortable 
rankings, scatter plots, bar charts, and maps, as well 
as the possibility of downloading portions of the NRI 
dataset.
How to Read the Country/Economy Profiles
The Country/Economy Profiles section presents a profile 
for each of the 142 economies covered in The Global 
Information Technology Report 2012. Each profile sum-
marizes an economy’s performance in the various di-
mensions of the Networked Readiness Index (NRI).
 PERFORMANCE HIGHLIGHTS
The first section of the profile presents the economy’s 
overall performance in the NRI, along with its perfor-
mance in the NRI’s four components and ten pillars. The 
economy’s rank (out of 142 economies) and score (on a 
1-to-7 scale) are reported. 
 On the radar chart to the right of the table, a blue 
line plots the economy’s score on each of the ten pillars. 
The black line represents the average score of all econo-
mies in the income group to which the economy under 
review belongs. The country classification by income 
group is defined by the World Bank and reflects the 
situation as of July 2011. Note that the two high-income 
groups in this classification system, High income: OECD 
and High income: non-OECD, were merged into a single 
group for the purpose of the analysis.
 THE NETWORKED READINESS INDEX IN DETAIL
This section presents an economy’s performance in 
each of the 53 indicators composing the NRI. The in-
dicators are organized by pillar. The numbering of the 
variables matches that of the data tables found at the 
end of the Report, which provide descriptions, rankings, 
and scores for all the indicators. 
The indicators derived from the 2010 and 2011 edi-
tions of the World Economic Forum’s Executive Opinion 
Survey are identified by an asterisk (*). These indicators 
are always measured on a 1-to-7 scale (where 1 is the 
lowest score and 7 is the highest). For those indicators 
not derived from the World Economic Forum’s Executive 
Opinion Survey, the scale is reported next to the title. 
The section “Technical Notes and Sources” at the end 
of this Report provides further details on each indica-
tor, including its definition, method of computation, and 
sources.
Note that for the sake of readability, the period to 
which each data point corresponds is omitted, but can 
be found in the corresponding data table. For more infor-
mation on the framework and computation of the NRI, as 
well as on the Executive Opinion Survey, please refer to 
Chapter 1.1.
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
174  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................63 ......... 3.6
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................76 ......... 3.8
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................101 ......... 3.0
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....63 ......... 3.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....65 ......... 3.7
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................94 ......... 3.0
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........77 .......... 75
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................26 ........ 390
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................75 ......... 4.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................124 ......... 2.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................70 ....... 38.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................10 ............ 5
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................122 ......... 4.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........93 ....... 18.4
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................69 ......... 4.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............58 ......... 3.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................91 .. 1,193.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................69 ....... 98.2
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................67 ....... 11.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................90 ......... 8.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................87 ......... 4.7
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................96 ....... 0.42
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..39 ..... 25.34
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......84 ....... 1.69
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................45 ......... 4.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................42 ......... 4.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..92 ....... 78.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................59 ....... 95.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................19 ..... 141.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................55 ....... 45.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............95 ....... 15.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................86 ....... 11.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......79 ......... 3.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................37 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................73 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................119 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................74 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................32 ......... 4.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................62 ......... 4.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................59 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....73 ....... 0.31
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....76 ......... 4.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....65 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........88 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................57 ......... 4.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................59 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
 Rank  Score  
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............68 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................82 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 89 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 78 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................65 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 75 .....3.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 57 .....5.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 56 .....5.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................62 ....3.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 59 .....3.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 74 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 64 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................72 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 75 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 69 .....3.7
 Albania
 Albania       Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  173
173
Index of Country/Economy Profiles
Country/Economy Page
Albania 174
Algeria 175
Angola 176
Argentina 177
Armenia 178
Australia 179
Austria 180
Azerbaijan 181
Bahrain 182
Bangladesh 183
Barbados 184
Belgium 185
Belize 186
Benin 187
Bolivia 188
Bosnia and Herzegovina 189
Botswana 190
Brazil 191
Brunei Darussalam 192
Bulgaria 193
Burkina Faso 194
Burundi 195
Cambodia 196
Cameroon 197
Canada 198
Cape Verde 199
Chad 200
Chile 201
China 202
Colombia 203
Costa Rica 204
Côte d’Ivoire 205
Croatia 206
Cyprus 207
Czech Republic 208
Denmark 209
Dominican Republic 210
Ecuador 211
Egypt 212
El Salvador 213
Estonia 214
Ethiopia 215
Finland 216
France 217
Gambia, The 218
Georgia 219
Germany 220
Ghana 221
Country/Economy Page
Greece 222
Guatemala 223
Guyana 224
Haiti 225
Honduras 226
Hong Kong SAR 227
Hungary 228
Iceland 229
India 230
Indonesia 231
Iran, Islamic Rep. 232
Ireland 233
Israel 234
Italy 235
Jamaica 236
Japan 237
Jordan 238
Kazakhstan 239
Kenya 240
Korea, Rep. 241
Kuwait 242
Kyrgyz Republic 243
Latvia 244
Lebanon 245
Lesotho 246
Lithuania 247
Luxembourg 248
Macedonia, FYR 249
Madagascar 250
Malawi 251
Malaysia 252
Mali 253
Malta 254
Mauritania 255
Mauritius 256
Mexico 257
Moldova 258
Mongolia 259
Montenegro 260
Morocco 261
Mozambique 262
Namibia 263
Nepal 264
Netherlands 265
New Zealand 266
Nicaragua 267
Nigeria 268
Norway 269
Country/Economy Page
Oman 270
Pakistan 271
Panama 272
Paraguay 273
Peru 274
Philippines 275
Poland 276
Portugal 277
Puerto Rico 278
Qatar 279
Romania 280
Russian Federation 281
Rwanda 282
Saudi Arabia 283
Senegal 284
Serbia 285
Singapore 286
Slovak Republic 287
Slovenia 288
South Africa 289
Spain 290
Sri Lanka 291
Suriname 292
Swaziland 293
Sweden 294
Switzerland 295
Syria 296
Taiwan, China 297
Tajikistan 298
Tanzania 299
Thailand 300
Timor-Leste 301
Trinidad and Tobago 302
Tunisia 303
Turkey 304
Uganda 305
Ukraine 306
United Arab Emirates 307
United Kingdom 308
United States 309
Uruguay 310
Venezuela 311
Vietnam 312
Yemen 313
Zambia 314
Zimbabwe 315
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
174  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................63 ......... 3.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................76 ......... 3.8
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................101 ......... 3.0
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....63 ......... 3.7
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....65 ......... 3.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................94 ......... 3.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........77 .......... 75
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................26 ........ 390
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................75 ......... 4.9
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................124 ......... 2.0
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................70 ....... 38.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................10 ............ 5
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................122 ......... 4.0
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........94 ....... 18.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................69 ......... 4.2
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............58 ......... 3.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................91 .. 1,193.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................69 ....... 98.2
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................67 ....... 11.8
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................90 ......... 8.4
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................87 ......... 4.7
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................96 ....... 0.42
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..39 ..... 25.34
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......84 ....... 1.69
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................45 ......... 4.2
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................42 ......... 4.5
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..92 ....... 78.2
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................59 ....... 95.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................19 ..... 141.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................55 ....... 45.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............95 ....... 15.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................86 ....... 11.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......79 ......... 3.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................37 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................73 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................119 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................74 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................32 ......... 4.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................62 ......... 4.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................59 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....73 ....... 0.31
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....76 ......... 4.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....65 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........88 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................57 ......... 4.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................59 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............68 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................82 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 89 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 78 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................65 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 75 .....3.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 57 .....5.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 56 .....5.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................62 ....3.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 59 .....3.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 74 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 64 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................72 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 75 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 69 .....3.7
Albania
 Albania       Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  175
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................114 ......... 2.7
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................130 ......... 2.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................126 ......... 2.5
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..109 ......... 3.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..104 ......... 3.0
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................135 ......... 2.2
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........93 .......... 83
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............123 .......... 45
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................95 ........ 630
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................122 ......... 4.0
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................110 ......... 2.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................134 ....... 72.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................92 .......... 25
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................133 .......... 14
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................131 ......... 3.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........74 ....... 30.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................101 ......... 3.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............137 ......... 2.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................92 .. 1,168.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................114 ....... 81.5
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................83 ......... 8.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................123 ......... 0.9
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................126 ......... 3.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................43 ....... 0.22
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..42 ..... 27.38
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....104 ....... 1.31
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................123 ......... 2.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................96 ......... 3.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..49 ....... 94.9
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................115 ....... 72.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................81 ....... 92.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................105 ....... 12.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............84 ....... 20.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................91 ....... 10.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......88 ......... 2.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................86 ......... 5.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................134 ......... 3.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................138 ......... 2.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............91 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................141 ......... 3.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................126 ......... 3.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................123 ......... 3.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................133 ......... 2.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...126 ....... 0.10
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..141 ......... 2.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......83 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..142 ......... 2.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............77 ....... 19.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......133 ......... 3.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................125 ......... 2.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................137 ......... 2.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............118 ..3.0
A. Environment subindex ............................................136 ....2.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 132 .....2.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 137 .....3.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................88 ....4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 105 .....3.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 51 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 97 .....4.4
C. Usage subindex ......................................................127 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 89 .....2.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 140 .....2.6
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 135 .....2.6
D. Impact subindex .....................................................140 ....2.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 140 .....2.1
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 135 .....2.4
Algeria
 Algeria      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
176  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................83 ......... 3.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................135 ......... 2.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................129 ......... 2.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..136 ......... 2.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..133 ......... 2.5
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................130 ......... 2.4
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............126 .......... 46
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................130 ..... 1,011
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................140 ......... 3.4
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................140 ......... 1.5
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................116 ....... 53.2
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................132 .......... 68
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................142 ......... 3.2
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......131 ......... 3.7
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................142 ......... 1.8
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............86 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................121 ..... 221.3
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................129 ....... 40.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............130 ......... 0.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................104 ......... 2.7
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................137 ......... 3.2
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................80 ....... 0.34
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 130 ... 181.75
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....101 ....... 1.33
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................141 ......... 1.9
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............142 ......... 1.5
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 132 ....... 31.3
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................118 ....... 70.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............126 ....... 46.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................115 ....... 10.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............111 ......... 7.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................101 ......... 5.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....120 ......... 0.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........86 ......... 1.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................130 ......... 3.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................133 ......... 3.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................141 ......... 1.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............114 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................140 ......... 3.4
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................89 ......... 3.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................119 ......... 3.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................121 ......... 3.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....63 ....... 0.34
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..134 ......... 3.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..138 ......... 2.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......138 ......... 3.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................140 ......... 1.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................131 ......... 3.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................105 ....... 0.07
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............140 ..2.5
A. Environment subindex ............................................141 ....2.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 133 .....2.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 141 .....2.6
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................139 ....2.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 137 .....2.0
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 121 .....3.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 137 .....2.5
C. Usage subindex ......................................................130 ....2.6
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 127 .....1.8
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 137 .....2.7
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 112 .....3.3
D. Impact subindex .....................................................137 ....2.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 135 .....2.3
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 139 .....2.3
Angola
 Angola      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  177
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................136 ......... 2.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................106 ......... 3.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................124 ......... 2.6
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..124 ......... 2.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..136 ......... 2.4
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................128 ......... 2.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........70 .......... 70
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................84 ........ 590
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................83 ......... 4.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................129 ......... 1.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................139 ..... 108.2
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................93 .......... 26
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................133 .......... 14
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................105 ......... 4.3
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........20 ....... 68.7
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................22 ......... 5.1
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............127 ......... 2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................62 .. 3,057.4
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................90 ....... 94.1
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................41 ....... 27.5
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................63 ....... 26.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................88 ......... 4.7
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................132 ....... 0.71
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..93 ..... 44.66
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................86 ......... 3.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............113 ......... 3.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..77 ....... 85.8
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................51 ....... 97.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................20 ..... 141.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................74 ....... 36.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............60 ....... 40.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................71 ....... 21.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......53 ......... 9.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........56 ......... 6.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................57 ......... 5.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................93 ......... 4.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................77 ......... 2.9
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............66 ......... 1.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................85 ......... 4.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................76 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................134 ......... 3.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................135 ......... 2.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....43 ....... 0.41
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....75 ......... 4.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......66 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....63 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............83 ....... 17.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......117 ......... 3.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................106 ......... 3.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................125 ......... 3.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................56 ....... 0.20
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............92 ..3.5
A. Environment subindex ............................................122 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 122 .....2.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 113 .....3.6
B. Readiness subindex .................................................84 ....4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 58 .....4.4
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 103 .....3.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 80 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................77 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 58 .....3.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 86 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 119 .....3.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................96 ....3.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 82 .....3.1
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 108 .....3.1
Argentina
 Argentina      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
178  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................88 ......... 3.2
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................88 ......... 3.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................108 ......... 2.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....81 ......... 3.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....84 ......... 3.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................96 ......... 3.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........102 .......... 89
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............133 .......... 49
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................48 ........ 440
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................116 ......... 4.2
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................109 ......... 2.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................79 ....... 40.9
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................139 ......... 3.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........47 ....... 51.5
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................131 ......... 3.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............124 ......... 2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................83 .. 1,874.6
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................66 ....... 98.9
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................86 ......... 7.8
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................72 ....... 17.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................101 ......... 4.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................31 ....... 0.17
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 104 ..... 57.39
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....109 ....... 1.21
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................97 ......... 3.2
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................81 ......... 3.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..55 ....... 92.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................10 ....... 99.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................33 ..... 125.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................59 ....... 44.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............83 ....... 21.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................79 ....... 15.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......86 ......... 2.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........69 ......... 3.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................102 ......... 4.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................114 ......... 4.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................61 ......... 3.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............62 ......... 1.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................113 ......... 4.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................105 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................76 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................74 ......... 3.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...110 ....... 0.17
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..109 ......... 3.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......58 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....96 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............56 ....... 24.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......110 ......... 3.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................92 ......... 3.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................91 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................117 ....... 0.04
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............94 ..3.5
A. Environment subindex ............................................110 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 112 .....3.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 93 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................90 ....4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 85 .....3.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 97 .....4.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 62 .....5.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................89 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 75 .....3.0
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 104 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 95 .....3.5
D. Impact subindex .......................................................99 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 90 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 106 .....3.1
Armenia
 Armenia      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  179
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................9 ......... 5.3
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................14 ......... 5.4
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................13 ......... 6.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....14 ......... 5.1
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....16 ......... 4.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................19 ......... 5.3
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............5 .......... 24
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................12 .......... 28
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................30 ........ 395
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................23 ......... 6.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................21 ......... 3.5
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................104 ....... 47.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ................................2 ............ 2
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................3 ............ 2
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................7 ......... 5.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........12 ....... 75.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................15 ......... 5.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............50 ......... 3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................11 11,240.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................47 ....... 99.1
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................32 ....... 41.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................5 .. 1,760.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................24 ......... 6.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................128 ....... 0.64
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..92 ..... 43.74
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......85 ....... 1.67
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................13 ......... 5.1
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................19 ......... 5.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....1 ..... 129.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................70 ..... 101.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................19 ....... 76.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............18 ....... 81.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................18 ....... 74.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......24 ....... 24.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........6 ....... 53.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................20 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................19 ......... 5.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................27 ......... 4.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............20 ....... 83.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................16 ......... 6.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................17 ......... 4.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................28 ......... 5.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................23 ......... 4.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......5 ....... 0.77
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....27 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......18 ....... 24.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....24 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............12 ....... 42.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........30 ......... 5.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................19 ......... 5.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................44 ......... 4.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................2 ....... 0.91
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............17 ..5.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................12 ....5.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 11 .....5.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 18 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................26 ....5.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 7 .....6.6
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 100 .....4.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 11 .....6.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................17 ....5.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 16 .....5.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 22 .....4.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 8 .....5.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................16 ....5.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 20 .....4.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 8 .....5.6
Australia
 Australia      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
180  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................34 ......... 4.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................10 ......... 5.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................22 ......... 5.5
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....18 ......... 5.0
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....15 ......... 4.8
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................16 ......... 5.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............5 .......... 24
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................4 .......... 25
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................32 ........ 397
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................10 ......... 6.4
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................43 ......... 2.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................115 ....... 53.1
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................97 .......... 28
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................8 ......... 5.8
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........35 ....... 60.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................34 ......... 4.8
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............26 ......... 4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................25 .. 7,830.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................16 ....... 73.7
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................18 ..... 856.6
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................4 ......... 6.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................12 ....... 0.08
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..74 ..... 35.04
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................24 ......... 4.7
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................38 ......... 4.6
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..31 ....... 99.6
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................13 ..... 145.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................23 ....... 72.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............25 ....... 76.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................21 ....... 72.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......25 ....... 23.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........20 ....... 24.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................13 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................12 ......... 5.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................12 ......... 4.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............10 ..... 143.9
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................18 ......... 5.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................14 ......... 5.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................41 ......... 5.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................48 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....33 ....... 0.48
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....22 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......14 ....... 31.6
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....37 ......... 4.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............27 ....... 36.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........15 ......... 5.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................18 ......... 5.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................12 ......... 5.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................21 ....... 0.50
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............19 ..5.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................21 ....4.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 14 .....5.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 37 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................10 ....6.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 12 .....6.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 24 .....6.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 24 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................20 ....5.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 17 .....5.4
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 11 .....5.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 39 .....4.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................20 ....5.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 19 .....4.8
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 16 .....5.3
Austria
 Austria      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  181
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................56 ......... 3.7
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................64 ......... 4.0
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................83 ......... 3.4
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....95 ......... 3.3
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....59 ......... 3.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................60 ......... 3.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........100 .......... 88
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................5 ........ 237
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................87 ......... 4.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................54 ......... 2.8
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................74 ....... 40.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................133 ......... 3.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........92 ....... 19.3
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................125 ......... 3.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............24 ......... 4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................68 .. 2,669.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................75 ......... 9.7
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................99 ......... 5.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................81 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................22 ....... 0.15
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..26 ..... 21.76
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......99 ....... 1.35
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................113 ......... 3.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................99 ......... 3.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..81 ....... 84.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................12 ....... 99.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................75 ....... 99.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................53 ....... 46.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............82 ....... 21.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................53 ....... 35.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......72 ......... 5.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........95 ......... 0.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................33 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................66 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................52 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............81 ......... 0.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................106 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................67 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................30 ......... 5.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................14 ......... 5.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....67 ....... 0.32
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....46 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......80 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....59 ......... 4.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............70 ....... 20.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........59 ......... 4.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................88 ......... 3.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................47 ......... 4.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................66 ....... 0.17
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............61 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................77 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 75 .....3.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 80 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................61 ....4.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 72 .....3.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 25 .....6.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 82 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................57 ....3.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 70 .....3.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 72 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 38 .....4.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................70 ....3.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 68 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 67 .....3.7
Azerbaijan
 Azerbaijan      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
182  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................36 ......... 4.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................33 ......... 4.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................26 ......... 5.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....31 ......... 4.7
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....25 ......... 4.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................20 ......... 5.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........40 .......... 54
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............132 .......... 48
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................96 ........ 635
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................22 ......... 6.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................8 ......... 4.2
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................8 ....... 15.0
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................42 ............ 9
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................25 ......... 5.5
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........49 ....... 51.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................60 ......... 4.3
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............17 ......... 4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................10 11,339.3
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................62 ....... 14.4
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................47 ....... 97.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................19 ......... 6.1
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................30 ....... 0.16
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..65 ..... 32.97
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......62 ....... 1.92
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................31 ......... 4.6
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................40 ......... 4.5
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..18 ..... 103.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................80 ....... 91.4
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................37 ..... 124.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................41 ....... 55.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................8 ....... 87.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................19 ....... 74.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......71 ......... 5.4
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........18 ....... 27.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................21 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................20 ......... 5.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................117 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............51 ......... 2.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................40 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................11 ......... 5.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................7 ......... 6.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................6 ......... 5.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......8 ....... 0.73
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....30 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......71 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....42 ......... 4.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............68 ....... 20.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........13 ......... 5.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................32 ......... 5.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................8 ......... 5.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................11 ....... 0.67
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............27 ..4.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................27 ....4.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 35 .....4.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 12 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................25 ....5.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 31 .....5.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 31 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 36 .....5.6
C. Usage subindex ........................................................26 ....4.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 30 .....4.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 39 .....3.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 4 .....5.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................30 ....4.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 54 .....3.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 12 .....5.4
Bahrain
 Bahrain      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  183
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................94 ......... 3.0
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................117 ......... 3.0
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................90 ......... 3.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..100 ......... 3.1
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....81 ......... 3.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................129 ......... 2.4
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........103 .......... 90
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............106 .......... 41
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................138 ..... 1,442
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................95 ......... 4.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................94 ......... 2.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................55 ....... 35.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................80 .......... 19
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................92 ......... 4.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......108 ....... 10.6
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................90 ......... 3.9
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............117 ......... 3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................120 ..... 240.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................97 ....... 90.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............110 ......... 2.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................134 ......... 0.3
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................112 ......... 4.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................2 ....... 0.03
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..76 ..... 36.28
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....107 ....... 1.25
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................85 ......... 3.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............106 ......... 3.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 116 ....... 49.3
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................128 ....... 55.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............127 ....... 46.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................130 ......... 3.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............127 ......... 3.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................119 ......... 2.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....127 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................122 ......... 4.3
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................95 ......... 4.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................121 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............115 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................117 ......... 4.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................121 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................49 ......... 5.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................62 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....58 ....... 0.36
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..100 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..105 ......... 3.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........103 ......... 7.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......105 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................128 ......... 2.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................104 ......... 3.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................94 ....... 0.10
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............113 ..3.2
A. Environment subindex ............................................123 ....3.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 130 .....2.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 100 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................103 ....3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 114 .....2.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 58 .....5.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 125 .....3.3
C. Usage subindex ......................................................108 ....3.0
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 125 .....1.8
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 118 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 56 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .....................................................124 ....2.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 125 .....2.5
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 120 .....2.9
Bangladesh
 Bangladesh      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
184  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................6 ......... 5.5
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................53 ......... 4.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................17 ......... 5.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....20 ......... 4.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....24 ......... 4.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................24 ......... 5.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ...............n/a ......... n/a
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract .........................n/a ......... n/a
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................27 ......... 6.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................93 ......... 2.3
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits .....................................n/a ......... n/a
2.04 No. days to start a business .............................n/a ......... n/a
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ...................n/a ......... n/a
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................68 ......... 4.9
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........24 ....... 65.9
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................26 ......... 5.0
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............39 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................55 .. 3,714.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................49 ....... 20.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................27 ..... 329.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................28 ......... 6.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................94 ....... 0.40
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..99 ..... 50.39
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....110 ....... 1.20
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................15 ......... 5.1
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................10 ......... 5.3
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..28 ..... 100.6
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................29 ..... 128.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................28 ....... 70.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............39 ....... 61.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................45 ....... 51.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......31 ....... 20.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................42 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................38 ......... 5.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................91 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............32 ....... 11.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................39 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................36 ......... 4.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................29 ......... 5.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................45 ......... 4.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...104 ....... 0.20
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....49 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......34 ......... 2.7
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....64 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............1 ....... 57.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........32 ......... 5.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................30 ......... 5.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................52 ......... 4.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................94 ....... 0.10
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............35 ..4.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................29 ....4.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 20 .....5.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 35 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................51 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 33 .....5.1
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 102 .....4.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 10 .....6.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................34 ....4.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 24 .....5.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 41 .....3.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 61 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................36 ....4.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 26 .....4.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 44 .....4.2
Barbados
 Barbados      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  185
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................73 ......... 3.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................35 ......... 4.8
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................29 ......... 5.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....51 ......... 4.1
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....41 ......... 4.2
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................26 ......... 5.1
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............7 .......... 25
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................5 .......... 26
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................59 ........ 505
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................8 ......... 6.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................20 ......... 3.5
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................119 ....... 57.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ................................8 ............ 4
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................2 ......... 6.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........21 ....... 67.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................1 ......... 6.1
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............36 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................20 .. 8,412.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................11 ..... 112.0
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................23 ..... 489.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................10 ......... 6.3
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................126 ....... 0.58
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..27 ..... 21.82
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......80 ....... 1.75
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................6 ......... 5.5
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................2 ......... 6.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....8 ..... 110.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................53 ..... 113.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................20 ....... 75.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............22 ....... 76.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................22 ....... 72.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......12 ....... 31.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........48 ......... 8.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................24 ......... 6.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................26 ......... 5.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................14 ......... 4.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............16 ..... 102.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................26 ......... 5.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................13 ......... 5.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................51 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................66 ......... 4.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....17 ....... 0.63
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....37 ......... 5.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......19 ....... 21.7
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....27 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............10 ....... 43.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........25 ......... 5.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................20 ......... 5.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................58 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................17 ....... 0.59
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............22 ..5.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................22 ....4.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 26 .....4.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 21 .....5.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................20 ....5.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 21 .....5.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 68 .....5.3
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 3 .....6.4
C. Usage subindex ........................................................23 ....4.9
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 23 .....5.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 19 .....5.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 34 .....4.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................22 ....4.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 22 .....4.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 20 .....5.1
Belgium
 Belgium      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
186  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................89 ......... 3.2
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................124 ......... 2.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................98 ......... 3.1
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....98 ......... 3.1
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....98 ......... 3.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................81 ......... 3.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............137 .......... 51
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................124 ........ 892
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................92 ......... 4.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................134 ......... 1.8
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................47 ....... 33.2
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................122 .......... 44
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................107 ......... 4.2
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........90 ....... 21.5
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................120 ......... 3.4
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............125 ......... 2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................101 ..... 720.2
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ....................n/a ......... n/a
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................54 ....... 18.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................30 ..... 301.7
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................113 ......... 4.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................118 ....... 0.53
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 129 ... 162.74
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................126 ......... 2.7
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............109 ......... 3.3
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..99 ....... 74.8
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % .........................................n/a ......... n/a
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............114 ....... 62.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................101 ....... 14.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............108 ......... 8.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ...................n/a ......... n/a
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......84 ......... 2.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................98 ......... 4.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................129 ......... 3.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................131 ......... 2.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............55 ......... 1.8
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................81 ......... 4.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................123 ......... 3.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................136 ......... 3.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................139 ......... 2.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...116 ....... 0.16
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..130 ......... 3.3
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......75 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..130 ......... 3.0
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............69 ....... 20.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......121 ......... 3.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................91 ......... 3.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................133 ......... 2.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................94 ....... 0.10
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............119 ..3.0
A. Environment subindex ............................................121 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 116 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 119 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................112 ....3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 78 .....3.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 131 .....2.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 116 .....3.7
C. Usage subindex ......................................................123 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 99 .....2.5
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 119 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 137 .....2.5
D. Impact subindex .....................................................123 ....2.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 123 .....2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 122 .....2.9
Belize
 Belize      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  187
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................72 ......... 3.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................120 ......... 2.9
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................95 ......... 3.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....77 ......... 3.5
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....85 ......... 3.2
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................95 ......... 3.0
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............112 .......... 42
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................114 ........ 795
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................108 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................87 ......... 2.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................128 ....... 66.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................99 .......... 29
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................93 ......... 4.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......120 ......... 6.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................56 ......... 4.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............38 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................139 ....... 16.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................97 ....... 90.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............115 ......... 2.2
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................140 ......... 0.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................116 ......... 3.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................89 ....... 0.38
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 121 ... 106.11
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....107 ....... 1.25
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................43 ......... 4.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................54 ......... 4.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 127 ....... 37.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................136 ....... 41.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................99 ....... 79.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................131 ......... 3.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............132 ......... 2.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................139 ......... 0.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....128 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................103 ......... 4.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................101 ......... 4.3
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................79 ......... 2.9
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............110 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................114 ......... 4.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................110 ......... 3.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................58 ......... 4.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................91 ......... 3.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...123 ....... 0.12
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....85 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..117 ......... 3.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......101 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................105 ......... 3.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................109 ......... 3.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................105 ....... 0.07
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............117 ..3.0
A. Environment subindex ............................................114 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 101 .....3.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 124 .....3.4
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................128 ....3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 116 .....2.8
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 125 .....2.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 126 .....3.2
C. Usage subindex ......................................................112 ....2.9
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 112 .....2.1
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 106 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 104 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .....................................................106 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 101 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 110 .....3.1
Benin
 Benin      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
188  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................108 ......... 2.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................119 ......... 3.0
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................100 ......... 3.0
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..110 ......... 2.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..107 ......... 2.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................118 ......... 2.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........87 .......... 80
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................85 ........ 591
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................136 ......... 3.7
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................48 ......... 2.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................136 ....... 80.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................125 .......... 50
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................136 .......... 15
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................134 ......... 3.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........62 ....... 38.6
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................122 ......... 3.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............107 ......... 3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................106 ..... 648.8
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................128 ....... 45.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............102 ......... 4.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................92 ......... 8.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................122 ......... 3.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................117 ....... 0.52
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 116 ..... 84.40
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....125 ....... 0.80
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................106 ......... 3.1
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............117 ......... 3.0
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..88 ....... 81.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................82 ....... 90.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............105 ....... 72.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................95 ....... 20.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............91 ....... 17.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................107 ......... 3.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....100 ......... 1.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........77 ......... 2.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................123 ......... 4.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................139 ......... 3.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................70 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............106 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................128 ......... 3.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................113 ......... 3.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................131 ......... 3.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................123 ......... 2.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....77 ....... 0.30
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..119 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....98 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............93 ....... 14.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......126 ......... 3.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................113 ......... 3.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................117 ......... 3.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................56 ....... 0.20
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............127 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................133 ....3.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 118 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 135 .....3.0
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................122 ....3.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 129 .....2.4
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 136 .....2.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 95 .....4.5
C. Usage subindex ......................................................120 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 108 .....2.2
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 123 .....3.0
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 120 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .....................................................116 ....2.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 117 .....2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 112 .....3.0
Bolivia
 Bolivia      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  189
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................121 ......... 2.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................115 ......... 3.1
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................97 ......... 3.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..119 ......... 2.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..109 ......... 2.9
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................121 ......... 2.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........63 .......... 66
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................87 ........ 595
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................105 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................125 ......... 2.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................21 ....... 25.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................119 .......... 40
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................132 ......... 3.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........69 ....... 35.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................71 ......... 4.1
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............109 ......... 3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................59 .. 3,513.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................42 ....... 99.7
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................60 ....... 15.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................73 ....... 16.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................66 ......... 5.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................81 ....... 0.34
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..47 ..... 28.30
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......60 ....... 1.93
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................73 ......... 3.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................41 ......... 4.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..64 ....... 89.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................48 ....... 97.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................97 ....... 82.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................44 ....... 52.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............70 ....... 33.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................77 ....... 18.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......58 ......... 8.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................85 ......... 5.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................107 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................124 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............49 ......... 2.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................108 ......... 4.4
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................137 ......... 2.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................127 ......... 3.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................128 ......... 2.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....88 ....... 0.28
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..118 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..107 ......... 3.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........67 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................81 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................120 ......... 3.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................117 ....... 0.04
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............84 ..3.7
A. Environment subindex ............................................109 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 108 .....3.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 97 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................50 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 62 .....4.3
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 45 .....5.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 45 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................99 ....3.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 61 .....3.5
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 126 .....3.0
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 123 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .....................................................105 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 111 .....2.7
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 101 .....3.2
Bosnia and Herzegovina
 Bosnia and Herzegovina      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
190  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................22 ......... 4.8
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................80 ......... 3.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................25 ......... 5.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....23 ......... 4.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....18 ......... 4.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................49 ......... 4.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........82 .......... 79
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................12 .......... 28
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................94 ........ 625
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................84 ......... 4.7
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................46 ......... 2.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................13 ....... 19.4
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................129 .......... 61
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................75 ......... 4.8
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......118 ......... 7.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................95 ......... 3.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............57 ......... 3.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................116 ..... 322.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................90 ......... 6.4
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................89 ......... 8.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................107 ......... 4.3
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................109 ....... 0.49
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 103 ..... 54.55
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................58 ......... 3.9
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................70 ......... 4.0
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..91 ....... 80.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................103 ....... 84.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................45 ..... 117.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................126 ......... 6.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............113 ......... 6.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................117 ......... 2.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....106 ......... 0.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........39 ....... 10.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................109 ......... 4.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................91 ......... 4.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................104 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................97 ......... 4.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................44 ......... 4.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................61 ......... 4.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................54 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...104 ....... 0.20
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..114 ......... 3.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..119 ......... 3.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............85 ....... 17.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........81 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................93 ......... 3.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................63 ......... 4.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................94 ....... 0.10
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............89 ..3.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................52 ....4.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 40 .....4.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 79 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................98 ....4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 93 .....3.3
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 101 .....4.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 85 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................96 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 102 .....2.4
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 87 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 72 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................98 ....3.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 113 .....2.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 91 .....3.4
Botswana
 Botswana      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  191
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................113 ......... 2.7
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................46 ......... 4.4
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................71 ......... 3.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....75 ......... 3.5
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....66 ......... 3.7
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................84 ......... 3.2
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........40 .......... 54
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............123 .......... 45
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................107 ........ 731
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................53 ......... 5.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................52 ......... 2.8
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................130 ....... 67.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................138 ........ 119
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................129 .......... 13
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................48 ......... 5.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........68 ....... 36.1
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................61 ......... 4.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............52 ......... 3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................72 .. 2,419.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................35 ....... 99.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................65 ....... 12.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................58 ....... 40.7
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................71 ......... 4.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................133 ....... 0.73
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..12 ..... 17.60
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................115 ......... 3.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............127 ......... 2.7
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..23 ..... 101.3
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................85 ....... 90.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................66 ..... 104.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................64 ....... 40.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............66 ....... 34.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................64 ....... 27.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......62 ......... 6.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........55 ......... 6.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................55 ......... 5.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................48 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................31 ......... 3.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............47 ......... 2.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................29 ......... 5.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................33 ......... 4.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................67 ......... 4.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................65 ......... 4.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....53 ....... 0.37
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....29 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......52 ......... 0.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....34 ......... 4.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............76 ....... 19.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........54 ......... 4.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................86 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................42 ......... 4.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................41 ....... 0.29
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............65 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................101 ....3.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 77 .....3.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 121 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................72 ....4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 68 .....4.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 67 .....5.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 86 .....4.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................54 ....3.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 66 .....3.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 33 .....4.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 59 .....4.0
D. Impact subindex .......................................................53 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 52 .....3.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 54 .....3.9
Brazil
 Brazil      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
192  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................25 ......... 4.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................70 ......... 3.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................42 ......... 4.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....39 ......... 4.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....52 ......... 3.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................50 ......... 3.9
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........63 .......... 66
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............130 .......... 47
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................71 ........ 540
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................70 ......... 5.0
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................42 ......... 2.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................12 ....... 16.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................135 ........ 101
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................136 .......... 15
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................63 ......... 5.0
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........98 ....... 17.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................64 ......... 4.2
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............23 ......... 4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................16 .. 8,898.0
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ....................n/a ......... n/a
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................42 ....... 25.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................53 ....... 65.2
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................51 ......... 5.3
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................103 ....... 0.45
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 115 ..... 81.24
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....126 ....... 0.78
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................28 ......... 4.6
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................25 ......... 4.9
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..11 ..... 107.3
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................61 ....... 95.3
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................56 ..... 109.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................48 ....... 50.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............19 ....... 79.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................25 ....... 71.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......69 ......... 5.4
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........13 ....... 33.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................45 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................63 ......... 4.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................75 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............54 ......... 1.9
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................57 ......... 5.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................59 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................37 ......... 5.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................37 ......... 4.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....85 ....... 0.28
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....87 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....70 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............47 ....... 28.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........39 ......... 5.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................37 ......... 5.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................50 ......... 4.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................66 ....... 0.17
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............54 ..4.0
A. Environment subindex ..............................................57 ....4.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 48 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 76 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................87 ....4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 48 .....4.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 135 .....2.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 25 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................41 ....4.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 39 .....4.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 61 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 50 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................50 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 64 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 46 .....4.2
Brunei Darussalam
 Brunei Darussalam      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  193
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................109 ......... 2.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................60 ......... 4.1
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................104 ......... 2.9
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..126 ......... 2.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..120 ......... 2.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................100 ......... 2.9
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........60 .......... 65
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................75 ........ 564
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................106 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................66 ......... 2.6
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................29 ....... 28.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................76 .......... 18
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................99 ......... 4.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........44 ....... 53.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................102 ......... 3.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............77 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................38 .. 5,873.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................22 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................21 ....... 64.2
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................51 ....... 73.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................54 ......... 5.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................136 ....... 0.80
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..53 ..... 29.50
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......98 ....... 1.36
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................101 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................82 ......... 3.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..69 ....... 88.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................45 ....... 98.3
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................23 ..... 136.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................52 ....... 46.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............65 ....... 35.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................58 ....... 33.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......39 ....... 14.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........68 ......... 3.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................60 ......... 5.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................127 ......... 3.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................82 ......... 2.9
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............46 ......... 3.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................52 ......... 5.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................128 ......... 3.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................112 ......... 3.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................101 ......... 3.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....44 ....... 0.41
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....88 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......45 ......... 0.8
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....82 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............46 ....... 28.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........76 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................47 ......... 4.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................92 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................38 ....... 0.30
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............70 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................73 ....3.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 99 .....3.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 53 .....4.3
B. Readiness subindex .................................................73 ....4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 39 .....4.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 98 .....4.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 70 .....5.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................68 ....3.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 56 .....3.8
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 101 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 87 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................60 ....3.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 69 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 55 .....3.9
Bulgaria
 Bulgaria      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
194  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................92 ......... 3.1
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................103 ......... 3.4
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................125 ......... 2.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....86 ......... 3.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..106 ......... 2.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................87 ......... 3.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................49 ........ 446
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................132 ......... 3.8
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................138 ......... 1.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................86 ....... 43.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................130 ......... 3.9
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......134 ......... 3.3
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................98 ......... 3.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............88 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................136 ....... 41.6
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................125 ....... 61.1
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............104 ......... 3.5
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................137 ......... 0.2
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................130 ......... 3.5
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................137 ....... 0.80
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 132 ... 193.53
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....127 ....... 0.75
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................124 ......... 2.7
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................88 ......... 3.6
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 140 ....... 20.7
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................139 ....... 28.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............135 ....... 34.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................139 ......... 1.4
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............134 ......... 2.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................135 ......... 0.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....121 ......... 0.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................137 ......... 3.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................106 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................128 ......... 2.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............109 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................124 ......... 4.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................138 ......... 2.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................75 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................76 ......... 3.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...117 ....... 0.16
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....94 ......... 4.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..127 ......... 3.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......118 ......... 3.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................137 ......... 1.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................79 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................111 ....... 0.06
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............135 ..2.7
A. Environment subindex ............................................113 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 96 .....3.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 123 .....3.4
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................141 ....2.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 127 .....2.4
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 139 .....1.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 142 .....2.1
C. Usage subindex ......................................................128 ....2.6
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 139 .....1.6
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 131 .....2.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 98 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .....................................................122 ....2.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 109 .....2.8
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 127 .....2.7
Burkina Faso
 Burkina Faso      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  195
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................129 ......... 2.3
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................141 ......... 2.0
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................141 ......... 1.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..130 ......... 2.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..134 ......... 2.5
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................139 ......... 1.9
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............120 .......... 44
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................118 ........ 832
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................142 ......... 3.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................142 ......... 1.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................98 ....... 46.2
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................66 .......... 14
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................113 ......... 4.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......135 ......... 3.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................137 ......... 2.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............140 ......... 2.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................138 ....... 26.2
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................111 ....... 83.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............142 ......... 0.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................138 ......... 0.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................142 ......... 2.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................79 ....... 0.33
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month .n/a ......... n/a
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................137 ......... 2.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............122 ......... 2.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 138 ....... 24.8
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................120 ....... 66.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............141 ....... 13.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................136 ......... 2.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ..............n/a ......... n/a
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ...................n/a ......... n/a
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....140 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................142 ......... 2.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................142 ......... 3.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................140 ......... 1.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................136 ......... 3.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................139 ......... 2.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................135 ......... 3.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................138 ......... 2.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...133 ....... 0.04
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..136 ......... 3.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..140 ......... 2.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......141 ......... 2.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................142 ......... 1.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................134 ......... 2.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............137 ..2.6
A. Environment subindex ............................................140 ....2.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 141 .....2.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 138 .....2.9
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................109 ....3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 131 .....2.3
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 43 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 135 .....2.7
C. Usage subindex ......................................................142 ....2.1
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 140 .....1.4
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 142 .....2.5
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 139 .....2.3
D. Impact subindex .....................................................141 ....2.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 138 .....2.2
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 141 .....1.9
Burundi
 Burundi      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
196  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................55 ......... 3.8
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................93 ......... 3.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................96 ......... 3.1
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....58 ......... 3.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....48 ......... 4.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................91 ......... 3.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............120 .......... 44
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................34 ........ 401
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................98 ......... 4.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................61 ......... 2.7
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................17 ....... 22.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................133 .......... 85
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................88 ......... 4.6
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......117 ......... 7.8
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................112 ......... 3.5
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............40 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................129 ..... 105.7
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................40 ....... 28.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................112 ......... 1.7
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................106 ......... 4.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................41 ....... 0.21
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 124 ... 125.31
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......99 ....... 1.35
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................68 ......... 3.8
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................97 ......... 3.4
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 118 ....... 46.2
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................107 ....... 77.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............120 ....... 57.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................140 ......... 1.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............122 ......... 4.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................133 ......... 0.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....114 ......... 0.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........90 ......... 0.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................108 ......... 4.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................77 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................85 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................86 ......... 4.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................97 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................60 ......... 4.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................58 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...120 ....... 0.14
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....77 ......... 4.3
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....93 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........110 ......... 2.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........83 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................95 ......... 3.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................80 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................88 ....... 0.11
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............108 ..3.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................89 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 73 .....3.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 106 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................106 ....3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 66 .....4.1
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 110 .....3.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 111 .....3.8
C. Usage subindex ......................................................111 ....2.9
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 126 .....1.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 89 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 88 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .....................................................110 ....2.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 126 .....2.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 93 .....3.4
Cambodia
 Cambodia      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  197
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................86 ......... 3.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................122 ......... 2.8
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................113 ......... 2.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....85 ......... 3.4
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....87 ......... 3.2
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................97 ......... 3.0
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........90 .......... 82
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............115 .......... 43
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................115 ........ 800
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................125 ......... 3.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................116 ......... 2.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................106 ....... 49.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................71 .......... 15
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................90 ......... 4.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......107 ....... 11.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................65 ......... 4.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............79 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................118 ..... 295.9
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................126 ....... 58.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............133 ......... 0.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................129 ......... 0.6
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................135 ......... 3.3
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................97 ....... 0.42
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 127 ... 160.03
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......97 ....... 1.36
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................78 ......... 3.5
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................80 ......... 3.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 123 ....... 42.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................109 ....... 75.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............130 ....... 44.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................128 ......... 4.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............118 ......... 5.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................122 ......... 1.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....138 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......106 ......... 0.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................128 ......... 4.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................108 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................114 ......... 2.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............86 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................94 ......... 4.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................95 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................104 ......... 4.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................105 ......... 3.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...118 ....... 0.15
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....93 ......... 4.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......74 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..120 ......... 3.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......122 ......... 3.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................131 ......... 2.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................116 ......... 3.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................73 ....... 0.16
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............125 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................118 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 119 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 111 .....3.6
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................131 ....2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 132 .....2.2
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 129 .....2.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 114 .....3.7
C. Usage subindex ......................................................126 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 134 .....1.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 107 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 118 .....3.1
D. Impact subindex .....................................................117 ....2.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 105 .....2.8
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 124 .....2.8
Cameroon
 Cameroon      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
198  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................11 ......... 5.2
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................21 ......... 5.3
1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................8 ......... 6.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....10 ......... 5.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....11 ......... 5.1
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................18 ......... 5.4
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........14 .......... 28
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................79 ........ 570
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................14 ......... 6.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................19 ......... 3.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................32 ....... 28.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................10 ............ 5
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................1 ............ 1
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................21 ......... 5.6
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........36 ....... 60.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................4 ......... 5.8
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............35 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................4 18,485.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................25 ....... 54.0
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................14 .. 1,238.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................14 ......... 6.2
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................78 ....... 0.33
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..29 ..... 22.11
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................7 ......... 5.4
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................8 ......... 5.4
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..24 ..... 101.3
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............107 ....... 70.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................13 ....... 81.6
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............12 ....... 83.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................16 ....... 78.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......14 ....... 29.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........16 ....... 30.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................5 ......... 6.3
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................29 ......... 5.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................24 ......... 4.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............21 ....... 77.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................10 ......... 6.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................18 ......... 4.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................38 ......... 5.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................53 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......3 ....... 0.88
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....14 ......... 5.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......16 ....... 29.5
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....12 ......... 5.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............14 ....... 42.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........28 ......... 5.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................15 ......... 6.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................30 ......... 4.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................8 ....... 0.73
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 9 ..5.5
A. Environment subindex ................................................8 ....5.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 12 .....5.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 5 .....5.3
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................4 ....6.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 3 .....6.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 21 .....6.0
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 5 .....6.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................18 ....5.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 20 .....5.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 23 .....4.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 9 .....5.2
D. Impact subindex .......................................................14 ....5.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 17 .....5.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 11 .....5.4
Canada
 Canada      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  199
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................27 ......... 4.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................72 ......... 3.9
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................57 ......... 4.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....70 ......... 3.6
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....69 ......... 3.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................114 ......... 2.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................42 ........ 425
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................67 ......... 5.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................105 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................68 ....... 37.8
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................51 .......... 11
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................126 ......... 4.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........96 ....... 17.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................119 ......... 3.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............44 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................112 ..... 526.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................119 ....... 72.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............108 ......... 3.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................79 ....... 14.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................103 ......... 4.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................112 ....... 0.50
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..81 ..... 37.80
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................66 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................95 ......... 3.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..72 ....... 87.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................100 ....... 84.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............103 ....... 75.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................82 ....... 30.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............104 ....... 11.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................111 ......... 3.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......80 ......... 3.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................94 ......... 4.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................64 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................137 ......... 2.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................98 ......... 4.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................116 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................26 ......... 5.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................22 ......... 4.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....89 ....... 0.27
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....65 ......... 4.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....73 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........53 ......... 4.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................96 ......... 3.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................27 ......... 5.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................66 ....... 0.17
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............81 ..3.7
A. Environment subindex ..............................................65 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 54 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 90 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................95 ....4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 117 .....2.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 86 .....4.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 84 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................80 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 94 .....2.6
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 110 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 45 .....4.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................68 ....3.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 74 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 62 .....3.8
Cape Verde
 Cape Verde      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
200  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................118 ......... 2.5
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................131 ......... 2.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................121 ......... 2.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..118 ......... 2.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..103 ......... 3.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................132 ......... 2.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............106 .......... 41
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................109 ........ 743
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................141 ......... 3.2
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................81 ......... 2.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................126 ....... 65.4
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................130 .......... 66
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................119 .......... 11
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................141 ......... 3.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......136 ......... 2.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................127 ......... 3.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............115 ......... 3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................141 ......... 9.4
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................133 ....... 24.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............141 ......... 0.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ..................n/a ......... n/a
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................141 ......... 2.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................129 ....... 0.67
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..34 ..... 23.97
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......92 ....... 1.50
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................109 ......... 3.1
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............116 ......... 3.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 136 ....... 25.7
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................138 ....... 33.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............139 ....... 23.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................137 ......... 1.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............139 ......... 0.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................137 ......... 0.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....141 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................141 ......... 3.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................141 ......... 3.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................109 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............104 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................142 ......... 2.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................129 ......... 3.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................122 ......... 3.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................113 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...136 ....... 0.02
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..133 ......... 3.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..134 ......... 2.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......123 ......... 3.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................139 ......... 1.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................129 ......... 3.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................111 ....... 0.06
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............138 ..2.6
A. Environment subindex ............................................139 ....2.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 127 .....2.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 142 .....2.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................130 ....2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 141 .....1.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 88 .....4.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 140 .....2.3
C. Usage subindex ......................................................140 ....2.2
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 141 .....1.4
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 138 .....2.6
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 134 .....2.7
D. Impact subindex .....................................................135 ....2.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 130 .....2.4
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 136 .....2.4
Chad
 Chad      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  201
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................38 ......... 4.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................32 ......... 5.0
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................24 ......... 5.5
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....26 ......... 4.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....23 ......... 4.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................63 ......... 3.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........55 .......... 62
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................56 ........ 480
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................30 ......... 6.0
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................34 ......... 3.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................21 ....... 25.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................36 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........37 ....... 59.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................14 ......... 5.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............47 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................57 .. 3,554.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................52 ....... 19.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................55 ....... 52.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................49 ......... 5.3
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................60 ....... 0.29
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..97 ..... 49.58
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................87 ......... 3.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............124 ......... 2.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..71 ....... 87.9
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................43 ....... 98.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................48 ..... 116.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................55 ....... 45.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............54 ....... 46.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................55 ....... 35.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......50 ....... 10.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........45 ......... 9.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................29 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................40 ......... 5.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................66 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............45 ......... 3.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................38 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................37 ......... 4.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................57 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................30 ......... 4.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....18 ....... 0.61
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....25 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......48 ......... 0.5
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....35 ......... 4.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............42 ....... 30.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........34 ......... 5.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................45 ......... 4.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................15 ......... 5.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................34 ....... 0.34
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............39 ..4.4
A. Environment subindex ..............................................30 ....4.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 38 .....4.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 23 .....5.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................71 ....4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 50 .....4.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 89 .....4.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 83 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................39 ....4.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 55 .....3.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 42 .....3.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 26 .....4.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................37 ....4.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 35 .....3.8
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 36 .....4.6
Chile
 Chile      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
202  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................29 ......... 4.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................47 ......... 4.4
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................63 ......... 3.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....42 ......... 4.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....44 ......... 4.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................47 ......... 4.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........80 .......... 78
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................41 .......... 34
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................35 ........ 406
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................100 ......... 4.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................22 ......... 3.5
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................124 ....... 63.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................116 .......... 38
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................133 .......... 14
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................22 ......... 5.5
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........84 ....... 24.3
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................59 ......... 4.3
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............16 ......... 4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................70 .. 2,602.6
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................46 ....... 99.5
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............114 ......... 2.4
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................110 ......... 1.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................37 ......... 5.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................26 ....... 0.15
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..55 ..... 30.41
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......92 ....... 1.50
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................54 ......... 4.0
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................31 ......... 4.7
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..90 ....... 80.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................68 ....... 94.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............113 ....... 64.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................76 ....... 34.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............64 ....... 35.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................67 ....... 23.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......54 ......... 9.4
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........82 ......... 1.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................89 ......... 4.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................61 ......... 4.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................23 ......... 4.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............38 ......... 6.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................49 ......... 5.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................45 ......... 4.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................18 ......... 5.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................16 ......... 5.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....53 ....... 0.37
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....38 ......... 5.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......32 ......... 2.9
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....33 ......... 4.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........102 ......... 7.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........31 ......... 5.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................28 ......... 5.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................31 ......... 4.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................32 ....... 0.37
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............51 ..4.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................64 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 46 .....4.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 105 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................66 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 87 .....3.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 42 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 57 .....5.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................51 ....3.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 82 .....2.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 37 .....4.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 33 .....4.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................41 ....4.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 79 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 30 .....4.8
China
 China      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  203
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................106 ......... 2.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................50 ......... 4.3
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................81 ......... 3.5
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....88 ......... 3.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....78 ......... 3.4
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................86 ......... 3.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........40 .......... 54
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................41 .......... 34
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................136 ..... 1,346
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................78 ......... 4.8
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................49 ......... 2.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................135 ....... 74.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................66 .......... 14
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................85 ......... 4.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........61 ....... 39.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................53 ......... 4.4
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............45 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................90 .. 1,244.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................111 ....... 83.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................72 ....... 10.2
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................76 ....... 14.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................89 ......... 4.7
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................62 ....... 0.29
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 101 ..... 53.23
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......64 ....... 1.91
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................72 ......... 3.7
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................83 ......... 3.7
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..43 ....... 96.4
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................73 ....... 93.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................78 ....... 96.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................72 ....... 36.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............77 ....... 26.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................76 ....... 19.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......67 ......... 5.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........70 ......... 3.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................75 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................83 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................59 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............65 ......... 1.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................67 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................84 ......... 3.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................83 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................49 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......9 ....... 0.71
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....55 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......73 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....40 ......... 4.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............66 ....... 21.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........70 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................68 ......... 4.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................51 ......... 4.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................26 ....... 0.44
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............73 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................94 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 82 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 95 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................85 ....4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 88 .....3.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 95 .....4.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 58 .....5.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................58 ....3.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 76 .....3.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 71 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 28 .....4.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................48 ....3.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 58 .....3.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 47 .....4.2
Colombia
 Colombia      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
204  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................126 ......... 2.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................68 ......... 3.9
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................38 ......... 4.9
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....65 ......... 3.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....47 ......... 4.0
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................70 ......... 3.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........50 .......... 58
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................120 ........ 852
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................68 ......... 5.0
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................102 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................117 ....... 55.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................128 .......... 60
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................65 ......... 4.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........80 ....... 25.6
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................20 ......... 5.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............64 ......... 3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................79 .. 2,095.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................121 ....... 69.5
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................64 ....... 12.7
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................45 ..... 107.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................77 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................18 ....... 0.10
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....4 ..... 10.51
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....131 ....... 0.67
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................23 ......... 4.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................46 ......... 4.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..30 ....... 99.7
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................58 ....... 96.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............111 ....... 65.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................72 ....... 36.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............57 ....... 41.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................66 ....... 24.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......64 ......... 6.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................50 ......... 5.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................55 ......... 5.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................40 ......... 3.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............57 ......... 1.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................51 ......... 5.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................29 ......... 4.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................85 ......... 4.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................70 ......... 3.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....77 ....... 0.30
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....40 ......... 5.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......67 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....45 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............50 ....... 27.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........55 ......... 4.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................66 ......... 4.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................74 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................56 ....... 0.20
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............58 ..4.0
A. Environment subindex ..............................................90 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 67 .....3.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 108 .....3.6
B. Readiness subindex .................................................54 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 77 .....3.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 35 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 26 .....5.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................63 ....3.6
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 65 .....3.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 43 .....3.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 74 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................58 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 45 .....3.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 63 .....3.8
Costa Rica
 Costa Rica      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  205
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................120 ......... 2.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................136 ......... 2.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................137 ......... 1.8
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..120 ......... 2.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..129 ......... 2.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................131 ......... 2.3
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........82 .......... 79
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................36 .......... 33
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................110 ........ 770
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................80 ......... 4.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................139 ......... 1.5
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................92 ....... 44.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................105 .......... 32
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................83 ......... 4.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......114 ......... 8.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................96 ......... 3.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............121 ......... 2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................117 ..... 305.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................93 ....... 92.2
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................85 ......... 7.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................118 ......... 1.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................132 ......... 3.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................66 ....... 0.30
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 107 ..... 65.96
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....110 ....... 1.20
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................114 ......... 3.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................90 ......... 3.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 135 ....... 27.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................130 ....... 55.3
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............102 ....... 76.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................134 ......... 2.6
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............136 ......... 1.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................128 ......... 1.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....129 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................93 ......... 4.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................65 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................133 ......... 2.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................130 ......... 3.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................51 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................88 ......... 4.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................118 ......... 3.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....67 ....... 0.32
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....82 ......... 4.3
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..123 ......... 3.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......120 ......... 3.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................134 ......... 2.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................118 ......... 3.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................66 ....... 0.17
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............122 ..3.0
A. Environment subindex ............................................130 ....3.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 135 .....2.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 127 .....3.4
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................121 ....3.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 106 .....3.1
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 108 .....3.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 131 .....2.9
C. Usage subindex ......................................................110 ....2.9
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 113 .....2.1
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 105 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 97 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .....................................................118 ....2.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 103 .....2.8
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 125 .....2.8
Côte d’Ivoire
 Côte d’Ivoire      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
206  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................87 ......... 3.2
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................69 ......... 3.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................99 ......... 3.1
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..129 ......... 2.7
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..126 ......... 2.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................69 ......... 3.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........40 .......... 54
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................74 ........ 561
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................51 ......... 5.4
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................108 ......... 2.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................43 ....... 32.3
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................115 ......... 4.1
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........50 ....... 49.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................83 ......... 3.9
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............122 ......... 2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................66 .. 2,764.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................31 ....... 42.9
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................37 ..... 168.6
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................46 ......... 5.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................49 ....... 0.23
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..40 ..... 25.76
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................89 ......... 3.3
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................29 ......... 4.9
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..46 ....... 95.3
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................41 ....... 98.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................16 ..... 144.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................39 ....... 60.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............42 ....... 60.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................40 ....... 56.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......36 ....... 18.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........30 ....... 15.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................80 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................80 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................64 ......... 3.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............33 ....... 10.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................54 ......... 5.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................125 ......... 3.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................99 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................114 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....40 ....... 0.42
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....89 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......37 ......... 1.7
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....79 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............44 ....... 30.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........75 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................43 ......... 4.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................115 ......... 3.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................25 ....... 0.46
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............45 ..4.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................68 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 80 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 62 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................31 ....5.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 45 .....4.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 19 .....6.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 42 .....5.4
C. Usage subindex ........................................................47 ....3.9
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 36 .....4.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 79 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 82 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................51 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 61 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 50 .....4.1
Croatia
 Croatia      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  207
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................19 ......... 4.8
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................41 ......... 4.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................27 ......... 5.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....32 ......... 4.6
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....20 ......... 4.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................38 ......... 4.4
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........34 .......... 48
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............115 .......... 43
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................108 ........ 735
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................41 ......... 5.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................32 ......... 3.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................19 ....... 23.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................30 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........46 ....... 52.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................47 ......... 4.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............37 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................47 .. 4,714.9
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................24 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................26 ....... 51.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................19 ..... 838.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................43 ......... 5.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................16 ....... 0.10
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..22 ..... 19.91
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......95 ....... 1.40
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................30 ......... 4.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................16 ......... 5.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..34 ....... 98.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................47 ....... 97.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................80 ....... 93.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................43 ....... 53.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............40 ....... 60.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................43 ....... 53.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......37 ....... 17.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........57 ......... 5.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................65 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................43 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................60 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............35 ......... 9.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................64 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................69 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................82 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................57 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....52 ....... 0.37
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....54 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......31 ......... 3.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....69 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............41 ....... 31.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........38 ......... 5.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................38 ......... 5.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................49 ......... 4.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................23 ....... 0.49
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............32 ..4.7
A. Environment subindex ..............................................31 ....4.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 36 .....4.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 25 .....4.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................15 ....5.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 23 .....5.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 14 .....6.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 17 .....5.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................46 ....3.9
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 45 .....4.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 50 .....3.7
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 62 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................38 ....4.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 43 .....3.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 37 .....4.6
Cyprus
 Cyprus      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
208  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................107 ......... 2.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................44 ......... 4.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................74 ......... 3.7
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..113 ......... 2.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..108 ......... 2.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................58 ......... 3.7
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........21 .......... 36
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................9 .......... 27
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................90 ........ 611
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................40 ......... 5.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................85 ......... 2.4
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................106 ....... 49.1
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................86 .......... 20
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................16 ......... 5.6
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........34 ....... 60.7
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................82 ......... 4.0
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............81 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................26 .. 7,825.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................37 ....... 99.8
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................19 ....... 69.2
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................28 ..... 318.2
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................23 ......... 6.1
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................93 ....... 0.40
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..91 ..... 43.54
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......73 ....... 1.81
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................49 ......... 4.1
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................66 ......... 4.1
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..62 ....... 90.4
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................22 ..... 137.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................31 ....... 68.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............37 ....... 64.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................35 ....... 60.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......40 ....... 14.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........67 ......... 3.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................36 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................45 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................25 ......... 4.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............28 ....... 18.3
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................23 ......... 5.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................39 ......... 4.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................105 ......... 4.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................106 ......... 3.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....36 ....... 0.45
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....74 ......... 4.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......30 ......... 3.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....78 ......... 4.0
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............19 ....... 40.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........47 ......... 4.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................21 ......... 5.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................82 ......... 4.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............42 ..4.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................50 ....4.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 51 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 59 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................45 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 26 .....5.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 93 .....4.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 44 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................38 ....4.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 38 .....4.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 29 .....4.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 77 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................43 ....3.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 38 .....3.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 48 .....4.1
Czech Republic
 Czech Republic      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  209
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................7 ......... 5.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................4 ......... 5.8
 1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................2 ......... 6.6
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......8 ......... 5.5
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......9 ......... 5.2
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................6 ......... 5.9
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........10 .......... 26
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................37 ........ 410
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................9 ......... 6.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................24 ......... 3.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................26 ....... 27.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................46 ......... 5.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........14 ....... 74.4
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................19 ......... 5.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............20 ......... 4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................31 .. 6,553.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ....................n/a ......... n/a
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................8 ..... 142.2
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................3 .. 1,873.3
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................7 ......... 6.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................6 ....... 0.06
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..58 ..... 31.28
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......66 ....... 1.89
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................16 ......... 5.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................30 ......... 4.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....6 ..... 117.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................34 ..... 124.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................6 ....... 88.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................7 ....... 88.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................8 ....... 86.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........3 ....... 37.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........10 ....... 46.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................2 ......... 6.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................9 ......... 6.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................9 ......... 5.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................5 ..... 209.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................6 ......... 6.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................3 ......... 5.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................22 ......... 5.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................17 ......... 4.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....13 ....... 0.67
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....17 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......11 ....... 44.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......8 ......... 5.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............6 ....... 45.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........8 ......... 6.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................8 ......... 6.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................19 ......... 5.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................13 ....... 0.64
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 4 ..5.7
A. Environment subindex ................................................5 ....5.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 6 .....5.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 7 .....5.2
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................9 ....6.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 15 .....6.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 18 .....6.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 14 .....5.9
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................3 ....5.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 4 .....6.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 4 .....6.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 12 .....5.1
D. Impact subindex .........................................................6 ....5.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 8 .....5.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 7 .....5.6
Denmark
 Denmark      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
210  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................117 ......... 2.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................67 ......... 3.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................115 ......... 2.7
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....96 ......... 3.2
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..112 ......... 2.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................124 ......... 2.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........78 .......... 76
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................41 .......... 34
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................51 ........ 460
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................59 ......... 5.2
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................113 ......... 2.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................83 ....... 41.7
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................80 .......... 19
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................60 ......... 5.0
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........72 ....... 34.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................89 ......... 3.9
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............94 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................86 .. 1,594.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................115 ....... 81.2
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................73 ....... 10.2
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................74 ....... 15.2
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................68 ......... 5.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................104 ....... 0.46
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..67 ..... 33.86
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................136 ......... 2.3
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............139 ......... 1.9
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..96 ....... 76.4
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................92 ....... 88.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................89 ....... 89.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................68 ....... 39.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............93 ....... 16.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................98 ......... 7.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......78 ......... 3.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........60 ......... 5.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................63 ......... 5.3
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................57 ......... 5.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................126 ......... 2.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............83 ......... 0.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................84 ......... 4.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................99 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................74 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................73 ......... 3.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....57 ....... 0.37
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....51 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......72 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....53 ......... 4.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............88 ....... 15.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........93 ......... 4.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................103 ......... 3.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................57 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................62 ....... 0.19
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............87 ..3.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................97 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 104 .....3.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 73 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................92 ....4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 84 .....3.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 75 .....5.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 107 .....3.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................82 ....3.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 87 .....2.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 95 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 65 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................80 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 76 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 86 .....3.5
Dominican Republic
 Dominican Republic      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  211
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................127 ......... 2.3
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................90 ......... 3.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................130 ......... 2.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..135 ......... 2.5
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..137 ......... 2.4
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................106 ......... 2.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........66 .......... 67
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................83 ........ 588
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................104 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................96 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................58 ....... 35.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................126 .......... 56
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................129 .......... 13
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................109 ......... 4.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........60 ....... 39.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................93 ......... 3.8
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............83 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................89 .. 1,323.8
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................92 ....... 93.3
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................82 ......... 8.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................75 ....... 14.6
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................110 ......... 4.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................92 ....... 0.39
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..85 ..... 40.12
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................105 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............107 ......... 3.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..89 ....... 80.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................101 ....... 84.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................69 ..... 102.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................84 ....... 29.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............76 ....... 27.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................87 ....... 11.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......97 ......... 1.4
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........47 ......... 8.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................101 ......... 4.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................103 ......... 4.3
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................87 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............93 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................105 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................93 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................117 ......... 3.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................86 ......... 3.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....70 ....... 0.32
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....95 ......... 4.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......91 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....83 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............82 ....... 18.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......100 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................108 ......... 3.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................77 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................73 ....... 0.16
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............96 ..3.5
A. Environment subindex ............................................119 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 120 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 110 .....3.6
B. Readiness subindex .................................................91 ....4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 90 .....3.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 81 .....5.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 96 .....4.4
C. Usage subindex ........................................................97 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 86 .....2.8
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 100 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 96 .....3.5
D. Impact subindex .......................................................95 ....3.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 97 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 95 .....3.3
Ecuador
 Ecuador      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
212  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................102 ......... 2.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................83 ......... 3.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................41 ......... 4.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....60 ......... 3.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....86 ......... 3.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................80 ......... 3.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........53 .......... 60
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............106 .......... 41
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................129 ..... 1,010
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................110 ......... 4.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................41 ......... 3.0
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................86 ....... 43.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................114 ......... 4.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........75 ....... 30.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................133 ......... 3.0
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............104 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................85 .. 1,673.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................42 ....... 99.7
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................89 ......... 6.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................106 ......... 2.3
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................100 ......... 4.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................13 ....... 0.09
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..15 ..... 18.63
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......95 ....... 1.40
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................135 ......... 2.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............132 ......... 2.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..80 ....... 84.7
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................112 ....... 74.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................91 ....... 87.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................89 ....... 26.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............68 ....... 34.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................60 ....... 31.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......91 ......... 1.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........91 ......... 0.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................56 ......... 5.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................78 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................83 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............73 ......... 0.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................96 ......... 4.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................131 ......... 3.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................71 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................96 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....23 ....... 0.53
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....86 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......78 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....74 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............43 ....... 30.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........85 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................107 ......... 3.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................87 ......... 3.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................41 ....... 0.29
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............79 ..3.8
A. Environment subindex ..............................................85 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 76 .....3.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 94 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................79 ....4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 89 .....3.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 12 .....6.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 108 .....3.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................74 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 79 .....2.9
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 103 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 51 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................74 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 62 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 83 .....3.5
Egypt
 Egypt      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  213
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................122 ......... 2.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................107 ......... 3.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................106 ......... 2.9
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..114 ......... 2.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..111 ......... 2.9
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................113 ......... 2.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........87 .......... 80
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................41 .......... 34
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................113 ........ 786
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................73 ......... 4.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................89 ......... 2.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................55 ....... 35.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................75 .......... 17
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................40 ......... 5.3
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........85 ....... 23.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................88 ......... 3.9
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............119 ......... 2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................96 ..... 972.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............121 ......... 1.5
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................82 ....... 13.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................74 ......... 4.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................59 ....... 0.29
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..95 ..... 47.27
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................125 ......... 2.7
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............129 ......... 2.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 107 ....... 63.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................104 ....... 84.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................35 ..... 124.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................100 ....... 15.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............99 ....... 13.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................94 ......... 8.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......85 ......... 2.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........71 ......... 3.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................62 ......... 5.3
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................85 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................115 ......... 2.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............79 ......... 0.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................65 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................77 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................132 ......... 3.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................124 ......... 2.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....39 ....... 0.43
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....72 ......... 4.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....57 ......... 4.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............97 ....... 12.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........98 ......... 4.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................114 ......... 3.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................108 ......... 3.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................105 ....... 0.07
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............103 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ............................................103 ....3.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 121 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 74 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................102 ....3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 104 .....3.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 84 .....4.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 113 .....3.8
C. Usage subindex ......................................................100 ....3.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 88 .....2.7
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 88 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 110 .....3.3
D. Impact subindex .....................................................102 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 93 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 113 .....3.0
El Salvador
 El Salvador      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
214  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................32 ......... 4.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................3 ......... 5.8
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................23 ......... 5.5
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....40 ......... 4.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....35 ......... 4.3
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................32 ......... 4.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........38 .......... 50
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................42 ........ 425
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................34 ......... 5.9
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................31 ......... 3.2
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................120 ....... 58.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................29 ......... 5.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........29 ....... 62.7
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................48 ......... 4.6
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............25 ......... 4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................24 .. 7,883.6
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................22 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................43 ....... 23.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................25 ..... 434.4
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................11 ......... 6.3
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................88 ....... 0.36
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..59 ..... 31.52
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................42 ......... 4.3
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................20 ......... 5.1
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..17 ..... 103.6
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................1 ....... 99.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................38 ..... 123.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................21 ....... 74.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............32 ....... 69.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................29 ....... 67.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......20 ....... 25.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........19 ....... 25.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................17 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................36 ......... 5.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................34 ......... 3.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............26 ....... 34.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................3 ......... 6.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................46 ......... 4.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................13 ......... 5.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................18 ......... 4.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....27 ....... 0.50
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......7 ......... 5.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......21 ....... 16.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....10 ......... 5.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............24 ....... 38.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........9 ......... 5.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................3 ......... 6.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................9 ......... 5.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................9 ....... 0.69
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............24 ..5.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................32 ....4.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 25 .....4.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 36 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................23 ....5.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 24 .....5.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 54 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 18 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................24 ....4.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 22 .....5.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 28 .....4.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 16 .....4.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................15 ....5.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 21 .....4.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 4 .....5.8
Estonia
 Estonia      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  215
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................52 ......... 3.8
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................116 ......... 3.1
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................93 ......... 3.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....62 ......... 3.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....72 ......... 3.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................66 ......... 3.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................91 ........ 620
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................131 ......... 3.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................120 ......... 2.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................37 ....... 31.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................42 ............ 9
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................125 ......... 4.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......123 ......... 5.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................91 ......... 3.8
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............55 ......... 3.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................135 ....... 47.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................136 ....... 10.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................99 ......... 5.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................139 ......... 0.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................139 ......... 3.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................32 ....... 0.17
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 138 1,248.33
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....138 ....... 0.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................59 ......... 3.9
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................86 ......... 3.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 128 ....... 35.7
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................137 ....... 35.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............142 ......... 8.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................141 ......... 0.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............137 ......... 1.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................134 ......... 0.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....139 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......113 ......... 0.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................139 ......... 3.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................135 ......... 3.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................125 ......... 2.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................138 ......... 3.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................134 ......... 2.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................77 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................55 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...104 ....... 0.20
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..127 ......... 3.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..125 ......... 3.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............98 ....... 12.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......119 ......... 3.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................121 ......... 2.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................81 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................117 ....... 0.04
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............130 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................84 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 72 .....3.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 99 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................138 ....2.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 140 .....1.9
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 132 .....2.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 132 .....2.9
C. Usage subindex ......................................................133 ....2.6
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 142 .....1.3
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 136 .....2.7
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 85 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .....................................................125 ....2.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 128 .....2.4
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 121 .....2.9
Ethiopia
 Ethiopia      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
216  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................4 ......... 5.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................6 ......... 5.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................4 ......... 6.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......3 ......... 5.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......1 ......... 5.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................1 ......... 6.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............7 .......... 25
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................36 .......... 33
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................25 ........ 375
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................5 ......... 6.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................9 ......... 4.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................72 ....... 39.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................66 .......... 14
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................71 ......... 4.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........2 ....... 91.6
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................16 ......... 5.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................8 ......... 4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................9 13,398.2
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................45 ....... 99.5
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................13 ..... 107.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................13 .. 1,245.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................17 ......... 6.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................10 ....... 0.07
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..52 ..... 29.34
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......71 ....... 1.83
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................3 ......... 5.9
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................3 ......... 6.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..10 ..... 107.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................10 ..... 156.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................7 ....... 86.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............16 ....... 82.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................13 ....... 80.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......15 ....... 28.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........4 ....... 60.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................14 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................11 ......... 6.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................5 ......... 5.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................3 ..... 276.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................14 ......... 6.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................8 ......... 5.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................10 ......... 5.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................20 ......... 4.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....31 ....... 0.48
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....11 ......... 5.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........1 ..... 125.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....13 ......... 5.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............8 ....... 43.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........19 ......... 5.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................4 ......... 6.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................21 ......... 5.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................30 ....... 0.41
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 3 ..5.8
A. Environment subindex ................................................2 ....5.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 4 .....5.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 4 .....5.3
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................2 ....6.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 5 .....6.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 16 .....6.2
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 1 .....6.5
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................4 ....5.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 5 .....6.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 5 .....6.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 17 .....4.9
D. Impact subindex .........................................................7 ....5.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 5 .....5.8
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 18 .....5.2
Finland
 Finland      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  217
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................15 ......... 4.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................22 ......... 5.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................37 ......... 4.9
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....22 ......... 4.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....17 ......... 4.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................7 ......... 5.8
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........24 .......... 39
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................15 .......... 29
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................18 ........ 331
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................11 ......... 6.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................36 ......... 3.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................127 ....... 65.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................12 ......... 5.7
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........41 ....... 54.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................5 ......... 5.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............48 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................19 .. 8,600.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................18 ....... 69.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................31 ..... 297.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................40 ......... 5.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................121 ....... 0.57
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..41 ..... 26.00
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................34 ......... 4.5
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................15 ......... 5.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....7 ..... 112.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................71 ..... 100.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................15 ....... 80.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............24 ....... 76.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................20 ....... 73.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........7 ....... 34.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........25 ....... 18.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................26 ......... 5.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................25 ......... 5.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................8 ......... 5.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............14 ..... 110.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................22 ......... 5.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................35 ......... 4.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................43 ......... 5.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................41 ......... 4.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....11 ....... 0.68
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......6 ......... 5.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......15 ....... 31.5
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....15 ......... 5.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............17 ....... 40.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........18 ......... 5.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................51 ......... 4.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................26 ......... 5.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................15 ....... 0.60
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............23 ..5.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................25 ....4.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 17 .....5.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 33 .....4.6
B. Readiness subindex .................................................28 ....5.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 30 .....5.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 69 .....5.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 16 .....5.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................21 ....5.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 21 .....5.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 17 .....5.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 18 .....4.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................19 ....5.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 15 .....5.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 23 .....5.0
France
 France      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
218  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................21 ......... 4.8
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................75 ......... 3.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................46 ......... 4.5
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....24 ......... 4.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....31 ......... 4.4
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................33 ......... 4.7
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................36 .......... 33
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................47 ........ 434
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................77 ......... 4.8
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................63 ......... 2.7
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................140 ..... 283.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................96 .......... 27
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................86 ......... 4.6
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......129 ......... 4.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................39 ......... 4.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............21 ......... 4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................126 ..... 134.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................106 ....... 85.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............127 ......... 1.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................103 ......... 2.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................90 ......... 4.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................107 ....... 0.49
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 137 ... 958.29
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....114 ....... 1.13
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................32 ......... 4.5
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................84 ......... 3.7
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 115 ....... 54.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................135 ....... 46.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................94 ....... 85.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................120 ......... 9.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............116 ......... 5.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................113 ......... 3.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....133 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........91 ......... 0.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................83 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................87 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................62 ......... 3.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................99 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................31 ......... 4.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................25 ......... 5.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................26 ......... 4.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...130 ....... 0.08
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....73 ......... 4.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....75 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........45 ......... 4.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................80 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................43 ......... 4.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............101 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ..............................................54 ....4.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 32 .....4.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 117 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................126 ....3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 115 .....2.8
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 133 .....2.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 121 .....3.6
C. Usage subindex ........................................................95 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 110 .....2.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 65 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 68 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................78 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 78 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 78 .....3.6
Gambia, The
 The Gambia      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  219
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................67 ......... 3.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................78 ......... 3.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................91 ......... 3.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....82 ......... 3.4
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....92 ......... 3.1
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................105 ......... 2.8
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........107 .......... 93
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................12 ........ 285
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................99 ......... 4.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................97 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................11 ....... 16.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ................................2 ............ 2
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................3 ............ 2
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................128 ......... 3.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........77 ....... 28.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................115 ......... 3.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............76 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................81 .. 1,921.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................45 ....... 21.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................85 ....... 11.9
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................76 ......... 4.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................71 ....... 0.31
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 111 ..... 75.48
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......83 ....... 1.72
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................116 ......... 3.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............100 ......... 3.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..76 ....... 86.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................3 ....... 99.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................85 ....... 91.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................88 ....... 26.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............89 ....... 18.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................78 ....... 16.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......66 ......... 5.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........38 ....... 11.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................54 ......... 5.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................115 ......... 4.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................103 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............60 ......... 1.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................92 ......... 4.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................106 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................78 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................88 ......... 3.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....97 ....... 0.25
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..105 ......... 3.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......59 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..112 ......... 3.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............62 ....... 22.2
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........77 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................67 ......... 4.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................40 ......... 4.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................111 ....... 0.06
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............88 ..3.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................74 ....3.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 98 .....3.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 55 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................93 ....4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 60 .....4.3
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 116 .....3.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 79 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................94 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 83 .....2.9
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 109 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 90 .....3.5
D. Impact subindex .......................................................87 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 100 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 73 .....3.6
Georgia
 Georgia      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
220  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................23 ......... 4.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................31 ......... 5.0
1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................7 ......... 6.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....19 ......... 4.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....12 ......... 5.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................13 ......... 5.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........12 .......... 27
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................29 ........ 394
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................20 ......... 6.2
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................37 ......... 3.0
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................101 ....... 46.7
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................71 .......... 15
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................9 ......... 5.8
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % .......n/a ......... n/a
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................36 ......... 4.8
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............29 ......... 4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................29 .. 7,168.7
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................15 ....... 74.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................17 ..... 872.8
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................22 ......... 6.1
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................27 ....... 0.15
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..77 ..... 36.81
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................17 ......... 4.9
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................48 ......... 4.4
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..20 ..... 102.6
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................30 ..... 127.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................12 ....... 82.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............10 ....... 85.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................10 ....... 82.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......10 ....... 31.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........32 ....... 15.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................40 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................14 ......... 5.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................3 ......... 5.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................7 ..... 202.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................28 ......... 5.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................16 ......... 4.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................36 ......... 5.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................47 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....21 ....... 0.55
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....24 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......10 ....... 45.6
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....25 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............15 ....... 41.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........26 ......... 5.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................41 ......... 4.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................46 ......... 4.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................14 ....... 0.61
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............16 ..5.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................18 ....5.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 13 .....5.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 32 .....4.6
B. Readiness subindex .................................................17 ....5.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 14 .....6.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 38 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 20 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................13 ....5.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 14 .....5.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 6 .....5.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 30 .....4.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................18 ....5.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 13 .....5.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 27 .....4.9
Germany
 Germany      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  221
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................37 ......... 4.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................104 ......... 3.3
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................59 ......... 4.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....43 ......... 4.2
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....62 ......... 3.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................88 ......... 3.1
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................57 ........ 487
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................94 ......... 4.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................123 ......... 2.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................48 ....... 33.6
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................53 .......... 12
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................67 ......... 4.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......115 ......... 8.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................72 ......... 4.1
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............95 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................115 ..... 359.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................117 ....... 77.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............122 ......... 1.5
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................111 ......... 1.7
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................118 ......... 3.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................20 ....... 0.12
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..84 ..... 39.82
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......65 ....... 1.90
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................74 ......... 3.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................98 ......... 3.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 111 ....... 58.3
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................119 ....... 66.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............106 ....... 71.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................119 ......... 9.6
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............107 ......... 9.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................131 ......... 0.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....115 ......... 0.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........96 ......... 0.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................112 ......... 4.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................109 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................93 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............108 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................103 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................81 ......... 3.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................87 ......... 4.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................85 ......... 3.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...119 ....... 0.15
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....79 ......... 4.3
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..101 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......103 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................110 ......... 3.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................110 ......... 3.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................99 ....... 0.09
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............97 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ..............................................63 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 55 .....3.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 82 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................99 ....4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 124 .....2.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 46 .....5.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 112 .....3.8
C. Usage subindex ......................................................114 ....2.9
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 116 .....2.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 99 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 109 .....3.3
D. Impact subindex .....................................................100 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 88 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 111 .....3.0
Ghana
 Ghana      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
222  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................84 ......... 3.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................85 ......... 3.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................85 ......... 3.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..121 ......... 2.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..121 ......... 2.8
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................52 ......... 3.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........52 .......... 59
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................116 ........ 819
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................56 ......... 5.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................103 ......... 2.2
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................99 ....... 46.4
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................47 .......... 10
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................82 ......... 4.6
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........3 ....... 89.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................104 ......... 3.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............113 ......... 3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................44 .. 4,848.4
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................35 ....... 31.0
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................44 ..... 124.2
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................65 ......... 5.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................111 ....... 0.50
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..21 ..... 19.85
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......80 ....... 1.75
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................120 ......... 2.9
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................61 ......... 4.1
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..27 ..... 100.9
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................56 ....... 97.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................58 ..... 108.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................58 ....... 44.4
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............47 ....... 53.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................48 ....... 46.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......32 ....... 19.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........61 ......... 4.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................84 ......... 5.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................89 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................96 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............36 ......... 9.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................95 ......... 4.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................114 ......... 3.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................106 ......... 4.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................119 ......... 3.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....58 ....... 0.36
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....99 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......36 ......... 1.9
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..122 ......... 3.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............35 ....... 33.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........87 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................78 ......... 3.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................96 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................47 ....... 0.26
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............59 ..4.0
A. Environment subindex ..............................................69 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 87 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 60 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................44 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 42 .....4.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 49 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 55 .....5.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................66 ....3.6
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 49 .....4.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 97 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 102 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................77 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 73 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 77 .....3.6
Greece
 Greece      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  223
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................139 ......... 2.0
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................73 ......... 3.9
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................117 ......... 2.6
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..116 ......... 2.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..110 ......... 2.9
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................123 ......... 2.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........87 .......... 80
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................27 .......... 31
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................139 ..... 1,459
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................48 ......... 5.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................64 ......... 2.6
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................79 ....... 40.9
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................115 .......... 37
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................50 ......... 5.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........97 ....... 17.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................44 ......... 4.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............118 ......... 3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................108 ..... 636.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................118 ....... 76.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............103 ......... 4.0
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................88 ......... 9.9
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................63 ......... 5.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................33 ....... 0.17
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 102 ..... 53.84
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......70 ....... 1.85
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................127 ......... 2.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............130 ......... 2.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 110 ....... 58.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................111 ....... 74.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................31 ..... 125.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................114 ....... 10.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............94 ....... 15.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................114 ......... 3.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......90 ......... 1.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........75 ......... 3.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................61 ......... 5.3
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................47 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................69 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............76 ......... 0.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................47 ......... 5.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................47 ......... 4.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................133 ......... 3.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................127 ......... 2.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....75 ....... 0.31
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....45 ......... 4.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......85 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....38 ......... 4.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........79 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................102 ......... 3.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................101 ......... 3.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................36 ....... 0.31
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............98 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ............................................116 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 128 .....2.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 86 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................105 ....3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 110 .....3.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 91 .....4.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 122 .....3.5
C. Usage subindex ......................................................101 ....3.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 91 .....2.7
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 53 .....3.7
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 121 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .......................................................67 ....3.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 48 .....3.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 81 .....3.5
Guatemala
 Guatemala      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
224  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................66 ......... 3.5
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................114 ......... 3.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................87 ......... 3.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....93 ......... 3.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....89 ......... 3.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................83 ......... 3.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................82 ........ 581
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................85 ......... 4.7
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................83 ......... 2.4
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................63 ....... 36.1
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................93 .......... 26
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................79 ......... 4.7
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......105 ....... 11.9
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................74 ......... 4.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............74 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................94 .. 1,091.0
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................91 ......... 6.4
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................97 ......... 6.6
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................92 ......... 4.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................37 ....... 0.19
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..19 ..... 19.63
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....134 ....... 0.50
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................56 ......... 3.9
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................78 ......... 3.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..60 ....... 91.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % .........................................n/a ......... n/a
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............104 ....... 73.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................83 ....... 29.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............112 ......... 6.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................102 ......... 5.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......95 ......... 1.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................87 ......... 5.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................96 ......... 4.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................73 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................80 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................60 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................59 ......... 4.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................63 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...108 ....... 0.18
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..101 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....97 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............96 ....... 12.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........74 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................98 ......... 3.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................86 ......... 4.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................99 ....... 0.09
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............90 ..3.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................86 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 81 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 88 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................81 ....4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 92 .....3.3
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 66 .....5.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 88 .....4.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................92 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 97 .....2.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 82 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 80 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .....................................................101 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 114 .....2.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 96 .....3.3
Guyana
 Guyana      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  225
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................141 ......... 1.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................139 ......... 2.1
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................140 ......... 1.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..140 ......... 2.1
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..141 ......... 2.1
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................142 ......... 1.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................69 ........ 530
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................135 ......... 3.7
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................141 ......... 1.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................78 ....... 40.8
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................137 ........ 105
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................135 ......... 3.7
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % .......n/a ......... n/a
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................136 ......... 2.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............138 ......... 2.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................134 ....... 49.9
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ....................n/a ......... n/a
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............139 ......... 0.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................120 ......... 1.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................140 ......... 3.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. ......................n/a ......... n/a
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month .n/a ......... n/a
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................140 ......... 2.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............131 ......... 2.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % .n/a ......... n/a
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................134 ....... 48.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............132 ....... 40.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................121 ......... 8.4
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............115 ......... 5.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................118 ......... 2.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....142 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................99 ......... 4.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................132 ......... 3.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................130 ......... 2.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............111 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................121 ......... 4.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................142 ......... 2.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................140 ......... 2.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................140 ......... 2.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...136 ....... 0.02
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..128 ......... 3.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..135 ......... 2.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......140 ......... 2.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................138 ......... 1.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................139 ......... 2.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................127 ....... 0.02
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............142 ..2.3
A. Environment subindex ............................................142 ....2.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 140 .....2.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 139 .....2.9
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................142 ....2.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 142 .....1.5
4th pillar: Affordability ....................................................... n/a .....n/a
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 138 .....2.4
C. Usage subindex ......................................................139 ....2.3
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 121 .....1.9
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 135 .....2.7
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 141 .....2.1
D. Impact subindex .....................................................138 ....2.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 129 .....2.4
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 140 .....2.1
Haiti
 Haiti      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
226  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................82 ......... 3.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................97 ......... 3.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................77 ......... 3.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....89 ......... 3.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....74 ......... 3.5
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................77 ......... 3.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........74 .......... 73
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............130 .......... 47
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................126 ........ 920
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................81 ......... 4.8
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................80 ......... 2.4
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................90 ....... 44.0
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................66 .......... 14
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................129 .......... 13
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................98 ......... 4.5
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........93 ....... 18.8
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................113 ......... 3.5
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............80 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................98 ..... 895.1
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................104 ....... 89.9
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................94 ......... 5.9
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................91 ......... 8.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................99 ......... 4.5
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................77 ....... 0.32
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..89 ..... 42.43
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................129 ......... 2.6
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............133 ......... 2.4
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 101 ....... 73.5
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................105 ....... 83.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................32 ..... 125.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................112 ....... 11.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............102 ....... 12.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................99 ......... 6.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......99 ......... 1.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........65 ......... 4.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................70 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................67 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................88 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................69 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................70 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................116 ......... 3.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................104 ......... 3.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....81 ....... 0.30
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....69 ......... 4.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....52 ......... 4.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............95 ....... 12.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......114 ......... 3.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................112 ......... 3.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................94 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............99 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ............................................107 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 100 .....3.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 112 .....3.6
B. Readiness subindex .................................................96 ....4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 96 .....3.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 80 .....5.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 105 .....3.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................98 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 93 .....2.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 73 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 107 .....3.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................97 ....3.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 85 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 104 .....3.1
Honduras
 Honduras      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  227
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................41 ......... 4.1
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................8 ......... 5.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................15 ......... 6.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......5 ......... 5.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......3 ......... 5.5
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................14 ......... 5.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........32 .......... 45
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................5 .......... 26
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................9 ........ 280
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................12 ......... 6.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................5 ......... 4.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................18 ....... 23.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ................................4 ............ 3
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................14 ......... 5.7
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........40 ....... 57.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................21 ......... 5.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............27 ......... 4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................41 .. 5,485.4
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................1 ..... 776.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................24 ..... 453.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................16 ......... 6.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................1 ....... 0.02
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..46 ..... 27.69
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) .....n/a ......... n/a
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................21 ......... 4.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................11 ......... 5.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..67 ....... 88.8
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................1 ..... 195.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................24 ....... 72.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............20 ....... 77.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................17 ....... 76.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......13 ....... 29.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........17 ....... 29.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................7 ......... 6.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................15 ......... 5.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................39 ......... 3.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .............n/a ......... n/a
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................21 ......... 5.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................26 ......... 4.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................24 ......... 5.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................28 ......... 4.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ....n/a ......... n/a
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....23 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ......n/a ......... n/a
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....19 ......... 5.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............31 ....... 36.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........16 ......... 5.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................14 ......... 6.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................17 ......... 5.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)........................n/a ......... n/a
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............13 ..5.5
A. Environment subindex ................................................7 ....5.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 15 .....5.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 3 .....5.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................16 ....5.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 28 .....5.5
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 5 .....6.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 23 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................16 ....5.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 12 .....5.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 20 .....5.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 15 .....5.0
D. Impact subindex .......................................................10 ....5.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 16 .....5.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 5 .....5.7
Hong Kong SAR
 Hong Kong SAR      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
228  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................61 ......... 3.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................49 ......... 4.4
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................64 ......... 3.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....91 ......... 3.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..119 ......... 2.8
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................45 ......... 4.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........27 .......... 41
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................30 ........ 395
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................43 ......... 5.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................117 ......... 2.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................112 ....... 52.4
2.04 No. days to start a business ................................8 ............ 4
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................39 ......... 5.3
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........33 ....... 61.7
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................77 ......... 4.0
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............90 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................56 .. 3,590.0
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................74 ....... 10.0
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................38 ..... 166.1
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................21 ......... 6.1
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................69 ....... 0.31
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..64 ..... 32.60
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......67 ....... 1.88
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................80 ......... 3.5
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................37 ......... 4.6
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..35 ....... 98.3
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................13 ....... 99.4
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................41 ..... 120.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................34 ....... 65.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............35 ....... 66.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................35 ....... 60.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......33 ....... 19.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........41 ....... 10.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................81 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................59 ......... 4.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................41 ......... 3.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............27 ....... 22.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................60 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................111 ......... 3.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................89 ......... 4.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................95 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....26 ....... 0.50
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....83 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......27 ......... 6.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..103 ......... 3.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............28 ....... 36.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........64 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................31 ......... 5.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................84 ......... 4.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................36 ....... 0.31
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............43 ..4.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................45 ....4.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 45 .....4.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 52 .....4.3
B. Readiness subindex .................................................49 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 61 .....4.3
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 55 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 40 .....5.5
C. Usage subindex ........................................................42 ....4.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 41 .....4.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 54 .....3.7
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 60 .....4.0
D. Impact subindex .......................................................45 ....3.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 44 .....3.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 45 .....4.2
Hungary
 Hungary      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  229
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................48 ......... 3.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................16 ......... 5.3
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................19 ......... 5.8
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....21 ......... 4.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....21 ......... 4.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................23 ......... 5.2
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........35 .......... 49
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................9 .......... 27
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................40 ........ 417
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................4 ......... 6.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................70 ......... 2.6
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................42 ....... 31.8
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................10 ............ 5
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................76 ......... 4.7
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........15 ....... 74.1
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................11 ......... 5.5
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............18 ......... 4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................1 53,352.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................2 ..... 291.0
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................1 .. 2,529.9
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................3 ......... 6.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................23 ....... 0.15
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..28 ..... 21.98
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................5 ......... 5.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................14 ......... 5.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..12 ..... 107.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................60 ..... 106.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................1 ....... 95.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................1 ....... 93.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................2 ....... 92.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........6 ....... 34.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........33 ....... 12.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................1 ......... 6.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................2 ......... 6.3
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................18 ......... 4.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............17 ....... 96.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................5 ......... 6.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................21 ......... 4.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................40 ......... 5.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................33 ......... 4.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....47 ....... 0.40
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....12 ......... 5.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......25 ......... 8.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....14 ......... 5.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............5 ....... 46.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........7 ......... 6.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................1 ......... 6.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................18 ......... 5.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................117 ....... 0.04
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............15 ..5.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................16 ....5.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 22 .....5.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 19 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................1 ....6.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 2 .....6.9
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 4 .....6.5
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 7 .....6.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................19 ....5.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 9 .....5.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 15 .....5.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 42 .....4.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................23 ....4.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 23 .....4.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 32 .....4.8
Iceland
 Iceland      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
230  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................44 ......... 4.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................48 ......... 4.4
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................51 ......... 4.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....64 ......... 3.7
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....51 ......... 3.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................68 ......... 3.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........58 .......... 64
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............126 .......... 46
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................137 ..... 1,420
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................47 ......... 5.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................27 ......... 3.4
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................121 ....... 61.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................99 .......... 29
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................31 ......... 5.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......101 ....... 16.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................30 ......... 4.9
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............78 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................102 ..... 697.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................111 ....... 83.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................96 ......... 5.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................107 ......... 2.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................85 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................5 ....... 0.06
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....6 ..... 13.28
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......60 ....... 1.93
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................38 ......... 4.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................32 ......... 4.7
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 109 ....... 60.2
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................122 ....... 62.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............117 ....... 61.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................124 ......... 7.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............114 ......... 6.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................104 ......... 4.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....101 ......... 0.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......107 ......... 0.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................90 ......... 4.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................41 ......... 5.3
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................35 ......... 3.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............63 ......... 1.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................56 ......... 5.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................63 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................42 ......... 5.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................35 ......... 4.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....53 ....... 0.37
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....35 ......... 5.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......56 ......... 0.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....32 ......... 4.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........69 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................74 ......... 4.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................53 ......... 4.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................56 ....... 0.20
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............69 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................78 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 71 .....3.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 91 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................64 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 100 .....3.2
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 1 .....6.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 100 .....4.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................78 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 117 .....2.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 47 .....3.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 46 .....4.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................52 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 41 .....3.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 65 .....3.8
India
 India      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  231
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................79 ......... 3.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................71 ......... 3.9
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................76 ......... 3.6
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....69 ......... 3.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....61 ......... 3.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................62 ......... 3.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........99 .......... 87
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................79 ........ 570
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................74 ......... 4.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................17 ......... 3.7
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................53 ....... 34.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................124 .......... 45
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................89 ......... 4.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........87 ....... 22.4
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................68 ......... 4.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............34 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................109 ..... 636.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................97 ....... 90.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............109 ......... 2.9
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................109 ......... 2.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................67 ......... 5.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................34 ....... 0.18
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..57 ..... 31.26
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......75 ....... 1.79
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................44 ......... 4.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................53 ......... 4.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..97 ....... 75.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................78 ....... 92.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................83 ....... 91.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................118 ......... 9.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............105 ....... 10.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................109 ......... 3.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....103 ......... 0.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........85 ......... 1.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................48 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................54 ......... 5.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................30 ......... 3.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............100 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................77 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................52 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................80 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................56 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....99 ....... 0.24
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....71 ......... 4.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......94 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....55 ......... 4.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........100 ......... 7.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........78 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................49 ......... 4.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................69 ......... 4.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............80 ..3.7
A. Environment subindex ..............................................72 ....3.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 88 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 64 .....4.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................74 ....4.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 103 .....3.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 34 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 69 .....5.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................85 ....3.3
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 103 .....2.4
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 49 .....3.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 75 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................86 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 106 .....2.8
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 66 .....3.7
Indonesia
 Indonesia      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
232  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................51 ......... 3.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................105 ......... 3.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................66 ......... 3.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....72 ......... 3.6
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..105 ......... 3.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................111 ......... 2.7
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................59 ........ 505
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................117 ......... 4.2
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................133 ......... 1.8
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................91 ....... 44.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................106 ......... 4.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........57 ....... 42.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................94 ......... 3.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............61 ......... 3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................64 .. 2,967.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............106 ......... 3.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................126 ......... 0.7
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................119 ......... 3.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................50 ....... 0.24
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 112 ..... 76.80
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....101 ....... 1.33
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................104 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................35 ......... 4.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..83 ....... 83.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................99 ....... 85.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................86 ....... 91.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................102 ....... 13.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............69 ....... 33.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................73 ....... 20.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....104 ......... 0.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................140 ......... 3.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................120 ......... 4.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................67 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............99 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................125 ......... 4.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................133 ......... 2.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................97 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................83 ......... 3.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....90 ....... 0.27
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....98 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......92 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..100 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............91 ....... 15.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........99 ......... 4.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................118 ......... 2.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................78 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................105 ....... 0.07
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............104 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ..............................................80 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 78 .....3.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 81 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................104 ....3.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 99 .....3.2
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 114 .....3.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 81 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ......................................................104 ....3.0
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 92 .....2.6
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 121 .....3.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 92 .....3.5
D. Impact subindex .....................................................113 ....2.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 107 .....2.8
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 107 .....3.1
Iran, Islamic Rep.
 Islamic Republic of Iran      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  233
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................43 ......... 4.0
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................34 ......... 4.8
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................10 ......... 6.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....37 ......... 4.5
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....29 ......... 4.5
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................10 ......... 5.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........19 .......... 35
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................1 .......... 21
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................100 ........ 650
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................32 ......... 5.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................106 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................24 ....... 26.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................59 ......... 5.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........30 ....... 62.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................29 ......... 4.9
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............82 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................34 .. 6,188.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................22 ....... 64.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................16 ..... 997.9
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................44 ......... 5.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................83 ....... 0.35
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..48 ..... 28.90
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................11 ......... 5.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................34 ......... 4.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....5 ..... 117.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................63 ..... 105.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................30 ....... 69.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............23 ....... 76.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................23 ....... 71.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......29 ....... 21.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........12 ....... 35.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................35 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................35 ......... 5.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................33 ......... 3.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............19 ....... 89.8
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................32 ......... 5.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................22 ......... 4.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................63 ......... 4.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................64 ......... 4.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....28 ....... 0.50
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....36 ......... 5.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......13 ....... 33.8
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....31 ......... 4.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............23 ....... 38.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........52 ......... 4.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................60 ......... 4.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................39 ......... 4.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................26 ....... 0.44
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............25 ..5.0
A. Environment subindex ..............................................20 ....5.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 18 .....5.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 28 .....4.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................18 ....5.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 17 .....6.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 44 .....5.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 15 .....5.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................28 ....4.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 25 .....5.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 25 .....4.7
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 47 .....4.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................26 ....4.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 18 .....4.8
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 41 .....4.3
Ireland
 Ireland      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
234  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................40 ......... 4.2
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................25 ......... 5.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................12 ......... 6.2
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....41 ......... 4.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....49 ......... 3.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................35 ......... 4.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........17 .......... 31
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................123 ........ 890
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................13 ......... 6.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................2 ......... 4.5
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................38 ....... 31.2
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................109 .......... 34
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................27 ......... 5.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........31 ....... 62.5
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................17 ......... 5.3
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................6 ......... 4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................23 .. 7,955.1
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................84 ......... 8.0
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................26 ..... 396.6
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................29 ......... 6.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................70 ....... 0.31
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....1 ....... 8.04
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....106 ....... 1.27
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................48 ......... 4.1
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................79 ......... 3.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..59 ....... 91.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................24 ..... 133.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................32 ....... 67.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............21 ....... 77.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................27 ....... 69.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......19 ....... 25.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........5 ....... 55.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................43 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................6 ......... 6.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................6 ......... 5.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................4 ..... 234.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................25 ......... 5.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................20 ......... 4.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................32 ......... 5.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................39 ......... 4.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....19 ....... 0.58
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....19 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........3 ....... 91.6
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....16 ......... 5.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............16 ....... 41.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........21 ......... 5.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................33 ......... 5.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................25 ......... 5.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................30 ....... 0.41
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............20 ..5.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................19 ....5.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 28 .....4.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 10 .....5.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................34 ....5.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 38 .....4.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 32 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 48 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................12 ....5.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 15 .....5.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 7 .....5.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 24 .....4.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................12 ....5.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 6 .....5.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 28 .....4.9
Israel
 Israel      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  235
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................100 ......... 2.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................61 ......... 4.1
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................60 ......... 4.0
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..133 ......... 2.6
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..125 ......... 2.7
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................59 ......... 3.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........35 .......... 49
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............106 .......... 41
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................131 ..... 1,210
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................71 ......... 5.0
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................98 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................132 ....... 68.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................58 ......... 5.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........23 ....... 66.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................35 ......... 4.8
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............114 ......... 3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................46 .. 4,742.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................23 ....... 61.5
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................39 ..... 154.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................72 ......... 4.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................48 ....... 0.23
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..36 ..... 24.58
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......88 ....... 1.62
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................88 ......... 3.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................74 ......... 3.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..32 ....... 99.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................40 ....... 98.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................11 ..... 149.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................42 ....... 53.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............36 ....... 64.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................39 ....... 59.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......28 ....... 21.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........27 ....... 16.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................51 ......... 5.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................102 ......... 4.3
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................26 ......... 4.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............24 ....... 51.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................71 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................120 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................120 ......... 3.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................112 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....84 ....... 0.29
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....81 ......... 4.3
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......24 ......... 8.8
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....92 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............22 ....... 39.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........66 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................79 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................88 ......... 3.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................53 ....... 0.21
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............48 ..4.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................75 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 85 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 70 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................35 ....5.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 43 .....4.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 28 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 51 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................45 ....3.9
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 29 .....4.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 45 .....3.8
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 113 .....3.2
D. Impact subindex .......................................................54 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 36 .....3.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 74 .....3.6
Italy
 Italy      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
236  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................62 ......... 3.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................62 ......... 4.0
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................48 ......... 4.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....78 ......... 3.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....82 ......... 3.3
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................75 ......... 3.4
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................101 ........ 655
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................44 ......... 5.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................127 ......... 1.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................96 ....... 45.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................72 ......... 4.8
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........81 ....... 25.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................63 ......... 4.2
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............102 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................65 .. 2,860.4
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................48 ....... 21.0
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................60 ....... 39.2
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................61 ......... 5.1
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................61 ....... 0.29
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..80 ..... 37.46
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................103 ......... 3.2
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............120 ......... 2.9
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..44 ....... 95.6
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................97 ....... 86.4
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................46 ..... 116.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................90 ....... 26.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............84 ....... 20.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................84 ....... 11.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......76 ......... 4.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........78 ......... 2.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................71 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................72 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................97 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............71 ......... 0.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................66 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................48 ......... 4.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................55 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................77 ......... 3.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...102 ....... 0.23
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....70 ......... 4.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......68 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....71 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............72 ....... 20.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........61 ......... 4.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................84 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................64 ......... 4.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................99 ....... 0.09
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............74 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................62 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 56 .....3.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 75 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................62 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 54 .....4.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 61 .....5.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 90 .....4.6
C. Usage subindex ........................................................79 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 84 .....2.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 67 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 78 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................82 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 81 .....3.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 84 .....3.5
Jamaica
 Jamaica      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  237
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................30 ......... 4.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................36 ......... 4.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................18 ......... 5.8
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....28 ......... 4.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....32 ......... 4.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................22 ......... 5.3
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............1 .......... 20
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................21 ........ 360
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................15 ......... 6.3
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................47 ......... 2.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................106 ....... 49.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................89 .......... 23
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................4 ......... 5.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........38 ....... 59.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................57 ......... 4.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............32 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................21 .. 8,215.8
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................59 ....... 15.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................20 ..... 649.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................12 ......... 6.3
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................138 ....... 0.81
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..14 ..... 18.13
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................36 ......... 4.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................24 ......... 4.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..22 ..... 101.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................79 ....... 95.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................17 ....... 78.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............14 ....... 83.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................12 ....... 81.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......18 ....... 26.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........3 ....... 64.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................68 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................3 ......... 6.3
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................1 ......... 5.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................6 ..... 207.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................13 ......... 6.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................6 ......... 5.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................44 ......... 5.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................42 ......... 4.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....13 ....... 0.67
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....28 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........4 ....... 88.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....54 ......... 4.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............26 ....... 37.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........42 ......... 4.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................39 ......... 4.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................66 ......... 4.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................6 ....... 0.76
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............18 ..5.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................26 ....4.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 16 .....5.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 39 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................27 ....5.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 22 .....5.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 78 .....5.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 22 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................8 ....5.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 13 .....5.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 3 .....6.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 21 .....4.8
D. Impact subindex .......................................................17 ....5.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 10 .....5.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 26 .....4.9
Japan
 Japan      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
238  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................110 ......... 2.8
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................74 ......... 3.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................49 ......... 4.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....49 ......... 4.1
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....67 ......... 3.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................40 ......... 4.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........49 .......... 57
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................103 ........ 689
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................42 ......... 5.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................62 ......... 2.7
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................27 ....... 27.7
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................53 .......... 12
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................34 ......... 5.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........58 ....... 41.8
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................85 ......... 3.9
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............70 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................74 .. 2,365.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................92 ......... 6.4
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................70 ....... 19.8
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................50 ......... 5.3
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................24 ....... 0.15
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..33 ..... 23.80
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......58 ....... 1.94
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................51 ......... 4.0
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................44 ......... 4.5
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..58 ....... 91.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................77 ....... 92.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................59 ..... 107.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................70 ....... 38.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............50 ....... 51.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................70 ....... 22.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......81 ......... 3.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......102 ......... 0.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................49 ......... 5.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................37 ......... 5.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................92 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............75 ......... 0.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................76 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................103 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................47 ......... 5.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................51 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....22 ....... 0.53
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....67 ......... 4.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......60 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....67 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........58 ......... 4.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................52 ......... 4.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................48 ......... 4.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................41 ....... 0.29
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............47 ..4.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................48 ....4.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 58 .....3.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 43 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................47 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 79 .....3.7
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 9 .....6.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 49 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................55 ....3.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 67 .....3.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 69 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 37 .....4.5
D. Impact subindex .......................................................57 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 70 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 49 .....4.1
Jordan
 Jordan      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  239
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................54 ......... 3.8
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................66 ......... 4.0
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................111 ......... 2.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....87 ......... 3.4
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....91 ......... 3.1
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................116 ......... 2.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........78 .......... 76
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................26 ........ 390
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................103 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................92 ......... 2.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................31 ....... 28.6
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................80 .......... 19
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................117 ......... 4.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........63 ....... 38.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................109 ......... 3.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............93 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................43 .. 5,130.9
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................79 ......... 8.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................98 ......... 5.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................78 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................64 ....... 0.29
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..13 ..... 18.01
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......73 ....... 1.81
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................112 ......... 3.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................85 ......... 3.7
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..41 ....... 97.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................7 ....... 99.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................40 ..... 121.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................78 ....... 34.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............78 ....... 25.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................68 ....... 23.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......55 ......... 8.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......113 ......... 0.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................115 ......... 4.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................113 ......... 4.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................101 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............64 ......... 1.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................44 ......... 5.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................96 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................50 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................60 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....24 ....... 0.53
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..106 ......... 3.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......57 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....87 ......... 3.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............48 ....... 28.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........51 ......... 4.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................72 ......... 4.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................68 ......... 4.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................18 ....... 0.56
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............55 ..4.0
A. Environment subindex ..............................................81 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 92 .....3.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 71 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................52 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 71 .....3.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 15 .....6.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 60 .....5.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................65 ....3.6
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 74 .....3.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 93 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 41 .....4.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................49 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 80 .....3.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 43 .....4.3
Kazakhstan
 Kazakhstan      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
240  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................81 ......... 3.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................56 ......... 4.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................103 ......... 2.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....74 ......... 3.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....76 ......... 3.4
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................99 ......... 2.9
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........82 .......... 79
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................53 ........ 465
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................72 ......... 4.9
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................28 ......... 3.3
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................109 ....... 49.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................108 .......... 33
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................119 .......... 11
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................66 ......... 4.9
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......130 ......... 4.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................46 ......... 4.6
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............63 ......... 3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................123 ..... 183.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................105 ....... 89.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............116 ......... 1.9
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................105 ......... 2.6
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................96 ......... 4.5
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................63 ....... 0.29
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 114 ..... 79.81
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................27 ......... 4.7
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................56 ......... 4.2
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 108 ....... 60.2
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................94 ....... 87.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............116 ....... 61.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................91 ....... 25.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............124 ......... 4.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................105 ......... 4.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....136 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........89 ......... 0.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................69 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................60 ......... 4.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................47 ......... 3.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............95 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................70 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................62 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................69 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................31 ......... 4.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...100 ....... 0.24
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....56 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......87 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....47 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........56 ......... 4.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................89 ......... 3.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................56 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................51 ....... 0.23
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............93 ..3.5
A. Environment subindex ..............................................99 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 94 .....3.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 101 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................108 ....3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 112 .....2.9
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 109 .....3.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 87 .....4.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................91 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 109 .....2.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 56 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 67 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................59 ....3.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 56 .....3.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 64 .....3.8
Kenya
 Kenya      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  241
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................123 ......... 2.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................18 ......... 5.3
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................69 ......... 3.8
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....84 ......... 3.4
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....97 ......... 3.1
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................46 ......... 4.1
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........25 .......... 40
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................36 .......... 33
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................3 ........ 230
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................24 ......... 6.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................100 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................34 ....... 29.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................15 ......... 5.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........1 ..... 103.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................50 ......... 4.5
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............31 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................14 .. 9,239.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................66 ....... 11.9
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................15 .. 1,140.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................15 ......... 6.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................84 ....... 0.35
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..68 ..... 33.90
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......79 ....... 1.76
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................55 ......... 3.9
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................12 ......... 5.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..39 ....... 97.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................62 ..... 105.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................10 ....... 83.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............17 ....... 81.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................1 ....... 96.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........4 ....... 35.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........1 ....... 78.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................32 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................8 ......... 6.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................20 ......... 4.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................9 ..... 160.9
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................2 ......... 6.4
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................41 ......... 4.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................15 ......... 5.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................15 ......... 5.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......1 ....... 1.00
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......2 ......... 5.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........6 ....... 68.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....20 ......... 5.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............61 ....... 22.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........6 ......... 6.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................10 ......... 6.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................6 ......... 5.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................1 ....... 1.00
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............12 ..5.5
A. Environment subindex ..............................................35 ....4.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 43 .....4.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 15 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................24 ....5.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 18 .....6.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 70 .....5.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 27 .....5.7
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................2 ....5.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 2 .....6.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 12 .....5.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 1 .....5.9
D. Impact subindex .........................................................4 ....5.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 12 .....5.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 1 .....6.2
Korea, Rep.
 Republic of Korea      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
242  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................64 ......... 3.5
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................110 ......... 3.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................32 ......... 5.1
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....48 ......... 4.2
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....50 ......... 3.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................51 ......... 3.9
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........53 .......... 60
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............136 .......... 50
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................78 ........ 566
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................58 ......... 5.2
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................25 ......... 3.4
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................9 ....... 15.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................105 .......... 32
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................80 ......... 4.7
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........89 ....... 21.9
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................99 ......... 3.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............97 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................3 20,306.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................76 ......... 9.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................41 ..... 138.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................70 ......... 5.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................21 ....... 0.14
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....7 ..... 14.89
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....136 ....... 0.23
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................108 ......... 3.1
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................94 ......... 3.5
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..26 ..... 101.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................69 ....... 93.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................9 ..... 160.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................69 ....... 38.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............62 ....... 37.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................59 ....... 31.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......92 ......... 1.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........58 ......... 5.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................59 ......... 5.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................39 ......... 5.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................90 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............82 ......... 0.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................91 ......... 4.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................102 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................114 ......... 3.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................109 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....35 ....... 0.46
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..120 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......55 ......... 0.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..114 ......... 3.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............78 ....... 18.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........90 ......... 4.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................65 ......... 4.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................102 ......... 3.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................51 ....... 0.23
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............62 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................56 ....4.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 60 .....3.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 61 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................48 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 37 .....4.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 62 .....5.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 66 .....5.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................67 ....3.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 60 .....3.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 80 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 84 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................93 ....3.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 110 .....2.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 76 .....3.6
Kuwait
 Kuwait      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  243
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................135 ......... 2.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................133 ......... 2.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................135 ......... 1.9
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..132 ......... 2.6
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..131 ......... 2.5
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................138 ......... 2.0
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................6 ........ 260
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................138 ......... 3.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................136 ......... 1.8
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................133 ....... 69.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................47 .......... 10
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................3 ............ 2
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................127 ......... 3.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........52 ....... 48.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................132 ......... 3.0
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............136 ......... 2.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................76 .. 2,282.2
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................79 ....... 96.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............137 ......... 0.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................117 ......... 1.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................58 ......... 5.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................35 ....... 0.18
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 125 ... 142.65
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................95 ......... 3.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................93 ......... 3.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..82 ....... 84.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................14 ....... 99.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................76 ....... 98.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................95 ....... 20.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............125 ......... 4.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................112 ......... 3.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....112 ......... 0.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......113 ......... 0.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................104 ......... 4.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................138 ......... 3.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................139 ......... 2.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............101 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................120 ......... 4.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................130 ......... 3.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................126 ......... 3.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................136 ......... 2.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....70 ....... 0.32
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..129 ......... 3.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..124 ......... 3.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............81 ....... 18.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......129 ......... 3.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................101 ......... 3.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................135 ......... 2.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................28 ....... 0.43
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............115 ..3.1
A. Environment subindex ............................................132 ....3.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 131 .....2.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 131 .....3.3
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................101 ....3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 98 .....3.2
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 106 .....3.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 75 .....4.9
C. Usage subindex ......................................................122 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 106 .....2.3
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 134 .....2.8
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 126 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .....................................................114 ....2.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 120 .....2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 100 .....3.2
Kyrgyz Republic
 Kyrgyz Republic      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
244  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................98 ......... 3.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................59 ......... 4.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................67 ......... 3.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..104 ......... 3.1
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....99 ......... 3.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................65 ......... 3.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........46 .......... 56
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................9 .......... 27
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................22 ........ 369
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................69 ......... 5.0
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................55 ......... 2.7
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................69 ....... 37.9
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................74 .......... 16
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................81 ......... 4.7
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........22 ....... 66.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................67 ......... 4.2
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............87 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................75 .. 2,322.1
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................67 ....... 98.8
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................37 ....... 30.0
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................36 ..... 173.0
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................45 ......... 5.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................44 ....... 0.22
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..20 ..... 19.84
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......77 ....... 1.77
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................70 ......... 3.7
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................49 ......... 4.4
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..50 ....... 94.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................2 ....... 99.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................68 ..... 102.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................26 ....... 71.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............38 ....... 62.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................37 ....... 59.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......34 ....... 19.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........29 ....... 15.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................64 ......... 5.3
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................94 ......... 4.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................43 ......... 3.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............30 ....... 12.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................43 ......... 5.4
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................64 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................98 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................103 ......... 3.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....41 ....... 0.42
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....84 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......42 ......... 1.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....76 ......... 4.0
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............20 ....... 40.2
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........63 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................34 ......... 5.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................98 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................44 ....... 0.27
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............41 ..4.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................49 ....4.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 59 .....3.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 44 .....4.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................29 ....5.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 47 .....4.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 13 .....6.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 43 .....5.4
C. Usage subindex ........................................................44 ....4.0
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 42 .....4.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 52 .....3.7
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 76 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................46 ....3.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 42 .....3.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 53 .....4.0
Latvia
 Latvia      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  245
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................132 ......... 2.3
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................138 ......... 2.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................127 ......... 2.5
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..105 ......... 3.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..132 ......... 2.5
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................112 ......... 2.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........71 .......... 72
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................105 ........ 721
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................79 ......... 4.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................60 ......... 2.7
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................36 ....... 30.2
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................42 ............ 9
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................28 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........43 ....... 54.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................18 ......... 5.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............141 ......... 2.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................71 .. 2,550.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............117 ......... 1.9
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................61 ....... 28.6
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................94 ......... 4.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................119 ....... 0.54
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..71 ..... 34.46
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....131 ....... 0.67
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................12 ......... 5.1
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................6 ......... 5.7
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..87 ....... 81.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................88 ....... 89.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............108 ....... 68.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................81 ....... 31.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............72 ....... 31.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................61 ....... 29.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......73 ......... 4.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................38 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................68 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................106 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............67 ......... 0.9
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................90 ......... 4.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................98 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................142 ......... 2.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................141 ......... 2.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....90 ....... 0.27
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..125 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......51 ......... 0.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..128 ......... 3.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............40 ....... 31.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......136 ......... 3.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................85 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................140 ......... 2.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................44 ....... 0.27
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............95 ..3.5
A. Environment subindex ..............................................92 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 129 .....2.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 42 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................89 ....4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 95 .....3.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 99 .....4.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 33 .....5.6
C. Usage subindex ......................................................105 ....3.0
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 68 .....3.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 94 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 138 .....2.5
D. Impact subindex .....................................................104 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 92 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 114 .....3.0
Lebanon
 Lebanon      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
246  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................101 ......... 2.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................134 ......... 2.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................107 ......... 2.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....94 ......... 3.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..122 ......... 2.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................101 ......... 2.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................112 ........ 785
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................126 ......... 3.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................130 ......... 1.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................10 ....... 16.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................119 .......... 40
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................108 ......... 4.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......133 ......... 3.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................134 ......... 2.9
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............123 ......... 2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................131 ....... 92.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................127 ....... 55.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............135 ......... 0.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................131 ......... 0.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................136 ......... 3.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................98 ....... 0.42
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 113 ..... 78.91
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......85 ....... 1.67
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................91 ......... 3.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............112 ......... 3.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 117 ....... 46.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................87 ....... 89.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............129 ....... 45.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................129 ......... 3.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............120 ......... 5.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................124 ......... 1.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....134 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........98 ......... 0.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................125 ......... 4.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................122 ......... 4.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................136 ......... 2.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............87 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................123 ......... 4.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................88 ......... 3.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................130 ......... 3.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................130 ......... 2.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....92 ....... 0.26
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..137 ......... 3.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..132 ......... 3.0
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........106 ......... 6.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......131 ......... 3.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................136 ......... 2.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................130 ......... 3.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................99 ....... 0.09
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............133 ..2.8
A. Environment subindex ............................................120 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 115 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 115 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................127 ....3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 133 .....2.1
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 123 .....3.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 106 .....3.9
C. Usage subindex ......................................................134 ....2.5
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 130 .....1.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 125 .....3.0
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 129 .....2.9
D. Impact subindex .....................................................136 ....2.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 139 .....2.1
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 134 .....2.4
Lesotho
 Lesotho      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  247
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................96 ......... 3.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................38 ......... 4.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................84 ......... 3.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....83 ......... 3.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....63 ......... 3.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................73 ......... 3.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........40 .......... 54
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................8 ........ 275
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................38 ......... 5.7
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................101 ......... 2.2
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................89 ....... 43.9
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................88 .......... 22
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................64 ......... 5.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........11 ....... 77.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................66 ......... 4.2
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............96 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................52 .. 3,966.3
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................30 ....... 45.4
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................34 ..... 175.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................18 ......... 6.2
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................55 ....... 0.26
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..10 ..... 17.17
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......62 ....... 1.92
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................64 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................21 ......... 5.0
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..36 ....... 98.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................4 ....... 99.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................12 ..... 147.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................37 ....... 62.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............44 ....... 59.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................34 ....... 60.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......30 ....... 20.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........35 ....... 12.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................30 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................53 ......... 5.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................48 ......... 3.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............39 ......... 6.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................7 ......... 6.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................65 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................70 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................71 ......... 3.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....29 ....... 0.48
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....26 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......43 ......... 0.9
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....23 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............21 ....... 39.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........37 ......... 5.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................27 ......... 5.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................33 ......... 4.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................19 ....... 0.53
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............31 ..4.7
A. Environment subindex ..............................................46 ....4.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 53 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 49 .....4.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................22 ....5.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 35 .....5.0
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 6 .....6.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 30 .....5.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................35 ....4.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 32 .....4.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 38 .....3.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 49 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................27 ....4.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 30 .....4.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 24 .....5.0
Lithuania
 &&&      &&& Lithuania      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
248  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................5 ......... 5.6
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................5 ......... 5.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................14 ......... 6.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....12 ......... 5.3
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......5 ......... 5.4
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................5 ......... 5.9
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............1 .......... 20
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................5 .......... 26
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................17 ........ 321
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................19 ......... 6.3
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................11 ......... 4.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................14 ....... 20.8
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................80 .......... 19
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................41 ......... 5.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......109 ....... 10.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................58 ......... 4.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................7 ......... 4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................33 .. 6,293.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................14 ....... 87.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................9 .. 1,415.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................20 ......... 6.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................53 ....... 0.25
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..61 ..... 31.66
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................35 ......... 4.5
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................47 ......... 4.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..37 ....... 97.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................17 ..... 143.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................4 ....... 90.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................4 ....... 90.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................4 ....... 90.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........8 ....... 33.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........26 ....... 17.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................22 ......... 6.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................24 ......... 5.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................16 ......... 4.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............15 ..... 103.3
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................30 ......... 5.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................7 ......... 5.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................5 ......... 6.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................12 ......... 5.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....51 ....... 0.38
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....31 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......20 ....... 17.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....28 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........10 ......... 5.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................22 ......... 5.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................23 ......... 5.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................66 ....... 0.17
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............21 ..5.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................13 ....5.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 5 .....5.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 27 .....4.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................19 ....5.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 13 .....6.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 36 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 31 .....5.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................15 ....5.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 7 .....5.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 18 .....5.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 20 .....4.8
D. Impact subindex .......................................................28 ....4.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 27 .....4.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 34 .....4.7
Luxembourg
 &&&      &&& Luxembourg      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  249
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................80 ......... 3.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................63 ......... 4.0
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................105 ......... 2.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....99 ......... 3.1
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..102 ......... 3.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................89 ......... 3.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........63 .......... 66
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................23 ........ 370
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................89 ......... 4.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................65 ......... 2.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................2 ......... 9.7
2.04 No. days to start a business ................................4 ............ 3
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................110 ......... 4.2
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........59 ....... 40.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................100 ......... 3.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............110 ......... 3.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................60 .. 3,074.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................58 ....... 16.8
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................65 ....... 24.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................53 ......... 5.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................125 ....... 0.58
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..62 ..... 32.24
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....117 ....... 1.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................75 ......... 3.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................75 ......... 3.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..84 ....... 82.8
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................57 ....... 97.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................65 ..... 104.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................46 ....... 51.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............41 ....... 60.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................47 ....... 49.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......44 ....... 12.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........54 ......... 6.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................47 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................121 ......... 4.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................86 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............59 ......... 1.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................101 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................124 ......... 3.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................52 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................69 ......... 3.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....69 ....... 0.32
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..110 ......... 3.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......53 ......... 0.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..104 ......... 3.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............52 ....... 25.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........62 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................46 ......... 4.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................76 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................53 ....... 0.21
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............66 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................60 ....4.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 83 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 47 .....4.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................78 ....4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 59 .....4.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 96 .....4.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 68 .....5.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................61 ....3.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 46 .....4.0
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 113 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 63 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................71 ....3.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 87 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 56 .....3.9
Macedonia, FYR
 Macedonia, FYR      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
250  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................125 ......... 2.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................132 ......... 2.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................131 ......... 2.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..127 ......... 2.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..115 ......... 2.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................137 ......... 2.1
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................121 ........ 871
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................130 ......... 3.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................72 ......... 2.6
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................64 ....... 36.6
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................112 ......... 4.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......132 ......... 3.7
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................103 ......... 3.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............101 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................133 ....... 56.8
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................134 ....... 23.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................98 ......... 5.5
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................130 ......... 0.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................131 ......... 3.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................99 ....... 0.43
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 133 ... 204.35
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................118 ......... 3.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................92 ......... 3.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 133 ....... 31.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................121 ....... 64.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............134 ....... 37.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................137 ......... 1.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............138 ......... 1.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................127 ......... 1.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....131 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......110 ......... 0.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................91 ......... 4.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................131 ......... 3.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................113 ......... 2.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................131 ......... 3.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................115 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................125 ......... 3.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................131 ......... 2.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...115 ....... 0.17
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..116 ......... 3.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..118 ......... 3.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........111 ......... 2.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......108 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................132 ......... 2.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................128 ......... 3.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................111 ....... 0.06
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............134 ..2.7
A. Environment subindex ............................................124 ....3.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 134 .....2.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 103 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................135 ....2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 134 .....2.1
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 117 .....3.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 130 .....3.1
C. Usage subindex ......................................................136 ....2.5
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 132 .....1.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 128 .....2.9
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 130 .....2.8
D. Impact subindex .....................................................129 ....2.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 134 .....2.3
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 128 .....2.7
Madagascar
 &&&      &&& Madagascar      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  251
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................53 ......... 3.8
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................91 ......... 3.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................52 ......... 4.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....50 ......... 4.1
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....45 ......... 4.0
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................53 ......... 3.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............112 .......... 42
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................15 ........ 312
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................111 ......... 4.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................131 ......... 1.8
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................30 ....... 28.2
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................117 .......... 39
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................101 ......... 4.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......139 ......... 0.5
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................81 ......... 4.0
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............73 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................127 ..... 119.7
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................106 ....... 85.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............140 ......... 0.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................136 ......... 0.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................109 ......... 4.2
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................130 ....... 0.67
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 139 1,252.34
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....114 ....... 1.13
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................47 ......... 4.1
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................73 ......... 3.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 131 ....... 32.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................113 ....... 73.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............140 ....... 20.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................135 ......... 2.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............121 ......... 4.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................116 ......... 2.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....130 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......104 ......... 0.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................111 ......... 4.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................104 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................81 ......... 2.9
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................115 ......... 4.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................71 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................102 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................79 ......... 3.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...138 ....... 0.02
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..102 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....90 ......... 3.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........82 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................123 ......... 2.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................93 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................127 ....... 0.02
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............116 ..3.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................70 ....3.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 47 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 114 .....3.6
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................132 ....2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 123 .....2.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 138 .....2.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 115 .....3.7
C. Usage subindex ......................................................129 ....2.6
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 137 .....1.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 98 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 124 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .....................................................112 ....2.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 99 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 117 .....3.0
Malawi
 &&&      &&& Malawi      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
252  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................12 ......... 5.1
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................23 ......... 5.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................43 ......... 4.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....17 ......... 5.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....14 ......... 4.9
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................31 ......... 4.9
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........46 .......... 56
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................15 .......... 29
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................42 ........ 425
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................35 ......... 5.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................10 ......... 4.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................49 ....... 34.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................26 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........65 ....... 37.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................27 ......... 5.0
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................4 ......... 4.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................58 .. 3,541.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................69 ....... 11.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................57 ....... 41.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................36 ......... 5.7
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................36 ....... 0.19
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..75 ..... 35.71
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................14 ......... 5.1
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................23 ......... 5.0
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 104 ....... 69.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................75 ....... 92.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................43 ..... 119.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................40 ....... 56.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............58 ....... 41.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................41 ....... 55.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......61 ......... 7.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........40 ....... 10.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................25 ......... 5.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................28 ......... 5.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................19 ......... 4.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............34 ......... 9.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................27 ......... 5.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................9 ......... 5.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................9 ......... 5.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................10 ......... 5.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....16 ....... 0.63
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....13 ......... 5.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......29 ......... 4.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......9 ......... 5.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............51 ....... 26.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........20 ......... 5.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................36 ......... 5.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................10 ......... 5.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................12 ....... 0.66
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............29 ..4.8
A. Environment subindex ..............................................23 ....4.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 24 .....4.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 24 .....5.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................55 ....5.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 65 .....4.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 41 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 47 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................29 ....4.6
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 47 .....4.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 27 .....4.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 6 .....5.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................24 ....4.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 31 .....4.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 15 .....5.3
Malaysia
 &&&      &&& Malaysia      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  253
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................70 ......... 3.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................108 ......... 3.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................112 ......... 2.7
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....76 ......... 3.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....70 ......... 3.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................103 ......... 2.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................91 ........ 620
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................118 ......... 4.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................119 ......... 2.0
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................111 ....... 51.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................95 ......... 4.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......121 ......... 5.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................118 ......... 3.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............65 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................137 ....... 33.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................135 ....... 20.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............118 ......... 1.9
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................127 ......... 0.7
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................128 ......... 3.5
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................91 ....... 0.39
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 118 ..... 88.62
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....113 ....... 1.19
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................119 ......... 2.9
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............128 ......... 2.7
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 125 ....... 37.7
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................140 ....... 26.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............124 ....... 48.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................133 ......... 2.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............128 ......... 3.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................125 ......... 1.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....135 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................135 ......... 3.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................112 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................105 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................133 ......... 3.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................122 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................54 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................68 ......... 3.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...107 ....... 0.18
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....90 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....86 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........92 ......... 4.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................109 ......... 3.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................60 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................88 ....... 0.11
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............126 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................104 ....3.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 93 .....3.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 118 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................140 ....2.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 139 .....1.9
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 130 .....2.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 141 .....2.2
C. Usage subindex ......................................................118 ....2.8
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 129 .....1.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 124 .....3.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 83 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................92 ....3.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 86 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 94 .....3.3
Mali
 &&&      &&& Mali      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
254  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................24 ......... 4.6
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................15 ......... 5.3
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................31 ......... 5.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....46 ......... 4.2
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....55 ......... 3.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................36 ......... 4.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........30 .......... 43
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ...............n/a ......... n/a
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract .........................n/a ......... n/a
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................21 ......... 6.2
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................39 ......... 3.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits .....................................n/a ......... n/a
 2.04 No. days to start a business .............................n/a ......... n/a
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ...................n/a ......... n/a
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................11 ......... 5.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........73 ....... 33.4
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................32 ......... 4.8
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............19 ......... 4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................39 .. 5,585.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................51 ....... 19.2
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................11 .. 1,380.3
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................27 ......... 6.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................122 ....... 0.57
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..37 ..... 24.71
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................18 ......... 4.9
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................22 ......... 5.0
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..14 ..... 104.8
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................76 ....... 92.4
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................55 ..... 109.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................35 ....... 63.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............28 ....... 73.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................26 ....... 70.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......16 ....... 28.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........37 ....... 11.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................18 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................34 ......... 5.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................63 ......... 3.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............29 ....... 12.9
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................24 ......... 5.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................57 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................4 ......... 6.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................4 ......... 5.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....34 ....... 0.47
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....21 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......28 ......... 4.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....22 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............33 ....... 35.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........14 ......... 5.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................16 ......... 6.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................7 ......... 5.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................34 ....... 0.34
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............26 ..4.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................37 ....4.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 30 .....4.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 41 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................21 ....5.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 16 .....6.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 65 .....5.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 19 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................27 ....4.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 27 .....4.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 35 .....4.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 11 .....5.2
D. Impact subindex .......................................................25 ....4.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 28 .....4.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 19 .....5.1
Malta
 &&&      &&& Malta      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  255
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................130 ......... 2.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................125 ......... 2.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................120 ......... 2.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....80 ......... 3.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....71 ......... 3.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................109 ......... 2.7
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............126 .......... 46
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................23 ........ 370
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................124 ......... 4.0
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................135 ......... 1.8
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................131 ....... 68.3
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................80 .......... 19
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................137 ......... 3.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......127 ......... 4.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................139 ......... 2.5
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............131 ......... 2.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................124 ..... 166.0
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................124 ....... 62.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............111 ......... 2.7
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................108 ......... 2.0
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................129 ......... 3.5
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................110 ....... 0.50
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 123 ... 118.95
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................139 ......... 2.0
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............125 ......... 2.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 139 ....... 24.4
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................126 ....... 57.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............100 ....... 79.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................132 ......... 3.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............129 ......... 3.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................123 ......... 1.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....117 ......... 0.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......117 ......... 0.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................133 ......... 3.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................140 ......... 3.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................118 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................139 ......... 3.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................141 ......... 2.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................129 ......... 3.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................126 ......... 2.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...128 ....... 0.09
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..138 ......... 3.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..136 ......... 2.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......134 ......... 3.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................135 ......... 2.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................124 ......... 3.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................88 ....... 0.11
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............139 ..2.5
A. Environment subindex ............................................135 ....2.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 117 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 140 .....2.7
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................137 ....2.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 128 .....2.4
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 124 .....2.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 139 .....2.4
C. Usage subindex ......................................................138 ....2.3
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 124 .....1.8
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 141 .....2.6
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 136 .....2.6
D. Impact subindex .....................................................134 ....2.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 137 .....2.3
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 130 .....2.6
Mauritania
 &&&      &&& Mauritania      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
256  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................20 ......... 4.8
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................51 ......... 4.3
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................40 ......... 4.9
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....33 ......... 4.6
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....33 ......... 4.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................55 ......... 3.8
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........46 .......... 56
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................99 ........ 645
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................55 ......... 5.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................53 ......... 2.8
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................21 ....... 25.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................57 ......... 5.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........82 ....... 24.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................87 ......... 3.9
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............62 ......... 3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................84 .. 1,870.9
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................77 ......... 9.2
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................48 ....... 86.6
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................75 ......... 4.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................39 ....... 0.20
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..49 ..... 28.98
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................50 ......... 4.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................63 ......... 4.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..66 ....... 89.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................93 ....... 87.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................84 ....... 91.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................86 ....... 28.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............61 ....... 37.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................62 ....... 29.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......65 ......... 6.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........49 ......... 7.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................74 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................56 ......... 5.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................89 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............102 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................75 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................40 ......... 4.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................35 ......... 5.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................50 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....81 ....... 0.30
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....62 ......... 4.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......79 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....68 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............89 ....... 15.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........73 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................75 ......... 4.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................54 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................111 ....... 0.06
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............53 ..4.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................41 ....4.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 39 .....4.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 46 .....4.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................58 ....5.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 73 .....3.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 23 .....6.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 63 .....5.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................64 ....3.6
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 73 .....3.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 62 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 52 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................83 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 83 .....3.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 82 .....3.5
Mauritius
 &&&      &&& Mauritius      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  257
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................128 ......... 2.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................54 ......... 4.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................89 ......... 3.2
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..101 ......... 3.1
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....80 ......... 3.3
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................85 ......... 3.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........50 .......... 58
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................39 ........ 415
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................61 ......... 5.2
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................78 ......... 2.5
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................113 ....... 52.7
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................42 ............ 9
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................84 ......... 4.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........79 ....... 27.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................49 ......... 4.5
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............75 ......... 3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................77 .. 2,256.2
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................87 ......... 7.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................67 ....... 20.6
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................82 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................100 ....... 0.43
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..43 ..... 27.53
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................107 ......... 3.1
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............126 ......... 2.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..75 ....... 86.9
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................72 ....... 93.4
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................98 ....... 80.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................80 ....... 31.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............75 ....... 29.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................69 ....... 22.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......51 ....... 10.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........87 ......... 1.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................78 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................81 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................76 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............58 ......... 1.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................62 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................80 ......... 3.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................96 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................80 ......... 3.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....38 ....... 0.44
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....58 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......63 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....51 ......... 4.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............80 ....... 18.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........86 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................82 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................62 ......... 4.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................32 ....... 0.37
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............76 ..3.8
A. Environment subindex ..............................................79 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 86 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 77 .....3.9
B. Readiness subindex .................................................76 ....4.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 81 .....3.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 52 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 91 .....4.6
C. Usage subindex ........................................................72 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 77 .....3.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 75 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 66 .....3.9
D. Impact subindex .......................................................65 ....3.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 71 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 58 .....3.9
Mexico
 &&&      &&& Mexico      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
258  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................99 ......... 3.0
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................101 ......... 3.4
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................132 ......... 2.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..108 ......... 3.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..100 ......... 3.0
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................110 ......... 2.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........103 .......... 90
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................20 ........ 352
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................112 ......... 4.3
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................126 ......... 1.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................39 ....... 31.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................42 ............ 9
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................104 ......... 4.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........64 ....... 38.1
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................124 ......... 3.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............132 ......... 2.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................95 ..... 997.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................72 ....... 98.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................20 ....... 65.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................81 ....... 13.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................73 ......... 4.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................76 ....... 0.32
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....5 ..... 12.24
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................102 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................69 ......... 4.0
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..70 ....... 88.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................44 ....... 98.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................90 ....... 88.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................65 ....... 40.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............63 ....... 36.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................56 ....... 34.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......60 ......... 7.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........74 ......... 3.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................96 ......... 4.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................126 ......... 3.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................107 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............70 ......... 0.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................109 ......... 4.4
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................118 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................86 ......... 4.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................108 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....81 ....... 0.30
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..123 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..111 ......... 3.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............49 ....... 28.2
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......112 ......... 3.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................63 ......... 4.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................114 ......... 3.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................56 ....... 0.20
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............78 ..3.8
A. Environment subindex ............................................106 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 109 .....3.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 89 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................41 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 63 .....4.3
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 8 .....6.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 65 .....5.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................90 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 71 .....3.2
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 120 .....3.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 94 .....3.5
D. Impact subindex .......................................................89 ....3.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 91 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 87 .....3.4
Moldova
 &&&      &&& Moldova     Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  259
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................111 ......... 2.8
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................118 ......... 3.0
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................122 ......... 2.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..106 ......... 3.0
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..114 ......... 2.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................136 ......... 2.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................31 .......... 32
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................16 ........ 314
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................120 ......... 4.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................137 ......... 1.8
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................20 ....... 24.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................96 ......... 4.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........45 ....... 52.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................135 ......... 2.8
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............89 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................87 .. 1,553.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................106 ....... 85.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................28 ....... 48.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................86 ....... 10.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................55 ......... 5.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................19 ....... 0.10
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....8 ..... 16.01
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......90 ....... 1.56
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................132 ......... 2.4
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................67 ......... 4.0
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..53 ....... 92.9
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................55 ....... 97.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................87 ....... 91.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................104 ....... 12.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............81 ....... 22.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................97 ......... 7.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......87 ......... 2.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........79 ......... 2.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................100 ......... 4.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................90 ......... 4.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................72 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............89 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................93 ......... 4.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................68 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................53 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................82 ......... 3.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....20 ....... 0.56
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....66 ......... 4.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....95 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............71 ....... 20.2
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........57 ......... 4.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................69 ......... 4.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................75 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................28 ....... 0.43
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............63 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................95 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 105 .....3.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 69 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................40 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 64 .....4.2
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 3 .....6.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 71 .....4.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................75 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 101 .....2.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 84 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 44 .....4.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................62 ....3.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 84 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 51 .....4.1
Mongolia
 &&&      &&& Mongolia      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
260  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................42 ......... 4.1
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................43 ......... 4.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................56 ......... 4.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....45 ......... 4.2
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....36 ......... 4.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................57 ......... 3.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........82 .......... 79
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............133 .......... 49
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................72 ........ 545
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................90 ......... 4.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................29 ......... 3.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................16 ....... 22.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................47 .......... 10
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................121 ......... 4.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........55 ....... 44.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................45 ......... 4.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............33 ......... 4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................50 .. 4,227.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................46 ....... 21.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................64 ....... 25.3
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................47 ......... 5.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................116 ....... 0.52
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..78 ..... 37.05
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................39 ......... 4.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................39 ......... 4.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..16 ..... 104.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................52 ....... 97.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................3 ..... 185.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................44 ....... 52.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............71 ....... 32.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................72 ....... 21.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......56 ......... 8.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........22 ....... 22.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................39 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................99 ......... 4.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................53 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................68 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................66 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................64 ......... 4.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................24 ......... 4.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....72 ....... 0.31
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....61 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....46 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............32 ....... 35.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........65 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................55 ......... 4.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................38 ......... 4.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................73 ....... 0.16
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............46 ..4.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................47 ....4.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 61 .....3.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 38 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................53 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 46 .....4.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 87 .....4.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 28 .....5.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................50 ....3.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 50 .....3.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 70 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 53 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................47 ....3.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 39 .....3.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 57 .....3.9
Montenegro
 &&&      &&& Montenegro      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  261
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................60 ......... 3.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................87 ......... 3.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................80 ......... 3.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....57 ......... 3.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....53 ......... 3.9
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................71 ......... 3.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........60 .......... 65
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................62 ........ 510
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................65 ......... 5.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................30 ......... 3.3
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................109 ....... 49.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................53 .......... 12
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................53 ......... 5.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......103 ....... 13.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................51 ......... 4.5
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............59 ......... 3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................105 ..... 664.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................68 ....... 98.4
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............100 ......... 4.8
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................102 ......... 3.0
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................93 ......... 4.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................135 ....... 0.77
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..18 ..... 19.56
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................93 ......... 3.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................65 ......... 4.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 114 ....... 56.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................127 ....... 56.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................74 ..... 100.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................49 ....... 49.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............67 ....... 34.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................65 ....... 25.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......94 ......... 1.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........76 ......... 2.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................44 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................74 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................108 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............74 ......... 0.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................102 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................74 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................73 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................52 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...100 ....... 0.24
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..113 ......... 3.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......64 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..102 ......... 3.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........104 ......... 6.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........95 ......... 4.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................87 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................83 ......... 4.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............91 ..3.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................66 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 68 .....3.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 66 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................100 ....4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 94 .....3.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 77 .....5.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 119 .....3.6
C. Usage subindex ........................................................73 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 69 .....3.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 92 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 70 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .....................................................109 ....2.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 127 .....2.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 92 .....3.4
Morocco
 &&&      &&& Morocco      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
262  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................69 ......... 3.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................109 ......... 3.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................114 ......... 2.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....90 ......... 3.3
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....94 ......... 3.1
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................125 ......... 2.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................106 ........ 730
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................113 ......... 4.3
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................122 ......... 2.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................51 ....... 34.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................129 ......... 3.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......138 ......... 1.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................121 ......... 3.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............60 ......... 3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................103 ..... 677.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................132 ....... 32.2
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............124 ......... 1.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................125 ......... 0.9
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................123 ......... 3.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................114 ....... 0.51
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..98 ..... 50.39
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....105 ....... 1.29
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................99 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............123 ......... 2.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 137 ....... 25.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................131 ....... 55.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............137 ....... 30.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................127 ......... 4.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............110 ......... 7.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................129 ......... 1.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....125 ......... 0.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......101 ......... 0.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................132 ......... 3.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................98 ......... 4.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................127 ......... 2.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................104 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................119 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................66 ......... 4.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................75 ......... 3.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...113 ....... 0.17
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..104 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..106 ......... 3.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........97 ......... 4.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................122 ......... 2.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................90 ......... 3.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................88 ....... 0.11
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............120 ..3.0
A. Environment subindex ............................................108 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 97 .....3.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 116 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................134 ....2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 136 .....2.0
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 105 .....3.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 134 .....2.7
C. Usage subindex ......................................................121 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 138 .....1.6
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 115 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 91 .....3.5
D. Impact subindex .....................................................108 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 104 .....2.8
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 109 .....3.1
Mozambique
 &&&      &&& Mozambique    Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  263
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................35 ......... 4.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................92 ......... 3.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................39 ......... 4.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....29 ......... 4.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....27 ......... 4.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................37 ......... 4.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................36 .......... 33
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................7 ........ 270
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................54 ......... 5.4
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................76 ......... 2.5
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................3 ......... 9.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................130 .......... 66
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................87 ......... 4.6
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......113 ......... 9.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................129 ......... 3.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............67 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................97 ..... 953.0
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............101 ......... 4.4
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................80 ....... 14.0
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................95 ......... 4.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................58 ....... 0.28
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 122 ... 113.43
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....130 ....... 0.73
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................122 ......... 2.8
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............121 ......... 2.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 106 ....... 64.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................91 ....... 88.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............109 ....... 67.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................125 ......... 6.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............96 ....... 15.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................107 ......... 3.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....108 ......... 0.4
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........46 ......... 8.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................105 ......... 4.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................51 ......... 5.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................102 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............85 ......... 0.3
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................83 ......... 4.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................50 ......... 4.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................56 ......... 4.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................81 ......... 3.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...131 ....... 0.07
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..124 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......61 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..110 ......... 3.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............87 ....... 16.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........91 ......... 4.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................111 ......... 3.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................121 ......... 3.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............105 ..3.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................44 ....4.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 33 .....4.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 87 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................113 ....3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 97 .....3.2
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 126 .....2.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 104 .....4.0
C. Usage subindex ......................................................106 ....3.0
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 111 .....2.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 68 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 108 .....3.3
D. Impact subindex .....................................................119 ....2.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 116 .....2.7
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 118 .....2.9
Namibia
 &&&      &&& Namibia      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
264  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................133 ......... 2.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................127 ......... 2.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................92 ......... 3.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..117 ......... 2.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....96 ......... 3.1
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................115 ......... 2.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................125 ........ 910
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................114 ......... 4.2
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................99 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................41 ....... 31.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................99 .......... 29
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................123 ......... 4.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......122 ......... 5.6
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................126 ......... 3.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............133 ......... 2.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................128 ..... 106.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................131 ....... 35.1
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............120 ......... 1.7
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................113 ......... 1.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................125 ......... 3.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................8 ....... 0.07
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 100 ..... 52.61
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................100 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............108 ......... 3.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 122 ....... 43.5
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................125 ....... 59.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............138 ....... 30.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................123 ......... 7.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............123 ......... 4.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................125 ......... 1.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....116 ......... 0.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......113 ......... 0.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................127 ......... 4.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................116 ......... 4.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................129 ......... 2.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............112 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................122 ......... 4.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................136 ......... 2.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................124 ......... 3.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................115 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...114 ....... 0.17
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..122 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..116 ......... 3.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........107 ......... 4.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......127 ......... 3.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................115 ......... 3.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................127 ......... 3.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................111 ....... 0.06
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............128 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................125 ....3.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 123 .....2.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 122 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................111 ....3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 135 .....2.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 74 .....5.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 128 .....3.2
C. Usage subindex ......................................................135 ....2.5
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 136 .....1.6
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 130 .....2.9
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 128 .....2.9
D. Impact subindex .....................................................128 ....2.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 132 .....2.3
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 126 .....2.8
Nepal
 &&&      &&& Nepal      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  265
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................17 ......... 4.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................11 ......... 5.4
1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................6 ......... 6.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......9 ......... 5.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......7 ......... 5.3
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................9 ......... 5.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........14 .......... 28
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................5 .......... 26
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................66 ........ 514
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................6 ......... 6.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................14 ......... 3.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................76 ....... 40.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................6 ......... 5.9
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........28 ....... 62.7
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................10 ......... 5.5
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............22 ......... 4.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................30 .. 6,777.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................70 ....... 98.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................6 ..... 154.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................2 .. 2,277.1
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................6 ......... 6.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................87 ....... 0.36
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..54 ..... 29.82
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................10 ......... 5.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................9 ......... 5.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....3 ..... 120.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................50 ..... 115.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................3 ....... 90.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................2 ....... 92.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................3 ....... 90.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........1 ....... 38.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........50 ......... 7.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................9 ......... 6.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................21 ......... 5.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................10 ......... 5.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................8 ..... 202.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................15 ......... 6.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................10 ......... 5.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................45 ......... 5.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................43 ......... 4.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....12 ....... 0.68
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....16 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........5 ....... 69.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....11 ......... 5.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............3 ....... 47.2
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........17 ......... 5.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................5 ......... 6.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................28 ......... 5.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................15 ....... 0.60
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 6 ..5.6
A. Environment subindex ................................................9 ....5.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 8 .....5.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 17 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................11 ....6.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 10 .....6.3
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 47 .....5.6
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 8 .....6.1
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................9 ....5.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 11 .....5.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 8 .....5.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 19 .....4.8
D. Impact subindex .........................................................5 ....5.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 4 .....5.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 13 .....5.4
Netherlands
 &&&      &&& Netherlands    High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
266  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................3 ......... 5.8
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................13 ......... 5.4
 1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................1 ......... 6.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......4 ......... 5.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......6 ......... 5.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................8 ......... 5.8
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............4 .......... 22
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................2 ........ 216
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................29 ......... 6.0
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................26 ......... 3.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................52 ....... 34.4
 2.04 No. days to start a business ................................1 ............ 1
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................1 ............ 1
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................45 ......... 5.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........7 ....... 82.7
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................24 ......... 5.1
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............71 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................12 10,035.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................76 ....... 97.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................50 ....... 19.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................7 .. 1,489.5
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................31 ......... 5.9
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................120 ....... 0.55
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..16 ..... 18.66
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......91 ....... 1.53
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................9 ......... 5.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................7 ......... 5.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....2 ..... 124.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................51 ..... 114.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................11 ....... 83.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............13 ....... 83.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................15 ....... 79.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......22 ....... 24.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........24 ....... 18.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................12 ......... 6.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................17 ......... 5.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................29 ......... 3.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............22 ....... 75.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................17 ......... 6.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................23 ......... 4.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................27 ......... 5.4
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................19 ......... 4.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....15 ....... 0.64
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....32 ......... 5.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......22 ....... 14.8
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....29 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............11 ....... 42.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........33 ......... 5.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................23 ......... 5.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................24 ......... 5.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................4 ....... 0.77
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............14 ..5.4
A. Environment subindex ................................................4 ....5.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 3 .....5.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 14 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................12 ....6.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 9 .....6.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 63 .....5.3
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 6 .....6.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................22 ....5.0
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 19 .....5.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 24 .....4.7
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 14 .....5.0
D. Impact subindex .......................................................21 ....5.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 25 .....4.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 10 .....5.5
New Zealand
 &&&      &&& New Zealand    High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  267
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................138 ......... 2.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................128 ......... 2.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................136 ......... 1.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..134 ......... 2.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..139 ......... 2.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................119 ......... 2.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........82 .......... 79
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................36 ........ 409
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................127 ......... 3.9
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................111 ......... 2.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................129 ....... 66.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................117 .......... 39
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................118 ......... 4.1
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........95 ....... 18.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................111 ......... 3.6
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............134 ......... 2.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................110 ..... 596.4
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................78 ......... 8.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................93 ......... 7.8
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................115 ......... 4.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................127 ....... 0.62
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 117 ..... 84.96
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................134 ......... 2.3
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............136 ......... 2.2
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 103 ....... 69.4
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................106 ....... 78.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............112 ....... 65.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................115 ....... 10.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............109 ......... 8.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................120 ......... 2.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....102 ......... 0.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........82 ......... 1.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................114 ......... 4.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................118 ......... 4.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................111 ......... 2.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................129 ......... 3.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................104 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................137 ......... 3.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................137 ......... 2.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....95 ....... 0.25
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..121 ......... 3.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..109 ......... 3.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............92 ....... 14.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......125 ......... 3.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................124 ......... 2.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................132 ......... 2.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................38 ....... 0.30
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............131 ..2.8
A. Environment subindex ............................................137 ....2.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 136 .....2.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 134 .....3.0
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................119 ....3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 91 .....3.4
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 134 .....2.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 120 .....3.6
C. Usage subindex ......................................................132 ....2.6
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 118 .....2.0
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 122 .....3.0
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 132 .....2.7
D. Impact subindex .....................................................120 ....2.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 118 .....2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 119 .....2.9
Nicaragua
 &&&      &&& Nicaragua      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
268  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................77 ......... 3.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................81 ......... 3.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................73 ......... 3.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....55 ......... 3.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....58 ......... 3.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................104 ......... 2.8
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........90 .......... 82
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................50 ........ 457
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................107 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................104 ......... 2.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................44 ....... 32.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................109 .......... 34
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................73 ......... 4.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......110 ....... 10.3
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................80 ......... 4.0
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............105 ......... 3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................125 ..... 140.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................97 ....... 90.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............138 ......... 0.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................115 ......... 1.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................108 ......... 4.3
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................101 ....... 0.43
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 120 ... 102.88
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................65 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............102 ......... 3.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 121 ....... 44.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................124 ....... 60.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............122 ....... 55.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................85 ....... 28.4
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............97 ....... 15.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................93 ......... 9.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....124 ......... 0.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........88 ......... 1.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................66 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................79 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................54 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............116 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................107 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................58 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................111 ......... 4.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................72 ......... 3.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...127 ....... 0.10
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....53 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......95 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....61 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........60 ......... 4.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................104 ......... 3.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................95 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............112 ..3.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................98 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 91 .....3.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 104 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................123 ....3.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 119 .....2.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 118 .....3.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 123 .....3.4
C. Usage subindex ......................................................109 ....3.0
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 105 .....2.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 77 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 116 .....3.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................88 ....3.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 60 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 102 .....3.2
Nigeria
 &&&      &&& Nigeria      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  269
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................10 ......... 5.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................9 ......... 5.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................9 ......... 6.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......6 ......... 5.6
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....10 ......... 5.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................12 ......... 5.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........16 .......... 29
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................41 .......... 34
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................9 ........ 280
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................3 ......... 6.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................3 ......... 4.4
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................82 ....... 41.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................32 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........16 ....... 73.8
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................28 ......... 5.0
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............43 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................2 27,298.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................76 ....... 97.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................12 ..... 109.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................6 .. 1,652.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................8 ......... 6.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................17 ....... 0.10
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..66 ..... 33.18
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................22 ......... 4.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................76 ......... 3.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....9 ..... 110.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................49 ..... 115.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................2 ....... 93.4
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................3 ....... 90.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................5 ....... 89.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........5 ....... 35.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........7 ....... 52.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................6 ......... 6.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................5 ......... 6.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................17 ......... 4.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............11 ..... 143.8
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................11 ......... 6.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................5 ......... 5.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................34 ......... 5.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................32 ......... 4.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......7 ....... 0.74
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......8 ......... 5.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......12 ....... 36.6
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......5 ......... 5.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............9 ....... 43.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........11 ......... 5.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................17 ......... 5.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................22 ......... 5.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................21 ....... 0.50
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 7 ..5.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................10 ....5.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 9 .....5.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 16 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................6 ....6.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 4 .....6.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 20 .....6.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 34 .....5.6
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................6 ....5.6
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 3 .....6.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 9 .....5.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 13 .....5.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................13 ....5.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 11 .....5.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 17 .....5.2
Norway
 &&&      &&& Norway      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
270  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................8 ......... 5.3
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................30 ......... 5.0
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................33 ......... 5.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....15 ......... 5.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....26 ......... 4.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................21 ......... 5.3
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........55 .......... 62
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............137 .......... 51
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................88 ........ 598
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................45 ......... 5.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................16 ......... 3.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................15 ....... 22.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................54 ......... 5.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........83 ....... 24.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................97 ......... 3.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............12 ......... 4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................36 .. 5,961.8
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................73 ....... 97.6
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................93 ......... 6.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................62 ....... 27.7
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................41 ......... 5.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................51 ....... 0.24
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..96 ..... 47.90
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................46 ......... 4.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................68 ......... 4.0
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..25 ..... 101.3
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................96 ....... 86.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................8 ..... 165.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................38 ....... 62.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............55 ....... 45.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................63 ....... 27.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......93 ......... 1.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........28 ....... 16.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................72 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................49 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................57 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............78 ......... 0.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................42 ......... 5.4
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................42 ......... 4.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................19 ......... 5.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................11 ......... 5.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....53 ....... 0.37
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....47 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......82 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....44 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............54 ....... 24.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........24 ......... 5.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................44 ......... 4.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................16 ......... 5.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................73 ....... 0.16
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............40 ..4.4
A. Environment subindex ..............................................36 ....4.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 34 .....4.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 31 .....4.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................70 ....4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 69 .....4.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 82 .....4.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 50 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................40 ....4.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 51 .....3.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 46 .....3.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 29 .....4.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................42 ....3.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 55 .....3.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 38 .....4.4
Oman
 &&&      &&& Oman      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  271
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................93 ......... 3.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................112 ......... 3.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................62 ......... 3.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..102 ......... 3.1
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....79 ......... 3.4
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................93 ......... 3.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........96 .......... 84
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............126 .......... 46
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................128 ........ 976
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................93 ......... 4.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................45 ......... 2.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................58 ....... 35.3
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................87 .......... 21
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................91 ......... 4.5
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......124 ......... 5.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................79 ......... 4.0
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............91 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................111 ..... 547.2
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................94 ....... 92.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............112 ......... 2.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................121 ......... 1.0
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................86 ......... 4.7
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................4 ....... 0.05
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..79 ..... 37.37
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................79 ......... 3.5
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................87 ......... 3.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 129 ....... 34.2
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................129 ....... 55.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............121 ....... 57.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................98 ....... 16.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............101 ....... 13.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................95 ......... 8.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....111 ......... 0.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................95 ......... 4.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................92 ......... 4.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................51 ......... 3.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............113 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................111 ......... 4.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................109 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................103 ......... 4.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................92 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....97 ....... 0.25
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....97 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......93 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....81 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............75 ....... 19.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......113 ......... 3.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................90 ......... 3.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................105 ......... 3.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................66 ....... 0.17
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............102 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ............................................112 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 110 .....3.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 96 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................97 ....4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 108 .....3.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 26 .....5.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 129 .....3.1
C. Usage subindex ......................................................107 ....3.0
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 104 .....2.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 96 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 103 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................94 ....3.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 94 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 99 .....3.3
Pakistan
 &&&      &&& Pakistan      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
272  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................124 ......... 2.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................37 ......... 4.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................133 ......... 2.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....61 ......... 3.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....95 ......... 3.1
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................39 ......... 4.2
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........71 .......... 72
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................27 .......... 31
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................102 ........ 686
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................28 ......... 6.0
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................33 ......... 3.2
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................94 ....... 45.2
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................33 ............ 8
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................43 ......... 5.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........56 ....... 44.6
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................105 ......... 3.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............46 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................82 .. 1,887.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................96 ....... 90.7
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................47 ....... 21.3
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................43 ..... 126.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................62 ......... 5.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................47 ....... 0.23
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..56 ..... 30.89
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......68 ....... 1.86
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................131 ......... 2.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............134 ......... 2.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 100 ....... 74.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................70 ....... 93.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................4 ..... 184.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................61 ....... 42.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............86 ....... 19.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................84 ....... 11.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......59 ......... 7.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........84 ......... 1.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................27 ......... 5.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................32 ......... 5.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................98 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............77 ......... 0.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................41 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................43 ......... 4.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................48 ......... 5.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................34 ......... 4.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....85 ....... 0.28
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....44 ......... 4.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......70 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....43 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............84 ....... 17.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........46 ......... 4.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................56 ......... 4.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................45 ......... 4.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................92 ....... 0.11
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............57 ..4.0
A. Environment subindex ..............................................61 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 84 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 48 .....4.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................69 ....4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 55 .....4.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 39 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 102 .....4.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................56 ....3.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 64 .....3.4
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 48 .....3.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 55 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................61 ....3.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 65 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 59 .....3.9
Panama
 &&&      &&& Panama     Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  273
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................134 ......... 2.2
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................123 ......... 2.8
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................138 ......... 1.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..125 ......... 2.7
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..124 ......... 2.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................133 ......... 2.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........93 .......... 83
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................85 ........ 591
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................109 ......... 4.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................69 ......... 2.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................55 ....... 35.0
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................112 .......... 35
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................100 ......... 4.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........67 ....... 36.6
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................130 ......... 3.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............128 ......... 2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................15 .. 8,902.4
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................91 ....... 94.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................81 ......... 8.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................96 ......... 6.7
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................117 ......... 3.9
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................75 ....... 0.32
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..70 ..... 34.22
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................138 ......... 2.2
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............137 ......... 2.2
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 105 ....... 66.9
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................67 ....... 94.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................82 ....... 91.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................97 ....... 19.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............87 ....... 19.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................81 ....... 13.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....107 ......... 0.4
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........63 ......... 4.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................113 ......... 4.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................110 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................116 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............98 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................112 ......... 4.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................101 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................141 ......... 2.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................132 ......... 2.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....92 ....... 0.26
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..107 ......... 3.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......84 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....94 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............94 ....... 14.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......130 ......... 3.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................133 ......... 2.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................119 ......... 3.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............111 ..3.3
A. Environment subindex ............................................126 ....3.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 138 .....2.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 102 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................82 ....4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 67 .....4.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 56 .....5.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 109 .....3.9
C. Usage subindex ......................................................119 ....2.8
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 100 .....2.5
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 116 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 131 .....2.7
D. Impact subindex .....................................................126 ....2.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 112 .....2.7
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 131 .....2.5
Paraguay
 &&&      &&& Paraguay      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
274  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................140 ......... 1.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................79 ......... 3.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................119 ......... 2.6
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..107 ......... 3.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....90 ......... 3.2
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................122 ......... 2.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........67 .......... 68
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............106 .......... 41
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................45 ........ 428
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................64 ......... 5.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................38 ......... 3.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................77 ....... 40.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................93 .......... 26
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................55 ......... 5.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........70 ....... 35.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................43 ......... 4.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............98 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................93 .. 1,139.4
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................75 ....... 97.1
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................80 ......... 8.5
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................77 ....... 14.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................91 ......... 4.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................141 ....... 1.27
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 110 ..... 75.40
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................128 ......... 2.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............135 ......... 2.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..56 ....... 91.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................89 ....... 89.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................73 ..... 100.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................76 ....... 34.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............80 ....... 22.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................80 ....... 14.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......82 ......... 3.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........62 ......... 4.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................79 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................62 ......... 4.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................99 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............88 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................88 ......... 4.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................75 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................101 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................93 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....44 ....... 0.41
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....52 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....56 ......... 4.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............79 ....... 18.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........71 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................76 ......... 3.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................72 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................66 ....... 0.17
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............106 ..3.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................93 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 114 .....3.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 56 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................129 ....3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 86 .....3.5
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 141 .....1.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 99 .....4.4
C. Usage subindex ........................................................81 ....3.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 85 .....2.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 85 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 73 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................76 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 72 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 75 .....3.6
Peru
 &&&      &&& Peru      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  275
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................112 ......... 2.7
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................84 ......... 3.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................102 ......... 2.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..115 ......... 2.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..118 ......... 2.8
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................102 ......... 2.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........68 .......... 69
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................119 ........ 842
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................62 ......... 5.2
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................71 ......... 2.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................100 ....... 46.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................112 .......... 35
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................136 .......... 15
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................47 ......... 5.2
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........76 ....... 28.9
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................55 ......... 4.4
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............126 ......... 2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................104 ..... 674.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................71 ....... 10.7
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................95 ......... 6.7
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................80 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................65 ....... 0.30
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..86 ..... 40.40
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................61 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............115 ......... 3.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..79 ....... 84.8
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................60 ....... 95.4
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................93 ....... 85.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................92 ....... 25.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............100 ....... 13.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................89 ....... 10.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......89 ......... 1.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........80 ......... 2.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................41 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................52 ......... 5.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................95 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............84 ......... 0.3
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................89 ......... 4.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................34 ......... 4.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................100 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................100 ......... 3.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....48 ....... 0.39
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....68 ......... 4.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......76 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....60 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............73 ....... 19.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......106 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................73 ......... 4.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................103 ......... 3.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................62 ....... 0.19
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............86 ..3.6
A. Environment subindex ............................................111 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 107 .....3.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 107 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................77 ....4.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 80 .....3.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 72 .....5.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 77 .....4.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................86 ....3.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 95 .....2.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 63 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 79 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................84 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 77 .....3.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 88 .....3.4
Philippines
 &&&      &&& Philippines      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
276  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................71 ......... 3.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................86 ......... 3.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................53 ......... 4.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....97 ......... 3.2
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....83 ......... 3.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................61 ......... 3.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........40 .......... 54
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................69 .......... 37
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................117 ........ 830
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................88 ......... 4.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................79 ......... 2.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................86 ....... 43.6
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................105 .......... 32
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................38 ......... 5.3
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........19 ....... 70.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................78 ......... 4.0
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............100 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................53 .. 3,948.4
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................34 ....... 37.7
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................33 ..... 210.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................69 ......... 5.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................73 ....... 0.31
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..51 ..... 29.30
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......77 ....... 1.77
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................71 ......... 3.7
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................52 ......... 4.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..40 ....... 97.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................11 ....... 99.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................39 ..... 122.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................36 ....... 62.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............33 ....... 69.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................33 ....... 63.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......42 ....... 13.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........14 ....... 31.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................119 ......... 4.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................100 ......... 4.3
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................49 ......... 3.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............42 ......... 5.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................48 ......... 5.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................55 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................115 ......... 3.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................116 ......... 3.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....49 ....... 0.39
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....91 ......... 4.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......39 ......... 1.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....84 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............36 ....... 32.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........94 ......... 4.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................48 ......... 4.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................111 ......... 3.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................50 ....... 0.24
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............49 ..4.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................58 ....4.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 66 .....3.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 58 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................38 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 41 .....4.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 50 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 41 .....5.4
C. Usage subindex ........................................................49 ....3.9
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 40 .....4.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 58 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 99 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................66 ....3.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 57 .....3.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 68 .....3.7
Poland
 &&&      &&& Poland      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  277
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................75 ......... 3.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................19 ......... 5.3
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................61 ......... 3.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..131 ......... 2.7
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..116 ......... 2.8
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................42 ......... 4.2
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........25 .......... 40
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................27 .......... 31
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................73 ........ 547
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................16 ......... 6.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................73 ......... 2.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................85 ....... 43.3
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................10 ............ 5
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................56 ......... 5.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........32 ....... 62.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................25 ......... 5.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............28 ......... 4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................48 .. 4,613.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................7 ..... 146.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................35 ..... 173.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................25 ......... 6.1
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................56 ....... 0.27
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..60 ..... 31.53
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................76 ......... 3.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............105 ......... 3.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..13 ..... 106.7
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................63 ....... 94.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................18 ..... 142.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................47 ....... 51.1
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............43 ....... 59.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................43 ....... 53.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......35 ....... 19.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........21 ....... 24.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................34 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................27 ......... 5.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................37 ......... 3.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............31 ....... 12.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................34 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................72 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................12 ......... 5.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................13 ......... 5.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....49 ....... 0.39
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....20 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......33 ......... 2.8
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....30 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............53 ....... 24.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........22 ......... 5.6
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................26 ......... 5.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................11 ......... 5.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................44 ....... 0.27
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............33 ..4.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................38 ....4.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 42 .....4.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 29 .....4.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................37 ....5.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 34 .....5.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 40 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 59 .....5.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................31 ....4.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 35 .....4.7
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 36 .....4.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 23 .....4.8
D. Impact subindex .......................................................35 ....4.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 37 .....3.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 29 .....4.9
Portugal
 &&&      &&& Portugal      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
278  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................116 ......... 2.7
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................45 ......... 4.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................45 ......... 4.5
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....38 ......... 4.5
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....42 ......... 4.2
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................17 ......... 5.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........28 .......... 42
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................91 ........ 620
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................26 ......... 6.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................56 ......... 2.7
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................123 ....... 63.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................20 ......... 5.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........6 ....... 86.0
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................52 ......... 4.5
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............69 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................40 .. 5,565.3
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................123 ....... 68.4
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................9 ..... 135.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................50 ....... 83.7
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................35 ......... 5.7
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................25 ....... 0.15
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..38 ..... 24.95
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) .....n/a ......... n/a
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................57 ......... 3.9
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................91 ......... 3.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..86 ....... 82.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................84 ....... 90.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............101 ....... 78.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................54 ....... 45.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............46 ....... 55.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................46 ....... 50.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......38 ....... 14.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........64 ......... 4.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................8 ......... 6.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................33 ......... 5.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................45 ......... 3.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .............n/a ......... n/a
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................33 ......... 5.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................19 ......... 4.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................84 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................84 ......... 3.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ....n/a ......... n/a
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....60 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ......n/a ......... n/a
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....39 ......... 4.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............39 ....... 31.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........49 ......... 4.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................59 ......... 4.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................73 ......... 4.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)........................n/a ......... n/a
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............36 ..4.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................39 ....4.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 41 .....4.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 40 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex .................................................39 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 53 .....4.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 11 .....6.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 78 .....4.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................36 ....4.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 53 .....3.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 21 .....4.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 54 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................29 ....4.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 24 .....4.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 39 .....4.4
Puerto Rico
 &&&      &&& Puerto Rico    High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  279
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................45 ......... 4.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................20 ......... 5.3
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................16 ......... 6.0
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....11 ......... 5.3
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....40 ......... 4.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................15 ......... 5.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........35 .......... 49
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............115 .......... 43
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................79 ........ 570
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................31 ......... 6.0
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................1 ......... 5.4
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................4 ....... 11.3
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................53 .......... 12
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................86 ............ 8
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................5 ......... 5.9
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......112 ....... 10.0
2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................7 ......... 5.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................1 ......... 6.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................5 15,483.6
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................57 ....... 17.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................49 ....... 85.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................33 ......... 5.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................38 ....... 0.20
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 109 ..... 71.64
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....122 ....... 0.93
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................4 ......... 5.6
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................13 ......... 5.2
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..52 ....... 93.7
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................64 ....... 94.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................25 ..... 132.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................13 ....... 81.6
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................5 ....... 89.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................9 ....... 84.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......57 ......... 8.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........43 ......... 9.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................15 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................7 ......... 6.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................11 ......... 5.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............61 ......... 1.3
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................19 ......... 5.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................24 ......... 4.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................8 ......... 6.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................2 ......... 5.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....87 ....... 0.28
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....18 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......54 ......... 0.3
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......6 ......... 5.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............55 ....... 24.2
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........2 ......... 6.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................7 ......... 6.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................2 ......... 6.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............28 ..4.8
A. Environment subindex ..............................................15 ....5.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 27 .....4.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 2 .....5.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................59 ....4.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 27 .....5.5
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 111 .....3.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 13 .....6.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................25 ....4.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 26 .....5.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 26 .....4.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 22 .....4.8
D. Impact subindex .......................................................32 ....4.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 34 .....3.8
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 21 .....5.0
Qatar
 &&&      &&& Qatar      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
280  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................115 ......... 2.7
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................94 ......... 3.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................94 ......... 3.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..122 ......... 2.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..113 ......... 2.9
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................98 ......... 3.0
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........58 .......... 64
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................27 .......... 31
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................65 ........ 512
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................115 ......... 4.2
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................77 ......... 2.5
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................93 ....... 44.4
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................66 .......... 14
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................97 ......... 4.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........25 ....... 63.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................92 ......... 3.8
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............111 ......... 3.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................63 .. 3,008.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................27 ....... 51.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................59 ....... 39.8
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................57 ......... 5.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................124 ....... 0.58
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....2 ....... 9.18
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................90 ......... 3.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................45 ......... 4.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..48 ....... 95.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................54 ....... 97.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................52 ..... 114.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................66 ....... 39.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............53 ....... 47.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................49 ....... 42.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......41 ....... 13.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........44 ......... 9.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................76 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................117 ......... 4.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................78 ......... 2.9
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............56 ......... 1.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................79 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................79 ......... 3.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................128 ......... 3.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................117 ......... 3.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....41 ....... 0.42
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..103 ......... 4.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......46 ......... 0.8
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..113 ......... 3.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............64 ....... 21.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........84 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................58 ......... 4.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................122 ......... 3.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................62 ....... 0.19
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............67 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................83 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 95 .....3.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 68 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................42 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 51 .....4.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 37 .....5.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 46 .....5.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................70 ....3.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 54 .....3.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 91 .....3.3
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 105 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................90 ....3.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 98 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 85 .....3.5
Romania
 &&&      &&& Romania      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  281
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................91 ......... 3.1
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................99 ......... 3.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................123 ......... 2.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..123 ......... 2.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..123 ......... 2.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................126 ......... 2.5
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........60 .......... 65
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................11 ........ 281
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................121 ......... 4.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................88 ......... 2.3
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................103 ....... 46.9
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................104 .......... 30
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................124 ......... 4.0
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........13 ....... 75.9
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................107 ......... 3.6
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............99 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................28 .. 7,253.5
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................81 ....... 95.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................36 ....... 30.8
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................68 ....... 20.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................59 ......... 5.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................42 ....... 0.22
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..17 ..... 18.71
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......89 ....... 1.60
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................82 ......... 3.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................50 ......... 4.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..68 ....... 88.6
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................9 ....... 99.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................7 ..... 166.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................60 ....... 43.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............52 ....... 50.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................50 ....... 42.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......46 ....... 11.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........73 ......... 3.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................97 ......... 4.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................130 ......... 3.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................38 ......... 3.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............43 ......... 5.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................73 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................82 ......... 3.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................65 ......... 4.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................94 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....66 ....... 0.33
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..112 ......... 3.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......40 ......... 1.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....99 ......... 3.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............18 ....... 40.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......111 ......... 3.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................62 ......... 4.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................97 ......... 3.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............56 ..4.0
A. Environment subindex ............................................100 ....3.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 102 .....3.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 83 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................32 ....5.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 40 .....4.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 17 .....6.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 53 .....5.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................60 ....3.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 52 .....3.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 83 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 71 .....3.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................73 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 53 .....3.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 89 .....3.4
Russian Federation
 Russian Federation      Upper middle income group
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
282  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................13 ......... 5.1
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................40 ......... 4.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................30 ......... 5.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....25 ......... 4.8
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....28 ......... 4.5
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................34 ......... 4.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................3 .......... 24
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................3 ........ 230
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................76 ......... 4.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................40 ......... 3.0
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................39 ....... 31.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ................................4 ............ 3
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................3 ............ 2
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................102 ......... 4.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......125 ......... 4.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................84 ......... 3.9
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............13 ......... 4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................140 ....... 16.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................79 ....... 96.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............125 ......... 1.2
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................128 ......... 0.7
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................104 ......... 4.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................102 ....... 0.44
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 131 ... 186.92
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......59 ....... 1.93
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................52 ......... 4.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................64 ......... 4.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 130 ....... 32.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................117 ....... 70.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............136 ....... 33.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................102 ....... 13.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............140 ......... 0.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................138 ......... 0.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....132 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......100 ......... 0.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................118 ......... 4.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................69 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................80 ......... 2.9
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................78 ......... 4.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................54 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................3 ......... 6.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................3 ......... 5.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...110 ....... 0.17
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....39 ......... 5.0
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....48 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........43 ......... 4.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................77 ......... 3.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................14 ......... 5.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................124 ....... 0.03
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............82 ..3.7
A. Environment subindex ..............................................33 ....4.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 19 .....5.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 57 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................120 ....3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 113 .....2.9
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 119 .....3.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 118 .....3.6
C. Usage subindex ........................................................87 ....3.3
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 133 .....1.7
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 66 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 31 .....4.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................56 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 50 .....3.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 60 .....3.8
Rwanda
 &&&      &&& Rwanda      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  283
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................16 ......... 4.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................26 ......... 5.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................21 ......... 5.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....30 ......... 4.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....22 ......... 4.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................25 ......... 5.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........39 .......... 52
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............115 .......... 43
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................96 ........ 635
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................36 ......... 5.8
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................7 ......... 4.2
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................6 ....... 14.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................10 ............ 5
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................17 ......... 5.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........66 ....... 36.8
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................42 ......... 4.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................3 ......... 4.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................27 .. 7,803.8
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................47 ....... 99.1
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................39 ....... 28.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................71 ....... 17.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................42 ......... 5.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................46 ....... 0.23
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..88 ..... 42.27
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....101 ....... 1.33
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................25 ......... 4.7
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................27 ......... 4.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..15 ..... 104.3
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................98 ....... 86.1
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................2 ..... 187.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................62 ....... 41.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............45 ....... 57.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................42 ....... 54.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......68 ......... 5.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........36 ....... 11.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................77 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................23 ......... 5.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................21 ......... 4.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............48 ......... 2.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................45 ......... 5.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................28 ......... 4.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................14 ......... 5.7
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................5 ......... 5.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....73 ....... 0.31
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....33 ......... 5.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......47 ......... 0.7
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....18 ......... 5.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............59 ....... 22.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........23 ......... 5.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................40 ......... 4.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................13 ......... 5.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................94 ....... 0.10
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............34 ..4.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................17 ....5.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 29 .....4.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 8 .....5.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................46 ....5.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 36 .....5.0
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 85 .....4.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 35 .....5.6
C. Usage subindex ........................................................33 ....4.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 44 .....4.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 31 .....4.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 25 .....4.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................40 ....4.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 40 .....3.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 40 .....4.4
Saudi Arabia
 &&&      &&& Saudi Arabia      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
284  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................104 ......... 2.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................65 ......... 4.0
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................110 ......... 2.8
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....92 ......... 3.3
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....88 ......... 3.2
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................82 ......... 3.3
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........80 .......... 78
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............115 .......... 43
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................111 ........ 780
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................50 ......... 5.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................90 ......... 2.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................97 ....... 46.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................10 ............ 5
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................61 ......... 5.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......116 ......... 7.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................37 ......... 4.8
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............30 ......... 4.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................122 ..... 203.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................97 ....... 90.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............113 ......... 2.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................116 ......... 1.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................64 ......... 5.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................74 ....... 0.32
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 108 ..... 66.86
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....117 ....... 1.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................60 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................71 ......... 4.0
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 126 ....... 37.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................133 ....... 49.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............110 ....... 67.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................99 ....... 16.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............117 ......... 5.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................103 ......... 4.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....105 ......... 0.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........99 ......... 0.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................92 ......... 4.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................31 ......... 5.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................74 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............107 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................50 ......... 5.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................112 ......... 3.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................23 ......... 5.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................38 ......... 4.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...109 ....... 0.18
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....43 ......... 4.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......86 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....36 ......... 4.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........68 ......... 4.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................71 ......... 4.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................35 ......... 4.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............100 ..3.4
A. Environment subindex ..............................................88 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 106 .....3.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 63 .....4.1
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................118 ....3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 109 .....3.0
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 112 .....3.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 127 .....3.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................88 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 115 .....2.1
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 59 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 57 .....4.0
D. Impact subindex .......................................................64 ....3.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 46 .....3.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 79 .....3.6
Senegal
 &&&      &&& Senegal     Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  285
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................95 ......... 3.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................100 ......... 3.4
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................128 ......... 2.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..137 ......... 2.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..127 ......... 2.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................107 ......... 2.7
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........76 .......... 74
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................96 ........ 635
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................123 ......... 4.0
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................121 ......... 2.0
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................49 ....... 34.0
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................136 ......... 3.6
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........51 ....... 49.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................114 ......... 3.5
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............92 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................54 .. 3,736.6
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................78 ....... 97.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................29 ....... 47.0
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................69 ....... 19.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................102 ......... 4.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................40 ....... 0.21
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..63 ..... 32.47
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......94 ....... 1.43
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................111 ......... 3.1
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................58 ......... 4.2
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..57 ....... 91.4
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................50 ....... 97.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................28 ..... 129.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................63 ....... 40.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............51 ....... 50.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................52 ....... 40.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......45 ....... 11.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........66 ......... 4.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................121 ......... 4.3
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................136 ......... 3.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................110 ......... 2.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................134 ......... 3.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................132 ......... 2.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................92 ......... 4.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................120 ......... 3.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...103 ....... 0.22
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..131 ......... 3.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..133 ......... 2.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............45 ....... 28.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......107 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................83 ......... 3.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................112 ......... 3.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................117 ....... 0.04
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............85 ..3.6
A. Environment subindex ............................................105 ....3.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 113 .....3.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 84 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................57 ....5.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 56 .....4.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 59 .....5.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 61 .....5.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................93 ....3.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 57 .....3.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 133 .....2.8
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 115 .....3.2
D. Impact subindex .....................................................111 ....2.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 108 .....2.8
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 105 .....3.1
Serbia
 &&&      &&& Serbia      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
286  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................1 ......... 6.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................2 ......... 5.9
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................20 ......... 5.6
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......1 ......... 6.3
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......8 ......... 5.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................2 ......... 6.1
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........18 .......... 34
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..................1 .......... 21
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ............................1 ........ 150
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................17 ......... 6.3
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................4 ......... 4.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................25 ....... 27.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ................................4 ............ 3
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................33 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........26 ....... 63.6
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................8 ......... 5.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................2 ......... 5.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................18 .. 8,741.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................4 ..... 172.2
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................21 ..... 529.7
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................9 ......... 6.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................28 ....... 0.15
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..72 ..... 34.51
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................2 ......... 5.9
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................1 ......... 6.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..19 ..... 103.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................65 ....... 94.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................15 ..... 145.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................27 ....... 71.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............11 ....... 84.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................11 ....... 82.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......21 ....... 24.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........9 ....... 48.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................16 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................10 ......... 6.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................22 ......... 4.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............13 ..... 123.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................20 ......... 5.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................4 ......... 5.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................1 ......... 6.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................1 ......... 5.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....10 ....... 0.69
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......5 ......... 5.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........8 ....... 58.5
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......4 ......... 5.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............2 ....... 51.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........3 ......... 6.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................6 ......... 6.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................1 ......... 6.1
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................9 ....... 0.69
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 2 ..5.9
A. Environment subindex ................................................1 ....5.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 1 .....6.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 1 .....5.5
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................8 ....6.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 20 .....5.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 29 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 2 .....6.5
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................5 ....5.6
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 10 .....5.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 14 .....5.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 2 .....5.8
D. Impact subindex .........................................................1 ....6.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 2 .....6.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 3 .....5.9
Singapore
 &&&      &&& Singapore     High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  287
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................97 ......... 3.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................58 ......... 4.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................116 ......... 2.7
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..139 ......... 2.2
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..138 ......... 2.4
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................54 ......... 3.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........28 .......... 42
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................31 .......... 32
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................76 ........ 565
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................49 ......... 5.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................68 ......... 2.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................105 ....... 48.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................76 .......... 18
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................37 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........42 ....... 54.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................106 ......... 3.6
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............129 ......... 2.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................45 .. 4,765.1
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................36 ....... 99.9
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................68 ....... 11.5
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................42 ..... 127.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................39 ......... 5.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................139 ....... 0.82
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..82 ..... 38.07
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......71 ....... 1.83
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................117 ......... 3.0
5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................72 ......... 4.0
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..65 ....... 89.4
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................57 ..... 108.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................16 ....... 79.4
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............29 ....... 72.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................30 ....... 67.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......43 ....... 12.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........52 ......... 7.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................53 ......... 5.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................58 ......... 5.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................84 ......... 2.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............40 ......... 6.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................31 ......... 5.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................87 ......... 3.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................113 ......... 3.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................107 ......... 3.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....60 ....... 0.35
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....80 ......... 4.3
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......35 ......... 2.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....77 ......... 4.0
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............34 ....... 34.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........89 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................35 ......... 5.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................106 ......... 3.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................105 ....... 0.07
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............64 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................67 ....3.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 74 .....3.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 65 .....4.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................83 ....4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 57 .....4.4
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 104 .....3.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 67 .....5.0
C. Usage subindex ........................................................48 ....3.9
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 37 .....4.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 55 .....3.7
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 100 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................63 ....3.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 49 .....3.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 72 .....3.6
Slovak Republic
 &&&      &&& Slovak Republic     High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
288  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................90 ......... 3.1
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................28 ......... 5.1
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................68 ......... 3.8
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..111 ......... 2.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..101 ......... 3.0
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................41 ......... 4.2
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........33 .......... 47
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................31 .......... 32
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................133 ..... 1,290
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................46 ......... 5.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................84 ......... 2.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................54 ....... 34.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................3 ............ 2
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................51 ......... 5.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........5 ....... 86.9
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................54 ......... 4.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............84 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................22 .. 8,125.7
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................42 ....... 99.7
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................17 ....... 70.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................29 ..... 303.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................34 ......... 5.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................57 ....... 0.28
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..87 ..... 40.79
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................63 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................17 ......... 5.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..38 ....... 97.1
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................6 ....... 99.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................64 ..... 104.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................29 ....... 70.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............31 ....... 70.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................28 ....... 68.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......23 ....... 24.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........31 ....... 15.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................67 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................84 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................28 ......... 3.9
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............23 ....... 65.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................35 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................83 ......... 3.8
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................72 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................102 ......... 3.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....46 ....... 0.40
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....63 ......... 4.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......23 ......... 9.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....72 ......... 4.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............25 ....... 38.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........44 ......... 4.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................25 ......... 5.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................61 ......... 4.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................20 ....... 0.51
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............37 ..4.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................42 ....4.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 57 .....3.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 26 .....4.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................30 ....5.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 29 .....5.4
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 71 .....5.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 29 .....5.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................37 ....4.2
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 33 .....4.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 32 .....4.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 69 .....3.8
D. Impact subindex .......................................................34 ....4.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 32 .....3.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 31 .....4.8
Slovenia
 &&&      &&& Slovenia      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  289
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................33 ......... 4.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................29 ......... 5.0
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................35 ......... 5.0
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....16 ......... 5.0
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....19 ......... 4.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................30 ......... 5.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........19 .......... 35
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................15 .......... 29
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................89 ........ 600
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................39 ......... 5.7
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................44 ......... 2.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................46 ....... 33.1
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................80 .......... 19
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................49 ......... 5.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......102 ....... 15.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................13 ......... 5.4
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............103 ......... 3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................42 .. 5,180.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................41 ....... 99.8
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............119 ......... 1.7
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................54 ....... 62.6
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................83 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................85 ....... 0.35
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..83 ..... 39.18
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....114 ....... 1.13
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................133 ......... 2.3
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............138 ......... 2.1
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..51 ....... 93.8
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................90 ....... 89.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................72 ..... 100.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................108 ....... 12.3
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............88 ....... 18.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................89 ....... 10.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......96 ......... 1.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........59 ......... 5.8
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................82 ......... 5.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................30 ......... 5.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................46 ......... 3.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............37 ......... 6.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................46 ......... 5.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................27 ......... 4.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................90 ......... 4.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................98 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....75 ....... 0.31
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....57 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......38 ......... 1.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....58 ......... 4.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............58 ....... 23.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......115 ......... 3.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................100 ......... 3.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................89 ......... 3.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................62 ....... 0.19
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............72 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................34 ....4.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 23 .....4.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 50 .....4.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................94 ....4.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 82 .....3.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 94 .....4.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 101 .....4.3
C. Usage subindex ........................................................76 ....3.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 96 .....2.6
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 34 .....4.0
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 89 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................81 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 59 .....3.4
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 98 .....3.3
South Africa
 &&&      &&& South Africa      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
290  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................68 ......... 3.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................39 ......... 4.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................65 ......... 3.9
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....73 ......... 3.5
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....60 ......... 3.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................43 ......... 4.1
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........30 .......... 43
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................67 ........ 515
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................33 ......... 5.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................59 ......... 2.7
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................71 ....... 38.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................97 .......... 28
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................23 ......... 5.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........17 ....... 73.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................6 ......... 5.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............85 ......... 3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................32 .. 6,387.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................37 ....... 99.8
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................24 ....... 56.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................32 ..... 233.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................38 ......... 5.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................134 ....... 0.73
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..45 ..... 27.68
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................98 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............111 ......... 3.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ....4 ..... 119.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................53 ....... 97.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................54 ..... 112.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................33 ....... 65.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............34 ....... 68.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................38 ....... 59.1
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......26 ....... 22.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........23 ....... 18.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................58 ......... 5.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................46 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................36 ......... 3.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............25 ....... 35.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................61 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................90 ......... 3.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................94 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................99 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......5 ....... 0.77
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....42 ......... 4.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......26 ......... 7.6
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....50 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............37 ....... 32.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........40 ......... 5.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................50 ......... 4.6
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................55 ......... 4.4
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................3 ....... 0.83
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............38 ..4.5
A. Environment subindex ..............................................40 ....4.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 44 .....4.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 30 .....4.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................56 ....5.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 32 .....5.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 90 .....4.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 64 .....5.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................32 ....4.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 34 .....4.7
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 40 .....3.9
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 40 .....4.4
D. Impact subindex .......................................................31 ....4.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 33 .....3.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 22 .....5.0
Spain
 &&&      &&& Spain      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  291
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................28 ......... 4.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................57 ......... 4.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................54 ......... 4.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....35 ......... 4.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....37 ......... 4.3
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................44 ......... 4.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........97 .......... 86
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................134 ..... 1,318
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................63 ......... 5.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................51 ......... 2.8
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................138 ..... 105.2
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................112 .......... 35
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................20 ............ 4
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................35 ......... 5.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........99 ....... 17.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................40 ......... 4.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............15 ......... 4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................113 ..... 451.4
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................70 ....... 98.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............105 ......... 3.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................100 ......... 4.4
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................97 ......... 4.5
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................3 ....... 0.04
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....3 ..... 10.51
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....124 ....... 0.88
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................40 ......... 4.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................55 ......... 4.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..74 ....... 87.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................83 ....... 90.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................96 ....... 83.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................109 ....... 12.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............103 ....... 12.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................100 ......... 5.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......98 ......... 1.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........81 ......... 1.9
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................107 ......... 4.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................42 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................50 ......... 3.3
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............69 ......... 0.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................37 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................49 ......... 4.2
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................20 ......... 5.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................21 ......... 4.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....94 ....... 0.26
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....48 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......69 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....49 ......... 4.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............74 ....... 19.7
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........48 ......... 4.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................97 ......... 3.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................37 ......... 4.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................77 ....... 0.14
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............71 ..3.9
A. Environment subindex ..............................................71 ....3.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 64 .....3.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 85 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex .................................................67 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 102 .....3.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 22 .....6.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 54 .....5.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................71 ....3.5
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 107 .....2.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 44 .....3.8
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 43 .....4.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................69 ....3.5
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 63 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 70 .....3.7
Sri Lanka
 &&&      &&& Sri Lanka      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
292  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................119 ......... 2.5
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................140 ......... 2.1
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................50 ......... 4.4
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..128 ......... 2.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..128 ......... 2.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................134 ......... 2.2
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............120 .......... 44
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................140 ..... 1,715
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................101 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................128 ......... 1.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................28 ....... 27.9
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................140 ........ 694
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................129 .......... 13
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................70 ......... 4.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......104 ....... 12.1
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................75 ......... 4.1
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............120 ......... 2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................61 .. 3,067.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ....................n/a ......... n/a
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............107 ......... 3.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................66 ....... 21.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................111 ......... 4.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................54 ....... 0.26
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 119 ..... 97.19
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....123 ....... 0.92
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................81 ......... 3.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................89 ......... 3.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..98 ....... 74.8
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................66 ....... 94.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................6 ..... 169.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................79 ....... 31.6
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............74 ....... 29.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................83 ....... 11.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......83 ......... 3.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................106 ......... 4.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................124 ......... 3.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................100 ......... 2.6
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............92 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................100 ......... 4.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................61 ......... 4.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................109 ......... 4.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................125 ......... 2.9
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...135 ....... 0.02
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..132 ......... 3.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..129 ......... 3.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............65 ....... 21.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......132 ......... 3.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................126 ......... 2.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................141 ......... 2.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................138 ....... 0.00
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............121 ..3.0
A. Environment subindex ............................................131 ....3.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 137 .....2.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 126 .....3.4
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................114 ....3.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 130 .....2.4
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 120 .....3.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 89 .....4.7
C. Usage subindex ......................................................102 ....3.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 63 .....3.4
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 102 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 133 .....2.7
D. Impact subindex .....................................................131 ....2.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 119 .....2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 138 .....2.3
Suriname
 &&&      &&& Suriname      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  293
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................103 ......... 2.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................137 ......... 2.3
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................79 ......... 3.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....68 ......... 3.7
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....77 ......... 3.4
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................76 ......... 3.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................97 .......... 40
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................127 ........ 972
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................137 ......... 3.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................118 ......... 2.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................65 ....... 36.8
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................126 .......... 56
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................119 ......... 4.0
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......126 ......... 4.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................138 ......... 2.6
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............135 ......... 2.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................114 ..... 408.6
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................95 ....... 91.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............131 ......... 0.6
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................87 ....... 10.1
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................127 ......... 3.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................108 ....... 0.49
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 140 1,420.08
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....133 ....... 0.55
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................110 ......... 3.1
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............110 ......... 3.3
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 112 ....... 58.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................95 ....... 86.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............115 ....... 61.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................122 ......... 8.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............106 ....... 10.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................110 ......... 3.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....119 ......... 0.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................120 ......... 4.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................128 ......... 3.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................135 ......... 2.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............90 ......... 0.2
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................127 ......... 3.9
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................92 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................138 ......... 3.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................134 ......... 2.7
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...139 ....... 0.00
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..140 ......... 2.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......62 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..141 ......... 2.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......137 ......... 3.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................127 ......... 2.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................138 ......... 2.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................92 ....... 0.11
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............136 ..2.7
A. Environment subindex ............................................128 ....3.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 103 .....3.2
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 136 .....3.0
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................124 ....3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 122 .....2.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 137 .....2.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 103 .....4.0
C. Usage subindex ......................................................137 ....2.4
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 114 .....2.1
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 127 .....2.9
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 140 .....2.2
D. Impact subindex .....................................................139 ....2.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 142 .....2.0
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 133 .....2.5
Swaziland
 &&&      &&& Swaziland      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
294  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ....................2 ......... 5.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................1 ......... 5.9
 1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................3 ......... 6.5
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......2 ......... 6.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......2 ......... 5.7
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................4 ......... 6.0
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............7 .......... 25
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................61 ........ 508
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................1 ......... 6.9
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...................................6 ......... 4.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................114 ....... 52.8
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................71 .......... 15
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................10 ......... 5.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........18 ....... 70.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................9 ......... 5.5
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............10 ......... 4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................6 14,341.9
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................49 ....... 99.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................3 ..... 236.9
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................12 .. 1,268.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................2 ......... 6.6
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................11 ....... 0.08
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..44 ..... 27.55
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................8 ......... 5.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................28 ......... 4.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..29 ..... 100.3
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................47 ..... 116.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................4 ....... 90.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................6 ....... 89.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................6 ....... 88.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........9 ....... 31.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........2 ....... 71.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................4 ......... 6.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................1 ......... 6.5
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................4 ......... 5.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................1 ..... 310.7
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................1 ......... 6.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................2 ......... 5.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................2 ......... 6.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................9 ......... 5.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....24 ....... 0.53
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......1 ......... 6.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........2 ..... 117.8
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......1 ......... 5.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............7 ....... 44.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........1 ......... 6.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................2 ......... 6.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................3 ......... 5.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................23 ....... 0.49
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 1 ..5.9
A. Environment subindex ................................................3 ....5.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 2 .....5.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 11 .....5.2
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................3 ....6.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 1 .....6.9
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 7 .....6.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 12 .....6.0
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................1 ....5.9
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 1 .....6.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 1 .....6.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 10 .....5.2
D. Impact subindex .........................................................2 ....5.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 1 .....6.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 6 .....5.6
Sweden
 &&&      &&& Sweden      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  295
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................18 ......... 4.8
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ............................................7 ......... 5.6
1.03 Judicial independence* ........................................5 ......... 6.4
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ......7 ......... 5.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ......4 ......... 5.5
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ............................3 ......... 6.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........10 .......... 26
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................31 .......... 32
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................26 ........ 390
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................2 ......... 6.7
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................18 ......... 3.7
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................35 ....... 30.1
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................76 .......... 18
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................24 ......... 5.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........48 ....... 51.5
2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................3 ......... 6.0
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............14 ......... 4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................17 .. 8,766.3
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..................5 ..... 155.5
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................4 .. 1,867.5
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................1 ......... 6.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................115 ....... 0.51
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..30 ..... 22.51
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .............................1 ......... 5.9
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................4 ......... 5.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..47 ....... 95.2
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................36 ..... 124.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................9 ....... 83.9
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .................9 ....... 86.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ......................7 ....... 86.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .........2 ....... 37.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........15 ....... 31.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................10 ......... 6.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ........................4 ......... 6.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................2 ......... 5.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ................2 ..... 286.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................12 ......... 6.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .........................................1 ......... 5.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................17 ......... 5.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................36 ......... 4.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....37 ....... 0.44
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......9 ......... 5.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........7 ....... 60.5
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....17 ......... 5.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...............4 ....... 47.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........5 ......... 6.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..................................9 ......... 6.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................20 ......... 5.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................56 ....... 0.20
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 5 ..5.6
A. Environment subindex ................................................6 ....5.4
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................... 7 .....5.6
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 13 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................7 ....6.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 8 .....6.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 48 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 4 .....6.3
C. Usage subindex ..........................................................7 ....5.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 6 .....5.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................... 2 .....6.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 35 .....4.6
D. Impact subindex .........................................................9 ....5.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 3 .....5.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 25 .....4.9
Switzerland
 &&&      &&& Switzerland    High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
296  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................105 ......... 2.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................129 ......... 2.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................109 ......... 2.8
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..103 ......... 3.1
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..117 ......... 2.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................72 ......... 3.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............140 .......... 55
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................122 ........ 872
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................119 ......... 4.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................107 ......... 2.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................73 ....... 39.7
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................44 ......... 5.2
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........78 ....... 27.4
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................108 ......... 3.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............116 ......... 3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................80 .. 2,083.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................74 ....... 97.5
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............123 ......... 1.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................141 ......... 0.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................121 ......... 3.7
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................140 ....... 1.09
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 128 ... 161.74
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....137 ....... 0.18
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................96 ......... 3.2
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................62 ......... 4.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 102 ....... 72.4
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................102 ....... 84.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............119 ....... 57.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................94 ....... 20.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............59 ....... 40.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................54 ....... 35.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....110 ......... 0.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......109 ......... 0.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................134 ......... 3.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................70 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................134 ......... 2.1
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............80 ......... 0.4
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................132 ......... 3.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................140 ......... 2.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................95 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................97 ......... 3.5
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...133 ....... 0.04
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..139 ......... 2.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......81 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..137 ......... 2.7
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............90 ....... 15.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......128 ......... 3.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................120 ......... 2.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................123 ......... 3.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............129 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................115 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 126 .....2.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 92 .....3.8
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................133 ....2.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 111 .....3.0
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 140 .....1.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 94 .....4.5
C. Usage subindex ......................................................116 ....2.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 98 .....2.5
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 129 .....2.9
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 127 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .....................................................132 ....2.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 136 .....2.3
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 129 .....2.6
Syria
 &&&      &&& Syria      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  297
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................74 ......... 3.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................24 ......... 5.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................44 ......... 4.7
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....44 ......... 4.2
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....34 ......... 4.3
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................29 ......... 5.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........23 .......... 37
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............123 .......... 45
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................62 ........ 510
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................37 ......... 5.7
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................15 ......... 3.9
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................60 ....... 35.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................47 .......... 10
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ......................8 ............ 3
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................1 ......... 6.1
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........8 ....... 82.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................23 ......... 5.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............11 ......... 4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................13 .. 9,909.3
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................38 ....... 29.7
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................22 ..... 492.7
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................13 ......... 6.3
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................113 ....... 0.50
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..11 ..... 17.52
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................19 ......... 4.9
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...................5 ......... 5.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..33 ....... 99.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................49 ....... 97.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................42 ..... 119.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................25 ....... 71.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............30 ....... 71.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................31 ....... 67.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......27 ....... 22.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........34 ....... 12.4
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................23 ......... 6.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................13 ......... 5.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................15 ......... 4.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .............n/a ......... n/a
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................9 ......... 6.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................30 ......... 4.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ....................................6 ......... 6.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................8 ......... 5.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ....n/a ......... n/a
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......4 ......... 5.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ......n/a ......... n/a
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......7 ......... 5.4
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*..........4 ......... 6.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................13 ......... 6.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................5 ......... 5.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)........................n/a ......... n/a
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............11 ..5.5
A. Environment subindex ..............................................24 ....4.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 37 .....4.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 6 .....5.3
B. Readiness subindex .................................................14 ....6.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 19 .....5.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 30 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ..................................................................... 9 .....6.1
C. Usage subindex ........................................................14 ....5.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 28 .....4.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 13 .....5.3
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 3 .....5.7
D. Impact subindex .........................................................3 ....5.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 7 .....5.6
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 2 .....6.0
Taiwan, China
 &&&      &&& Taiwan, China      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
298  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................39 ......... 4.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................95 ......... 3.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................72 ......... 3.7
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....56 ......... 3.9
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....46 ......... 4.0
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................74 ......... 3.4
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................46 ........ 430
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................102 ......... 4.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................57 ......... 2.7
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................137 ....... 84.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................90 .......... 24
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................116 ......... 4.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........91 ....... 19.7
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................128 ......... 3.2
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............51 ......... 3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................73 .. 2,413.1
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................137 ......... 0.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............132 ......... 0.5
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................132 ......... 0.4
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................98 ......... 4.5
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................7 ....... 0.06
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 136 ... 956.58
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....138 ....... 0.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................84 ......... 3.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............114 ......... 3.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..73 ....... 87.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................8 ....... 99.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................92 ....... 86.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................110 ....... 11.6
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............130 ......... 2.9
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................136 ......... 0.2
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....123 ......... 0.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........94 ......... 0.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................136 ......... 3.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................119 ......... 4.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................68 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................119 ......... 4.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................108 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................79 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................67 ......... 4.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...128 ....... 0.09
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..115 ......... 3.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..121 ......... 3.3
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........80 ......... 4.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................94 ......... 3.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................65 ......... 4.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................124 ....... 0.03
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............114 ..3.2
A. Environment subindex ..............................................87 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 52 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 128 .....3.4
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................115 ....3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 138 .....1.9
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 122 .....3.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 72 .....4.9
C. Usage subindex ......................................................115 ....2.8
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 119 .....1.9
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 111 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 106 .....3.3
D. Impact subindex .....................................................103 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 115 .....2.7
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 97 .....3.3
Tajikistan
 &&&      &&& Tajikistan      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  299
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................58 ......... 3.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................102 ......... 3.4
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................75 ......... 3.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....59 ......... 3.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....64 ......... 3.7
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................79 ......... 3.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................52 ........ 462
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................128 ......... 3.9
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................74 ......... 2.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................95 ....... 45.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................99 .......... 29
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................121 .......... 12
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................111 ......... 4.2
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......137 ......... 1.5
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................117 ......... 3.4
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............68 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................130 ..... 104.4
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................106 ....... 85.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............129 ......... 0.7
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................133 ......... 0.4
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................134 ......... 3.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................131 ....... 0.70
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 105 ..... 57.46
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....117 ....... 1.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................92 ......... 3.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............119 ......... 2.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % .n/a ......... n/a
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................114 ....... 72.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............125 ....... 46.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................113 ....... 11.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............131 ......... 2.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................130 ......... 0.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....137 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......107 ......... 0.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................131 ......... 3.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................125 ......... 3.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................55 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............117 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................135 ......... 3.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................91 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................108 ......... 4.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................90 ......... 3.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...110 ....... 0.17
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..117 ......... 3.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..115 ......... 3.5
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........109 ......... 2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......116 ......... 3.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................119 ......... 2.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................99 ......... 3.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................117 ....... 0.04
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............123 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................102 ....3.5
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 65 .....3.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 129 .....3.3
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................125 ....3.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 125 .....2.5
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 128 .....2.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 117 .....3.7
C. Usage subindex ......................................................124 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 131 .....1.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 114 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 114 .....3.2
D. Impact subindex .....................................................127 ....2.6
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 133 .....2.3
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 123 .....2.8
Tanzania
 &&&      &&& Tanzania      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
300  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................85 ......... 3.2
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................82 ......... 3.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................55 ......... 4.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....53 ......... 4.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....54 ......... 3.9
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................92 ......... 3.1
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........74 .......... 73
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................55 ........ 479
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................82 ......... 4.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................50 ......... 2.9
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................67 ....... 37.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................99 .......... 29
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................52 ......... 5.1
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........53 ....... 46.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................73 ......... 4.1
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............72 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................78 .. 2,159.5
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................130 ....... 37.8
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................70 ....... 10.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................84 ....... 13.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................84 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................14 ....... 0.09
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..73 ..... 34.79
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......80 ....... 1.75
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................77 ......... 3.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................60 ......... 4.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..94 ....... 77.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................71 ....... 93.5
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................67 ..... 103.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................93 ....... 21.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............79 ....... 22.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................88 ....... 11.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......74 ......... 4.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........93 ......... 0.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................88 ......... 5.0
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................75 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................56 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............72 ......... 0.6
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................58 ......... 5.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................56 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................93 ......... 4.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................89 ......... 3.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....65 ....... 0.33
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....64 ......... 4.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......77 ......... 0.1
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....62 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............99 ....... 10.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........72 ......... 4.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................54 ......... 4.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................71 ......... 4.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................99 ....... 0.09
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............77 ..3.8
A. Environment subindex ..............................................59 ....4.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 69 .....3.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 54 .....4.2
B. Readiness subindex .................................................75 ....4.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 107 .....3.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 33 .....5.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 74 .....4.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................83 ....3.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 90 .....2.7
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 60 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 86 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................85 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 96 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 71 .....3.6
Thailand
 &&&      &&& Thailand      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  301
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................57 ......... 3.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................126 ......... 2.7
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................86 ......... 3.3
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..112 ......... 2.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....93 ......... 3.1
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................120 ......... 2.6
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............137 .......... 51
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................132 ..... 1,285
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................134 ......... 3.7
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................86 ......... 2.3
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................1 ......... 0.2
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................136 ........ 103
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................138 ......... 3.4
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......100 ....... 16.7
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................141 ......... 2.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............106 ......... 3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita .....................n/a ......... n/a
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................122 ....... 69.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................61 ....... 15.2
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................122 ......... 0.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................138 ......... 3.2
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................86 ....... 0.35
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 126 ... 146.22
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) .....n/a ......... n/a
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................130 ......... 2.5
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............140 ......... 1.8
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 113 ....... 56.3
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................132 ....... 50.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............123 ....... 53.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................142 ......... 0.2
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ..............n/a ......... n/a
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ...................n/a ......... n/a
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....126 ......... 0.0
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......105 ......... 0.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................124 ......... 4.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................137 ......... 3.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................132 ......... 2.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............119 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................126 ......... 4.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................127 ......... 3.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................107 ......... 4.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................110 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...121 ....... 0.13
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..135 ......... 3.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..131 ......... 3.0
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......139 ......... 2.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................130 ......... 2.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................113 ......... 3.5
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................129 ....... 0.01
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............132 ..2.8
A. Environment subindex ............................................129 ....3.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 124 .....2.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 130 .....3.3
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................117 ....3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 76 .....3.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 113 .....3.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 133 .....2.8
C. Usage subindex ......................................................131 ....2.6
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 120 .....1.9
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 132 .....2.8
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 122 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .....................................................133 ....2.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 131 .....2.4
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 132 .....2.5
Timor-Leste
 &&&      &&& Timor-Leste      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
302  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................78 ......... 3.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................113 ......... 3.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................47 ......... 4.4
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....71 ......... 3.6
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....75 ......... 3.5
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................67 ......... 3.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............112 .......... 42
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................135 ..... 1,340
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................60 ......... 5.2
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................58 ......... 2.7
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................33 ....... 29.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................121 .......... 43
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................69 ......... 4.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......106 ....... 11.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................33 ......... 4.8
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............108 ......... 3.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................37 .. 5,929.2
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................56 ....... 17.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................52 ....... 72.3
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................56 ......... 5.2
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................82 ....... 0.34
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..24 ..... 20.86
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....117 ....... 1.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................37 ......... 4.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................33 ......... 4.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..63 ....... 89.9
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................42 ....... 98.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................21 ..... 141.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................50 ....... 48.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............48 ....... 53.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................75 ....... 19.8
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......48 ....... 10.8
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................52 ......... 5.6
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................71 ......... 4.8
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................120 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............53 ......... 2.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................72 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................53 ......... 4.1
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................91 ......... 4.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................87 ......... 3.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....63 ....... 0.34
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..111 ......... 3.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......50 ......... 0.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....85 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............60 ....... 22.8
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......109 ......... 3.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................61 ......... 4.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................100 ......... 3.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............60 ..4.0
A. Environment subindex ..............................................76 ....3.7
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 90 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 72 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................43 ....5.2
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 44 .....4.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 64 .....5.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 37 .....5.5
C. Usage subindex ........................................................52 ....3.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 43 .....4.3
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 81 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 81 .....3.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................91 ....3.2
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 89 .....3.0
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 90 .....3.4
Trinidad and Tobago
 &&&      &&& Trinidad and Tobago      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  303
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................46 ......... 4.0
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................42 ......... 4.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................58 ......... 4.1
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....27 ......... 4.8
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....30 ......... 4.4
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................56 ......... 3.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........71 .......... 72
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................87 .......... 39
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................76 ........ 565
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................57 ......... 5.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................35 ......... 3.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................122 ....... 62.9
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................51 .......... 11
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................110 .......... 10
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................42 ......... 5.2
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........71 ....... 34.4
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................31 ......... 4.9
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............42 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................88 .. 1,494.1
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................63 ....... 13.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................78 ....... 14.1
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................79 ......... 4.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................72 ....... 0.31
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..25 ..... 21.28
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....127 ....... 0.75
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................41 ......... 4.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................18 ......... 5.1
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..61 ....... 90.5
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................108 ....... 77.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................61 ..... 106.0
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................71 ....... 36.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............92 ....... 17.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................96 ......... 7.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......75 ......... 4.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......112 ......... 0.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................19 ......... 6.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................50 ......... 5.1
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................44 ......... 3.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............68 ......... 0.8
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................82 ......... 4.8
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................38 ......... 4.4
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................21 ......... 5.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................25 ......... 4.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....29 ....... 0.48
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....50 ......... 4.8
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......65 ......... 0.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....41 ......... 4.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........35 ......... 5.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................53 ......... 4.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................36 ......... 4.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................38 ....... 0.30
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............50 ..4.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................55 ....4.0
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 49 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 67 .....4.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................68 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 70 .....3.9
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 73 .....5.2
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 52 .....5.2
C. Usage subindex ........................................................53 ....3.8
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 78 .....3.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 51 .....3.7
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 27 .....4.7
D. Impact subindex .......................................................44 ....3.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 51 .....3.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 42 .....4.3
Tunisia
 &&&      &&& Tunisia      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
304  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................31 ......... 4.4
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................52 ......... 4.3
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................88 ......... 3.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....66 ......... 3.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....68 ......... 3.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................108 ......... 2.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........55 .......... 62
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................41 ........ 420
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................52 ......... 5.4
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................82 ......... 2.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................81 ....... 41.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................13 ......... 5.7
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........54 ....... 45.8
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................110 ......... 3.6
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............56 ......... 3.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................67 .. 2,701.0
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................53 ....... 19.1
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................46 ....... 99.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................52 ......... 5.3
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................95 ....... 0.40
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..50 ..... 29.29
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................94 ......... 3.3
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............103 ......... 3.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..93 ....... 77.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................81 ....... 90.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................95 ....... 84.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................67 ....... 39.8
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............56 ....... 44.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................51 ....... 41.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......52 ......... 9.7
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........53 ......... 7.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................73 ......... 5.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................44 ......... 5.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................71 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............41 ......... 5.8
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................55 ......... 5.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................86 ......... 3.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................46 ......... 5.1
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................78 ......... 3.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....60 ....... 0.35
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....59 ......... 4.7
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......44 ......... 0.9
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....66 ......... 4.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............63 ....... 22.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........41 ......... 4.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................64 ......... 4.3
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................34 ......... 4.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................53 ....... 0.21
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............52 ..4.1
A. Environment subindex ..............................................53 ....4.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 62 .....3.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 51 .....4.3
B. Readiness subindex .................................................60 ....4.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 52 .....4.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 53 .....5.5
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 92 .....4.5
C. Usage subindex ........................................................59 ....3.7
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 62 .....3.5
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 57 .....3.6
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 58 .....4.0
D. Impact subindex .......................................................55 ....3.7
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 67 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 52 .....4.1
Turkey
 &&&      &&& Turkey      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  305
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................65 ......... 3.5
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................96 ......... 3.5
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................70 ......... 3.7
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....54 ......... 4.0
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....56 ......... 3.8
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................78 ......... 3.3
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed .........n/a ......... n/a
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................58 ........ 490
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................91 ......... 4.6
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................95 ......... 2.3
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................62 ....... 35.7
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................109 .......... 34
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................139 .......... 16
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................78 ......... 4.7
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......128 ......... 4.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................86 ......... 3.9
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............66 ......... 3.6
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................132 ....... 69.4
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............128 ......... 0.9
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................124 ......... 0.9
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................124 ......... 3.6
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................106 ....... 0.48
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..69 ..... 34.08
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................67 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............101 ......... 3.4
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 134 ....... 28.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................110 ....... 74.6
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............133 ....... 38.4
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................105 ....... 12.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............135 ......... 2.1
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................132 ......... 0.4
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....118 ......... 0.2
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......117 ......... 0.0
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................129 ......... 3.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................97 ......... 4.4
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................112 ......... 2.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............118 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................110 ......... 4.4
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................100 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................68 ......... 4.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................46 ......... 4.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...125 ....... 0.10
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....78 ......... 4.3
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....88 ......... 3.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........108 ......... 4.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......102 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................117 ......... 3.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................70 ......... 4.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................105 ....... 0.07
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............110 ..3.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................91 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 63 .....3.8
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 120 .....3.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................107 ....3.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 118 .....2.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 79 .....5.0
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 124 .....3.4
C. Usage subindex ......................................................117 ....2.8
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 135 .....1.7
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 108 .....3.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 93 .....3.5
D. Impact subindex .....................................................115 ....2.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 121 .....2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 103 .....3.1
Uganda
 &&&      &&& Uganda      Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
306  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................137 ......... 2.1
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................98 ......... 3.5
 1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................134 ......... 2.1
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..138 ......... 2.3
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..135 ......... 2.4
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................117 ......... 2.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........97 .......... 86
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................19 ........ 343
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................96 ......... 4.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................114 ......... 2.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................118 ....... 57.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................90 .......... 24
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................120 ......... 4.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........9 ....... 79.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................116 ......... 3.4
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............112 ......... 3.1
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................51 .. 4,184.6
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................25 ....... 99.9
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................95 ......... 5.9
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................83 ....... 13.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................60 ......... 5.1
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .........................9 ....... 0.07
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ....9 ..... 16.74
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......76 ....... 1.78
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................62 ......... 3.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................36 ......... 4.6
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..45 ....... 95.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ............................................5 ....... 99.7
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................44 ..... 118.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................55 ....... 45.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............73 ....... 30.7
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................74 ....... 20.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......63 ......... 6.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........96 ......... 0.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................116 ......... 4.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................82 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................42 ......... 3.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............50 ......... 2.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................59 ......... 5.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................117 ......... 3.3
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................118 ......... 3.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................122 ......... 3.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....60 ....... 0.35
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....96 ......... 4.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......49 ......... 0.4
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....91 ......... 3.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............38 ....... 32.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........96 ......... 4.0
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................70 ......... 4.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................107 ......... 3.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................47 ....... 0.26
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............75 ..3.8
A. Environment subindex ............................................117 ....3.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 125 .....2.9
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 98 .....3.7
B. Readiness subindex .................................................33 ....5.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 74 .....3.8
4th pillar: Affordability .......................................................... 2 .....6.8
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 39 .....5.5
C. Usage subindex ........................................................84 ....3.3
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 72 .....3.2
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 76 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 111 .....3.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................75 ....3.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 66 .....3.3
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 80 .....3.6
Ukraine
 &&&      &&& Ukraine     Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  307
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................26 ......... 4.6
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................27 ......... 5.1
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................34 ......... 5.1
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....34 ......... 4.6
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....43 ......... 4.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................27 ......... 5.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........21 .......... 36
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............133 .......... 49
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................70 ........ 537
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................25 ......... 6.1
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................13 ......... 4.0
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................5 ....... 14.1
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................72 ............ 7
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................19 ......... 5.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........86 ....... 22.5
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................38 ......... 4.7
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................5 ......... 4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................7 13,898.1
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................55 ....... 17.9
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................40 ..... 152.4
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................30 ......... 5.9
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................15 ....... 0.09
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..94 ..... 46.56
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....117 ....... 1.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................29 ......... 4.6
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................26 ......... 4.9
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..54 ....... 92.3
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................86 ....... 90.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................14 ..... 145.5
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................18 ....... 78.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............26 ....... 76.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................32 ....... 65.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......49 ....... 10.5
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........72 ......... 3.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................28 ......... 5.9
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................16 ......... 5.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................32 ......... 3.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............44 ......... 4.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................36 ......... 5.5
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................25 ......... 4.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................11 ......... 5.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ........................7 ......... 5.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....96 ....... 0.25
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....15 ......... 5.4
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......41 ......... 1.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....21 ......... 5.1
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............30 ....... 36.1
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........12 ......... 5.8
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................29 ......... 5.7
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...................................4 ......... 5.8
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................79 ....... 0.13
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............30 ..4.8
A. Environment subindex ..............................................28 ....4.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 31 .....4.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 22 .....5.0
B. Readiness subindex .................................................36 ....5.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 25 .....5.6
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 92 .....4.7
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 38 .....5.5
C. Usage subindex ........................................................30 ....4.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 31 .....4.8
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 30 .....4.2
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 32 .....4.6
D. Impact subindex .......................................................33 ....4.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 29 .....4.1
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 33 .....4.8
United Arab Emirates
 &&&      &&& United Arab Emirates      High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
308  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................14 ......... 5.0
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................12 ......... 5.4
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................11 ......... 6.2
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....13 ......... 5.3
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....13 ......... 4.9
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................11 ......... 5.7
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........12 .......... 27
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................12 .......... 28
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................33 ........ 399
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .........................7 ......... 6.5
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................23 ......... 3.4
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................66 ....... 37.3
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................58 .......... 13
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...............................3 ......... 5.9
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........39 ....... 58.5
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ..........................2 ......... 6.0
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............49 ......... 3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................35 .. 5,970.4
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................37 ....... 99.8
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................10 ..... 132.8
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................10 .. 1,396.3
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .............................5 ......... 6.4
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................68 ....... 0.31
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..35 ..... 24.55
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......68 ....... 1.86
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................20 ......... 4.8
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................43 ......... 4.5
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..21 ..... 101.8
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................27 ..... 130.8
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.................................8 ....... 85.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............15 ....... 82.6
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................14 ....... 79.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......11 ....... 31.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........11 ....... 38.2
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .............................3 ......... 6.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................22 ......... 5.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................13 ......... 4.8
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............18 ....... 92.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................4 ......... 6.3
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................15 ......... 4.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................16 ......... 5.6
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................29 ......... 4.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......4 ....... 0.77
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ......3 ......... 5.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......17 ....... 28.2
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......3 ......... 5.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............13 ....... 42.5
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........27 ......... 5.4
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................12 ......... 6.1
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................29 ......... 4.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................4 ....... 0.77
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............10 ..5.5
A. Environment subindex ..............................................11 ....5.3
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 10 .....5.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 20 .....5.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................13 ....6.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 11 .....6.2
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 27 .....5.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 21 .....5.8
C. Usage subindex ........................................................11 ....5.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................... 8 .....5.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 16 .....5.1
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 7 .....5.3
D. Impact subindex .......................................................11 ....5.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 14 .....5.2
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................... 9 .....5.5
United Kingdom
 &&&      &&& United Kingdom     High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  309
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................49 ......... 3.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................17 ......... 5.3
1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................36 ......... 4.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....36 ......... 4.5
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....39 ......... 4.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................28 ......... 5.0
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ............1 .......... 20
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................31 .......... 32
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................14 ........ 300
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................18 ......... 6.3
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................12 ......... 4.0
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................101 ....... 46.7
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................16 ............ 6
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................18 ......... 5.6
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ..........4 ....... 89.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................12 ......... 5.4
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .................9 ......... 4.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ........................8 13,524.2
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................37 ....... 99.8
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................33 ....... 39.2
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .....................8 .. 1,446.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................26 ......... 6.0
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................52 ....... 0.25
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..23 ..... 19.95
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................26 ......... 4.7
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................51 ......... 4.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..42 ....... 96.5
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................15 ....... 99.0
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................88 ....... 89.9
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................22 ....... 74.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............27 ....... 75.5
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................24 ....... 71.6
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......17 ....... 27.6
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ...........8 ....... 50.6
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................11 ......... 6.2
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................18 ......... 5.9
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .......................................7 ......... 5.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............12 ..... 137.5
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* ...........................8 ......... 6.1
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................12 ......... 5.0
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................31 ......... 5.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................27 ......... 4.6
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .......2 ....... 0.94
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....10 ......... 5.6
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .........9 ....... 48.6
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ......2 ......... 5.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............29 ....... 36.3
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........29 ......... 5.3
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................24 ......... 5.8
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................32 ......... 4.9
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best)...........................6 ....... 0.76
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ................ 8 ..5.6
A. Environment subindex ..............................................14 ....5.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 21 .....5.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ................. 9 .....5.2
B. Readiness subindex ...................................................5 ....6.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................... 6 .....6.8
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 10 .....6.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 32 .....5.7
C. Usage subindex ........................................................10 ....5.4
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 18 .....5.4
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 10 .....5.4
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................... 5 .....5.5
D. Impact subindex .........................................................8 ....5.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ................................................ 9 .....5.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 14 .....5.4
United States
 &&&      &&& United States    High income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
310  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................59 ......... 3.6
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................55 ......... 4.2
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................28 ......... 5.3
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....52 ......... 4.0
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....38 ......... 4.3
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................48 ......... 4.0
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........68 .......... 69
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ..............106 .......... 41
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ........................104 ........ 720
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................66 ......... 5.1
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................75 ......... 2.5
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................84 ....... 42.0
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................24 ............ 7
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................28 ............ 5
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................103 ......... 4.4
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........27 ....... 63.3
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................41 ......... 4.7
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............54 ......... 3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................69 .. 2,620.8
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .......................1 ..... 100.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................44 ....... 23.0
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................56 ....... 45.0
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................32 ......... 5.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................90 ....... 0.39
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..32 ..... 23.14
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....127 ....... 0.75
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................83 ......... 3.4
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............104 ......... 3.3
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..78 ....... 85.0
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................46 ....... 98.3
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................26 ..... 131.7
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................51 ....... 47.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............49 ....... 52.8
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................57 ....... 33.3
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......47 ....... 10.9
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........42 ......... 9.7
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................31 ......... 5.8
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................76 ......... 4.7
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................65 ......... 3.0
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............52 ......... 2.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................63 ......... 5.0
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................73 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................39 ......... 5.2
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................40 ......... 4.4
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....31 ....... 0.48
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....34 ......... 5.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....26 ......... 4.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............67 ....... 21.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........36 ......... 5.2
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................11 ......... 6.2
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................41 ......... 4.7
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................47 ....... 0.26
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............44 ..4.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................43 ....4.2
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 50 .....4.0
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 45 .....4.4
B. Readiness subindex .................................................63 ....4.8
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 49 .....4.7
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 83 .....4.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 76 .....4.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................43 ....4.0
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 48 .....4.0
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 64 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 36 .....4.5
D. Impact subindex .......................................................39 ....4.1
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 47 .....3.5
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 35 .....4.6
Uruguay
 &&&      &&& Uruguay      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  311
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................142 ......... 1.7
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................111 ......... 3.2
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................142 ......... 1.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..142 ......... 1.9
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..142 ......... 1.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................140 ......... 1.8
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........100 .......... 88
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................18 .......... 30
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................62 ........ 510
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................97 ......... 4.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................112 ......... 2.1
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ....................................124 ....... 63.5
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................139 ........ 141
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ..................140 .......... 17
2.06 Intensity of local competition* ...........................140 ......... 3.3
2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........10 ....... 78.1
2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................62 ......... 4.3
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............139 ......... 2.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................49 .. 4,251.9
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................97 ....... 90.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................88 ......... 6.8
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. ...................94 ......... 7.4
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................105 ......... 4.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................123 ....... 0.57
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..31 ..... 23.10
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................121 ......... 2.8
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............118 ......... 2.9
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..85 ....... 82.5
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................62 ....... 95.2
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ................77 ....... 96.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................75 ....... 35.7
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............90 ....... 17.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................92 ......... 9.7
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......70 ......... 5.4
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .........51 ......... 7.5
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* ...........................46 ......... 5.7
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................105 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................123 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............94 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................116 ......... 4.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................94 ......... 3.6
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................121 ......... 3.8
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................129 ......... 2.8
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....77 ....... 0.30
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..108 ......... 3.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......89 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..108 ......... 3.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............57 ....... 23.9
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......124 ......... 3.5
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................99 ......... 3.4
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................126 ......... 3.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................77 ....... 0.14
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............107 ..3.3
A. Environment subindex ............................................138 ....2.8
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 139 .....2.4
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 133 .....3.1
B. Readiness subindex .................................................80 ....4.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ........................ 83 .....3.5
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 60 .....5.4
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 93 .....4.5
C. Usage subindex ......................................................103 ....3.1
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 81 .....2.9
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 117 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 117 .....3.1
D. Impact subindex .....................................................107 ....3.0
9th pillar: Economic impacts .............................................. 95 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 115 .....3.0
Venezuela
 &&&      &&& Venezuela      Upper middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
312  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................47 ......... 4.0
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................77 ......... 3.7
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................78 ......... 3.6
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....67 ......... 3.7
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....73 ......... 3.6
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................127 ......... 2.5
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........93 .......... 83
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................41 .......... 34
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................13 ........ 295
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................133 ......... 3.8
 2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................91 ......... 2.3
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................75 ....... 40.1
 2.04 No. days to start a business ............................122 .......... 44
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................62 ......... 5.0
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ........88 ....... 22.3
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................123 ......... 3.3
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............41 ......... 4.0
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ......................99 ..... 849.9
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................120 ....... 70.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user................97 ......... 5.6
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................101 ......... 3.1
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* ...........................48 ......... 5.3
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................67 ....... 0.30
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month ..90 ..... 42.55
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ........1 ....... 2.00
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................69 ......... 3.7
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................59 ......... 4.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % ..95 ....... 77.2
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................74 ....... 92.8
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..................5 ..... 175.3
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %...............................87 ....... 27.6
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % ...............98 ....... 14.2
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ....................82 ....... 12.5
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .......77 ......... 4.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......103 ......... 0.3
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................110 ......... 4.5
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................88 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................58 ......... 3.2
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............96 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................53 ......... 5.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................107 ......... 3.5
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................33 ......... 5.3
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................44 ......... 4.3
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) .....77 ....... 0.30
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....41 ......... 4.9
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......88 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....80 ......... 3.9
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........101 ......... 7.4
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*........50 ......... 4.7
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ................................42 ......... 4.9
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................67 ......... 4.2
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).........................99 ....... 0.09
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ..............83 ..3.7
A. Environment subindex ..............................................96 ....3.6
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 79 .....3.5
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 109 .....3.6
B. Readiness subindex .................................................86 ....4.4
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 101 .....3.1
4th pillar: Affordability ........................................................ 76 .....5.1
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 73 .....4.9
C. Usage subindex ........................................................69 ....3.5
6th pillar: Individual usage .................................................. 80 .....2.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 78 .....3.5
8th pillar: Government usage ............................................. 48 .....4.1
D. Impact subindex .......................................................79 ....3.3
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 102 .....2.9
10th pillar: Social impacts .................................................. 61 .....3.8
Vietnam
 &&&      &&& Vietnam     Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  313
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ................131 ......... 2.3
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................142 ......... 1.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................139 ......... 1.8
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ..141 ......... 2.0
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..140 ......... 2.2
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ........................141 ......... 1.7
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........103 .......... 90
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................55 .......... 36
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................68 ........ 520
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................139 ......... 3.5
2.02 Venture capital availability* .................................67 ......... 2.6
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................45 ....... 32.9
2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................53 .......... 12
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................77 ......... 4.7
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......111 ....... 10.2
2.08 Quality of management schools* ......................140 ......... 2.4
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............142 ......... 1.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................119 ..... 289.3
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................110 ....... 84.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............126 ......... 1.1
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................135 ......... 0.3
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................114 ......... 4.0
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................45 ....... 0.23
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 135 ... 487.69
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....135 ....... 0.46
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* .........................142 ......... 1.7
5.02 Quality of math & science education* ...............141 ......... 1.7
5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 120 ....... 44.1
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................123 ....... 62.4
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............128 ....... 46.1
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................107 ....... 12.4
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............126 ......... 4.0
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................115 ......... 2.9
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....109 ......... 0.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................138 ......... 3.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................123 ......... 4.0
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................142 ......... 1.5
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............105 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................137 ......... 3.6
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .....................................135 ......... 2.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................139 ......... 2.9
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................142 ......... 2.0
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...132 ....... 0.05
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..142 ......... 2.2
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..139 ......... 2.6
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce .............86 ....... 17.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......142 ......... 2.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................141 ......... 1.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................142 ......... 2.3
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................117 ....... 0.04
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............141 ..2.4
A. Environment subindex ............................................134 ....2.9
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 142 .....2.3
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 125 .....3.4
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................136 ....2.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 121 .....2.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 127 .....2.9
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 136 .....2.5
C. Usage subindex ......................................................141 ....2.2
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 128 .....1.8
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 139 .....2.6
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 142 .....2.1
D. Impact subindex .....................................................142 ....1.9
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 141 .....2.1
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 142 .....1.8
Yemen
 &&&      &&& Yemen      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
314  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................50 ......... 3.9
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ..........................................89 ......... 3.6
 1.03 Judicial independence* ......................................82 ......... 3.5
 1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....47 ......... 4.2
 1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ....57 ......... 3.8
 1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................64 ......... 3.6
 1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ..........90 .......... 82
 1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................47 .......... 35
 1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................54 ........ 471
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .......................86 ......... 4.6
 2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................115 ......... 2.1
 2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ........................................6 ....... 14.5
 2.04 No. days to start a business ..............................76 .......... 18
 2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................46 ............ 6
 2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................74 ......... 4.8
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % .......n/a ......... n/a
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................76 ......... 4.0
 2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* ...............53 ......... 3.9
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................100 ..... 783.2
 3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. .....................97 ....... 90.0
 3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............134 ......... 0.4
 3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................114 ......... 1.2
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................120 ......... 3.8
4th pillar: Affordability
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .....................105 ....... 0.48
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 106 ..... 61.88
 4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ....110 ....... 1.20
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................53 ......... 4.0
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................77 ......... 3.8
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 119 ....... 45.6
 5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ........................................116 ....... 70.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............131 ....... 41.6
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................115 ....... 10.0
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............133 ......... 2.4
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................121 ......... 2.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....122 ......... 0.1
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. ........n/a ......... n/a
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................117 ......... 4.4
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ......................86 ......... 4.6
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* .....................................94 ......... 2.7
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ............103 ......... 0.0
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .........................87 ......... 4.7
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................85 ......... 3.7
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ..................................81 ......... 4.5
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ......................61 ......... 4.1
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...124 ....... 0.10
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ....92 ......... 4.1
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......96 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ....89 ......... 3.8
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ...........105 ......... 6.0
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......104 ......... 3.9
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................116 ......... 3.0
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* .................................85 ......... 4.0
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................138 ....... 0.00
 Rank  Score   
 (out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............109 ..3.3
A. Environment subindex ..............................................51 ....4.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................... 70 .....3.7
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............... 34 .....4.5
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................116 ....3.3
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 120 .....2.7
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 115 .....3.3
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................. 110 .....3.8
C. Usage subindex ......................................................113 ....2.9
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 123 .....1.9
7th pillar: Business usage .................................................. 90 .....3.4
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 101 .....3.4
D. Impact subindex .....................................................121 ....2.8
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 122 .....2.6
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 116 .....3.0
Zambia
 &&&      &&& Zambia      Lower middle income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Note: Indicators followed by an asterisk (*) are measured on a 1-to-7 (best) scale. 
For further details and explanation, please refer to the section “How to Read 
the Country/Economy Profiles” on page 171.
3: Country/Economy Profiles
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  315
1. Political and 
regulatory environment
6. Individual usage
5. Skills7. Business 
usage
4. Affordability8. Government
usage
3. Infrastructure and
digital content
9. Economic
impacts
2. Business and innovation 
environment
10. Social
impacts
1
The Networked Readiness Index in detail
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies* ..................76 ......... 3.4
1.02 Laws relating to ICT* ........................................121 ......... 2.9
1.03 Judicial independence* ....................................118 ......... 2.6
1.04 Efficiency of legal system in settling disputes* ....79 ......... 3.4
1.05 Efficiency of legal system in challenging regs* ..130 ......... 2.5
1.06 Intellectual property protection* ..........................90 ......... 3.1
1.07 Software piracy rate, % software installed ........106 .......... 91
1.08 No. procedures to enforce a contract ................78 .......... 38
1.09 No. days to enforce a contract ..........................37 ........ 410
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies* .....................129 ......... 3.9
2.02 Venture capital availability* ...............................132 ......... 1.8
2.03 Total tax rate, % profits ......................................60 ....... 35.6
2.04 No. days to start a business ............................134 .......... 90
2.05 No. procedures to start a business ....................97 ............ 9
2.06 Intensity of local competition* .............................94 ......... 4.5
 2.07 Tertiary education gross enrollment rate, % ......119 ......... 6.2
 2.08 Quality of management schools* ........................70 ......... 4.1
2.09 Gov’t procurement of advanced tech* .............130 ......... 2.7
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
3.01 Electricity production, kWh/capita ....................107 ..... 641.7
3.02 Mobile network coverage, % pop. ...................116 ....... 80.0
3.03 Int’l Internet bandwidth, kb/s per user..............136 ......... 0.3
3.04 Secure Internet servers/million pop. .................119 ......... 1.0
3.05 Accessibility of digital content* .........................133 ......... 3.4
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs, PPP $/min. .......................29 ....... 0.16
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs, PPP $/month 134 ... 297.40
4.03 Internet & telephony competition, 0–2 (best) ......87 ....... 1.64
5th pillar: Skills
5.01 Quality of educational system* ...........................33 ......... 4.5
 5.02 Quality of math & science education* .................57 ......... 4.2
 5.03 Secondary education gross enrollment rate, % 124 ....... 41.0
5.04 Adult literacy rate, % ..........................................79 ....... 91.9
INDICATOR RANK /142 VALUE
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile phone subscriptions/100 pop. ..............118 ....... 61.2
 6.02 Individuals using Internet, %.............................111 ....... 11.5
 6.03 Households w/ personal computer, % .............119 ......... 5.3
 6.04 Households w/ Internet access, % ..................106 ......... 4.0
 6.05 Broadband Internet subscriptions/100 pop. .....113 ......... 0.3
 6.06 Mobile broadband subscriptions/100 pop. .......111 ......... 0.1
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks* .........................126 ......... 4.1
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption* ....................111 ......... 4.2
 7.02 Capacity for innovation* ...................................122 ......... 2.4
 7.03 PCT patents, applications/million pop.  ..............97 ......... 0.1
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use* .......................118 ......... 4.2
 7.05 Extent of staff training* .......................................78 ......... 3.9
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Gov’t prioritization of ICT* ................................110 ......... 4.0
 8.02 Importance of ICT to gov’t vision* ....................111 ......... 3.2
 8.03 Government Online Service Index, 0–1 (best) ...122 ....... 0.13
9th pillar: Economic impacts
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products* ..126 ......... 3.5
 9.02 ICT PCT patents, applications/million pop.  .......90 ......... 0.0
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models* ..126 ......... 3.2
 9.04 Knowledge-intensive jobs, % workforce ............n/a ......... n/a
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services*......135 ......... 3.1
 10.02 Internet access in schools* ..............................129 ......... 2.5
 10.03 ICT use & gov’t efficiency* ...............................136 ......... 2.6
 10.04 E-Participation Index, 0–1 (best).......................124 ....... 0.03
Rank  Score  
(out of 142)  (1–7)
Networked Readiness Index 2012 ............124 ..2.9
A. Environment subindex ............................................127 ....3.1
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ................. 111 .....3.1
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ............. 132 .....3.2
B. Readiness subindex ...............................................110 ....3.5
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content ...................... 126 .....2.5
4th pillar: Affordability ...................................................... 107 .....3.6
5th pillar: Skills ................................................................... 98 .....4.4
C. Usage subindex ......................................................125 ....2.7
6th pillar: Individual usage ................................................ 122 .....1.9
7th pillar: Business usage ................................................ 112 .....3.1
8th pillar: Government usage ........................................... 125 .....3.0
D. Impact subindex .....................................................130 ....2.4
9th pillar: Economic impacts ............................................ 124 .....2.5
10th pillar: Social impacts ................................................ 137 .....2.3
Zimbabwe
 &&&      &&& Zimbabwe     Low income group average
2
3
4
5
6
7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Part 4 
Data Tables
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  319
The following pages provide detailed data for all 
142 economies included in The Global Information 
Technology Report 2012. The data tables are organized 
into 10 sections, which correspond to the 10 pillars of 
the Networked Readiness Index (NRI).
Environment subindex
 1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
 2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
Readiness subindex
 3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 4th pillar: Affordability
 5th pillar: Skills
Usage subindex
 6th pillar: Individual usage
 7th pillar: Business usage
 8th pillar: Government usage
Impact subindex
 9th pillar: Economic impacts
 10th pillar: Social impacts
EXECUTIVE OPINION SURVEY INDICATORS
In the tables, indicators derived from the World 
Economic Forum’s Executive Opinion Survey (Survey) 
have scores represented by blue-colored bar graphs. 
Survey questions asked for responses on a scale of 1 
to 7, where an answer of 1 and 7 always corresponds 
to the worst and best possible outcomes, respectively. 
In the tables, the Survey question and the two extreme 
answers are shown above the rankings. Scores are 
reported with a precision of one decimal point, although 
exact figures are used to determine rankings. The sam-
ple mean is represented by a dotted line running across 
the bar graphs. For more information on the Executive 
Opinion Survey and a detailed explanation of how  
scores are computed, please refer to Chapter 1.3 of The 
Global Competitiveness Report 2011–2012, available on 
the World Economic Forum website at www.weforum.
org/gcr.
OTHER INDICATORS
Indicators not derived from the Executive Opinion Survey 
are presented in black bar graphs. For each indicator, 
a short description appears at the top of the page. The 
base period (i.e., the period when a majority of the data 
were collected) follows the description. When the year 
differs from the base year for a particular economy, this 
is indicated in a footnote. A more detailed description 
and the full source for each indicator can be found in the 
“Technical Notes and Sources” section at the end of the 
Report. When data are not available or are too outdated, 
“n/a” is used in lieu of the rank and the value.
Because of the nature of data, ties between two 
or more countries are possible. In such cases, shared 
rankings are indicated accordingly. For example, it takes 
the same number of procedures – 21 –in Ireland as in 
Singapore to enforce a contract. As a result, in Table 
1.08 the two countries are both ranked 1st and listed 
alphabetically.
ONLINE DATA PORTAL
In complement to the analysis presented in this  
Report, an online data portal can be accessed via 
www.weforum.org/gitr. The platform offers a number 
of analytical tools and visualizations, including sortable 
rankings, scatter plots, bar charts, and maps, as well 
as the possibility of downloading portions of the NRI 
dataset.
How to Read the Data Tables
4: Data Tables
324  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 1 Singapore .................................. 6.5
 2 Sweden ..................................... 5.9
 3 New Zealand ............................. 5.8
 4 Finland ....................................... 5.6
 5 Luxembourg .............................. 5.6
 6 Barbados ................................... 5.5
 7 Denmark .................................... 5.4
 8 Oman ........................................ 5.3
 9 Australia ..................................... 5.3
 10 Norway ...................................... 5.3
 11 Canada ...................................... 5.2
 12 Malaysia ..................................... 5.1
 13 Rwanda ..................................... 5.1
 14 United Kingdom ......................... 5.0
 15 France ....................................... 4.9
 16 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.9
 17 Netherlands ............................... 4.9
 18 Switzerland ................................ 4.8
 19 Cyprus ....................................... 4.8
 20 Mauritius .................................... 4.8
 21 Gambia, The .............................. 4.8
 22 Botswana .................................. 4.8
 23 Germany .................................... 4.6
 24 Malta ......................................... 4.6
 25 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.6
 26 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.6
 27 Cape Verde ............................... 4.5
 28 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.4
 29 China ......................................... 4.4
 30 Japan ........................................ 4.4
 31 Turkey ........................................ 4.4
 32 Estonia ....................................... 4.4
 33 South Africa ............................... 4.4
 34 Austria ....................................... 4.4
 35 Namibia ..................................... 4.4
 36 Bahrain ...................................... 4.3
 37 Ghana ........................................ 4.2
 38 Chile .......................................... 4.2
 39 Tajikistan .................................... 4.2
 40 Israel .......................................... 4.2
 41 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 4.1
 42 Montenegro ............................... 4.1
 43 Ireland ........................................ 4.0
 44 India ........................................... 4.0
 45 Qatar ......................................... 4.0
 46 Tunisia ....................................... 4.0
 47 Vietnam ..................................... 4.0
 48 Iceland ....................................... 3.9
 49 United States ............................. 3.9
 50 Zambia ...................................... 3.9
 51 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.9
 52 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.8
 53 Malawi ....................................... 3.8
 54 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.8
 55 Cambodia .................................. 3.8
 56 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.7
 57 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.6
 58 Tanzania .................................... 3.6
 59 Uruguay ..................................... 3.6
 60 Morocco .................................... 3.6
 61 Hungary ..................................... 3.6
 62 Jamaica ..................................... 3.6
 63 Albania ....................................... 3.6
 64 Kuwait ....................................... 3.5
 65 Uganda ...................................... 3.5
 66 Guyana ...................................... 3.5
 67 Georgia ...................................... 3.5
 68 Spain ......................................... 3.5
 69 Mozambique .............................. 3.4
 70 Mali ............................................ 3.4
 71 Poland ....................................... 3.4
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 72 Benin ......................................... 3.4
 73 Belgium ..................................... 3.4
 74 Taiwan, China ............................ 3.4
 75 Portugal ..................................... 3.4
 76 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.4
 77 Nigeria ....................................... 3.4
 78 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.4
 79 Indonesia ................................... 3.4
 80 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.4
 81 Kenya ........................................ 3.4
 82 Honduras ................................... 3.3
 83 Angola ....................................... 3.3
 84 Greece ....................................... 3.3
 85 Thailand ..................................... 3.2
 86 Cameroon .................................. 3.2
 87 Croatia ....................................... 3.2
 88 Armenia ..................................... 3.2
 89 Belize ......................................... 3.2
 90 Slovenia ..................................... 3.1
 91 Russian Federation .................... 3.1
 92 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.1
 93 Pakistan ..................................... 3.0
 94 Bangladesh ................................ 3.0
 95 Serbia ........................................ 3.0
 96 Lithuania .................................... 3.0
 97 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.0
 98 Latvia ......................................... 3.0
 99 Moldova ..................................... 3.0
 100 Italy ............................................ 2.9
 101 Lesotho ..................................... 2.9
 102 Egypt ......................................... 2.9
 103 Swaziland .................................. 2.9
 104 Senegal ..................................... 2.9
 105 Syria .......................................... 2.9
 106 Colombia ................................... 2.9
 107 Czech Republic ......................... 2.9
 108 Bolivia ........................................ 2.9
 109 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.9
 110 Jordan ....................................... 2.8
 111 Mongolia .................................... 2.8
 112 Philippines ................................. 2.7
 113 Brazil .......................................... 2.7
 114 Algeria ....................................... 2.7
 115 Romania .................................... 2.7
 116 Puerto Rico ................................ 2.7
 117 Dominican Republic ................... 2.6
 118 Chad .......................................... 2.5
 119 Suriname ................................... 2.5
 120 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.5
 121 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.5
 122 El Salvador................................. 2.5
 123 Korea, Rep. ............................... 2.4
 124 Panama ..................................... 2.4
 125 Madagascar ............................... 2.4
 126 Costa Rica ................................. 2.4
 127 Ecuador ..................................... 2.3
 128 Mexico ....................................... 2.3
 129 Burundi ...................................... 2.3
 130 Mauritania .................................. 2.3
 131 Yemen ....................................... 2.3
 132 Lebanon .................................... 2.3
 133 Nepal ......................................... 2.2
 134 Paraguay ................................... 2.2
 135 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.2
 136 Argentina ................................... 2.2
 137 Ukraine ...................................... 2.1
 138 Nicaragua .................................. 2.0
 139 Guatemala ................................. 2.0
 140 Peru ........................................... 1.9
 141 Haiti ........................................... 1.9
 142 Venezuela .................................. 1.7
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies
How effective is your national parliament/congress as a law-making institution? [1 = very ineffective; 7 = very effective—among the best in the 
world]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  321
Index of Data Tables
Environment subindex
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment ..................323
 1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies ..............................324
 1.02 Laws relating to ICT .......................................................325
 1.03 Judicial independence .................................................. 326
 1.04 Efficiency of legal framework in settling disputes ..........327
 1.05 Efficiency of legal framework  
in challenging regulations ............................................. 328
 1.06 Intellectual property protection ..................................... 329
 1.07 Software piracy rate ..................................................... 330
 1.08 Number of procedures to enforce a contract ................331
 1.09 Time to enforce a contract ........................................... 332
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment ..............333
 2.01 Availability of latest technologies .................................. 334
 2.02 Venture capital availability ............................................. 335
 2.03 Total tax rate ................................................................. 336
 2.04 Time required to start a business ................................. 337
 2.05 Number of procedures required to start a business .... 338
 2.06 Intensity of local competition ........................................ 339
 2.07 Tertiary education enrollment rate ................................ 340
 2.08 Quality of management schools ....................................341
 2.09 Government procurement of advanced  
technology products ..................................................... 342
Readiness subindex
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content .......................343
 3.01 Electricity production .................................................... 344
 3.02 Mobile network coverage rate ...................................... 345
 3.03 International Internet bandwidth per Internet user ........ 346
 3.04 Secure Internet servers .................................................347
 3.05 Accessibility of digital content ...................................... 348
4th pillar: Affordability ..........................................................349
 4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs ..................................................... 350
 4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs ....................................351
 4.03 Internet and telephony sectors competition index ........ 352
5th pillar: Skills .....................................................................353
 5.01 Quality of the educational system ................................. 354
 5.02 Quality of math and science education ........................ 355
 5.03 Secondary enrollment rate ........................................... 356
 5.04 Adult literacy rate .......................................................... 357
Usage subindex
6th pillar: Individual usage ...................................................359
 6.01 Mobile telephone subscriptions .................................... 360
 6.02 Internet users ................................................................ 361
 6.03 Households with a personal computer ......................... 362
 6.04 Households with Internet access ................................. 363
 6.05 Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions ....................... 364
 6.06 Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions ..................... 365
 6.07 Use of virtual social networks ....................................... 366
7th pillar: Business usage ....................................................367
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption.................................. 368
 7.02 Capacity for innovation ................................................. 369
 7.03 PCT patent applications ................................................370
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use .....................................371
 7.05 Extent of staff training ....................................................372
8th pillar: Government usage ..............................................373
 8.01 Government prioritization of ICT ....................................374
 8.02 Importance of ICT to government vision of the future ...375
 8.03 Government Online Service Index .................................376
Impact subindex
9th pillar: Economic impacts ...............................................377
 9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products ................378
 9.02 PCT ICT patent applications ..........................................379
 9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models ............... 380
 9.04 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities ..............381
10th pillar: Social impacts ...................................................383
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services ................... 384
 10.02 Internet access in schools ............................................ 385
 10.03 ICT use and government efficiency .............................. 386
 10.04 E-Participation Index..................................................... 387
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
1st pillar 
Political and regulatory  
environment
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
324  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 1 Singapore .................................. 6.5
 2 Sweden ..................................... 5.9
 3 New Zealand ............................. 5.8
 4 Finland ....................................... 5.6
 5 Luxembourg .............................. 5.6
 6 Barbados ................................... 5.5
 7 Denmark .................................... 5.4
 8 Oman ........................................ 5.3
 9 Australia ..................................... 5.3
 10 Norway ...................................... 5.3
 11 Canada ...................................... 5.2
 12 Malaysia ..................................... 5.1
 13 Rwanda ..................................... 5.1
 14 United Kingdom ......................... 5.0
 15 France ....................................... 4.9
 16 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.9
 17 Netherlands ............................... 4.9
 18 Switzerland ................................ 4.8
 19 Cyprus ....................................... 4.8
 20 Mauritius .................................... 4.8
 21 Gambia, The .............................. 4.8
 22 Botswana .................................. 4.8
 23 Germany .................................... 4.6
 24 Malta ......................................... 4.6
 25 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.6
 26 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.6
 27 Cape Verde ............................... 4.5
 28 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.4
 29 China ......................................... 4.4
 30 Japan ........................................ 4.4
 31 Turkey ........................................ 4.4
 32 Estonia ....................................... 4.4
 33 South Africa ............................... 4.4
 34 Austria ....................................... 4.4
 35 Namibia ..................................... 4.4
 36 Bahrain ...................................... 4.3
 37 Ghana ........................................ 4.2
 38 Chile .......................................... 4.2
 39 Tajikistan .................................... 4.2
 40 Israel .......................................... 4.2
 41 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 4.1
 42 Montenegro ............................... 4.1
 43 Ireland ........................................ 4.0
 44 India ........................................... 4.0
 45 Qatar ......................................... 4.0
 46 Tunisia ....................................... 4.0
 47 Vietnam ..................................... 4.0
 48 Iceland ....................................... 3.9
 49 United States ............................. 3.9
 50 Zambia ...................................... 3.9
 51 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.9
 52 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.8
 53 Malawi ....................................... 3.8
 54 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.8
 55 Cambodia .................................. 3.8
 56 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.7
 57 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.6
 58 Tanzania .................................... 3.6
 59 Uruguay ..................................... 3.6
 60 Morocco .................................... 3.6
 61 Hungary ..................................... 3.6
 62 Jamaica ..................................... 3.6
 63 Albania ....................................... 3.6
 64 Kuwait ....................................... 3.5
 65 Uganda ...................................... 3.5
 66 Guyana ...................................... 3.5
 67 Georgia ...................................... 3.5
 68 Spain ......................................... 3.5
 69 Mozambique .............................. 3.4
 70 Mali ............................................ 3.4
 71 Poland ....................................... 3.4
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 72 Benin ......................................... 3.4
 73 Belgium ..................................... 3.4
 74 Taiwan, China ............................ 3.4
 75 Portugal ..................................... 3.4
 76 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.4
 77 Nigeria ....................................... 3.4
 78 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.4
 79 Indonesia ................................... 3.4
 80 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.4
 81 Kenya ........................................ 3.4
 82 Honduras ................................... 3.3
 83 Angola ....................................... 3.3
 84 Greece ....................................... 3.3
 85 Thailand ..................................... 3.2
 86 Cameroon .................................. 3.2
 87 Croatia ....................................... 3.2
 88 Armenia ..................................... 3.2
 89 Belize ......................................... 3.2
 90 Slovenia ..................................... 3.1
 91 Russian Federation .................... 3.1
 92 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.1
 93 Pakistan ..................................... 3.0
 94 Bangladesh ................................ 3.0
 95 Serbia ........................................ 3.0
 96 Lithuania .................................... 3.0
 97 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.0
 98 Latvia ......................................... 3.0
 99 Moldova ..................................... 3.0
 100 Italy ............................................ 2.9
 101 Lesotho ..................................... 2.9
 102 Egypt ......................................... 2.9
 103 Swaziland .................................. 2.9
 104 Senegal ..................................... 2.9
 105 Syria .......................................... 2.9
 106 Colombia ................................... 2.9
 107 Czech Republic ......................... 2.9
 108 Bolivia ........................................ 2.9
 109 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.9
 110 Jordan ....................................... 2.8
 111 Mongolia .................................... 2.8
 112 Philippines ................................. 2.7
 113 Brazil .......................................... 2.7
 114 Algeria ....................................... 2.7
 115 Romania .................................... 2.7
 116 Puerto Rico ................................ 2.7
 117 Dominican Republic ................... 2.6
 118 Chad .......................................... 2.5
 119 Suriname ................................... 2.5
 120 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.5
 121 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.5
 122 El Salvador................................. 2.5
 123 Korea, Rep. ............................... 2.4
 124 Panama ..................................... 2.4
 125 Madagascar ............................... 2.4
 126 Costa Rica ................................. 2.4
 127 Ecuador ..................................... 2.3
 128 Mexico ....................................... 2.3
 129 Burundi ...................................... 2.3
 130 Mauritania .................................. 2.3
 131 Yemen ....................................... 2.3
 132 Lebanon .................................... 2.3
 133 Nepal ......................................... 2.2
 134 Paraguay ................................... 2.2
 135 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.2
 136 Argentina ................................... 2.2
 137 Ukraine ...................................... 2.1
 138 Nicaragua .................................. 2.0
 139 Guatemala ................................. 2.0
 140 Peru ........................................... 1.9
 141 Haiti ........................................... 1.9
 142 Venezuela .................................. 1.7
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies
How effective is your national parliament/congress as a law-making institution? [1 = very ineffective; 7 = very effective—among the best in the 
world]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  325 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.0 7
 1 Sweden ..................................... 5.9
 2 Singapore .................................. 5.9
 3 Estonia ....................................... 5.8
 4 Denmark .................................... 5.8
 5 Luxembourg .............................. 5.7
 6 Finland ....................................... 5.7
 7 Switzerland ................................ 5.6
 8 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.5
 9 Norway ...................................... 5.5
 10 Austria ....................................... 5.5
 11 Netherlands ............................... 5.4
 12 United Kingdom ......................... 5.4
 13 New Zealand ............................. 5.4
 14 Australia ..................................... 5.4
 15 Malta ......................................... 5.3
 16 Iceland ....................................... 5.3
 17 United States ............................. 5.3
 18 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.3
 19 Portugal ..................................... 5.3
 20 Qatar ......................................... 5.3
 21 Canada ...................................... 5.3
 22 France ....................................... 5.2
 23 Malaysia ..................................... 5.2
 24 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.1
 25 Israel .......................................... 5.1
 26 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.1
 27 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.1
 28 Slovenia ..................................... 5.1
 29 South Africa ............................... 5.0
 30 Oman ........................................ 5.0
 31 Germany .................................... 5.0
 32 Chile .......................................... 5.0
 33 Bahrain ...................................... 4.9
 34 Ireland ........................................ 4.8
 35 Belgium ..................................... 4.8
 36 Japan ........................................ 4.7
 37 Panama ..................................... 4.7
 38 Lithuania .................................... 4.6
 39 Spain ......................................... 4.6
 40 Rwanda ..................................... 4.6
 41 Cyprus ....................................... 4.6
 42 Tunisia ....................................... 4.5
 43 Montenegro ............................... 4.5
 44 Czech Republic ......................... 4.5
 45 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.5
 46 Brazil .......................................... 4.4
 47 China ......................................... 4.4
 48 India ........................................... 4.4
 49 Hungary ..................................... 4.4
 50 Colombia ................................... 4.3
 51 Mauritius .................................... 4.3
 52 Turkey ........................................ 4.3
 53 Barbados ................................... 4.2
 54 Mexico ....................................... 4.2
 55 Uruguay ..................................... 4.2
 56 Kenya ........................................ 4.2
 57 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.1
 58 Slovak Republic ......................... 4.1
 59 Latvia ......................................... 4.1
 60 Bulgaria ..................................... 4.1
 61 Italy ............................................ 4.1
 62 Jamaica ..................................... 4.0
 63 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.0
 64 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.0
 65 Senegal ..................................... 4.0
 66 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.0
 67 Dominican Republic ................... 3.9
 68 Costa Rica ................................. 3.9
 69 Croatia ....................................... 3.9
 70 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 3.9
 71 Indonesia ................................... 3.9
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.0 7
 72 Cape Verde ............................... 3.9
 73 Guatemala ................................. 3.9
 74 Jordan ....................................... 3.9
 75 Gambia, The .............................. 3.9
 76 Albania ....................................... 3.8
 77 Vietnam ..................................... 3.7
 78 Georgia ...................................... 3.7
 79 Peru ........................................... 3.7
 80 Botswana .................................. 3.7
 81 Nigeria ....................................... 3.7
 82 Thailand ..................................... 3.7
 83 Egypt ......................................... 3.7
 84 Philippines ................................. 3.7
 85 Greece ....................................... 3.7
 86 Poland ....................................... 3.6
 87 Morocco .................................... 3.6
 88 Armenia ..................................... 3.6
 89 Zambia ...................................... 3.6
 90 Ecuador ..................................... 3.6
 91 Malawi ....................................... 3.6
 92 Namibia ..................................... 3.6
 93 Cambodia .................................. 3.6
 94 Romania .................................... 3.6
 95 Tajikistan .................................... 3.5
 96 Uganda ...................................... 3.5
 97 Honduras ................................... 3.5
 98 Ukraine ...................................... 3.5
 99 Russian Federation .................... 3.5
 100 Serbia ........................................ 3.4
 101 Moldova ..................................... 3.4
 102 Tanzania .................................... 3.4
 103 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.4
 104 Ghana ........................................ 3.3
 105 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.2
 106 Argentina ................................... 3.2
 107 El Salvador................................. 3.2
 108 Mali ............................................ 3.2
 109 Mozambique .............................. 3.2
 110 Kuwait ....................................... 3.2
 111 Venezuela .................................. 3.2
 112 Pakistan ..................................... 3.2
 113 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.2
 114 Guyana ...................................... 3.1
 115 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.1
 116 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.1
 117 Bangladesh ................................ 3.0
 118 Mongolia .................................... 3.0
 119 Bolivia ........................................ 3.0
 120 Benin ......................................... 2.9
 121 Zimbabwe .................................. 2.9
 122 Cameroon .................................. 2.8
 123 Paraguay ................................... 2.8
 124 Belize ......................................... 2.7
 125 Mauritania .................................. 2.7
 126 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.7
 127 Nepal ......................................... 2.7
 128 Nicaragua .................................. 2.7
 129 Syria .......................................... 2.7
 130 Algeria ....................................... 2.6
 131 Chad .......................................... 2.6
 132 Madagascar ............................... 2.5
 133 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.5
 134 Lesotho ..................................... 2.5
 135 Angola ....................................... 2.5
 136 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.5
 137 Swaziland .................................. 2.3
 138 Lebanon .................................... 2.2
 139 Haiti ........................................... 2.1
 140 Suriname ................................... 2.1
 141 Burundi ...................................... 2.0
 142 Yemen ....................................... 1.9
1.02 Laws relating to ICT
How would you assess your country’s laws relating to the use of information and communication technologies (e.g., electronic commerce, 
digital signatures, consumer protection)? [1 = nonexistent; 7 = well developed]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
326  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.9 7
 1 New Zealand ............................. 6.7
 2 Denmark .................................... 6.6
 3 Sweden ..................................... 6.5
 4 Finland ....................................... 6.4
 5 Switzerland ................................ 6.4
 6 Netherlands ............................... 6.3
 7 Germany .................................... 6.3
 8 Canada ...................................... 6.3
 9 Norway ...................................... 6.3
 10 Ireland ........................................ 6.3
 11 United Kingdom ......................... 6.2
 12 Israel .......................................... 6.2
 13 Australia ..................................... 6.1
 14 Luxembourg .............................. 6.1
 15 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 6.1
 16 Qatar ......................................... 6.0
 17 Barbados ................................... 5.9
 18 Japan ........................................ 5.8
 19 Iceland ....................................... 5.8
 20 Singapore .................................. 5.6
 21 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.6
 22 Austria ....................................... 5.5
 23 Estonia ....................................... 5.5
 24 Chile .......................................... 5.5
 25 Botswana .................................. 5.4
 26 Bahrain ...................................... 5.3
 27 Cyprus ....................................... 5.3
 28 Uruguay ..................................... 5.3
 29 Belgium ..................................... 5.3
 30 Rwanda ..................................... 5.2
 31 Malta ......................................... 5.1
 32 Kuwait ....................................... 5.1
 33 Oman ........................................ 5.1
 34 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.1
 35 South Africa ............................... 5.0
 36 United States ............................. 4.9
 37 France ....................................... 4.9
 38 Costa Rica ................................. 4.9
 39 Namibia ..................................... 4.9
 40 Mauritius .................................... 4.9
 41 Egypt ......................................... 4.8
 42 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.8
 43 Malaysia ..................................... 4.7
 44 Taiwan, China ............................ 4.7
 45 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.5
 46 Gambia, The .............................. 4.5
 47 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.4
 48 Jamaica ..................................... 4.4
 49 Jordan ....................................... 4.4
 50 Suriname ................................... 4.4
 51 India ........................................... 4.3
 52 Malawi ....................................... 4.3
 53 Poland ....................................... 4.3
 54 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.3
 55 Thailand ..................................... 4.2
 56 Montenegro ............................... 4.2
 57 Cape Verde ............................... 4.2
 58 Tunisia ....................................... 4.1
 59 Ghana ........................................ 4.1
 60 Italy ............................................ 4.0
 61 Portugal ..................................... 3.9
 62 Pakistan ..................................... 3.9
 63 China ......................................... 3.9
 64 Hungary ..................................... 3.9
 65 Spain ......................................... 3.9
 66 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.8
 67 Latvia ......................................... 3.8
 68 Slovenia ..................................... 3.8
 69 Korea, Rep. ............................... 3.8
 70 Uganda ...................................... 3.7
 71 Brazil .......................................... 3.7
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.9 7
 72 Tajikistan .................................... 3.7
 73 Nigeria ....................................... 3.7
 74 Czech Republic ......................... 3.7
 75 Tanzania .................................... 3.6
 76 Indonesia ................................... 3.6
 77 Honduras ................................... 3.6
 78 Vietnam ..................................... 3.6
 79 Swaziland .................................. 3.6
 80 Morocco .................................... 3.6
 81 Colombia ................................... 3.5
 82 Zambia ...................................... 3.5
 83 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.4
 84 Lithuania .................................... 3.4
 85 Greece ....................................... 3.3
 86 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.3
 87 Guyana ...................................... 3.3
 88 Turkey ........................................ 3.3
 89 Mexico ....................................... 3.2
 90 Bangladesh ................................ 3.2
 91 Georgia ...................................... 3.2
 92 Nepal ......................................... 3.2
 93 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.1
 94 Romania .................................... 3.1
 95 Benin ......................................... 3.1
 96 Cambodia .................................. 3.1
 97 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.1
 98 Belize ......................................... 3.1
 99 Croatia ....................................... 3.1
 100 Bolivia ........................................ 3.0
 101 Albania ....................................... 3.0
 102 Philippines ................................. 2.9
 103 Kenya ........................................ 2.9
 104 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.9
 105 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 2.9
 106 El Salvador................................. 2.9
 107 Lesotho ..................................... 2.9
 108 Armenia ..................................... 2.8
 109 Syria .......................................... 2.8
 110 Senegal ..................................... 2.8
 111 Kazakhstan ................................ 2.7
 112 Mali ............................................ 2.7
 113 Cameroon .................................. 2.7
 114 Mozambique .............................. 2.7
 115 Dominican Republic ................... 2.7
 116 Slovak Republic ......................... 2.7
 117 Guatemala ................................. 2.6
 118 Zimbabwe .................................. 2.6
 119 Peru ........................................... 2.6
 120 Mauritania .................................. 2.6
 121 Chad .......................................... 2.6
 122 Mongolia .................................... 2.6
 123 Russian Federation .................... 2.6
 124 Argentina ................................... 2.6
 125 Burkina Faso .............................. 2.6
 126 Algeria ....................................... 2.5
 127 Lebanon .................................... 2.5
 128 Serbia ........................................ 2.4
 129 Angola ....................................... 2.4
 130 Ecuador ..................................... 2.3
 131 Madagascar ............................... 2.3
 132 Moldova ..................................... 2.2
 133 Panama ..................................... 2.1
 134 Ukraine ...................................... 2.1
 135 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 1.9
 136 Nicaragua .................................. 1.8
 137 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 1.8
 138 Paraguay ................................... 1.8
 139 Yemen ....................................... 1.8
 140 Haiti ........................................... 1.7
 141 Burundi ...................................... 1.7
 142 Venezuela .................................. 1.6
1.03 Judicial independence
To what extent is the judiciary in your country independent from influences of members of government, citizens, or firms? [1 = heavily 
influenced; 7 = entirely independent]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  327 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.7 7
 1 Singapore .................................. 6.3
 2 Sweden ..................................... 6.0
 3 Finland ....................................... 5.8
 4 New Zealand ............................. 5.8
 5 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.7
 6 Norway ...................................... 5.6
 7 Switzerland ................................ 5.5
 8 Denmark .................................... 5.5
 9 Netherlands ............................... 5.5
 10 Canada ...................................... 5.4
 11 Qatar ......................................... 5.3
 12 Luxembourg .............................. 5.3
 13 United Kingdom ......................... 5.3
 14 Australia ..................................... 5.1
 15 Oman ........................................ 5.0
 16 South Africa ............................... 5.0
 17 Malaysia ..................................... 5.0
 18 Austria ....................................... 5.0
 19 Germany .................................... 4.9
 20 Barbados ................................... 4.9
 21 Iceland ....................................... 4.9
 22 France ....................................... 4.9
 23 Botswana .................................. 4.9
 24 Gambia, The .............................. 4.8
 25 Rwanda ..................................... 4.8
 26 Chile .......................................... 4.8
 27 Tunisia ....................................... 4.8
 28 Japan ........................................ 4.8
 29 Namibia ..................................... 4.8
 30 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.8
 31 Bahrain ...................................... 4.7
 32 Cyprus ....................................... 4.6
 33 Mauritius .................................... 4.6
 34 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.6
 35 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.5
 36 United States ............................. 4.5
 37 Ireland ........................................ 4.5
 38 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.5
 39 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.4
 40 Estonia ....................................... 4.3
 41 Israel .......................................... 4.3
 42 China ......................................... 4.3
 43 Ghana ........................................ 4.2
 44 Taiwan, China ............................ 4.2
 45 Montenegro ............................... 4.2
 46 Malta ......................................... 4.2
 47 Zambia ...................................... 4.2
 48 Kuwait ....................................... 4.2
 49 Jordan ....................................... 4.1
 50 Malawi ....................................... 4.1
 51 Belgium ..................................... 4.1
 52 Uruguay ..................................... 4.0
 53 Thailand ..................................... 4.0
 54 Uganda ...................................... 4.0
 55 Nigeria ....................................... 3.9
 56 Tajikistan .................................... 3.9
 57 Morocco .................................... 3.9
 58 Cambodia .................................. 3.9
 59 Tanzania .................................... 3.9
 60 Egypt ......................................... 3.9
 61 Panama ..................................... 3.8
 62 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.8
 63 Albania ....................................... 3.7
 64 India ........................................... 3.7
 65 Costa Rica ................................. 3.7
 66 Turkey ........................................ 3.7
 67 Vietnam ..................................... 3.7
 68 Swaziland .................................. 3.7
 69 Indonesia ................................... 3.7
 70 Cape Verde ............................... 3.6
 71 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.6
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.7 7
 72 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.6
 73 Spain ......................................... 3.5
 74 Kenya ........................................ 3.5
 75 Brazil .......................................... 3.5
 76 Mali ............................................ 3.5
 77 Benin ......................................... 3.5
 78 Jamaica ..................................... 3.4
 79 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.4
 80 Mauritania .................................. 3.4
 81 Armenia ..................................... 3.4
 82 Georgia ...................................... 3.4
 83 Lithuania .................................... 3.4
 84 Korea, Rep. ............................... 3.4
 85 Cameroon .................................. 3.4
 86 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.4
 87 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.4
 88 Colombia ................................... 3.3
 89 Honduras ................................... 3.3
 90 Mozambique .............................. 3.3
 91 Hungary ..................................... 3.3
 92 Senegal ..................................... 3.3
 93 Guyana ...................................... 3.3
 94 Lesotho ..................................... 3.3
 95 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.3
 96 Dominican Republic ................... 3.2
 97 Poland ....................................... 3.2
 98 Belize ......................................... 3.1
 99 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.1
 100 Bangladesh ................................ 3.1
 101 Mexico ....................................... 3.1
 102 Pakistan ..................................... 3.1
 103 Syria .......................................... 3.1
 104 Latvia ......................................... 3.1
 105 Lebanon .................................... 3.0
 106 Mongolia .................................... 3.0
 107 Peru ........................................... 3.0
 108 Moldova ..................................... 3.0
 109 Algeria ....................................... 3.0
 110 Bolivia ........................................ 2.9
 111 Slovenia ..................................... 2.9
 112 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.9
 113 Czech Republic ......................... 2.9
 114 El Salvador................................. 2.9
 115 Philippines ................................. 2.9
 116 Guatemala ................................. 2.9
 117 Nepal ......................................... 2.9
 118 Chad .......................................... 2.8
 119 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.8
 120 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.8
 121 Greece ....................................... 2.8
 122 Romania .................................... 2.8
 123 Russian Federation .................... 2.8
 124 Argentina ................................... 2.7
 125 Paraguay ................................... 2.7
 126 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.7
 127 Madagascar ............................... 2.7
 128 Suriname ................................... 2.7
 129 Croatia ....................................... 2.7
 130 Burundi ...................................... 2.7
 131 Portugal ..................................... 2.7
 132 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.6
 133 Italy ............................................ 2.6
 134 Nicaragua .................................. 2.5
 135 Ecuador ..................................... 2.5
 136 Angola ....................................... 2.5
 137 Serbia ........................................ 2.5
 138 Ukraine ...................................... 2.3
 139 Slovak Republic ......................... 2.2
 140 Haiti ........................................... 2.1
 141 Yemen ....................................... 2.0
 142 Venezuela .................................. 1.9
1.04 Efficiency of legal framework in settling disputes
How efficient is the legal framework in your country for private businesses to settle disputes? [1 = extremely inefficient; 7 = highly efficient]  |  
2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
328  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 1 Finland ....................................... 5.7
 2 Sweden ..................................... 5.7
 3 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.5
 4 Switzerland ................................ 5.5
 5 Luxembourg .............................. 5.4
 6 New Zealand ............................. 5.3
 7 Netherlands ............................... 5.3
 8 Singapore .................................. 5.3
 9 Denmark .................................... 5.2
 10 Norway ...................................... 5.2
 11 Canada ...................................... 5.1
 12 Germany .................................... 5.0
 13 United Kingdom ......................... 4.9
 14 Malaysia ..................................... 4.9
 15 Austria ....................................... 4.8
 16 Australia ..................................... 4.8
 17 France ....................................... 4.8
 18 Botswana .................................. 4.7
 19 South Africa ............................... 4.7
 20 Cyprus ....................................... 4.6
 21 Iceland ....................................... 4.6
 22 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.6
 23 Chile .......................................... 4.6
 24 Barbados ................................... 4.6
 25 Bahrain ...................................... 4.6
 26 Oman ........................................ 4.6
 27 Namibia ..................................... 4.6
 28 Rwanda ..................................... 4.5
 29 Ireland ........................................ 4.5
 30 Tunisia ....................................... 4.4
 31 Gambia, The .............................. 4.4
 32 Japan ........................................ 4.3
 33 Mauritius .................................... 4.3
 34 Taiwan, China ............................ 4.3
 35 Estonia ....................................... 4.3
 36 Montenegro ............................... 4.3
 37 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.3
 38 Uruguay ..................................... 4.3
 39 United States ............................. 4.2
 40 Qatar ......................................... 4.2
 41 Belgium ..................................... 4.2
 42 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.2
 43 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.2
 44 China ......................................... 4.0
 45 Malawi ....................................... 4.0
 46 Tajikistan .................................... 4.0
 47 Costa Rica ................................. 4.0
 48 Cambodia .................................. 4.0
 49 Israel .......................................... 3.9
 50 Kuwait ....................................... 3.9
 51 India ........................................... 3.9
 52 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 3.9
 53 Morocco .................................... 3.9
 54 Thailand ..................................... 3.9
 55 Malta ......................................... 3.8
 56 Uganda ...................................... 3.8
 57 Zambia ...................................... 3.8
 58 Nigeria ....................................... 3.8
 59 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.8
 60 Spain ......................................... 3.8
 61 Indonesia ................................... 3.8
 62 Ghana ........................................ 3.8
 63 Lithuania .................................... 3.7
 64 Tanzania .................................... 3.7
 65 Albania ....................................... 3.7
 66 Brazil .......................................... 3.7
 67 Jordan ....................................... 3.6
 68 Turkey ........................................ 3.6
 69 Cape Verde ............................... 3.6
 70 Mali ............................................ 3.6
 71 Mauritania .................................. 3.6
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 72 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.6
 73 Vietnam ..................................... 3.6
 74 Honduras ................................... 3.5
 75 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.5
 76 Kenya ........................................ 3.4
 77 Swaziland .................................. 3.4
 78 Colombia ................................... 3.4
 79 Pakistan ..................................... 3.4
 80 Mexico ....................................... 3.3
 81 Bangladesh ................................ 3.3
 82 Jamaica ..................................... 3.3
 83 Poland ....................................... 3.3
 84 Armenia ..................................... 3.2
 85 Benin ......................................... 3.2
 86 Egypt ......................................... 3.2
 87 Cameroon .................................. 3.2
 88 Senegal ..................................... 3.2
 89 Guyana ...................................... 3.2
 90 Peru ........................................... 3.2
 91 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.1
 92 Georgia ...................................... 3.1
 93 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.1
 94 Mozambique .............................. 3.1
 95 Panama ..................................... 3.1
 96 Nepal ......................................... 3.1
 97 Korea, Rep. ............................... 3.1
 98 Belize ......................................... 3.0
 99 Latvia ......................................... 3.0
 100 Moldova ..................................... 3.0
 101 Slovenia ..................................... 3.0
 102 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.0
 103 Chad .......................................... 3.0
 104 Algeria ....................................... 3.0
 105 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.0
 106 Burkina Faso .............................. 2.9
 107 Bolivia ........................................ 2.9
 108 Czech Republic ......................... 2.9
 109 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.9
 110 Guatemala ................................. 2.9
 111 El Salvador................................. 2.9
 112 Dominican Republic ................... 2.9
 113 Romania .................................... 2.9
 114 Mongolia .................................... 2.9
 115 Madagascar ............................... 2.8
 116 Portugal ..................................... 2.8
 117 Syria .......................................... 2.8
 118 Philippines ................................. 2.8
 119 Hungary ..................................... 2.8
 120 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.8
 121 Greece ....................................... 2.8
 122 Lesotho ..................................... 2.7
 123 Russian Federation .................... 2.7
 124 Paraguay ................................... 2.7
 125 Italy ............................................ 2.7
 126 Croatia ....................................... 2.7
 127 Serbia ........................................ 2.6
 128 Suriname ................................... 2.6
 129 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.6
 130 Zimbabwe .................................. 2.5
 131 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.5
 132 Lebanon .................................... 2.5
 133 Angola ....................................... 2.5
 134 Burundi ...................................... 2.5
 135 Ukraine ...................................... 2.4
 136 Argentina ................................... 2.4
 137 Ecuador ..................................... 2.4
 138 Slovak Republic ......................... 2.4
 139 Nicaragua .................................. 2.2
 140 Yemen ....................................... 2.2
 141 Haiti ........................................... 2.1
 142 Venezuela .................................. 1.6
1.05 Efficiency of legal framework in challenging regulations
How efficient is the legal framework in your country for private businesses to challenge the legality of government actions and/or regulations? 
[1 = extremely inefficient; 7 = highly efficient]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  329 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.7 7
 1 Finland ....................................... 6.2
 2 Singapore .................................. 6.1
 3 Switzerland ................................ 6.1
 4 Sweden ..................................... 6.0
 5 Luxembourg .............................. 5.9
 6 Denmark .................................... 5.9
 7 France ....................................... 5.8
 8 New Zealand ............................. 5.8
 9 Netherlands ............................... 5.8
 10 Ireland ........................................ 5.7
 11 United Kingdom ......................... 5.7
 12 Norway ...................................... 5.6
 13 Germany .................................... 5.6
 14 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.5
 15 Qatar ......................................... 5.5
 16 Austria ....................................... 5.5
 17 Puerto Rico ................................ 5.5
 18 Canada ...................................... 5.4
 19 Australia ..................................... 5.3
 20 Bahrain ...................................... 5.3
 21 Oman ........................................ 5.3
 22 Japan ........................................ 5.3
 23 Iceland ....................................... 5.2
 24 Barbados ................................... 5.1
 25 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.1
 26 Belgium ..................................... 5.1
 27 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.0
 28 United States ............................. 5.0
 29 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.0
 30 South Africa ............................... 5.0
 31 Malaysia ..................................... 4.9
 32 Estonia ....................................... 4.8
 33 Gambia, The .............................. 4.7
 34 Rwanda ..................................... 4.6
 35 Israel .......................................... 4.6
 36 Malta ......................................... 4.6
 37 Namibia ..................................... 4.6
 38 Cyprus ....................................... 4.4
 39 Panama ..................................... 4.2
 40 Jordan ....................................... 4.2
 41 Slovenia ..................................... 4.2
 42 Portugal ..................................... 4.2
 43 Spain ......................................... 4.1
 44 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.1
 45 Hungary ..................................... 4.1
 46 Korea, Rep. ............................... 4.1
 47 China ......................................... 4.0
 48 Uruguay ..................................... 4.0
 49 Botswana .................................. 4.0
 50 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 3.9
 51 Kuwait ....................................... 3.9
 52 Greece ....................................... 3.8
 53 Malawi ....................................... 3.8
 54 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.8
 55 Mauritius .................................... 3.8
 56 Tunisia ....................................... 3.8
 57 Montenegro ............................... 3.7
 58 Czech Republic ......................... 3.7
 59 Italy ............................................ 3.7
 60 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.7
 61 Poland ....................................... 3.7
 62 Indonesia ................................... 3.6
 63 Chile .......................................... 3.6
 64 Zambia ...................................... 3.6
 65 Latvia ......................................... 3.6
 66 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.6
 67 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.5
 68 India ........................................... 3.5
 69 Croatia ....................................... 3.5
 70 Costa Rica ................................. 3.5
 71 Morocco .................................... 3.5
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.7 7
 72 Syria .......................................... 3.5
 73 Lithuania .................................... 3.5
 74 Tajikistan .................................... 3.4
 75 Jamaica ..................................... 3.4
 76 Swaziland .................................. 3.3
 77 Honduras ................................... 3.3
 78 Uganda ...................................... 3.3
 79 Tanzania .................................... 3.3
 80 Egypt ......................................... 3.3
 81 Belize ......................................... 3.3
 82 Senegal ..................................... 3.3
 83 Guyana ...................................... 3.2
 84 Brazil .......................................... 3.2
 85 Mexico ....................................... 3.2
 86 Colombia ................................... 3.2
 87 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.2
 88 Ghana ........................................ 3.1
 89 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.1
 90 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.1
 91 Cambodia .................................. 3.1
 92 Thailand ..................................... 3.1
 93 Pakistan ..................................... 3.1
 94 Albania ....................................... 3.0
 95 Benin ......................................... 3.0
 96 Armenia ..................................... 3.0
 97 Cameroon .................................. 3.0
 98 Romania .................................... 3.0
 99 Kenya ........................................ 2.9
 100 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.9
 101 Lesotho ..................................... 2.8
 102 Philippines ................................. 2.8
 103 Mali ............................................ 2.8
 104 Nigeria ....................................... 2.8
 105 Georgia ...................................... 2.8
 106 Ecuador ..................................... 2.7
 107 Serbia ........................................ 2.7
 108 Turkey ........................................ 2.7
 109 Mauritania .................................. 2.7
 110 Moldova ..................................... 2.7
 111 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 2.7
 112 Lebanon .................................... 2.7
 113 El Salvador................................. 2.6
 114 Cape Verde ............................... 2.6
 115 Nepal ......................................... 2.6
 116 Kazakhstan ................................ 2.6
 117 Ukraine ...................................... 2.6
 118 Bolivia ........................................ 2.6
 119 Nicaragua .................................. 2.6
 120 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.6
 121 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.6
 122 Peru ........................................... 2.5
 123 Guatemala ................................. 2.5
 124 Dominican Republic ................... 2.5
 125 Mozambique .............................. 2.5
 126 Russian Federation .................... 2.5
 127 Vietnam ..................................... 2.5
 128 Argentina ................................... 2.5
 129 Bangladesh ................................ 2.4
 130 Angola ....................................... 2.4
 131 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.3
 132 Chad .......................................... 2.3
 133 Paraguay ................................... 2.3
 134 Suriname ................................... 2.2
 135 Algeria ....................................... 2.2
 136 Mongolia .................................... 2.2
 137 Madagascar ............................... 2.1
 138 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.0
 139 Burundi ...................................... 1.9
 140 Venezuela .................................. 1.8
 141 Yemen ....................................... 1.7
 142 Haiti ........................................... 1.6
1.06 Intellectual property protection
How would you rate intellectual property protection, including anti-counterfeiting measures, in your country? [1 = very weak; 7 = very strong]  
|  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
330  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Japan .............................................20
 1 Luxembourg ...................................20
 1 United States ..................................20
 4 New Zealand ..................................22
 5 Australia ..........................................24
 5 Austria ............................................24
 7 Belgium ..........................................25
 7 Finland ............................................25
 7 Sweden ..........................................25
 10 Denmark .........................................26
 10 Switzerland .....................................26
 12 Germany .........................................27
 12 United Kingdom ..............................27
 14 Canada ...........................................28
 14 Netherlands ....................................28
 16 Norway ...........................................29
 17 Israel ...............................................31
 18 Singapore .......................................34
 19 Ireland .............................................35
 19 South Africa ....................................35
 21 Czech Republic ..............................36
 21 United Arab Emirates ......................36
 23 Taiwan, China .................................37
 24 France ............................................39
 25 Korea, Rep. ....................................40
 25 Portugal ..........................................40
 27 Hungary ..........................................41
 28 Puerto Rico .....................................42
 28 Slovak Republic ..............................42
 30 Malta ..............................................43
 30 Spain ..............................................43
 32 Hong Kong SAR .............................45
 33 Slovenia ..........................................47
 34 Cyprus ............................................48
 35 Iceland ............................................49
 35 Italy .................................................49
 35 Qatar ..............................................49
 38 Estonia ............................................50
 39 Saudi Arabia ...................................52
 40 Bahrain ...........................................54
 40 Brazil ...............................................54
 40 Colombia ........................................54
 40 Croatia ............................................54
 40 Lithuania .........................................54
 40 Poland ............................................54
 46 Latvia ..............................................56
 46 Malaysia ..........................................56
 46 Mauritius .........................................56
 49 Jordan ............................................57
 50 Costa Rica ......................................58
 50 Mexico ............................................58
 52 Greece ............................................59
 53 Egypt ..............................................60
 53 Kuwait ............................................60
 55 Chile ...............................................62
 55 Oman .............................................62
 55 Turkey .............................................62
 58 India ................................................64
 58 Romania .........................................64
 60 Bulgaria ..........................................65
 60 Morocco .........................................65
 60 Russian Federation .........................65
 63 Bosnia and Herzegovina .................66
 63 Brunei Darussalam ..........................66
 63 Macedonia, FYR .............................66
 66 Ecuador ..........................................67
 67 Peru ................................................68
 68 Philippines ......................................69
 68 Uruguay ..........................................69
 70 Argentina ........................................70
 71 Lebanon .........................................72
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 71 Panama ..........................................72
 71 Tunisia ............................................72
 74 Honduras ........................................73
 74 Thailand ..........................................73
 76 Serbia .............................................74
 77 Albania ............................................75
 78 Dominican Republic ........................76
 78 Kazakhstan .....................................76
 80 China ..............................................78
 80 Senegal ..........................................78
 82 Botswana .......................................79
 82 Côte d’Ivoire ...................................79
 82 Kenya .............................................79
 82 Montenegro ....................................79
 82 Nicaragua .......................................79
 87 Bolivia .............................................80
 87 El Salvador......................................80
 87 Guatemala ......................................80
 90 Cameroon .......................................82
 90 Nigeria ............................................82
 90 Zambia ...........................................82
 93 Algeria ............................................83
 93 Paraguay ........................................83
 93 Vietnam ..........................................83
 96 Pakistan ..........................................84
 97 Sri Lanka ........................................86
 97 Ukraine ...........................................86
 99 Indonesia ........................................87
 100 Azerbaijan .......................................88
 100 Venezuela .......................................88
 102 Armenia ..........................................89
 103 Bangladesh .....................................90
 103 Moldova ..........................................90
 103 Yemen ............................................90
 106 Zimbabwe .......................................91
 107 Georgia ...........................................93
 n/a Angola ...........................................n/a
 n/a Barbados .......................................n/a
 n/a Belize .............................................n/a
 n/a Benin .............................................n/a
 n/a Burkina Faso ..................................n/a
 n/a Burundi ..........................................n/a
 n/a Cambodia ......................................n/a
 n/a Cape Verde ...................................n/a
 n/a Chad ..............................................n/a
 n/a Ethiopia ..........................................n/a
 n/a Gambia, The ..................................n/a
 n/a Ghana ............................................n/a
 n/a Guyana ..........................................n/a
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
 n/a Iran, Islamic Rep. ...........................n/a
 n/a Jamaica .........................................n/a
 n/a Kyrgyz Republic .............................n/a
 n/a Lesotho .........................................n/a
 n/a Madagascar ...................................n/a
 n/a Malawi ...........................................n/a
 n/a Mali ................................................n/a
 n/a Mauritania ......................................n/a
 n/a Mongolia ........................................n/a
 n/a Mozambique ..................................n/a
 n/a Namibia .........................................n/a
 n/a Nepal .............................................n/a
 n/a Rwanda .........................................n/a
 n/a Suriname .......................................n/a
 n/a Swaziland ......................................n/a
 n/a Syria ..............................................n/a
 n/a Tajikistan ........................................n/a
 n/a Tanzania ........................................n/a
 n/a Timor-Leste ...................................n/a
 n/a Trinidad and Tobago ......................n/a
 n/a Uganda ..........................................n/a
1.07 Software piracy rate
Unlicensed software units as a percentage of total software units installed  |  2010
SOURCE: Business Software Alliance/International Data Corporation, Eighth Annual BSA Global Software Piracy Study (May 2011)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  331 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Ireland .............................................21
 1 Singapore .......................................21
 3 Rwanda ..........................................24
 4 Austria ............................................25
 5 Belgium ..........................................26
 5 Hong Kong SAR .............................26
 5 Luxembourg ...................................26
 5 Netherlands ....................................26
 9 Czech Republic ..............................27
 9 Iceland ............................................27
 9 Latvia ..............................................27
 12 Australia ..........................................28
 12 Botswana .......................................28
 12 United Kingdom ..............................28
 15 France ............................................29
 15 Malaysia ..........................................29
 15 South Africa ....................................29
 18 Germany .........................................30
 18 Japan .............................................30
 18 Lithuania .........................................30
 18 Moldova ..........................................30
 18 Mozambique ...................................30
 18 New Zealand ..................................30
 18 Sweden ..........................................30
 18 Ukraine ...........................................30
 18 Venezuela .......................................30
 27 Guatemala ......................................31
 27 Panama ..........................................31
 27 Portugal ..........................................31
 27 Romania .........................................31
 31 Mongolia .........................................32
 31 Slovak Republic ..............................32
 31 Slovenia ..........................................32
 31 Switzerland .....................................32
 31 United States ..................................32
 36 Côte d’Ivoire ...................................33
 36 Finland ............................................33
 36 Gambia, The ...................................33
 36 Korea, Rep. ....................................33
 36 Namibia ..........................................33
 41 China ..............................................34
 41 Colombia ........................................34
 41 Dominican Republic ........................34
 41 El Salvador......................................34
 41 Norway ...........................................34
 41 Vietnam ..........................................34
 47 Denmark .........................................35
 47 Estonia ............................................35
 47 Haiti ................................................35
 47 Hungary ..........................................35
 47 Israel ...............................................35
 47 Jamaica ..........................................35
 47 Tajikistan .........................................35
 47 Zambia ...........................................35
 55 Argentina ........................................36
 55 Canada ...........................................36
 55 Chile ...............................................36
 55 Georgia ...........................................36
 55 Ghana .............................................36
 55 Guyana ...........................................36
 55 Kazakhstan .....................................36
 55 Mali .................................................36
 55 Mauritius .........................................36
 55 Russian Federation .........................36
 55 Serbia .............................................36
 55 Thailand ..........................................36
 55 Turkey .............................................36
 55 Yemen ............................................36
 69 Bosnia and Herzegovina .................37
 69 Burkina Faso ...................................37
 69 Cape Verde ....................................37
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 69 Ethiopia ...........................................37
 69 Lebanon .........................................37
 69 Macedonia, FYR .............................37
 69 Nicaragua .......................................37
 69 Philippines ......................................37
 69 Poland ............................................37
 78 Croatia ............................................38
 78 Jordan ............................................38
 78 Kyrgyz Republic ..............................38
 78 Madagascar ....................................38
 78 Mexico ............................................38
 78 Paraguay ........................................38
 78 Tanzania .........................................38
 78 Uganda ...........................................38
 78 Zimbabwe .......................................38
 87 Albania ............................................39
 87 Azerbaijan .......................................39
 87 Bulgaria ..........................................39
 87 Ecuador ..........................................39
 87 Greece ............................................39
 87 Iran, Islamic Rep. ............................39
 87 Nepal ..............................................39
 87 Puerto Rico .....................................39
 87 Spain ..............................................39
 87 Tunisia ............................................39
 97 Bolivia .............................................40
 97 Costa Rica ......................................40
 97 Indonesia ........................................40
 97 Kenya .............................................40
 97 Lesotho ..........................................40
 97 Morocco .........................................40
 97 Nigeria ............................................40
 97 Sri Lanka ........................................40
 97 Swaziland .......................................40
 106 Bangladesh .....................................41
 106 Chad ...............................................41
 106 Egypt ..............................................41
 106 Italy .................................................41
 106 Peru ................................................41
 106 Uruguay ..........................................41
 112 Benin ..............................................42
 112 Malawi ............................................42
 112 Trinidad and Tobago .......................42
 115 Cameroon .......................................43
 115 Cyprus ............................................43
 115 Qatar ..............................................43
 115 Saudi Arabia ...................................43
 115 Senegal ..........................................43
 120 Burundi ...........................................44
 120 Cambodia .......................................44
 120 Suriname ........................................44
 123 Algeria ............................................45
 123 Brazil ...............................................45
 123 Taiwan, China .................................45
 126 Angola ............................................46
 126 India ................................................46
 126 Mauritania .......................................46
 126 Pakistan ..........................................46
 130 Brunei Darussalam ..........................47
 130 Honduras ........................................47
 132 Bahrain ...........................................48
 133 Armenia ..........................................49
 133 Montenegro ....................................49
 133 United Arab Emirates ......................49
 136 Kuwait ............................................50
 137 Belize ..............................................51
 137 Oman .............................................51
 137 Timor-Leste ....................................51
 140 Syria ...............................................55
 n/a Barbados .......................................n/a
 n/a Malta .............................................n/a
1.08 Number of procedures to enforce a contract
Number of procedures to resolve a dispute, counted from the moment the plaintiff files a lawsuit in court until payment  |  2011
SOURCE: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
332  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Singapore .....................................150
 2 New Zealand ................................216
 3 Korea, Rep. ..................................230
 3 Rwanda ........................................230
 5 Azerbaijan .....................................237
 6 Kyrgyz Republic ............................260
 7 Namibia ........................................270
 8 Lithuania .......................................275
 9 Hong Kong SAR ...........................280
 9 Norway .........................................280
 11 Russian Federation .......................281
 12 Georgia .........................................285
 13 Vietnam ........................................295
 14 United States ................................300
 15 Malawi ..........................................312
 16 Mongolia .......................................314
 17 Luxembourg .................................321
 18 France ..........................................331
 19 Ukraine .........................................343
 20 Moldova ........................................352
 21 Japan ...........................................360
 22 Latvia ............................................369
 23 Macedonia, FYR ...........................370
 23 Mauritania .....................................370
 25 Finland ..........................................375
 26 Albania ..........................................390
 26 Kazakhstan ...................................390
 26 Switzerland ...................................390
 29 Germany .......................................394
 30 Australia ........................................395
 30 Hungary ........................................395
 32 Austria ..........................................397
 33 United Kingdom ............................399
 34 Cambodia .....................................401
 35 China ............................................406
 36 Nicaragua .....................................409
 37 Denmark .......................................410
 37 Zimbabwe .....................................410
 39 Mexico ..........................................415
 40 Iceland ..........................................417
 41 Turkey ...........................................420
 42 Cape Verde ..................................425
 42 Estonia ..........................................425
 42 Malaysia ........................................425
 45 Peru ..............................................428
 46 Tajikistan .......................................430
 47 Gambia, The .................................434
 48 Armenia ........................................440
 49 Burkina Faso .................................446
 50 Nigeria ..........................................457
 51 Dominican Republic ......................460
 52 Tanzania .......................................462
 53 Kenya ...........................................465
 54 Zambia .........................................471
 55 Thailand ........................................479
 56 Chile .............................................480
 57 Ghana ...........................................487
 58 Uganda .........................................490
 59 Belgium ........................................505
 59 Iran, Islamic Rep. ..........................505
 61 Sweden ........................................508
 62 Morocco .......................................510
 62 Taiwan, China ...............................510
 62 Venezuela .....................................510
 65 Romania .......................................512
 66 Netherlands ..................................514
 67 Spain ............................................515
 68 Yemen ..........................................520
 69 Haiti ..............................................530
 70 United Arab Emirates ....................537
 71 Brunei Darussalam ........................540
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Montenegro ..................................545
 73 Portugal ........................................547
 74 Croatia ..........................................561
 75 Bulgaria ........................................564
 76 Slovak Republic ............................565
 76 Tunisia ..........................................565
 78 Kuwait ..........................................566
 79 Canada .........................................570
 79 Indonesia ......................................570
 79 Qatar ............................................570
 82 Guyana .........................................581
 83 Ecuador ........................................588
 84 Argentina ......................................590
 85 Bolivia ...........................................591
 85 Paraguay ......................................591
 87 Bosnia and Herzegovina ...............595
 88 Oman ...........................................598
 89 South Africa ..................................600
 90 Czech Republic ............................611
 91 Ethiopia .........................................620
 91 Mali ...............................................620
 91 Puerto Rico ...................................620
 94 Botswana .....................................625
 95 Algeria ..........................................630
 96 Bahrain .........................................635
 96 Saudi Arabia .................................635
 96 Serbia ...........................................635
 99 Mauritius .......................................645
 100 Ireland ...........................................650
 101 Jamaica ........................................655
 102 Panama ........................................686
 103 Jordan ..........................................689
 104 Uruguay ........................................720
 105 Lebanon .......................................721
 106 Mozambique .................................730
 107 Brazil .............................................731
 108 Cyprus ..........................................735
 109 Chad .............................................743
 110 Côte d’Ivoire .................................770
 111 Senegal ........................................780
 112 Lesotho ........................................785
 113 El Salvador....................................786
 114 Benin ............................................795
 115 Cameroon .....................................800
 116 Greece ..........................................819
 117 Poland ..........................................830
 118 Burundi .........................................832
 119 Philippines ....................................842
 120 Costa Rica ....................................852
 121 Madagascar ..................................871
 122 Syria .............................................872
 123 Israel .............................................890
 124 Belize ............................................892
 125 Nepal ............................................910
 126 Honduras ......................................920
 127 Swaziland .....................................972
 128 Pakistan ........................................976
 129 Egypt .........................................1,010
 130 Angola .......................................1,011
 131 Italy ............................................1,210
 132 Timor-Leste ...............................1,285
 133 Slovenia .....................................1,290
 134 Sri Lanka ...................................1,318
 135 Trinidad and Tobago ..................1,340
 136 Colombia ...................................1,346
 137 India ...........................................1,420
 138 Bangladesh ................................1,442
 139 Guatemala .................................1,459
 140 Suriname ...................................1,715
 n/a Barbados .......................................n/a
 n/a Malta .............................................n/a
1.09 Time to enforce a contract
Number of days to resolve a dispute, counted from the moment the plaintiff decides to file the lawsuit in court until payment  |  2011
SOURCE: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
2nd pillar 
Business and innovation  
environment
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
334  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 5.0 7
 1 Sweden ..................................... 6.9
 2 Switzerland ................................ 6.7
 3 Norway ...................................... 6.6
 4 Iceland ....................................... 6.6
 5 Finland ....................................... 6.6
 6 Netherlands ............................... 6.5
 7 United Kingdom ......................... 6.5
 8 Belgium ..................................... 6.5
 9 Denmark .................................... 6.5
 10 Austria ....................................... 6.4
 11 France ....................................... 6.4
 12 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 6.4
 13 Israel .......................................... 6.3
 14 Canada ...................................... 6.3
 15 Japan ........................................ 6.3
 16 Portugal ..................................... 6.3
 17 Singapore .................................. 6.3
 18 United States ............................. 6.3
 19 Luxembourg .............................. 6.3
 20 Germany .................................... 6.2
 21 Malta ......................................... 6.2
 22 Bahrain ...................................... 6.1
 23 Australia ..................................... 6.1
 24 Korea, Rep. ............................... 6.1
 25 United Arab Emirates ................. 6.1
 26 Puerto Rico ................................ 6.1
 27 Barbados ................................... 6.1
 28 Panama ..................................... 6.0
 29 New Zealand ............................. 6.0
 30 Chile .......................................... 6.0
 31 Qatar ......................................... 6.0
 32 Ireland ........................................ 5.9
 33 Spain ......................................... 5.9
 34 Estonia ....................................... 5.9
 35 Malaysia ..................................... 5.8
 36 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.8
 37 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.7
 38 Lithuania .................................... 5.7
 39 South Africa ............................... 5.7
 40 Czech Republic ......................... 5.6
 41 Cyprus ....................................... 5.6
 42 Jordan ....................................... 5.5
 43 Hungary ..................................... 5.5
 44 Jamaica ..................................... 5.5
 45 Oman ........................................ 5.5
 46 Slovenia ..................................... 5.5
 47 India ........................................... 5.5
 48 Guatemala ................................. 5.5
 49 Slovak Republic ......................... 5.5
 50 Senegal ..................................... 5.4
 51 Croatia ....................................... 5.4
 52 Turkey ........................................ 5.4
 53 Brazil .......................................... 5.4
 54 Namibia ..................................... 5.4
 55 Mauritius .................................... 5.4
 56 Greece ....................................... 5.3
 57 Tunisia ....................................... 5.3
 58 Kuwait ....................................... 5.2
 59 Dominican Republic ................... 5.2
 60 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 5.2
 61 Mexico ....................................... 5.2
 62 Philippines ................................. 5.2
 63 Sri Lanka ................................... 5.1
 64 Peru ........................................... 5.1
 65 Morocco .................................... 5.1
 66 Uruguay ..................................... 5.1
 67 Cape Verde ............................... 5.1
 68 Costa Rica ................................. 5.0
 69 Latvia ......................................... 5.0
 70 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.0
 71 Italy ............................................ 5.0
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 5.0 7
 72 Kenya ........................................ 4.9
 73 El Salvador................................. 4.9
 74 Indonesia ................................... 4.9
 75 Albania ....................................... 4.9
 76 Rwanda ..................................... 4.8
 77 Gambia, The .............................. 4.8
 78 Colombia ................................... 4.8
 79 Lebanon .................................... 4.8
 80 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 4.8
 81 Honduras ................................... 4.8
 82 Thailand ..................................... 4.8
 83 Argentina ................................... 4.8
 84 Botswana .................................. 4.7
 85 Guyana ...................................... 4.7
 86 Zambia ...................................... 4.6
 87 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.6
 88 Poland ....................................... 4.6
 89 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.6
 90 Montenegro ............................... 4.6
 91 Uganda ...................................... 4.6
 92 Belize ......................................... 4.6
 93 Pakistan ..................................... 4.6
 94 Ghana ........................................ 4.6
 95 Bangladesh ................................ 4.6
 96 Ukraine ...................................... 4.6
 97 Venezuela .................................. 4.5
 98 Cambodia .................................. 4.5
 99 Georgia ...................................... 4.5
 100 China ......................................... 4.5
 101 Suriname ................................... 4.4
 102 Tajikistan .................................... 4.4
 103 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.4
 104 Ecuador ..................................... 4.4
 105 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 4.4
 106 Bulgaria ..................................... 4.4
 107 Nigeria ....................................... 4.4
 108 Benin ......................................... 4.4
 109 Paraguay ................................... 4.3
 110 Egypt ......................................... 4.3
 111 Malawi ....................................... 4.3
 112 Moldova ..................................... 4.3
 113 Mozambique .............................. 4.3
 114 Nepal ......................................... 4.2
 115 Romania .................................... 4.2
 116 Armenia ..................................... 4.2
 117 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.2
 118 Mali ............................................ 4.1
 119 Syria .......................................... 4.1
 120 Mongolia .................................... 4.1
 121 Russian Federation .................... 4.1
 122 Algeria ....................................... 4.0
 123 Serbia ........................................ 4.0
 124 Mauritania .................................. 4.0
 125 Cameroon .................................. 3.9
 126 Lesotho ..................................... 3.9
 127 Nicaragua .................................. 3.9
 128 Tanzania .................................... 3.9
 129 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.9
 130 Madagascar ............................... 3.9
 131 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.8
 132 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.8
 133 Vietnam ..................................... 3.8
 134 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.7
 135 Haiti ........................................... 3.7
 136 Bolivia ........................................ 3.7
 137 Swaziland .................................. 3.6
 138 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.5
 139 Yemen ....................................... 3.5
 140 Angola ....................................... 3.4
 141 Chad .......................................... 3.2
 142 Burundi ...................................... 3.1
2.01 Availability of latest technologies
To what extent are the latest technologies available in your country? [1 = not available; 7 = widely available]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  335 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 2.7 7
 1 Qatar ......................................... 5.4
 2 Israel .......................................... 4.5
 3 Norway ...................................... 4.4
 4 Singapore .................................. 4.4
 5 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 4.4
 6 Sweden ..................................... 4.3
 7 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.2
 8 Bahrain ...................................... 4.2
 9 Finland ....................................... 4.2
 10 Malaysia ..................................... 4.1
 11 Luxembourg .............................. 4.1
 12 United States ............................. 4.0
 13 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.0
 14 Netherlands ............................... 3.9
 15 Taiwan, China ............................ 3.9
 16 Oman ........................................ 3.9
 17 Indonesia ................................... 3.7
 18 Switzerland ................................ 3.7
 19 Canada ...................................... 3.6
 20 Belgium ..................................... 3.5
 21 Australia ..................................... 3.5
 22 China ......................................... 3.5
 23 United Kingdom ......................... 3.4
 24 Denmark .................................... 3.4
 25 Kuwait ....................................... 3.4
 26 New Zealand ............................. 3.4
 27 India ........................................... 3.4
 28 Kenya ........................................ 3.3
 29 Montenegro ............................... 3.3
 30 Morocco .................................... 3.3
 31 Estonia ....................................... 3.2
 32 Cyprus ....................................... 3.2
 33 Panama ..................................... 3.2
 34 Chile .......................................... 3.1
 35 Tunisia ....................................... 3.1
 36 France ....................................... 3.0
 37 Germany .................................... 3.0
 38 Peru ........................................... 3.0
 39 Malta ......................................... 3.0
 40 Rwanda ..................................... 3.0
 41 Egypt ......................................... 3.0
 42 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 2.9
 43 Austria ....................................... 2.9
 44 South Africa ............................... 2.9
 45 Pakistan ..................................... 2.9
 46 Botswana .................................. 2.9
 47 Japan ........................................ 2.9
 48 Bolivia ........................................ 2.9
 49 Colombia ................................... 2.9
 50 Thailand ..................................... 2.9
 51 Sri Lanka ................................... 2.8
 52 Brazil .......................................... 2.8
 53 Mauritius .................................... 2.8
 54 Azerbaijan .................................. 2.8
 55 Latvia ......................................... 2.7
 56 Puerto Rico ................................ 2.7
 57 Tajikistan .................................... 2.7
 58 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 2.7
 59 Spain ......................................... 2.7
 60 Lebanon .................................... 2.7
 61 Cambodia .................................. 2.7
 62 Jordan ....................................... 2.7
 63 Gambia, The .............................. 2.7
 64 Guatemala ................................. 2.6
 65 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 2.6
 66 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.6
 67 Yemen ....................................... 2.6
 68 Slovak Republic ......................... 2.6
 69 Paraguay ................................... 2.6
 70 Iceland ....................................... 2.6
 71 Philippines ................................. 2.6
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 2.7 7
 72 Madagascar ............................... 2.6
 73 Portugal ..................................... 2.6
 74 Tanzania .................................... 2.6
 75 Uruguay ..................................... 2.5
 76 Namibia ..................................... 2.5
 77 Romania .................................... 2.5
 78 Mexico ....................................... 2.5
 79 Poland ....................................... 2.4
 80 Honduras ................................... 2.4
 81 Chad .......................................... 2.4
 82 Turkey ........................................ 2.4
 83 Guyana ...................................... 2.4
 84 Slovenia ..................................... 2.4
 85 Czech Republic ......................... 2.4
 86 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.3
 87 Benin ......................................... 2.3
 88 Russian Federation .................... 2.3
 89 El Salvador................................. 2.3
 90 Senegal ..................................... 2.3
 91 Vietnam ..................................... 2.3
 92 Kazakhstan ................................ 2.3
 93 Barbados ................................... 2.3
 94 Bangladesh ................................ 2.3
 95 Uganda ...................................... 2.3
 96 Ecuador ..................................... 2.2
 97 Georgia ...................................... 2.2
 98 Italy ............................................ 2.2
 99 Nepal ......................................... 2.2
 100 Korea, Rep. ............................... 2.2
 101 Lithuania .................................... 2.2
 102 Costa Rica ................................. 2.2
 103 Greece ....................................... 2.2
 104 Nigeria ....................................... 2.2
 105 Cape Verde ............................... 2.2
 106 Ireland ........................................ 2.2
 107 Syria .......................................... 2.1
 108 Croatia ....................................... 2.1
 109 Armenia ..................................... 2.1
 110 Algeria ....................................... 2.1
 111 Nicaragua .................................. 2.1
 112 Venezuela .................................. 2.1
 113 Dominican Republic ................... 2.1
 114 Ukraine ...................................... 2.1
 115 Zambia ...................................... 2.1
 116 Cameroon .................................. 2.1
 117 Hungary ..................................... 2.1
 118 Swaziland .................................. 2.1
 119 Mali ............................................ 2.0
 120 Ethiopia ...................................... 2.0
 121 Serbia ........................................ 2.0
 122 Mozambique .............................. 2.0
 123 Ghana ........................................ 2.0
 124 Albania ....................................... 2.0
 125 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.0
 126 Moldova ..................................... 1.9
 127 Jamaica ..................................... 1.9
 128 Suriname ................................... 1.9
 129 Argentina ................................... 1.9
 130 Lesotho ..................................... 1.9
 131 Malawi ....................................... 1.8
 132 Zimbabwe .................................. 1.8
 133 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 1.8
 134 Belize ......................................... 1.8
 135 Mauritania .................................. 1.8
 136 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 1.8
 137 Mongolia .................................... 1.8
 138 Burkina Faso .............................. 1.6
 139 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 1.5
 140 Angola ....................................... 1.5
 141 Haiti ........................................... 1.4
 142 Burundi ...................................... 1.4
2.02 Venture capital availability
In your country, how easy is it for entrepreneurs with innovative but risky projects to find venture capital? [1 = very difficult; 7 = very easy]  |  
2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
336  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Timor-Leste ...................................0.2
 2 Macedonia, FYR ............................9.7
 3 Namibia .........................................9.8
 4 Qatar ...........................................11.3
 5 United Arab Emirates ...................14.1
 6 Saudi Arabia ................................14.5
 6 Zambia ........................................14.5
 8 Bahrain ........................................15.0
 9 Kuwait .........................................15.5
 10 Lesotho .......................................16.0
 11 Georgia ........................................16.5
 12 Brunei Darussalam .......................16.8
 13 Botswana ....................................19.4
 14 Luxembourg ................................20.8
 15 Oman ..........................................22.0
 16 Montenegro .................................22.3
 17 Cambodia ....................................22.5
 18 Hong Kong SAR ..........................23.0
 19 Cyprus .........................................23.1
 20 Mongolia ......................................24.6
 21 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............25.0
 21 Chile ............................................25.0
 21 Mauritius ......................................25.0
 24 Ireland ..........................................26.3
 25 Singapore ....................................27.1
 26 Denmark ......................................27.5
 27 Jordan .........................................27.7
 28 Suriname .....................................27.9
 29 Bulgaria .......................................28.1
 30 Malawi .........................................28.2
 31 Kazakhstan ..................................28.6
 32 Canada ........................................28.8
 33 Trinidad and Tobago ....................29.1
 34 Korea, Rep. .................................29.7
 35 Switzerland ..................................30.1
 36 Lebanon ......................................30.2
 37 Ethiopia ........................................31.1
 38 Israel ............................................31.2
 39 Moldova .......................................31.3
 39 Rwanda .......................................31.3
 41 Nepal ...........................................31.5
 42 Iceland .........................................31.8
 43 Croatia .........................................32.3
 44 Nigeria .........................................32.7
 45 Yemen .........................................32.9
 46 South Africa .................................33.1
 47 Belize ...........................................33.2
 48 Ghana ..........................................33.6
 49 Malaysia .......................................34.0
 49 Serbia ..........................................34.0
 51 Mozambique ................................34.3
 52 New Zealand ...............................34.4
 53 Indonesia .....................................34.5
 54 Slovenia .......................................34.7
 55 Bangladesh ..................................35.0
 55 El Salvador...................................35.0
 55 Paraguay .....................................35.0
 58 Ecuador .......................................35.3
 58 Pakistan .......................................35.3
 60 Taiwan, China ..............................35.6
 60 Zimbabwe ....................................35.6
 62 Uganda ........................................35.7
 63 Guyana ........................................36.1
 64 Madagascar .................................36.6
 65 Swaziland ....................................36.8
 66 United Kingdom ...........................37.3
 67 Thailand .......................................37.5
 68 Cape Verde .................................37.8
 69 Latvia ...........................................37.9
 70 Albania .........................................38.5
 71 Spain ...........................................38.7
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Finland .........................................39.0
 73 Syria ............................................39.7
 74 Azerbaijan ....................................40.0
 75 Vietnam .......................................40.1
 76 Netherlands .................................40.5
 77 Peru .............................................40.7
 78 Haiti .............................................40.8
 79 Armenia .......................................40.9
 79 Guatemala ...................................40.9
 81 Turkey ..........................................41.1
 82 Norway ........................................41.6
 83 Dominican Republic .....................41.7
 84 Uruguay .......................................42.0
 85 Portugal .......................................43.3
 86 Burkina Faso ................................43.6
 86 Egypt ...........................................43.6
 86 Poland .........................................43.6
 89 Lithuania ......................................43.9
 90 Honduras .....................................44.0
 91 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................44.1
 92 Côte d’Ivoire ................................44.3
 93 Romania ......................................44.4
 94 Panama .......................................45.2
 95 Tanzania ......................................45.5
 96 Jamaica .......................................45.6
 97 Senegal .......................................46.0
 98 Burundi ........................................46.2
 99 Greece .........................................46.4
 100 Philippines ...................................46.5
 101 Germany ......................................46.7
 101 United States ...............................46.7
 103 Russian Federation ......................46.9
 104 Australia .......................................47.7
 105 Slovak Republic ...........................48.8
 106 Cameroon ....................................49.1
 106 Czech Republic ...........................49.1
 106 Japan ..........................................49.1
 109 Kenya ..........................................49.6
 109 Morocco ......................................49.6
 111 Mali ..............................................51.8
 112 Hungary .......................................52.4
 113 Mexico .........................................52.7
 114 Sweden .......................................52.8
 115 Austria .........................................53.1
 116 Angola .........................................53.2
 117 Costa Rica ...................................55.0
 118 Ukraine ........................................57.1
 119 Belgium .......................................57.3
 120 Estonia .........................................58.6
 121 India .............................................61.8
 122 Tunisia .........................................62.9
 123 Puerto Rico ..................................63.1
 124 China ...........................................63.5
 124 Venezuela ....................................63.5
 126 Chad ............................................65.4
 127 France .........................................65.7
 128 Benin ...........................................66.0
 129 Nicaragua ....................................66.8
 130 Brazil ............................................67.1
 131 Mauritania ....................................68.3
 132 Italy ..............................................68.5
 133 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................69.0
 134 Algeria .........................................72.0
 135 Colombia .....................................74.8
 136 Bolivia ..........................................80.0
 137 Tajikistan ......................................84.5
 138 Sri Lanka ...................................105.2
 139 Argentina ...................................108.2
 140 Gambia, The ..............................283.5
 n/a Barbados .......................................n/a
 n/a Malta .............................................n/a
2.03 Total tax rate
Sum of profit tax, labor tax and social contributions, property taxes, turnover taxes, and other taxes, as a share (%) of commercial profits   |  
2011
SOURCE: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  337 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 New Zealand ....................................1
 2 Australia ............................................2
 2 Georgia .............................................2
 4 Hong Kong SAR ...............................3
 4 Macedonia, FYR ...............................3
 4 Rwanda ............................................3
 4 Singapore .........................................3
 8 Belgium ............................................4
 8 Hungary ............................................4
 10 Albania ..............................................5
 10 Canada .............................................5
 10 Iceland ..............................................5
 10 Portugal ............................................5
 10 Saudi Arabia .....................................5
 10 Senegal ............................................5
 16 Denmark ...........................................6
 16 Italy ...................................................6
 16 Malaysia ............................................6
 16 Mauritius ...........................................6
 16 Puerto Rico .......................................6
 16 Slovenia ............................................6
 16 Turkey ...............................................6
 16 United States ....................................6
 24 Chile .................................................7
 24 Croatia ..............................................7
 24 Egypt ................................................7
 24 Estonia ..............................................7
 24 France ..............................................7
 24 Jamaica ............................................7
 24 Korea, Rep. ......................................7
 24 Norway .............................................7
 24 Uruguay ............................................7
 33 Armenia ............................................8
 33 Azerbaijan .........................................8
 33 Cyprus ..............................................8
 33 Iran, Islamic Rep. ..............................8
 33 Madagascar ......................................8
 33 Mali ...................................................8
 33 Netherlands ......................................8
 33 Oman ...............................................8
 33 Panama ............................................8
 42 Bahrain .............................................9
 42 Ethiopia .............................................9
 42 Lebanon ...........................................9
 42 Mexico ..............................................9
 42 Moldova ............................................9
 47 Greece ............................................10
 47 Kyrgyz Republic ..............................10
 47 Montenegro ....................................10
 47 Taiwan, China .................................10
 51 Cape Verde ....................................11
 51 Tunisia ............................................11
 53 Ghana .............................................12
 53 Jordan ............................................12
 53 Morocco .........................................12
 53 Qatar ..............................................12
 53 Yemen ............................................12
 58 Burkina Faso ...................................13
 58 Ireland .............................................13
 58 Mongolia .........................................13
 58 Mozambique ...................................13
 58 Serbia .............................................13
 58 Syria ...............................................13
 58 United Arab Emirates ......................13
 58 United Kingdom ..............................13
 66 Burundi ...........................................14
 66 Colombia ........................................14
 66 Finland ............................................14
 66 Honduras ........................................14
 66 Romania .........................................14
 71 Cameroon .......................................15
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 71 Germany .........................................15
 71 Sweden ..........................................15
 74 Latvia ..............................................16
 75 El Salvador......................................17
 76 Bulgaria ..........................................18
 76 Slovak Republic ..............................18
 76 Switzerland .....................................18
 76 Zambia ...........................................18
 80 Bangladesh .....................................19
 80 Dominican Republic ........................19
 80 Kazakhstan .....................................19
 80 Luxembourg ...................................19
 80 Mauritania .......................................19
 80 South Africa ....................................19
 86 Czech Republic ..............................20
 87 Pakistan ..........................................21
 88 Lithuania .........................................22
 89 Japan .............................................23
 90 Tajikistan .........................................24
 90 Ukraine ...........................................24
 92 Algeria ............................................25
 93 Argentina ........................................26
 93 Guyana ...........................................26
 93 Peru ................................................26
 96 Gambia, The ...................................27
 97 Austria ............................................28
 97 Spain ..............................................28
 99 Benin ..............................................29
 99 India ................................................29
 99 Nepal ..............................................29
 99 Tanzania .........................................29
 99 Thailand ..........................................29
 104 Russian Federation .........................30
 105 Côte d’Ivoire ...................................32
 105 Kuwait ............................................32
 105 Poland ............................................32
 108 Kenya .............................................33
 109 Israel ...............................................34
 109 Nigeria ............................................34
 109 Uganda ...........................................34
 112 Paraguay ........................................35
 112 Philippines ......................................35
 112 Sri Lanka ........................................35
 115 Guatemala ......................................37
 116 China ..............................................38
 117 Malawi ............................................39
 117 Nicaragua .......................................39
 119 Bosnia and Herzegovina .................40
 119 Lesotho ..........................................40
 121 Trinidad and Tobago .......................43
 122 Belize ..............................................44
 122 Vietnam ..........................................44
 124 Indonesia ........................................45
 125 Bolivia .............................................50
 126 Ecuador ..........................................56
 126 Swaziland .......................................56
 128 Costa Rica ......................................60
 129 Botswana .......................................61
 130 Chad ...............................................66
 130 Namibia ..........................................66
 132 Angola ............................................68
 133 Cambodia .......................................85
 134 Zimbabwe .......................................90
 135 Brunei Darussalam ........................101
 136 Timor-Leste ..................................103
 137 Haiti ..............................................105
 138 Brazil .............................................119
 139 Venezuela .....................................141
 140 Suriname ......................................694
 n/a Barbados .......................................n/a
 n/a Malta .............................................n/a
2.04 Time required to start a business
Number of days required to start a business  |  2011
SOURCE: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
338  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Canada .............................................1
 1 New Zealand ....................................1
 3 Australia ............................................2
 3 Georgia .............................................2
 3 Kyrgyz Republic ................................2
 3 Rwanda ............................................2
 3 Slovenia ............................................2
 8 Armenia ............................................3
 8 Belgium ............................................3
 8 Burkina Faso .....................................3
 8 Finland ..............................................3
 8 Hong Kong SAR ...............................3
 8 Macedonia, FYR ...............................3
 8 Madagascar ......................................3
 8 Saudi Arabia .....................................3
 8 Senegal ............................................3
 8 Singapore .........................................3
 8 Sweden ............................................3
 8 Taiwan, China ...................................3
 20 Bulgaria ............................................4
 20 Denmark ...........................................4
 20 Hungary ............................................4
 20 Ireland ...............................................4
 20 Latvia ................................................4
 20 Malaysia ............................................4
 20 Mali ...................................................4
 20 Sri Lanka ..........................................4
 28 Albania ..............................................5
 28 Cameroon .........................................5
 28 Estonia ..............................................5
 28 Ethiopia .............................................5
 28 France ..............................................5
 28 Iceland ..............................................5
 28 Israel .................................................5
 28 Korea, Rep. ......................................5
 28 Lebanon ...........................................5
 28 Mauritius ...........................................5
 28 Norway .............................................5
 28 Oman ...............................................5
 28 Peru ..................................................5
 28 Portugal ............................................5
 28 South Africa ......................................5
 28 Tajikistan ...........................................5
 28 Thailand ............................................5
 28 Uruguay ............................................5
 46 Azerbaijan .........................................6
 46 Benin ................................................6
 46 Croatia ..............................................6
 46 Cyprus ..............................................6
 46 Egypt ................................................6
 46 Iran, Islamic Rep. ..............................6
 46 Italy ...................................................6
 46 Jamaica ............................................6
 46 Kazakhstan .......................................6
 46 Lithuania ...........................................6
 46 Luxembourg .....................................6
 46 Mexico ..............................................6
 46 Montenegro ......................................6
 46 Morocco ...........................................6
 46 Netherlands ......................................6
 46 Panama ............................................6
 46 Poland ..............................................6
 46 Puerto Rico .......................................6
 46 Romania ...........................................6
 46 Slovak Republic ................................6
 46 Switzerland .......................................6
 46 Turkey ...............................................6
 46 United Kingdom ................................6
 46 United States ....................................6
 46 Yemen ..............................................6
 46 Zambia .............................................6
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Bahrain .............................................7
 72 Bangladesh .......................................7
 72 Chile .................................................7
 72 Dominican Republic ..........................7
 72 Ghana ...............................................7
 72 Jordan ..............................................7
 72 Lesotho ............................................7
 72 Moldova ............................................7
 72 Mongolia ...........................................7
 72 Nepal ................................................7
 72 Paraguay ..........................................7
 72 Serbia ...............................................7
 72 Syria .................................................7
 72 United Arab Emirates ........................7
 86 Angola ..............................................8
 86 Austria ..............................................8
 86 Cape Verde ......................................8
 86 El Salvador........................................8
 86 Gambia, The .....................................8
 86 Guyana .............................................8
 86 Indonesia ..........................................8
 86 Japan ...............................................8
 86 Nicaragua .........................................8
 86 Nigeria ..............................................8
 86 Qatar ................................................8
 97 Belize ................................................9
 97 Burundi .............................................9
 97 Cambodia .........................................9
 97 Colombia ..........................................9
 97 Czech Republic ................................9
 97 Germany ...........................................9
 97 Mauritania .........................................9
 97 Mozambique .....................................9
 97 Russian Federation ...........................9
 97 Trinidad and Tobago .........................9
 97 Ukraine .............................................9
 97 Vietnam ............................................9
 97 Zimbabwe .........................................9
 110 Botswana .......................................10
 110 Côte d’Ivoire ...................................10
 110 Greece ............................................10
 110 Malawi ............................................10
 110 Namibia ..........................................10
 110 Pakistan ..........................................10
 110 Spain ..............................................10
 110 Timor-Leste ....................................10
 110 Tunisia ............................................10
 119 Chad ...............................................11
 119 Kenya .............................................11
 121 Bosnia and Herzegovina .................12
 121 Costa Rica ......................................12
 121 Guatemala ......................................12
 121 Haiti ................................................12
 121 India ................................................12
 121 Kuwait ............................................12
 121 Swaziland .......................................12
 121 Tanzania .........................................12
 129 Brazil ...............................................13
 129 Ecuador ..........................................13
 129 Honduras ........................................13
 129 Suriname ........................................13
 133 Algeria ............................................14
 133 Argentina ........................................14
 133 China ..............................................14
 136 Bolivia .............................................15
 136 Brunei Darussalam ..........................15
 136 Philippines ......................................15
 139 Uganda ...........................................16
 140 Venezuela .......................................17
 n/a Barbados .......................................n/a
 n/a Malta .............................................n/a
2.05 Number of procedures required to start a business
Number of procedures required to start a business  |  2011
SOURCE: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  339 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.8 7
 1 Taiwan, China ............................ 6.1
 2 Belgium ..................................... 6.0
 3 United Kingdom ......................... 5.9
 4 Japan ........................................ 5.9
 5 Qatar ......................................... 5.9
 6 Netherlands ............................... 5.9
 7 Australia ..................................... 5.9
 8 Austria ....................................... 5.8
 9 Germany .................................... 5.8
 10 Sweden ..................................... 5.8
 11 Malta ......................................... 5.8
 12 France ....................................... 5.7
 13 Turkey ........................................ 5.7
 14 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.7
 15 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.6
 16 Czech Republic ......................... 5.6
 17 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.6
 18 United States ............................. 5.6
 19 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.6
 20 Puerto Rico ................................ 5.6
 21 Canada ...................................... 5.6
 22 China ......................................... 5.5
 23 Spain ......................................... 5.5
 24 Switzerland ................................ 5.5
 25 Bahrain ...................................... 5.5
 26 Malaysia ..................................... 5.4
 27 Israel .......................................... 5.4
 28 Lebanon .................................... 5.4
 29 Estonia ....................................... 5.4
 30 Cyprus ....................................... 5.4
 31 India ........................................... 5.4
 32 Norway ...................................... 5.4
 33 Singapore .................................. 5.4
 34 Jordan ....................................... 5.4
 35 Sri Lanka ................................... 5.4
 36 Chile .......................................... 5.4
 37 Slovak Republic ......................... 5.4
 38 Poland ....................................... 5.3
 39 Hungary ..................................... 5.3
 40 El Salvador................................. 5.3
 41 Luxembourg .............................. 5.2
 42 Tunisia ....................................... 5.2
 43 Panama ..................................... 5.2
 44 Syria .......................................... 5.2
 45 New Zealand ............................. 5.2
 46 Denmark .................................... 5.2
 47 Philippines ................................. 5.2
 48 Brazil .......................................... 5.2
 49 South Africa ............................... 5.2
 50 Guatemala ................................. 5.1
 51 Slovenia ..................................... 5.1
 52 Thailand ..................................... 5.1
 53 Morocco .................................... 5.1
 54 Oman ........................................ 5.1
 55 Peru ........................................... 5.1
 56 Portugal ..................................... 5.1
 57 Mauritius .................................... 5.0
 58 Italy ............................................ 5.0
 59 Ireland ........................................ 5.0
 60 Dominican Republic ................... 5.0
 61 Senegal ..................................... 5.0
 62 Vietnam ..................................... 5.0
 63 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.0
 64 Lithuania .................................... 5.0
 65 Costa Rica ................................. 4.9
 66 Kenya ........................................ 4.9
 67 Ghana ........................................ 4.9
 68 Barbados ................................... 4.9
 69 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.9
 70 Suriname ................................... 4.8
 71 Finland ....................................... 4.8
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.8 7
 72 Jamaica ..................................... 4.8
 73 Nigeria ....................................... 4.8
 74 Zambia ...................................... 4.8
 75 Botswana .................................. 4.8
 76 Iceland ....................................... 4.7
 77 Yemen ....................................... 4.7
 78 Uganda ...................................... 4.7
 79 Guyana ...................................... 4.7
 80 Kuwait ....................................... 4.7
 81 Latvia ......................................... 4.7
 82 Greece ....................................... 4.6
 83 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 4.6
 84 Mexico ....................................... 4.6
 85 Colombia ................................... 4.6
 86 Gambia, The .............................. 4.6
 87 Namibia ..................................... 4.6
 88 Cambodia .................................. 4.6
 89 Indonesia ................................... 4.6
 90 Cameroon .................................. 4.6
 91 Pakistan ..................................... 4.5
 92 Bangladesh ................................ 4.5
 93 Benin ......................................... 4.5
 94 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.5
 95 Mali ............................................ 4.5
 96 Mongolia .................................... 4.5
 97 Romania .................................... 4.5
 98 Honduras ................................... 4.5
 99 Bulgaria ..................................... 4.4
 100 Paraguay ................................... 4.4
 101 Malawi ....................................... 4.4
 102 Rwanda ..................................... 4.4
 103 Uruguay ..................................... 4.4
 104 Moldova ..................................... 4.4
 105 Argentina ................................... 4.3
 106 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.2
 107 Belize ......................................... 4.2
 108 Lesotho ..................................... 4.2
 109 Ecuador ..................................... 4.2
 110 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.2
 111 Tanzania .................................... 4.2
 112 Madagascar ............................... 4.2
 113 Burundi ...................................... 4.2
 114 Egypt ......................................... 4.1
 115 Croatia ....................................... 4.1
 116 Tajikistan .................................... 4.1
 117 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.1
 118 Nicaragua .................................. 4.1
 119 Swaziland .................................. 4.0
 120 Ukraine ...................................... 4.0
 121 Montenegro ............................... 4.0
 122 Albania ....................................... 4.0
 123 Nepal ......................................... 4.0
 124 Russian Federation .................... 4.0
 125 Ethiopia ...................................... 4.0
 126 Cape Verde ............................... 4.0
 127 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.9
 128 Georgia ...................................... 3.9
 129 Mozambique .............................. 3.9
 130 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.9
 131 Algeria ....................................... 3.9
 132 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.8
 133 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.8
 134 Bolivia ........................................ 3.8
 135 Haiti ........................................... 3.7
 136 Serbia ........................................ 3.6
 137 Mauritania .................................. 3.4
 138 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.4
 139 Armenia ..................................... 3.4
 140 Venezuela .................................. 3.3
 141 Chad .......................................... 3.2
 142 Angola ....................................... 3.2
2.06 Intensity of local competition
How would you assess the intensity of competition in the local markets in your country? [1 = limited in most industries; 7 = intense in most 
industries]  |  2008–2009 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
340  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Korea, Rep. ...............................103.9
 2 Finland .........................................91.6
 3 Greece6 .......................................89.4
 4 United States ...............................89.1
 5 Slovenia .......................................86.9
 6 Puerto Rico8 ................................86.0
 7 New Zealand ...............................82.7
 8 Taiwan, China ..............................82.2
 9 Ukraine8 ......................................79.5
 10 Venezuela ....................................78.1
 11 Lithuania ......................................77.4
 12 Australia .......................................75.9
 13 Russian Federation ......................75.9
 14 Denmark ......................................74.4
 15 Iceland .........................................74.1
 16 Norway ........................................73.8
 17 Spain ...........................................73.2
 18 Sweden .......................................70.8
 19 Poland .........................................70.5
 20 Argentina7 ...................................68.7
 21 Belgium .......................................67.5
 22 Latvia ...........................................66.1
 23 Italy ..............................................66.0
 24 Barbados8 ...................................65.9
 25 Romania ......................................63.8
 26 Singapore ....................................63.6
 27 Uruguay .......................................63.3
 28 Netherlands .................................62.7
 29 Estonia .........................................62.7
 30 Ireland ..........................................62.5
 31 Israel ............................................62.5
 32 Portugal .......................................62.2
 33 Hungary .......................................61.7
 34 Czech Republic ...........................60.7
 35 Austria .........................................60.2
 36 Canada1 ......................................60.0
 37 Chile ............................................59.2
 38 Japan ..........................................59.0
 39 United Kingdom ...........................58.5
 40 Hong Kong SAR ..........................57.2
 41 France .........................................54.5
 42 Slovak Republic ...........................54.2
 43 Lebanon8.....................................54.0
 44 Bulgaria .......................................53.0
 45 Mongolia8 ....................................52.1
 46 Cyprus .........................................52.0
 47 Armenia8 .....................................51.5
 48 Switzerland ..................................51.5
 49 Bahrain8 ......................................51.2
 50 Croatia .........................................49.2
 51 Serbia8 ........................................49.1
 52 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................48.8
 53 Thailand8 .....................................46.2
 54 Turkey ..........................................45.8
 55 Montenegro .................................44.9
 56 Panama .......................................44.6
 57 Iran, Islamic Rep.8 .......................42.8
 58 Jordan .........................................41.8
 59 Macedonia, FYR ..........................40.4
 60 Ecuador7 .....................................39.8
 61 Colombia8 ...................................39.1
 62 Bolivia6 ........................................38.6
 63 Kazakhstan8 ................................38.5
 64 Moldova8 .....................................38.1
 65 Malaysia7 .....................................37.5
 66 Saudi Arabia8 ..............................36.8
 67 Paraguay .....................................36.6
 68 Brazil ............................................36.1
 69 Bosnia and Herzegovina8 ............35.9
 70 Peru5 ...........................................35.0
 71 Tunisia .........................................34.4
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Dominican Republic3 ...................34.0
 73 Malta ...........................................33.4
 74 Algeria8 ........................................30.8
 75 Egypt7 .........................................30.4
 76 Philippines7 ..................................28.9
 77 Georgia8 ......................................28.2
 78 Syria ............................................27.4
 79 Mexico .........................................27.0
 80 Costa Rica4 .................................25.6
 81 Jamaica .......................................25.0
 82 Mauritius7 ....................................24.9
 83 Oman8 .........................................24.5
 84 China ...........................................24.3
 85 El Salvador...................................23.0
 86 United Arab Emirates2 .................22.5
 87 Indonesia .....................................22.4
 88 Vietnam8 ......................................22.3
 89 Kuwait3 ........................................21.9
 90 Belize8 .........................................21.5
 91 Tajikistan8 ....................................19.7
 92 Azerbaijan8 ..................................19.3
 93 Honduras7 ...................................18.8
 94 Albania3 .......................................18.4
 95 Nicaragua2 ..................................18.0
 96 Cape Verde8 ................................17.8
 97 Guatemala6 .................................17.8
 98 Brunei Darussalam8 .....................17.2
 99 Sri Lanka6....................................17.1
 100 Timor-Leste .................................16.7
 101 India .............................................16.2
 102 South Africa5 ...............................15.4
 103 Morocco ......................................13.2
 104 Suriname1 ...................................12.1
 105 Guyana8 ......................................11.9
 106 Trinidad and Tobago4 ..................11.5
 107 Cameroon8 ..................................11.5
 108 Bangladesh ..................................10.6
 109 Luxembourg7...............................10.5
 110 Nigeria4 .......................................10.3
 111 Yemen6 .......................................10.2
 112 Qatar8..........................................10.0
 113 Namibia7 .......................................9.0
 114 Côte d’Ivoire6 ................................8.9
 115 Ghana ............................................8.8
 116 Senegal8 ........................................7.9
 117 Cambodia7 ....................................7.8
 118 Botswana5 .....................................7.4
 119 Zimbabwe8 ....................................6.2
 120 Benin5 ...........................................6.0
 121 Mali8 ..............................................5.8
 122 Nepal3 ...........................................5.6
 123 Ethiopia8 ........................................5.5
 124 Pakistan7 .......................................5.4
 125 Rwanda .........................................4.8
 126 Swaziland5 ....................................4.4
 127 Mauritania8 ....................................4.4
 128 Uganda ..........................................4.2
 129 Gambia, The7 ................................4.1
 130 Kenya ............................................4.0
 131 Angola8 .........................................3.7
 132 Madagascar8 .................................3.7
 133 Lesotho5 ........................................3.5
 134 Burkina Faso8 ................................3.3
 135 Burundi8 ........................................3.2
 136 Chad8 ............................................2.2
 137 Tanzania4 ......................................1.5
 138 Mozambique4 ................................1.5
 139 Malawi6 .........................................0.5
 n/a Germany ........................................n/a
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
 n/a Zambia ..........................................n/a
2.07 Tertiary education enrollment rate
Gross tertiary education enrollment rate (%)  |  2009
SOURCES: United Nations Education, Science and Culture Organization (UNESCO), UNESCO Institute for Statistics Data Centre (accessed November 11, 2011);  
World Bank, World Development Indicators 2009; national sources
1 2002 2 2003 3 2004 4 2005 5 2006 6 2007 7 2008 8 2010
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  341 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.2 7
 1 Belgium ..................................... 6.1
 2 United Kingdom ......................... 6.0
 3 Switzerland ................................ 6.0
 4 Canada ...................................... 5.8
 5 France ....................................... 5.7
 6 Spain ......................................... 5.7
 7 Qatar ......................................... 5.7
 8 Singapore .................................. 5.6
 9 Sweden ..................................... 5.5
 10 Netherlands ............................... 5.5
 11 Iceland ....................................... 5.5
 12 United States ............................. 5.4
 13 South Africa ............................... 5.4
 14 Chile .......................................... 5.4
 15 Australia ..................................... 5.4
 16 Finland ....................................... 5.3
 17 Israel .......................................... 5.3
 18 Lebanon .................................... 5.3
 19 Denmark .................................... 5.2
 20 Costa Rica ................................. 5.2
 21 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.2
 22 Argentina ................................... 5.1
 23 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.1
 24 New Zealand ............................. 5.1
 25 Portugal ..................................... 5.1
 26 Barbados ................................... 5.0
 27 Malaysia ..................................... 5.0
 28 Norway ...................................... 5.0
 29 Ireland ........................................ 4.9
 30 India ........................................... 4.9
 31 Tunisia ....................................... 4.9
 32 Malta ......................................... 4.8
 33 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.8
 34 Austria ....................................... 4.8
 35 Italy ............................................ 4.8
 36 Germany .................................... 4.8
 37 Senegal ..................................... 4.8
 38 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.7
 39 Gambia, The .............................. 4.7
 40 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.7
 41 Uruguay ..................................... 4.7
 42 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.7
 43 Peru ........................................... 4.7
 44 Guatemala ................................. 4.6
 45 Montenegro ............................... 4.6
 46 Kenya ........................................ 4.6
 47 Cyprus ....................................... 4.6
 48 Estonia ....................................... 4.6
 49 Mexico ....................................... 4.5
 50 Korea, Rep. ............................... 4.5
 51 Morocco .................................... 4.5
 52 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.5
 53 Colombia ................................... 4.4
 54 Slovenia ..................................... 4.4
 55 Philippines ................................. 4.4
 56 Benin ......................................... 4.4
 57 Japan ........................................ 4.3
 58 Luxembourg .............................. 4.3
 59 China ......................................... 4.3
 60 Bahrain ...................................... 4.3
 61 Brazil .......................................... 4.3
 62 Venezuela .................................. 4.3
 63 Jamaica ..................................... 4.2
 64 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.2
 65 Cameroon .................................. 4.2
 66 Lithuania .................................... 4.2
 67 Latvia ......................................... 4.2
 68 Indonesia ................................... 4.2
 69 Albania ....................................... 4.2
 70 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.1
 71 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 4.1
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.2 7
 72 Ghana ........................................ 4.1
 73 Thailand ..................................... 4.1
 74 Guyana ...................................... 4.1
 75 Suriname ................................... 4.1
 76 Zambia ...................................... 4.0
 77 Hungary ..................................... 4.0
 78 Poland ....................................... 4.0
 79 Pakistan ..................................... 4.0
 80 Nigeria ....................................... 4.0
 81 Malawi ....................................... 4.0
 82 Czech Republic ......................... 4.0
 83 Croatia ....................................... 3.9
 84 Rwanda ..................................... 3.9
 85 Jordan ....................................... 3.9
 86 Uganda ...................................... 3.9
 87 Mauritius .................................... 3.9
 88 El Salvador................................. 3.9
 89 Dominican Republic ................... 3.9
 90 Bangladesh ................................ 3.9
 91 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.8
 92 Romania .................................... 3.8
 93 Ecuador ..................................... 3.8
 94 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.7
 95 Botswana .................................. 3.7
 96 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.7
 97 Oman ........................................ 3.7
 98 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.7
 99 Kuwait ....................................... 3.7
 100 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.7
 101 Algeria ....................................... 3.7
 102 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.7
 103 Madagascar ............................... 3.7
 104 Greece ....................................... 3.7
 105 Panama ..................................... 3.6
 106 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.6
 107 Russian Federation .................... 3.6
 108 Syria .......................................... 3.6
 109 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.6
 110 Turkey ........................................ 3.6
 111 Nicaragua .................................. 3.6
 112 Cambodia .................................. 3.5
 113 Honduras ................................... 3.5
 114 Serbia ........................................ 3.5
 115 Georgia ...................................... 3.4
 116 Ukraine ...................................... 3.4
 117 Tanzania .................................... 3.4
 118 Mali ............................................ 3.4
 119 Cape Verde ............................... 3.4
 120 Belize ......................................... 3.4
 121 Mozambique .............................. 3.3
 122 Bolivia ........................................ 3.3
 123 Vietnam ..................................... 3.3
 124 Moldova ..................................... 3.3
 125 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.2
 126 Nepal ......................................... 3.2
 127 Chad .......................................... 3.2
 128 Tajikistan .................................... 3.2
 129 Namibia ..................................... 3.1
 130 Paraguay ................................... 3.1
 131 Armenia ..................................... 3.1
 132 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.0
 133 Egypt ......................................... 3.0
 134 Lesotho ..................................... 2.9
 135 Mongolia .................................... 2.8
 136 Haiti ........................................... 2.7
 137 Burundi ...................................... 2.6
 138 Swaziland .................................. 2.6
 139 Mauritania .................................. 2.5
 140 Yemen ....................................... 2.4
 141 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.1
 142 Angola ....................................... 1.8
2.08 Quality of management schools
How would you assess the quality of management or business schools in your country?  [1 = poor; 7 = excellent—among the best in the 
world)  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
342  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 1 Qatar ......................................... 6.2
 2 Singapore .................................. 5.4
 3 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.9
 4 Malaysia ..................................... 4.9
 5 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.8
 6 Israel .......................................... 4.8
 7 Luxembourg .............................. 4.7
 8 Finland ....................................... 4.7
 9 United States ............................. 4.7
 10 Sweden ..................................... 4.5
 11 Taiwan, China ............................ 4.5
 12 Oman ........................................ 4.5
 13 Rwanda ..................................... 4.5
 14 Switzerland ................................ 4.5
 15 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.4
 16 China ......................................... 4.4
 17 Bahrain ...................................... 4.4
 18 Iceland ....................................... 4.4
 19 Malta ......................................... 4.3
 20 Denmark .................................... 4.3
 21 Gambia, The .............................. 4.3
 22 Netherlands ............................... 4.3
 23 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.3
 24 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.2
 25 Estonia ....................................... 4.2
 26 Austria ....................................... 4.2
 27 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 4.2
 28 Portugal ..................................... 4.2
 29 Germany .................................... 4.2
 30 Senegal ..................................... 4.2
 31 Korea, Rep. ............................... 4.1
 32 Japan ........................................ 4.1
 33 Montenegro ............................... 4.1
 34 Indonesia ................................... 4.1
 35 Canada ...................................... 4.1
 36 Belgium ..................................... 4.1
 37 Cyprus ....................................... 4.1
 38 Benin ......................................... 4.1
 39 Barbados ................................... 4.1
 40 Cambodia .................................. 4.1
 41 Vietnam ..................................... 4.0
 42 Tunisia ....................................... 4.0
 43 Norway ...................................... 4.0
 44 Cape Verde ............................... 4.0
 45 Colombia ................................... 4.0
 46 Panama ..................................... 4.0
 47 Chile .......................................... 4.0
 48 France ....................................... 4.0
 49 United Kingdom ......................... 3.9
 50 Australia ..................................... 3.9
 51 Tajikistan .................................... 3.9
 52 Brazil .......................................... 3.9
 53 Zambia ...................................... 3.9
 54 Uruguay ..................................... 3.9
 55 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.8
 56 Turkey ........................................ 3.8
 57 Botswana .................................. 3.8
 58 Albania ....................................... 3.8
 59 Morocco .................................... 3.7
 60 Mozambique .............................. 3.7
 61 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.7
 62 Mauritius .................................... 3.7
 63 Kenya ........................................ 3.7
 64 Costa Rica ................................. 3.7
 65 Mali ............................................ 3.6
 66 Uganda ...................................... 3.6
 67 Namibia ..................................... 3.6
 68 Tanzania .................................... 3.6
 69 Puerto Rico ................................ 3.6
 70 Jordan ....................................... 3.6
 71 New Zealand ............................. 3.6
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.6 7
 72 Thailand ..................................... 3.6
 73 Malawi ....................................... 3.6
 74 Guyana ...................................... 3.5
 75 Mexico ....................................... 3.5
 76 Georgia ...................................... 3.5
 77 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.5
 78 India ........................................... 3.5
 79 Cameroon .................................. 3.5
 80 Honduras ................................... 3.5
 81 Czech Republic ......................... 3.5
 82 Ireland ........................................ 3.4
 83 Ecuador ..................................... 3.4
 84 Slovenia ..................................... 3.4
 85 Spain ......................................... 3.4
 86 Angola ....................................... 3.4
 87 Latvia ......................................... 3.4
 88 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.4
 89 Mongolia .................................... 3.4
 90 Hungary ..................................... 3.4
 91 Pakistan ..................................... 3.4
 92 Serbia ........................................ 3.4
 93 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.4
 94 Dominican Republic ................... 3.3
 95 Ghana ........................................ 3.3
 96 Lithuania .................................... 3.3
 97 Kuwait ....................................... 3.3
 98 Peru ........................................... 3.3
 99 Russian Federation .................... 3.3
 100 Poland ....................................... 3.3
 101 Madagascar ............................... 3.3
 102 Jamaica ..................................... 3.3
 103 South Africa ............................... 3.3
 104 Egypt ......................................... 3.3
 105 Nigeria ....................................... 3.2
 106 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.2
 107 Bolivia ........................................ 3.2
 108 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.2
 109 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.2
 110 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.1
 111 Romania .................................... 3.1
 112 Ukraine ...................................... 3.1
 113 Greece ....................................... 3.0
 114 Italy ............................................ 3.0
 115 Chad .......................................... 3.0
 116 Syria .......................................... 3.0
 117 Bangladesh ................................ 3.0
 118 Guatemala ................................. 3.0
 119 El Salvador................................. 2.9
 120 Suriname ................................... 2.9
 121 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.9
 122 Croatia ....................................... 2.9
 123 Lesotho ..................................... 2.8
 124 Armenia ..................................... 2.8
 125 Belize ......................................... 2.8
 126 Philippines ................................. 2.8
 127 Argentina ................................... 2.8
 128 Paraguay ................................... 2.8
 129 Slovak Republic ......................... 2.8
 130 Zimbabwe .................................. 2.7
 131 Mauritania .................................. 2.7
 132 Moldova ..................................... 2.6
 133 Nepal ......................................... 2.6
 134 Nicaragua .................................. 2.6
 135 Swaziland .................................. 2.5
 136 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.4
 137 Algeria ....................................... 2.4
 138 Haiti ........................................... 2.4
 139 Venezuela .................................. 2.4
 140 Burundi ...................................... 2.3
 141 Lebanon .................................... 2.3
 142 Yemen ....................................... 1.9
2.09 Government procurement of advanced technology products
Do government procurement decisions foster technology innovation in your country? [1 = no, not at all; 7 = yes, extremely effectively]  |  
2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
3rd pillar 
Infrastructure and  
digital content 
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
344  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Iceland1 ................................53,352.5
 2 Norway1 ...............................27,298.9
 3 Kuwait ..................................20,306.9
 4 Canada1 ...............................18,485.8
 5 Qatar ....................................15,483.6
 6 Sweden1 ..............................14,341.9
 7 United Arab Emirates ............13,898.1
 8 United States1 ......................13,524.2
 9 Finland1 ................................13,398.2
 10 Bahrain .................................11,339.3
 11 Australia1 ..............................11,240.6
 12 New Zealand1 .......................10,035.6
 13 Taiwan, China1 .......................9,909.3
 14 Korea, Rep.1 ..........................9,239.7
 15 Paraguay ................................8,902.4
 16 Brunei Darussalam ..................8,898.0
 17 Switzerland1 ...........................8,766.3
 18 Singapore ...............................8,741.6
 19 France1...................................8,600.0
 20 Belgium1 .................................8,412.1
 21 Japan1 ....................................8,215.8
 22 Slovenia ..................................8,125.7
 23 Israel .......................................7,955.1
 24 Estonia ....................................7,883.6
 25 Austria1 ..................................7,830.9
 26 Czech Republic1 .....................7,825.9
 27 Saudi Arabia ...........................7,803.8
 28 Russian Federation .................7,253.5
 29 Germany1 ...............................7,168.7
 30 Netherlands1 ..........................6,777.5
 31 Denmark1 ...............................6,553.6
 32 Spain1 ....................................6,387.0
 33 Luxembourg1..........................6,293.7
 34 Ireland1 ...................................6,188.5
 35 United Kingdom1 ....................5,970.4
 36 Oman .....................................5,961.8
 37 Trinidad and Tobago ...............5,929.2
 38 Bulgaria ..................................5,873.0
 39 Malta ......................................5,585.3
 40 Puerto Rico .............................5,565.3
 41 Hong Kong SAR .....................5,485.4
 42 South Africa ............................5,180.9
 43 Kazakhstan .............................5,130.9
 44 Greece1 ..................................4,848.4
 45 Slovak Republic1 ....................4,765.1
 46 Italy1 .......................................4,742.1
 47 Cyprus ....................................4,714.9
 48 Portugal1 ................................4,613.5
 49 Venezuela ...............................4,251.9
 50 Montenegro ............................4,227.7
 51 Ukraine ...................................4,184.6
 52 Lithuania .................................3,966.3
 53 Poland1 ..................................3,948.4
 54 Serbia .....................................3,736.6
 55 Barbados ................................3,714.5
 56 Hungary1 ................................3,590.0
 57 Chile .......................................3,554.7
 58 Malaysia ..................................3,541.3
 59 Bosnia and Herzegovina .........3,513.6
 60 Macedonia, FYR .....................3,074.8
 61 Suriname ................................3,067.6
 62 Argentina ................................3,057.4
 63 Romania .................................3,008.7
 64 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................2,967.7
 65 Jamaica ..................................2,860.4
 66 Croatia ....................................2,764.8
 67 Turkey1 ...................................2,701.0
 68 Azerbaijan ...............................2,669.5
 69 Uruguay ..................................2,620.8
 70 China ......................................2,602.6
 71 Lebanon .................................2,550.1
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Brazil .......................................2,419.1
 73 Tajikistan .................................2,413.1
 74 Jordan ....................................2,365.9
 75 Latvia ......................................2,322.1
 76 Kyrgyz Republic ......................2,282.2
 77 Mexico1 ..................................2,256.2
 78 Thailand ..................................2,159.5
 79 Costa Rica ..............................2,095.3
 80 Syria .......................................2,083.0
 81 Georgia ...................................1,921.0
 82 Panama ..................................1,887.6
 83 Armenia ..................................1,874.6
 84 Mauritius .................................1,870.9
 85 Egypt ......................................1,673.1
 86 Dominican Republic ................1,594.8
 87 Mongolia .................................1,553.9
 88 Tunisia ....................................1,494.1
 89 Ecuador ..................................1,323.8
 90 Colombia ................................1,244.8
 91 Albania ....................................1,193.5
 92 Algeria ....................................1,168.7
 93 Peru ........................................1,139.4
 94 Guyana ...................................1,091.0
 95 Moldova .....................................997.5
 96 El Salvador.................................972.3
 97 Namibia .....................................953.0
 98 Honduras ...................................895.1
 99 Vietnam .....................................849.9
 100 Zambia ......................................783.2
 101 Belize .........................................720.2
 102 India ...........................................697.1
 103 Mozambique ..............................677.3
 104 Philippines .................................674.5
 105 Morocco ....................................664.8
 106 Bolivia ........................................648.8
 107 Zimbabwe ..................................641.7
 108 Guatemala .................................636.7
 109 Indonesia ...................................636.0
 110 Nicaragua ..................................596.4
 111 Pakistan .....................................547.2
 112 Cape Verde ...............................526.3
 113 Sri Lanka ...................................451.4
 114 Swaziland ..................................408.6
 115 Ghana ........................................359.3
 116 Botswana ..................................322.8
 117 Côte d’Ivoire ..............................305.5
 118 Cameroon ..................................295.9
 119 Yemen .......................................289.3
 120 Bangladesh ................................240.3
 121 Angola .......................................221.3
 122 Senegal .....................................203.7
 123 Kenya ........................................183.5
 124 Mauritania ..................................166.0
 125 Nigeria .......................................140.1
 126 Gambia, The ..............................134.5
 127 Malawi .......................................119.7
 128 Nepal .........................................106.7
 129 Cambodia ..................................105.7
 130 Tanzania ....................................104.4
 131 Lesotho2 ......................................92.1
 132 Uganda ........................................69.4
 133 Madagascar .................................56.8
 134 Haiti .............................................49.9
 135 Ethiopia ........................................47.5
 136 Burkina Faso1 ..............................41.6
 137 Mali ..............................................33.9
 138 Burundi ........................................26.2
 139 Benin ...........................................16.3
 140 Rwanda .......................................16.0
 141 Chad ..............................................9.4
 n/a Timor-Leste ...................................n/a
3.01 Electricity production
Electricity production (kWh) per capita  |  2008
SOURCES: The World Bank, World Development Indicators Online (accessed October 10, 2011); US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), The World Factbook (accessed 
October 11, 2011)
1 2009 2 2010
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  345 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Azerbaijan ..................................100.0
 1 Bahrain ......................................100.0
 1 Chile ..........................................100.0
 1 Croatia5 .....................................100.0
 1 Hong Kong SAR ........................100.0
 1 Israel4 ........................................100.0
 1 Kuwait .......................................100.0
 1 Lithuania ....................................100.0
 1 Malta .........................................100.0
 1 Montenegro ...............................100.0
 1 Nicaragua5 ................................100.0
 1 Qatar .........................................100.0
 1 Singapore ..................................100.0
 1 Switzerland ................................100.0
 1 Taiwan, China ............................100.0
 1 Trinidad and Tobago ..................100.0
 1 Tunisia .......................................100.0
 1 Turkey ........................................100.0
 1 Uganda4 ....................................100.0
 1 United Arab Emirates .................100.0
 1 Uruguay .....................................100.0
 22 Bulgaria .....................................100.0
 22 Estonia .......................................100.0
 24 Cyprus .......................................100.0
 25 Barbados3 ...................................99.9
 25 Belgium .......................................99.9
 25 Greece .........................................99.9
 25 Japan ..........................................99.9
 25 Korea, Rep. .................................99.9
 25 Luxembourg ................................99.9
 25 Macedonia, FYR ..........................99.9
 25 Mexico .........................................99.9
 25 Romania ......................................99.9
 25 Ukraine ........................................99.9
 35 Brazil ............................................99.9
 36 Slovak Republic ...........................99.9
 37 Czech Republic ...........................99.8
 37 Spain ...........................................99.8
 37 United Kingdom ...........................99.8
 37 United States ...............................99.8
 41 South Africa3 ...............................99.8
 42 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............99.7
 42 Egypt ...........................................99.7
 42 Slovenia .......................................99.7
 45 Finland4 .......................................99.5
 46 China5 .........................................99.5
 47 Australia .......................................99.1
 47 Saudi Arabia ................................99.1
 49 Austria5 .......................................99.0
 49 Botswana4 ...................................99.0
 49 Cambodia5 ..................................99.0
 49 Canada5 ......................................99.0
 49 France .........................................99.0
 49 Georgia ........................................99.0
 49 Germany ......................................99.0
 49 Hungary .......................................99.0
 49 Iceland .........................................99.0
 49 Ireland ..........................................99.0
 49 Italy ..............................................99.0
 49 Jordan .........................................99.0
 49 Mauritius ......................................99.0
 49 Philippines ...................................99.0
 49 Poland .........................................99.0
 49 Portugal .......................................99.0
 49 Sweden .......................................99.0
 66 Armenia .......................................98.9
 67 Latvia3 .........................................98.8
 68 Morocco ......................................98.4
 69 Albania .........................................98.2
 70 Netherlands4 ...............................98.0
 70 Sri Lanka .....................................98.0
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Moldova3 .....................................98.0
 73 Oman ..........................................97.6
 74 Syria ............................................97.5
 75 Peru .............................................97.1
 76 New Zealand ...............................97.0
 76 Norway1 ......................................97.0
 78 Serbia ..........................................97.0
 79 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................96.0
 79 Rwanda .......................................96.0
 81 El Salvador3 .................................95.0
 81 Guyana ........................................95.0
 81 Iran, Islamic Rep.3 .......................95.0
 81 Jamaica3 .....................................95.0
 81 Kazakhstan ..................................95.0
 81 Lebanon5.....................................95.0
 81 Malaysia .......................................95.0
 81 Namibia3 .....................................95.0
 81 Russian Federation2 ....................95.0
 90 Argentina3 ...................................94.1
 91 Paraguay .....................................94.0
 92 Ecuador .......................................93.3
 93 Côte d’Ivoire5 ..............................92.2
 94 Pakistan .......................................92.0
 95 Swaziland4 ..................................91.0
 96 Panama .......................................90.7
 97 Bangladesh2 ................................90.0
 97 Benin ...........................................90.0
 97 Indonesia2 ...................................90.0
 97 Nigeria .........................................90.0
 97 Senegal .......................................90.0
 97 Venezuela3 ..................................90.0
 97 Zambia ........................................90.0
 104 Honduras3 ...................................89.9
 105 Kenya ..........................................89.0
 106 Gambia, The3 ..............................85.0
 106 Malawi .........................................85.0
 106 Mongolia ......................................85.0
 106 Tanzania ......................................85.0
 110 Yemen .........................................84.0
 111 Burundi5 ......................................83.0
 111 Colombia2 ...................................83.0
 111 India5 ...........................................83.0
 114 Algeria3 ........................................81.5
 115 Dominican Republic .....................81.2
 116 Zimbabwe ....................................80.0
 117 Ghana ..........................................77.0
 118 Guatemala2 .................................76.0
 119 Cape Verde .................................72.0
 120 Vietnam2 ......................................70.0
 121 Costa Rica5 .................................69.5
 122 Timor-Leste4................................69.0
 123 Puerto Rico5 ................................68.4
 124 Mauritania4 ..................................62.0
 125 Burkina Faso2 ..............................61.1
 126 Cameroon2 ..................................58.0
 127 Lesotho2 ......................................55.0
 128 Bolivia3 ........................................45.9
 129 Angola2 .......................................40.0
 130 Thailand3 .....................................37.8
 131 Nepal ...........................................35.1
 132 Mozambique ................................32.2
 133 Chad2 ..........................................24.0
 134 Madagascar2 ...............................23.0
 135 Mali2 ............................................20.0
 136 Ethiopia2 ......................................10.0
 137 Tajikistan1 ......................................0.0
 n/a Belize .............................................n/a
 n/a Brunei Darussalam .........................n/a
 n/a Denmark ........................................n/a
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
 n/a Suriname .......................................n/a
3.02 Mobile network coverage rate
Percentage of total population covered by a mobile network signal  |  2010
SOURCE: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition)
1 2001 2 2006 3 2007 4 2008 5 2009
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
346  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Hong Kong SAR ........................776.6
 2 Iceland .......................................291.0
 3 Sweden .....................................236.9
 4 Singapore ..................................172.2
 5 Switzerland ................................155.5
 6 Netherlands ...............................154.3
 7 Portugal .....................................146.6
 8 Denmark ....................................142.2
 9 Puerto Rico ................................135.4
 10 United Kingdom .........................132.8
 11 Belgium .....................................112.0
 12 Norway ......................................109.6
 13 Finland .......................................107.3
 14 Luxembourg ................................87.6
 15 Germany ......................................74.1
 16 Austria .........................................73.7
 17 Slovenia .......................................70.4
 18 France .........................................69.6
 19 Czech Republic ...........................69.2
 20 Moldova .......................................65.8
 21 Bulgaria .......................................64.2
 22 Ireland ..........................................64.1
 23 Italy ..............................................61.5
 24 Spain ...........................................56.1
 25 Canada ........................................54.0
 26 Cyprus .........................................51.6
 27 Romania ......................................51.4
 28 Mongolia ......................................48.3
 29 Serbia ..........................................47.0
 30 Lithuania ......................................45.4
 31 Croatia .........................................42.9
 32 Australia .......................................41.4
 33 United States ...............................39.2
 34 Poland .........................................37.7
 35 Greece .........................................31.0
 36 Russian Federation ......................30.8
 37 Latvia ...........................................30.0
 38 Taiwan, China ..............................29.7
 39 Saudi Arabia ................................28.3
 40 Cambodia ....................................28.1
 41 Argentina .....................................27.5
 42 Brunei Darussalam .......................25.1
 43 Estonia .........................................23.1
 44 Uruguay .......................................23.0
 45 Georgia ........................................21.4
 46 Montenegro .................................21.3
 47 Panama .......................................21.3
 48 Jamaica .......................................21.0
 49 Barbados .....................................20.6
 50 New Zealand ...............................19.3
 51 Malta ...........................................19.2
 52 Chile ............................................19.1
 53 Turkey ..........................................19.1
 54 Belize ...........................................18.3
 55 United Arab Emirates ...................17.9
 56 Trinidad and Tobago ....................17.8
 57 Qatar ...........................................17.1
 58 Macedonia, FYR ..........................16.8
 59 Japan ..........................................15.8
 60 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............15.6
 61 Timor-Leste3................................15.2
 62 Bahrain ........................................14.4
 63 Tunisia .........................................13.3
 64 Costa Rica ...................................12.7
 65 Brazil ............................................12.6
 66 Korea, Rep. .................................11.9
 67 Albania .........................................11.8
 68 Slovak Republic ...........................11.5
 69 Malaysia .......................................11.4
 70 Thailand .......................................10.8
 71 Philippines ...................................10.7
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Colombia .....................................10.2
 73 Dominican Republic .....................10.2
 74 Hungary .......................................10.0
 75 Azerbaijan ......................................9.7
 76 Kuwait ...........................................9.6
 77 Mauritius ........................................9.2
 78 Nicaragua ......................................8.6
 79 Kazakhstan ....................................8.6
 80 Peru ...............................................8.5
 81 Paraguay .......................................8.3
 82 Ecuador .........................................8.3
 83 Algeria ...........................................8.1
 84 Israel ..............................................8.0
 85 Côte d’Ivoire ..................................7.8
 86 Armenia .........................................7.8
 87 Mexico ...........................................7.3
 88 Venezuela ......................................6.8
 89 Egypt .............................................6.6
 90 Botswana ......................................6.4
 91 Guyana ..........................................6.4
 92 Jordan ...........................................6.4
 93 Oman ............................................6.1
 94 Honduras .......................................5.9
 95 Ukraine ..........................................5.9
 96 India ...............................................5.8
 97 Vietnam .........................................5.6
 98 Madagascar ...................................5.5
 99 Ethiopia ..........................................5.4
 100 Morocco ........................................4.8
 101 Namibia .........................................4.4
 102 Bolivia ............................................4.3
 103 Guatemala .....................................4.0
 104 Burkina Faso ..................................3.5
 105 Sri Lanka .......................................3.3
 106 Iran, Islamic Rep. ...........................3.1
 107 Suriname .......................................3.1
 108 Cape Verde ...................................3.1
 109 Indonesia .......................................2.9
 110 Bangladesh ....................................2.8
 111 Mauritania ......................................2.7
 112 Pakistan .........................................2.6
 113 Senegal .........................................2.4
 114 China .............................................2.4
 115 Benin .............................................2.2
 116 Kenya ............................................1.9
 117 Lebanon ........................................1.9
 118 Mali ................................................1.9
 119 South Africa ...................................1.7
 120 Nepal .............................................1.7
 121 El Salvador.....................................1.5
 122 Ghana ............................................1.5
 123 Syria ..............................................1.4
 124 Mozambique ..................................1.3
 125 Rwanda .........................................1.2
 126 Yemen ...........................................1.1
 127 Gambia, The ..................................1.1
 128 Uganda ..........................................0.9
 129 Tanzania ........................................0.7
 130 Angola ...........................................0.6
 131 Swaziland ......................................0.6
 132 Tajikistan1 ......................................0.5
 133 Cameroon ......................................0.4
 134 Zambia ..........................................0.4
 135 Lesotho .........................................0.3
 136 Zimbabwe ......................................0.3
 137 Kyrgyz Republic .............................0.3
 138 Nigeria ...........................................0.1
 139 Haiti ...............................................0.1
 140 Malawi2 .........................................0.1
 141 Chad ..............................................0.1
 142 Burundi ..........................................0.1
3.03 International Internet bandwidth per Internet user
International Internet bandwidth (kb/s) per Internet user  |  2010
SOURCE: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition)
1 2007 2 2008 3 2009
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  347 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Iceland ....................................2,529.9
 2 Netherlands ............................2,277.1
 3 Denmark .................................1,873.3
 4 Switzerland .............................1,867.5
 5 Australia ..................................1,760.8
 6 Norway ...................................1,652.5
 7 New Zealand ..........................1,489.5
 8 United States ..........................1,446.3
 9 Luxembourg ...........................1,415.5
 10 United Kingdom ......................1,396.3
 11 Malta ......................................1,380.3
 12 Sweden ..................................1,268.2
 13 Finland ....................................1,245.4
 14 Canada ...................................1,238.9
 15 Korea, Rep. ............................1,140.4
 16 Ireland ........................................997.9
 17 Germany ....................................872.8
 18 Austria .......................................856.6
 19 Cyprus .......................................838.1
 20 Japan ........................................649.8
 21 Singapore ..................................529.7
 22 Taiwan, China ............................492.7
 23 Belgium .....................................489.8
 24 Hong Kong SAR ........................453.5
 25 Estonia .......................................434.4
 26 Israel ..........................................396.6
 27 Barbados ...................................329.3
 28 Czech Republic .........................318.2
 29 Slovenia .....................................303.0
 30 Belize .........................................301.7
 31 France .......................................297.1
 32 Spain .........................................233.4
 33 Poland .......................................210.8
 34 Lithuania ....................................175.9
 35 Portugal .....................................173.5
 36 Latvia .........................................173.0
 37 Croatia .......................................168.6
 38 Hungary .....................................166.1
 39 Italy ............................................154.4
 40 United Arab Emirates .................152.4
 41 Kuwait .......................................138.9
 42 Slovak Republic .........................127.5
 43 Panama .....................................126.8
 44 Greece .......................................124.2
 45 Costa Rica .................................107.8
 46 Turkey ..........................................99.0
 47 Bahrain ........................................97.5
 48 Mauritius ......................................86.6
 49 Qatar ...........................................85.3
 50 Puerto Rico ..................................83.7
 51 Bulgaria .......................................73.4
 52 Trinidad and Tobago ....................72.3
 53 Brunei Darussalam .......................65.2
 54 South Africa .................................62.6
 55 Chile ............................................52.8
 56 Uruguay .......................................45.0
 57 Malaysia .......................................41.5
 58 Brazil ............................................40.7
 59 Romania ......................................39.8
 60 Jamaica .......................................39.2
 61 Lebanon ......................................28.6
 62 Oman ..........................................27.7
 63 Argentina .....................................26.1
 64 Montenegro .................................25.3
 65 Macedonia, FYR ..........................24.3
 66 Suriname .....................................21.0
 67 Mexico .........................................20.6
 68 Russian Federation ......................20.3
 69 Serbia ..........................................19.9
 70 Jordan .........................................19.8
 71 Saudi Arabia ................................17.5
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Armenia .......................................17.5
 73 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............16.0
 74 Dominican Republic .....................15.2
 75 Ecuador .......................................14.6
 76 Colombia .....................................14.3
 77 Peru .............................................14.2
 78 Tunisia .........................................14.1
 79 Cape Verde .................................14.1
 80 Namibia .......................................14.0
 81 Moldova .......................................13.5
 82 El Salvador...................................13.4
 83 Ukraine ........................................13.2
 84 Thailand .......................................13.2
 85 Georgia ........................................11.9
 86 Mongolia ......................................10.5
 87 Swaziland ....................................10.1
 88 Guatemala .....................................9.9
 89 Botswana ......................................8.5
 90 Albania ...........................................8.4
 91 Honduras .......................................8.3
 92 Bolivia ............................................8.0
 93 Nicaragua ......................................7.8
 94 Venezuela ......................................7.4
 95 Philippines .....................................6.7
 96 Paraguay .......................................6.7
 97 Guyana ..........................................6.6
 98 Kazakhstan ....................................5.2
 99 Azerbaijan ......................................5.1
 100 Sri Lanka .......................................4.4
 101 Vietnam .........................................3.1
 102 Morocco ........................................3.0
 103 Gambia, The ..................................2.9
 104 Angola ...........................................2.7
 105 Kenya ............................................2.6
 106 Egypt .............................................2.3
 107 India ...............................................2.2
 108 Mauritania ......................................2.0
 109 Indonesia .......................................2.0
 110 China .............................................1.9
 111 Ghana ............................................1.7
 112 Cambodia ......................................1.7
 113 Nepal .............................................1.5
 114 Zambia ..........................................1.2
 115 Nigeria ...........................................1.2
 116 Senegal .........................................1.1
 117 Kyrgyz Republic .............................1.1
 118 Côte d’Ivoire ..................................1.1
 119 Zimbabwe ......................................1.0
 120 Haiti ...............................................1.0
 121 Pakistan .........................................1.0
 122 Timor-Leste ...................................0.9
 123 Algeria ...........................................0.9
 124 Uganda ..........................................0.9
 125 Mozambique ..................................0.9
 126 Iran, Islamic Rep. ...........................0.7
 127 Mali ................................................0.7
 128 Rwanda .........................................0.7
 129 Cameroon ......................................0.6
 130 Madagascar ...................................0.5
 131 Lesotho .........................................0.5
 132 Tajikistan ........................................0.4
 133 Tanzania ........................................0.4
 134 Bangladesh ....................................0.3
 135 Yemen ...........................................0.3
 136 Malawi ...........................................0.3
 137 Burkina Faso ..................................0.2
 138 Burundi ..........................................0.2
 139 Ethiopia ..........................................0.1
 140 Benin .............................................0.1
 141 Syria ..............................................0.1
 n/a Chad ..............................................n/a
3.04 Secure Internet servers
Secure Internet servers per million population  |  2010
SOURCES: The World Bank, World Development Indicators Online (accessed October 10, 2011); national sources
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
348  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.9 7
 1 Switzerland ................................ 6.6
 2 Sweden ..................................... 6.6
 3 Iceland ....................................... 6.5
 4 Austria ....................................... 6.4
 5 United Kingdom ......................... 6.4
 6 Netherlands ............................... 6.4
 7 Denmark .................................... 6.4
 8 Norway ...................................... 6.4
 9 Singapore .................................. 6.4
 10 Belgium ..................................... 6.3
 11 Estonia ....................................... 6.3
 12 Japan ........................................ 6.3
 13 Taiwan, China ............................ 6.3
 14 Canada ...................................... 6.2
 15 Korea, Rep. ............................... 6.2
 16 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 6.2
 17 Finland ....................................... 6.2
 18 Lithuania .................................... 6.2
 19 Bahrain ...................................... 6.1
 20 Luxembourg .............................. 6.1
 21 Hungary ..................................... 6.1
 22 Germany .................................... 6.1
 23 Czech Republic ......................... 6.1
 24 Australia ..................................... 6.1
 25 Portugal ..................................... 6.1
 26 United States ............................. 6.0
 27 Malta ......................................... 6.0
 28 Barbados ................................... 6.0
 29 Israel .......................................... 6.0
 30 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.9
 31 New Zealand ............................. 5.9
 32 Uruguay ..................................... 5.8
 33 Qatar ......................................... 5.8
 34 Slovenia ..................................... 5.8
 35 Puerto Rico ................................ 5.7
 36 Malaysia ..................................... 5.7
 37 China ......................................... 5.6
 38 Spain ......................................... 5.6
 39 Slovak Republic ......................... 5.6
 40 France ....................................... 5.5
 41 Oman ........................................ 5.5
 42 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.4
 43 Cyprus ....................................... 5.4
 44 Ireland ........................................ 5.4
 45 Latvia ......................................... 5.4
 46 Croatia ....................................... 5.4
 47 Montenegro ............................... 5.4
 48 Vietnam ..................................... 5.3
 49 Chile .......................................... 5.3
 50 Jordan ....................................... 5.3
 51 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.3
 52 Turkey ........................................ 5.3
 53 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 5.2
 54 Bulgaria ..................................... 5.2
 55 Mongolia .................................... 5.2
 56 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 5.2
 57 Romania .................................... 5.2
 58 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 5.2
 59 Russian Federation .................... 5.2
 60 Ukraine ...................................... 5.1
 61 Jamaica ..................................... 5.1
 62 Panama ..................................... 5.1
 63 Guatemala ................................. 5.1
 64 Senegal ..................................... 5.0
 65 Greece ....................................... 5.0
 66 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 5.0
 67 Indonesia ................................... 5.0
 68 Dominican Republic ................... 5.0
 69 Poland ....................................... 5.0
 70 Kuwait ....................................... 5.0
 71 Brazil .......................................... 4.9
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.9 7
 72 Italy ............................................ 4.9
 73 Moldova ..................................... 4.9
 74 El Salvador................................. 4.9
 75 Mauritius .................................... 4.9
 76 Georgia ...................................... 4.9
 77 Costa Rica ................................. 4.8
 78 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.8
 79 Tunisia ....................................... 4.8
 80 Philippines ................................. 4.8
 81 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.8
 82 Mexico ....................................... 4.8
 83 South Africa ............................... 4.8
 84 Thailand ..................................... 4.8
 85 India ........................................... 4.8
 86 Pakistan ..................................... 4.7
 87 Albania ....................................... 4.7
 88 Argentina ................................... 4.7
 89 Colombia ................................... 4.7
 90 Gambia, The .............................. 4.6
 91 Peru ........................................... 4.6
 92 Guyana ...................................... 4.6
 93 Morocco .................................... 4.6
 94 Lebanon .................................... 4.5
 95 Namibia ..................................... 4.5
 96 Kenya ........................................ 4.5
 97 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.5
 98 Tajikistan .................................... 4.5
 99 Honduras ................................... 4.5
 100 Egypt ......................................... 4.5
 101 Armenia ..................................... 4.4
 102 Serbia ........................................ 4.4
 103 Cape Verde ............................... 4.4
 104 Rwanda ..................................... 4.4
 105 Venezuela .................................. 4.4
 106 Cambodia .................................. 4.4
 107 Botswana .................................. 4.3
 108 Nigeria ....................................... 4.3
 109 Malawi ....................................... 4.2
 110 Ecuador ..................................... 4.1
 111 Suriname ................................... 4.1
 112 Bangladesh ................................ 4.0
 113 Belize ......................................... 4.0
 114 Yemen ....................................... 4.0
 115 Nicaragua .................................. 4.0
 116 Benin ......................................... 3.9
 117 Paraguay ................................... 3.9
 118 Ghana ........................................ 3.9
 119 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.9
 120 Zambia ...................................... 3.8
 121 Syria .......................................... 3.7
 122 Bolivia ........................................ 3.6
 123 Mozambique .............................. 3.6
 124 Uganda ...................................... 3.6
 125 Nepal ......................................... 3.6
 126 Algeria ....................................... 3.6
 127 Swaziland .................................. 3.6
 128 Mali ............................................ 3.5
 129 Mauritania .................................. 3.5
 130 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.5
 131 Madagascar ............................... 3.5
 132 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.4
 133 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.4
 134 Tanzania .................................... 3.4
 135 Cameroon .................................. 3.3
 136 Lesotho ..................................... 3.2
 137 Angola ....................................... 3.2
 138 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.2
 139 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.1
 140 Haiti ........................................... 3.0
 141 Chad .......................................... 2.6
 142 Burundi ...................................... 2.4
3.05 Accessibility of digital content
In your country, how accessible is digital content (e.g., text and audiovisual content, software products) via multiple platforms (e.g., fixed-line 
Internet, wireless Internet, mobile network, satellite, etc.)? [1 = not accessible at all; 7 = widely accessible]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
4th pillar 
Affordability
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
350  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Hong Kong SAR ..........................0.02
 2 Bangladesh ..................................0.03
 3 Sri Lanka .....................................0.04
 4 Pakistan .......................................0.05
 5 India .............................................0.06
 6 Denmark ......................................0.06
 7 Tajikistan ......................................0.06
 8 Nepal ...........................................0.07
 9 Ukraine ........................................0.07
 10 Finland .........................................0.07
 11 Sweden .......................................0.08
 12 Austria .........................................0.08
 13 Egypt ...........................................0.09
 14 Thailand .......................................0.09
 15 United Arab Emirates2 .................0.09
 16 Cyprus .........................................0.10
 17 Norway ........................................0.10
 18 Costa Rica ...................................0.10
 19 Mongolia ......................................0.10
 20 Ghana ..........................................0.12
 21 Kuwait .........................................0.14
 22 Azerbaijan ....................................0.15
 23 Iceland .........................................0.15
 24 Jordan .........................................0.15
 25 Puerto Rico ..................................0.15
 26 China ...........................................0.15
 27 Germany ......................................0.15
 28 Singapore ....................................0.15
 29 Zimbabwe ....................................0.16
 30 Bahrain1 ......................................0.16
 31 Armenia .......................................0.17
 32 Ethiopia2 ......................................0.17
 33 Guatemala ...................................0.17
 34 Indonesia .....................................0.18
 35 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................0.18
 36 Malaysia .......................................0.19
 37 Guyana ........................................0.19
 38 Qatar2..........................................0.20
 39 Mauritius ......................................0.20
 40 Serbia ..........................................0.21
 41 Cambodia ....................................0.21
 42 Russian Federation ......................0.22
 43 Algeria .........................................0.22
 44 Latvia ...........................................0.22
 45 Yemen2 .......................................0.23
 46 Saudi Arabia2 ..............................0.23
 47 Panama .......................................0.23
 48 Italy ..............................................0.23
 49 Croatia .........................................0.23
 50 Iran, Islamic Rep.2 .......................0.24
 51 Oman2 .........................................0.24
 52 United States ...............................0.25
 53 Luxembourg ................................0.25
 54 Suriname2 ...................................0.26
 55 Lithuania ......................................0.26
 56 Portugal .......................................0.27
 57 Slovenia .......................................0.28
 58 Namibia .......................................0.28
 59 El Salvador...................................0.29
 60 Chile ............................................0.29
 61 Jamaica2 .....................................0.29
 62 Colombia .....................................0.29
 63 Kenya ..........................................0.29
 64 Kazakhstan ..................................0.29
 65 Philippines ...................................0.30
 66 Côte d’Ivoire ................................0.30
 67 Vietnam2 ......................................0.30
 68 United Kingdom ...........................0.31
 69 Hungary .......................................0.31
 70 Israel ............................................0.31
 71 Georgia ........................................0.31
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Tunisia .........................................0.31
 73 Poland .........................................0.31
 74 Senegal .......................................0.32
 75 Paraguay .....................................0.32
 76 Moldova .......................................0.32
 77 Honduras .....................................0.32
 78 Canada ........................................0.33
 79 Burundi ........................................0.33
 80 Angola .........................................0.34
 81 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............0.34
 82 Trinidad and Tobago ....................0.34
 83 Ireland ..........................................0.35
 84 Korea, Rep. .................................0.35
 85 South Africa .................................0.35
 86 Timor-Leste .................................0.35
 87 Netherlands .................................0.36
 88 Estonia .........................................0.36
 89 Benin ...........................................0.38
 90 Uruguay .......................................0.39
 91 Mali ..............................................0.39
 92 Ecuador .......................................0.39
 93 Czech Republic ...........................0.40
 94 Barbados1 ...................................0.40
 95 Turkey ..........................................0.40
 96 Albania .........................................0.42
 97 Cameroon ....................................0.42
 98 Lesotho .......................................0.42
 99 Madagascar .................................0.43
 100 Mexico .........................................0.43
 101 Nigeria .........................................0.43
 102 Rwanda .......................................0.44
 103 Brunei Darussalam .......................0.45
 104 Dominican Republic .....................0.46
 105 Zambia ........................................0.48
 106 Uganda ........................................0.48
 107 Gambia, The2 ..............................0.49
 108 Swaziland ....................................0.49
 109 Botswana ....................................0.49
 110 Mauritania2 ..................................0.50
 111 Greece .........................................0.50
 112 Cape Verde .................................0.50
 113 Taiwan, China ..............................0.50
 114 Mozambique ................................0.51
 115 Switzerland ..................................0.51
 116 Montenegro .................................0.52
 117 Bolivia ..........................................0.52
 118 Belize ...........................................0.53
 119 Lebanon ......................................0.54
 120 New Zealand2 ..............................0.55
 121 France .........................................0.57
 122 Malta2 ..........................................0.57
 123 Venezuela ....................................0.57
 124 Romania ......................................0.58
 125 Macedonia, FYR ..........................0.58
 126 Belgium .......................................0.58
 127 Nicaragua ....................................0.62
 128 Australia2 .....................................0.64
 129 Chad ............................................0.67
 130 Malawi2 .......................................0.67
 131 Tanzania ......................................0.70
 132 Argentina .....................................0.71
 133 Brazil ............................................0.73
 134 Spain ...........................................0.73
 135 Morocco ......................................0.77
 136 Bulgaria .......................................0.80
 137 Burkina Faso ................................0.80
 138 Japan ..........................................0.81
 139 Slovak Republic ...........................0.82
 140 Syria ............................................1.09
 141 Peru .............................................1.27
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs
Average per-minute cost of different types of mobile cellular calls (PPP $)  |  2010
SOURCE: Authors’ calculations based on International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition), 
and on national sources. See Technical Notes and Sources for more details.
1 2008 2 2009
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  351 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Israel ............................................8.04
 2 Romania ......................................9.18
 3 Sri Lanka ...................................10.51
 4 Costa Rica .................................10.51
 5 Moldova .....................................12.24
 6 India ...........................................13.28
 7 Kuwait .......................................14.89
 8 Mongolia ....................................16.01
 9 Ukraine ......................................16.74
 10 Lithuania ....................................17.17
 11 Taiwan, China ............................17.52
 12 Brazil ..........................................17.60
 13 Kazakhstan ................................18.01
 14 Japan ........................................18.13
 15 Egypt .........................................18.63
 16 New Zealand2 ............................18.66
 17 Russian Federation ....................18.71
 18 Morocco ....................................19.56
 19 Guyana ......................................19.63
 20 Latvia .........................................19.84
 21 Greece .......................................19.85
 22 Cyprus .......................................19.91
 23 United States .............................19.95
 24 Trinidad and Tobago ..................20.86
 25 Tunisia .......................................21.28
 26 Azerbaijan ..................................21.76
 27 Belgium .....................................21.82
 28 Iceland .......................................21.98
 29 Canada ......................................22.11
 30 Switzerland ................................22.51
 31 Venezuela ..................................23.10
 32 Uruguay .....................................23.14
 33 Jordan .......................................23.80
 34 Chad ..........................................23.97
 35 United Kingdom .........................24.55
 36 Italy ............................................24.58
 37 Malta2 ........................................24.71
 38 Puerto Rico ................................24.95
 39 Albania .......................................25.34
 40 Croatia .......................................25.76
 41 France .......................................26.00
 42 Algeria .......................................27.38
 43 Mexico .......................................27.53
 44 Sweden .....................................27.55
 45 Spain .........................................27.68
 46 Hong Kong SAR ........................27.69
 47 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............28.30
 48 Ireland ........................................28.90
 49 Mauritius ....................................28.98
 50 Turkey ........................................29.29
 51 Poland .......................................29.30
 52 Finland .......................................29.34
 53 Bulgaria .....................................29.50
 54 Netherlands ...............................29.82
 55 China .........................................30.41
 56 Panama .....................................30.89
 57 Indonesia ...................................31.26
 58 Denmark ....................................31.28
 59 Estonia .......................................31.52
 60 Portugal .....................................31.53
 61 Luxembourg ..............................31.66
 62 Macedonia, FYR ........................32.24
 63 Serbia ........................................32.47
 64 Hungary .....................................32.60
 65 Bahrain1 ....................................32.97
 66 Norway ......................................33.18
 67 Dominican Republic ...................33.86
 68 Korea, Rep. ...............................33.90
 69 Uganda ......................................34.08
 70 Paraguay ...................................34.22
 71 Lebanon ....................................34.46
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Singapore ..................................34.51
 73 Thailand .....................................34.79
 74 Austria .......................................35.04
 75 Malaysia .....................................35.71
 76 Bangladesh ................................36.28
 77 Germany ....................................36.81
 78 Montenegro ...............................37.05
 79 Pakistan .....................................37.37
 80 Jamaica2 ...................................37.46
 81 Cape Verde ...............................37.80
 82 Slovak Republic .........................38.07
 83 South Africa ...............................39.18
 84 Ghana ........................................39.82
 85 Ecuador .....................................40.12
 86 Philippines .................................40.40
 87 Slovenia .....................................40.79
 88 Saudi Arabia2 ............................42.27
 89 Honduras ...................................42.43
 90 Vietnam2 ....................................42.55
 91 Czech Republic .........................43.54
 92 Australia2 ...................................43.74
 93 Argentina ...................................44.66
 94 United Arab Emirates2 ...............46.56
 95 El Salvador.................................47.27
 96 Oman2 .......................................47.90
 97 Chile ..........................................49.58
 98 Mozambique ..............................50.39
 99 Barbados2 .................................50.39
 100 Nepal .........................................52.61
 101 Colombia ...................................53.23
 102 Guatemala .................................53.84
 103 Botswana ..................................54.55
 104 Armenia .....................................57.39
 105 Tanzania ....................................57.46
 106 Zambia ......................................61.88
 107 Côte d’Ivoire ..............................65.96
 108 Senegal .....................................66.86
 109 Qatar2........................................71.64
 110 Peru ...........................................75.40
 111 Georgia ......................................75.48
 112 Iran, Islamic Rep.2 .....................76.80
 113 Lesotho .....................................78.91
 114 Kenya ........................................79.81
 115 Brunei Darussalam .....................81.24
 116 Bolivia ........................................84.40
 117 Nicaragua ..................................84.96
 118 Mali ............................................88.62
 119 Suriname2 .................................97.19
 120 Nigeria .....................................102.88
 121 Benin .......................................106.11
 122 Namibia ...................................113.43
 123 Mauritania2 ..............................118.95
 124 Cambodia ................................125.31
 125 Kyrgyz Republic .......................142.65
 126 Timor-Leste .............................146.22
 127 Cameroon ................................160.03
 128 Syria ........................................161.74
 129 Belize .......................................162.74
 130 Angola .....................................181.75
 131 Rwanda ...................................186.92
 132 Burkina Faso ............................193.53
 133 Madagascar .............................204.35
 134 Zimbabwe ................................297.40
 135 Yemen2 ...................................487.69
 136 Tajikistan ..................................956.58
 137 Gambia, The2 ..........................958.29
 138 Ethiopia2 ...............................1,248.33
 139 Malawi2 ................................1,252.34
 140 Swaziland .............................1,420.08
 n/a Burundi ..........................................n/a
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs
Monthly subscription charge for fixed (wired) broadband Internet service (PPP $)  |  2010
SOURCE: Authors’ calculations based on International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition), 
and on national sources. See Technical Notes and Sources for more details.
1 2008 2 2009
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
352  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Argentina .....................................2.00
 1 Austria .........................................2.00
 1 Belize ...........................................2.00
 1 Botswana ....................................2.00
 1 Brazil ............................................2.00
 1 Burundi ........................................2.00
 1 Canada ........................................2.00
 1 Cape Verde .................................2.00
 1 Chile ............................................2.00
 1 Croatia .........................................2.00
 1 Dominican Republic .....................2.00
 1 Ecuador .......................................2.00
 1 El Salvador...................................2.00
 1 Estonia .........................................2.00
 1 France .........................................2.00
 1 Germany ......................................2.00
 1 Haiti .............................................2.00
 1 Honduras .....................................2.00
 1 Iceland .........................................2.00
 1 Ireland ..........................................2.00
 1 Jamaica .......................................2.00
 1 Japan ..........................................2.00
 1 Kenya ..........................................2.00
 1 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................2.00
 1 Luxembourg ................................2.00
 1 Madagascar .................................2.00
 1 Malaysia .......................................2.00
 1 Malta ...........................................2.00
 1 Mauritania ....................................2.00
 1 Mauritius ......................................2.00
 1 Mexico .........................................2.00
 1 Moldova .......................................2.00
 1 Montenegro .................................2.00
 1 Morocco ......................................2.00
 1 Nepal ...........................................2.00
 1 Netherlands .................................2.00
 1 Nicaragua ....................................2.00
 1 Nigeria .........................................2.00
 1 Norway ........................................2.00
 1 Oman ..........................................2.00
 1 Pakistan .......................................2.00
 1 Paraguay .....................................2.00
 1 Peru .............................................2.00
 1 Philippines ...................................2.00
 1 Portugal .......................................2.00
 1 Romania ......................................2.00
 1 Singapore ....................................2.00
 1 Slovenia .......................................2.00
 1 Spain ...........................................2.00
 1 Sweden .......................................2.00
 1 Switzerland ..................................2.00
 1 Taiwan, China ..............................2.00
 1 Turkey ..........................................2.00
 1 Uganda ........................................2.00
 1 United States ...............................2.00
 1 Venezuela ....................................2.00
 1 Vietnam .......................................2.00
 58 Jordan .........................................1.94
 59 Rwanda .......................................1.93
 60 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............1.93
 60 India .............................................1.93
 62 Bahrain ........................................1.92
 62 Lithuania ......................................1.92
 64 Colombia .....................................1.91
 65 Ghana ..........................................1.90
 66 Denmark ......................................1.89
 67 Hungary .......................................1.88
 68 Panama .......................................1.86
 68 United Kingdom ...........................1.86
 70 Guatemala ...................................1.85
 71 Finland .........................................1.83
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 71 Slovak Republic ...........................1.83
 73 Czech Republic ...........................1.81
 73 Kazakhstan ..................................1.81
 75 Indonesia .....................................1.79
 76 Ukraine ........................................1.78
 77 Latvia ...........................................1.77
 77 Poland .........................................1.77
 79 Korea, Rep. .................................1.76
 80 Belgium .......................................1.75
 80 Greece .........................................1.75
 80 Thailand .......................................1.75
 83 Georgia ........................................1.72
 84 Albania .........................................1.69
 85 Australia .......................................1.67
 85 Lesotho .......................................1.67
 87 Zimbabwe ....................................1.64
 88 Italy ..............................................1.62
 89 Russian Federation ......................1.60
 90 Mongolia ......................................1.56
 91 New Zealand ...............................1.53
 92 Chad ............................................1.50
 92 China ...........................................1.50
 94 Serbia ..........................................1.43
 95 Cyprus .........................................1.40
 95 Egypt ...........................................1.40
 97 Cameroon ....................................1.36
 98 Bulgaria .......................................1.36
 99 Azerbaijan ....................................1.35
 99 Cambodia ....................................1.35
 101 Angola .........................................1.33
 101 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................1.33
 101 Saudi Arabia ................................1.33
 104 Algeria .........................................1.31
 105 Mozambique ................................1.29
 106 Israel ............................................1.27
 107 Bangladesh ..................................1.25
 107 Benin ...........................................1.25
 109 Armenia .......................................1.21
 110 Barbados .....................................1.20
 110 Côte d’Ivoire ................................1.20
 110 Zambia ........................................1.20
 113 Mali ..............................................1.19
 114 Gambia, The ................................1.13
 114 Malawi .........................................1.13
 114 South Africa .................................1.13
 117 Macedonia, FYR ..........................1.00
 117 Senegal .......................................1.00
 117 Tanzania ......................................1.00
 117 Trinidad and Tobago ....................1.00
 117 United Arab Emirates ...................1.00
 122 Qatar ...........................................0.93
 123 Suriname .....................................0.92
 124 Sri Lanka .....................................0.88
 125 Bolivia ..........................................0.80
 126 Brunei Darussalam .......................0.78
 127 Burkina Faso ................................0.75
 127 Tunisia .........................................0.75
 127 Uruguay .......................................0.75
 130 Namibia .......................................0.73
 131 Costa Rica ...................................0.67
 131 Lebanon ......................................0.67
 133 Swaziland ....................................0.55
 134 Guyana ........................................0.50
 135 Yemen .........................................0.46
 136 Kuwait .........................................0.23
 137 Syria ............................................0.18
 138 Ethiopia ........................................0.00
 138 Tajikistan ......................................0.00
 n/a Hong Kong SAR ............................n/a
 n/a Puerto Rico ....................................n/a
 n/a Timor-Leste ...................................n/a
4.03 Internet and telephony sectors competition index
Level of competition index for Internet services, international long distance services, and mobile telephone services on a 0-to-2 (best) scale  |  
As of October 2011
SOURCE: Authors’ calculations based on  International Telecommunication Union (ITU), ITU World Telecommunication Regulatory Database (accessed October 10, 2011).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
5th pillar 
Skills
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
354  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.7 7
 1 Switzerland ................................ 5.9
 2 Singapore .................................. 5.9
 3 Finland ....................................... 5.9
 4 Qatar ......................................... 5.6
 5 Iceland ....................................... 5.6
 6 Belgium ..................................... 5.5
 7 Canada ...................................... 5.4
 8 Sweden ..................................... 5.3
 9 New Zealand ............................. 5.3
 10 Netherlands ............................... 5.2
 11 Ireland ........................................ 5.2
 12 Lebanon .................................... 5.1
 13 Australia ..................................... 5.1
 14 Malaysia ..................................... 5.1
 15 Barbados ................................... 5.1
 16 Denmark .................................... 5.0
 17 Germany .................................... 4.9
 18 Malta ......................................... 4.9
 19 Taiwan, China ............................ 4.9
 20 United Kingdom ......................... 4.8
 21 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 4.8
 22 Norway ...................................... 4.8
 23 Costa Rica ................................. 4.8
 24 Austria ....................................... 4.7
 25 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.7
 26 United States ............................. 4.7
 27 Kenya ........................................ 4.7
 28 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.6
 29 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.6
 30 Cyprus ....................................... 4.6
 31 Bahrain ...................................... 4.6
 32 Gambia, The .............................. 4.5
 33 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.5
 34 France ....................................... 4.5
 35 Luxembourg .............................. 4.5
 36 Japan ........................................ 4.4
 37 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.4
 38 India ........................................... 4.4
 39 Montenegro ............................... 4.4
 40 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.3
 41 Tunisia ....................................... 4.3
 42 Estonia ....................................... 4.3
 43 Benin ......................................... 4.3
 44 Indonesia ................................... 4.2
 45 Albania ....................................... 4.2
 46 Oman ........................................ 4.2
 47 Malawi ....................................... 4.1
 48 Israel .......................................... 4.1
 49 Czech Republic ......................... 4.1
 50 Mauritius .................................... 4.0
 51 Jordan ....................................... 4.0
 52 Rwanda ..................................... 4.0
 53 Zambia ...................................... 4.0
 54 China ......................................... 4.0
 55 Korea, Rep. ............................... 3.9
 56 Guyana ...................................... 3.9
 57 Puerto Rico ................................ 3.9
 58 Botswana .................................. 3.9
 59 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.9
 60 Senegal ..................................... 3.8
 61 Philippines ................................. 3.8
 62 Ukraine ...................................... 3.8
 63 Slovenia ..................................... 3.8
 64 Lithuania .................................... 3.8
 65 Nigeria ....................................... 3.8
 66 Cape Verde ............................... 3.8
 67 Uganda ...................................... 3.8
 68 Cambodia .................................. 3.8
 69 Vietnam ..................................... 3.7
 70 Latvia ......................................... 3.7
 71 Poland ....................................... 3.7
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.7 7
 72 Colombia ................................... 3.7
 73 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.6
 74 Ghana ........................................ 3.6
 75 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.6
 76 Portugal ..................................... 3.6
 77 Thailand ..................................... 3.6
 78 Cameroon .................................. 3.5
 79 Pakistan ..................................... 3.5
 80 Hungary ..................................... 3.5
 81 Suriname ................................... 3.4
 82 Russian Federation .................... 3.4
 83 Uruguay ..................................... 3.4
 84 Tajikistan .................................... 3.4
 85 Bangladesh ................................ 3.4
 86 Argentina ................................... 3.4
 87 Chile .......................................... 3.4
 88 Italy ............................................ 3.3
 89 Croatia ....................................... 3.3
 90 Romania .................................... 3.3
 91 Lesotho ..................................... 3.3
 92 Tanzania .................................... 3.3
 93 Morocco .................................... 3.3
 94 Turkey ........................................ 3.3
 95 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.3
 96 Syria .......................................... 3.2
 97 Armenia ..................................... 3.2
 98 Spain ......................................... 3.2
 99 Mozambique .............................. 3.2
 100 Nepal ......................................... 3.2
 101 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.2
 102 Moldova ..................................... 3.2
 103 Jamaica ..................................... 3.2
 104 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.2
 105 Ecuador ..................................... 3.2
 106 Bolivia ........................................ 3.1
 107 Mexico ....................................... 3.1
 108 Kuwait ....................................... 3.1
 109 Chad .......................................... 3.1
 110 Swaziland .................................. 3.1
 111 Serbia ........................................ 3.1
 112 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.0
 113 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.0
 114 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.0
 115 Brazil .......................................... 3.0
 116 Georgia ...................................... 3.0
 117 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.0
 118 Madagascar ............................... 3.0
 119 Mali ............................................ 2.9
 120 Greece ....................................... 2.9
 121 Venezuela .................................. 2.8
 122 Namibia ..................................... 2.8
 123 Algeria ....................................... 2.8
 124 Burkina Faso .............................. 2.7
 125 El Salvador................................. 2.7
 126 Belize ......................................... 2.7
 127 Guatemala ................................. 2.6
 128 Peru ........................................... 2.6
 129 Honduras ................................... 2.6
 130 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.5
 131 Panama ..................................... 2.4
 132 Mongolia .................................... 2.4
 133 South Africa ............................... 2.3
 134 Nicaragua .................................. 2.3
 135 Egypt ......................................... 2.3
 136 Dominican Republic ................... 2.3
 137 Burundi ...................................... 2.3
 138 Paraguay ................................... 2.2
 139 Mauritania .................................. 2.0
 140 Haiti ........................................... 2.0
 141 Angola ....................................... 1.9
 142 Yemen ....................................... 1.7
5.01 Quality of the educational system
How well does the educational system in your country meet the needs of a competitive economy? [1 = not well at all; 7 = very well]  |  2010–
2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  355 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.9 7
 1 Singapore .................................. 6.4
 2 Belgium ..................................... 6.3
 3 Finland ....................................... 6.3
 4 Switzerland ................................ 5.8
 5 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.8
 6 Lebanon .................................... 5.7
 7 New Zealand ............................. 5.5
 8 Canada ...................................... 5.4
 9 Netherlands ............................... 5.4
 10 Barbados ................................... 5.3
 11 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.3
 12 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.2
 13 Qatar ......................................... 5.2
 14 Iceland ....................................... 5.2
 15 France ....................................... 5.1
 16 Cyprus ....................................... 5.1
 17 Slovenia ..................................... 5.1
 18 Tunisia ....................................... 5.1
 19 Australia ..................................... 5.1
 20 Estonia ....................................... 5.1
 21 Lithuania .................................... 5.0
 22 Malta ......................................... 5.0
 23 Malaysia ..................................... 5.0
 24 Japan ........................................ 4.9
 25 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.9
 26 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.9
 27 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.9
 28 Sweden ..................................... 4.9
 29 Croatia ....................................... 4.9
 30 Denmark .................................... 4.8
 31 China ......................................... 4.7
 32 India ........................................... 4.7
 33 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.6
 34 Ireland ........................................ 4.6
 35 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.6
 36 Ukraine ...................................... 4.6
 37 Hungary ..................................... 4.6
 38 Austria ....................................... 4.6
 39 Montenegro ............................... 4.5
 40 Bahrain ...................................... 4.5
 41 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 4.5
 42 Albania ....................................... 4.5
 43 United Kingdom ......................... 4.5
 44 Jordan ....................................... 4.5
 45 Romania .................................... 4.5
 46 Costa Rica ................................. 4.4
 47 Luxembourg .............................. 4.4
 48 Germany .................................... 4.4
 49 Latvia ......................................... 4.4
 50 Russian Federation .................... 4.3
 51 United States ............................. 4.3
 52 Poland ....................................... 4.3
 53 Indonesia ................................... 4.3
 54 Benin ......................................... 4.2
 55 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.2
 56 Kenya ........................................ 4.2
 57 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.2
 58 Serbia ........................................ 4.2
 59 Vietnam ..................................... 4.2
 60 Thailand ..................................... 4.2
 61 Greece ....................................... 4.1
 62 Syria .......................................... 4.1
 63 Mauritius .................................... 4.1
 64 Rwanda ..................................... 4.1
 65 Morocco .................................... 4.1
 66 Czech Republic ......................... 4.1
 67 Mongolia .................................... 4.0
 68 Oman ........................................ 4.0
 69 Moldova ..................................... 4.0
 70 Botswana .................................. 4.0
 71 Senegal ..................................... 4.0
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.9 7
 72 Slovak Republic ......................... 4.0
 73 Malawi ....................................... 3.9
 74 Italy ............................................ 3.9
 75 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.9
 76 Norway ...................................... 3.9
 77 Zambia ...................................... 3.8
 78 Guyana ...................................... 3.8
 79 Israel .......................................... 3.8
 80 Cameroon .................................. 3.8
 81 Armenia ..................................... 3.8
 82 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.8
 83 Colombia ................................... 3.7
 84 Gambia, The .............................. 3.7
 85 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.7
 86 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.6
 87 Pakistan ..................................... 3.6
 88 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.6
 89 Suriname ................................... 3.6
 90 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.6
 91 Puerto Rico ................................ 3.6
 92 Madagascar ............................... 3.5
 93 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.5
 94 Kuwait ....................................... 3.5
 95 Cape Verde ............................... 3.5
 96 Algeria ....................................... 3.4
 97 Cambodia .................................. 3.4
 98 Ghana ........................................ 3.4
 99 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.4
 100 Georgia ...................................... 3.4
 101 Uganda ...................................... 3.4
 102 Nigeria ....................................... 3.4
 103 Turkey ........................................ 3.4
 104 Uruguay ..................................... 3.3
 105 Portugal ..................................... 3.3
 106 Bangladesh ................................ 3.3
 107 Ecuador ..................................... 3.3
 108 Nepal ......................................... 3.3
 109 Belize ......................................... 3.3
 110 Swaziland .................................. 3.3
 111 Spain ......................................... 3.3
 112 Lesotho ..................................... 3.2
 113 Argentina ................................... 3.2
 114 Tajikistan .................................... 3.2
 115 Philippines ................................. 3.1
 116 Chad .......................................... 3.1
 117 Bolivia ........................................ 3.0
 118 Venezuela .................................. 2.9
 119 Tanzania .................................... 2.9
 120 Jamaica ..................................... 2.9
 121 Namibia ..................................... 2.8
 122 Burundi ...................................... 2.8
 123 Mozambique .............................. 2.8
 124 Chile .......................................... 2.8
 125 Mauritania .................................. 2.8
 126 Mexico ....................................... 2.8
 127 Brazil .......................................... 2.7
 128 Mali ............................................ 2.7
 129 El Salvador................................. 2.6
 130 Guatemala ................................. 2.6
 131 Haiti ........................................... 2.5
 132 Egypt ......................................... 2.4
 133 Honduras ................................... 2.4
 134 Panama ..................................... 2.4
 135 Peru ........................................... 2.4
 136 Nicaragua .................................. 2.2
 137 Paraguay ................................... 2.2
 138 South Africa ............................... 2.1
 139 Dominican Republic ................... 1.9
 140 Timor-Leste ............................... 1.8
 141 Yemen ....................................... 1.7
 142 Angola ....................................... 1.5
5.02 Quality of math and science education
How would you assess the quality of math and science education in your country’s schools? [1 = poor; 7 = excellent—among the best in the 
world)  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
356  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Australia .....................................129.2
 2 New Zealand .............................124.6
 3 Netherlands ...............................120.2
 4 Spain .........................................119.0
 5 Ireland ........................................117.5
 6 Denmark ....................................117.4
 7 France .......................................112.6
 8 Belgium .....................................110.5
 9 Norway ......................................110.2
 10 Finland .......................................107.5
 11 Brunei Darussalam .....................107.3
 12 Iceland .......................................107.2
 13 Portugal .....................................106.7
 14 Malta .........................................104.8
 15 Saudi Arabia7 ............................104.3
 16 Montenegro7 .............................104.0
 17 Estonia .......................................103.6
 18 Bahrain4 ....................................103.1
 19 Singapore ..................................103.0
 20 Germany ....................................102.6
 21 United Kingdom .........................101.8
 22 Japan ........................................101.5
 23 Brazil6 ........................................101.3
 24 Canada6 ....................................101.3
 25 Oman7 .......................................101.3
 26 Kuwait6 ......................................101.0
 27 Greece5 .....................................100.9
 28 Barbados7 .................................100.6
 29 Sweden .....................................100.3
 30 Costa Rica7 .................................99.7
 31 Austria .........................................99.6
 32 Italy ..............................................99.1
 33 Taiwan, China ..............................99.0
 34 Cyprus .........................................98.4
 35 Hungary .......................................98.3
 36 Lithuania ......................................98.0
 37 Luxembourg6...............................97.6
 38 Slovenia .......................................97.1
 39 Korea, Rep. .................................97.1
 40 Poland .........................................97.0
 41 Kazakhstan7 ................................97.0
 42 United States ...............................96.5
 43 Colombia7 ...................................96.4
 44 Jamaica .......................................95.6
 45 Ukraine7 ......................................95.6
 46 Croatia .........................................95.3
 47 Switzerland ..................................95.2
 48 Romania ......................................95.1
 49 Algeria .........................................94.9
 50 Latvia ...........................................94.1
 51 South Africa .................................93.8
 52 Qatar7..........................................93.7
 53 Mongolia ......................................92.9
 54 United Arab Emirates4 .................92.3
 55 Armenia7 .....................................92.0
 56 Peru .............................................91.6
 57 Serbia7 ........................................91.4
 58 Jordan6 .......................................91.1
 59 Israel ............................................91.0
 60 Guyana7 ......................................91.0
 61 Tunisia .........................................90.5
 62 Czech Republic ...........................90.4
 63 Trinidad and Tobago6 ..................89.9
 64 Bosnia and Herzegovina7 ............89.6
 65 Slovak Republic ...........................89.4
 66 Mauritius7 ....................................89.4
 67 Hong Kong SAR ..........................88.8
 68 Russian Federation ......................88.6
 69 Bulgaria .......................................88.0
 70 Moldova7 .....................................88.0
 71 Chile ............................................87.9
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Cape Verde7 ................................87.5
 73 Tajikistan7 ....................................87.2
 74 Sri Lanka2....................................87.1
 75 Mexico .........................................86.9
 76 Georgia ........................................86.2
 77 Argentina6 ...................................85.8
 78 Uruguay .......................................85.0
 79 Philippines ...................................84.8
 80 Egypt2 .........................................84.7
 81 Azerbaijan5 ..................................84.5
 82 Kyrgyz Republic7 .........................84.0
 83 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................83.5
 84 Macedonia, FYR ..........................82.8
 85 Venezuela7 ..................................82.5
 86 Puerto Rico7 ................................82.2
 87 Lebanon7.....................................81.4
 88 Bolivia6 ........................................81.0
 89 Ecuador .......................................80.4
 90 China ...........................................80.1
 91 Botswana5 ...................................80.0
 92 Albania7 .......................................78.2
 93 Turkey ..........................................77.6
 94 Thailand7 .....................................77.2
 95 Vietnam6 ......................................77.2
 96 Dominican Republic7 ...................76.4
 97 Indonesia .....................................75.1
 98 Suriname .....................................74.8
 99 Belize7 .........................................74.8
 100 Panama7 .....................................74.1
 101 Honduras7 ...................................73.5
 102 Syria7...........................................72.4
 103 Nicaragua7 ..................................69.4
 104 Malaysia6 .....................................69.1
 105 Paraguay .....................................66.9
 106 Namibia5 .....................................64.0
 107 El Salvador...................................63.1
 108 Kenya ..........................................60.2
 109 India6 ...........................................60.2
 110 Guatemala7 .................................58.5
 111 Ghana ..........................................58.3
 112 Swaziland7 ..................................58.1
 113 Timor-Leste7................................56.3
 114 Morocco5 ....................................56.1
 115 Gambia, The7 ..............................54.1
 116 Bangladesh ..................................49.3
 117 Lesotho7 ......................................46.4
 118 Cambodia7 ..................................46.2
 119 Zambia3 .......................................45.6
 120 Yemen7 .......................................44.1
 121 Nigeria7 .......................................44.0
 122 Nepal4 .........................................43.5
 123 Cameroon ....................................42.2
 124 Zimbabwe3 ..................................41.0
 125 Mali7 ............................................37.7
 126 Senegal7 ......................................37.4
 127 Benin3 .........................................37.1
 128 Ethiopia7 ......................................35.7
 129 Pakistan7 .....................................34.2
 130 Rwanda7 .....................................32.2
 131 Malawi7 .......................................32.1
 132 Angola7 .......................................31.3
 133 Madagascar .................................31.1
 134 Uganda7 ......................................28.1
 135 Côte d’Ivoire1 ..............................27.1
 136 Chad7 ..........................................25.7
 137 Mozambique7 ..............................25.5
 138 Burundi7 ......................................24.8
 139 Mauritania7 ..................................24.4
 140 Burkina Faso7 ..............................20.7
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
 n/a Tanzania ........................................n/a
5.03 Secondary enrollment rate
Gross secondary education enrollment rate  |  2009
SOURCES: United Nations Education, Science and Culture Organization (UNESCO), UNESCO Institute for Statistics Data Centre (accessed November 11, 2011); national 
sources; UNICEF ChildInfo.org Country Profiles (accessed January 23, 2012)
1 2002 2 2004 3 2005 4 2006 5 2007 6 2008 7 2010
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  357 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Estonia .........................................99.8
 2 Latvia ...........................................99.8
 3 Georgia ........................................99.7
 4 Lithuania ......................................99.7
 5 Ukraine ........................................99.7
 6 Slovenia .......................................99.7
 7 Kazakhstan ..................................99.7
 8 Tajikistan ......................................99.7
 9 Russian Federation ......................99.6
 10 Armenia .......................................99.5
 11 Poland .........................................99.5
 12 Azerbaijan3 ..................................99.5
 13 Hungary .......................................99.4
 14 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................99.2
 15 Australia4 .....................................99.0
 15 Austria4 .......................................99.0
 15 Barbados4 ...................................99.0
 15 Belgium4 ......................................99.0
 15 Canada4 ......................................99.0
 15 Czech Republic4 ..........................99.0
 15 Denmark4 ....................................99.0
 15 Finland4 .......................................99.0
 15 France4........................................99.0
 15 Germany4 ....................................99.0
 15 Hong Kong SAR4 ........................99.0
 15 Iceland4 .......................................99.0
 15 Ireland4 ........................................99.0
 15 Israel4 ..........................................99.0
 15 Japan4 .........................................99.0
 15 Korea, Rep.4 ...............................99.0
 15 Luxembourg4...............................99.0
 15 Netherlands4 ...............................99.0
 15 New Zealand4 ..............................99.0
 15 Norway4 ......................................99.0
 15 Slovak Republic4 .........................99.0
 15 Sweden4 .....................................99.0
 15 Switzerland4 ................................99.0
 15 United Kingdom4 .........................99.0
 15 United States4 .............................99.0
 40 Italy ..............................................98.9
 41 Croatia .........................................98.8
 42 Trinidad and Tobago ....................98.7
 43 Chile ............................................98.6
 44 Moldova .......................................98.5
 45 Bulgaria .......................................98.3
 46 Uruguay .......................................98.3
 47 Cyprus .........................................97.9
 48 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............97.8
 49 Taiwan, China4 ............................97.8
 50 Serbia ..........................................97.8
 51 Argentina .....................................97.7
 52 Montenegro3 ...............................97.7
 53 Spain ...........................................97.7
 54 Romania ......................................97.7
 55 Mongolia ......................................97.5
 56 Greece .........................................97.2
 57 Macedonia, FYR ..........................97.1
 58 Costa Rica ...................................96.1
 59 Albania4 .......................................95.9
 60 Philippines4 ..................................95.4
 61 Brunei Darussalam .......................95.3
 62 Venezuela3 ..................................95.2
 63 Portugal .......................................94.9
 64 Qatar ...........................................94.7
 65 Singapore ....................................94.7
 66 Suriname4 ...................................94.6
 67 Paraguay3....................................94.6
 68 China ...........................................94.0
 69 Kuwait4 ........................................93.9
 70 Panama .......................................93.6
 71 Thailand1 .....................................93.5
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Mexico .........................................93.4
 73 Colombia .....................................93.2
 74 Vietnam .......................................92.8
 75 Malaysia .......................................92.5
 76 Malta1 ..........................................92.4
 77 Jordan3 .......................................92.2
 78 Indonesia4 ...................................92.2
 79 Zimbabwe ....................................91.9
 80 Bahrain ........................................91.4
 81 Turkey ..........................................90.8
 82 Bolivia4 ........................................90.7
 83 Sri Lanka4....................................90.6
 84 Puerto Rico ..................................90.5
 85 Brazil4 ..........................................90.0
 86 United Arab Emirates1 .................90.0
 87 Lesotho .......................................89.7
 88 Lebanon3.....................................89.6
 89 Peru3 ...........................................89.6
 90 South Africa4 ...............................89.0
 91 Namibia .......................................88.5
 92 Dominican Republic3 ...................88.2
 93 Mauritius ......................................87.9
 94 Kenya ..........................................87.0
 95 Swaziland ....................................86.9
 96 Oman4 .........................................86.6
 97 Jamaica .......................................86.4
 98 Saudi Arabia ................................86.1
 99 Iran, Islamic Rep.4 .......................85.0
 100 Cape Verde .................................84.8
 101 Ecuador .......................................84.2
 102 Syria ............................................84.2
 103 Botswana ....................................84.1
 104 El Salvador...................................84.1
 105 Honduras3 ...................................83.6
 106 Nicaragua1 ..................................78.0
 107 Cambodia4 ..................................77.6
 108 Tunisia4 .......................................77.6
 109 Cameroon4 ..................................75.9
 110 Uganda4 ......................................74.6
 111 Guatemala ...................................74.5
 112 Egypt4 .........................................74.0
 113 Malawi .........................................73.7
 114 Tanzania ......................................72.9
 115 Algeria2 ........................................72.6
 116 Zambia ........................................70.9
 117 Rwanda .......................................70.7
 118 Angola .........................................70.0
 119 Ghana ..........................................66.6
 120 Burundi ........................................66.6
 121 Madagascar .................................64.5
 122 India2 ...........................................62.8
 123 Yemen .........................................62.4
 124 Nigeria .........................................60.8
 125 Nepal ...........................................59.1
 126 Mauritania ....................................57.5
 127 Morocco ......................................56.1
 128 Bangladesh ..................................55.9
 129 Pakistan4 .....................................55.5
 130 Côte d’Ivoire ................................55.3
 131 Mozambique ................................55.1
 132 Timor-Leste3................................50.6
 133 Senegal .......................................49.7
 134 Haiti2 ...........................................48.7
 135 Gambia, The ................................46.5
 136 Benin ...........................................41.7
 137 Ethiopia4 ......................................35.9
 138 Chad ............................................33.6
 139 Burkina Faso3 ..............................28.7
 140 Mali2 ............................................26.2
 n/a Belize .............................................n/a
 n/a Guyana ..........................................n/a
5.04 Adult literacy rate
Adult literacy rate (%)  |  2009
SOURCES: United Nations Education, Science and Culture Organization (UNESCO), UNESCO Institute for Statistics Data Centre (accessed October 11, 2011); The World 
Bank, EdStats Database (accessed October 11, 2011); national sources
1 2005 2 2006 3 2007 4 2008
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
6th pillar 
Individual usage
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
360  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Hong Kong SAR ........................195.6
 2 Saudi Arabia ..............................187.9
 3 Montenegro ...............................185.3
 4 Panama .....................................184.7
 5 Vietnam .....................................175.3
 6 Suriname ...................................169.6
 7 Russian Federation ....................166.3
 8 Oman ........................................165.5
 9 Kuwait .......................................160.8
 10 Finland .......................................156.4
 11 Italy ............................................149.6
 12 Lithuania ....................................147.2
 13 Austria .......................................145.8
 14 United Arab Emirates .................145.5
 15 Singapore ..................................145.2
 16 Croatia .......................................144.5
 17 Luxembourg ..............................143.3
 18 Portugal .....................................142.3
 19 Albania .......................................141.9
 20 Argentina ...................................141.8
 21 Trinidad and Tobago ..................141.2
 22 Czech Republic .........................137.2
 23 Bulgaria .....................................136.1
 24 Israel ..........................................133.1
 25 Qatar .........................................132.4
 26 Uruguay .....................................131.7
 27 United Kingdom .........................130.8
 28 Serbia ........................................129.2
 29 Barbados ...................................128.1
 30 Germany ....................................127.0
 31 Guatemala .................................125.6
 32 Honduras ...................................125.1
 33 Armenia .....................................125.0
 34 Denmark ....................................124.7
 35 El Salvador.................................124.3
 36 Switzerland ................................124.3
 37 Bahrain ......................................124.2
 38 Estonia .......................................123.2
 39 Poland .......................................122.7
 40 Kazakhstan ................................121.1
 41 Hungary .....................................120.3
 42 Taiwan, China ............................119.9
 43 Malaysia .....................................119.2
 44 Ukraine ......................................118.6
 45 Botswana ..................................117.8
 46 Jamaica .....................................116.1
 47 Sweden .....................................116.1
 48 Chile ..........................................116.0
 49 Norway ......................................115.7
 50 Netherlands ...............................115.4
 51 New Zealand .............................114.9
 52 Romania ....................................114.7
 53 Belgium .....................................113.5
 54 Spain .........................................112.0
 55 Malta .........................................109.3
 56 Brunei Darussalam .....................109.1
 57 Slovak Republic .........................108.5
 58 Greece .......................................108.2
 59 Jordan .......................................107.0
 60 Iceland .......................................106.5
 61 Tunisia .......................................106.0
 62 Korea, Rep. ...............................105.4
 63 Ireland ........................................105.2
 64 Slovenia .....................................104.5
 65 Macedonia, FYR ........................104.5
 66 Brazil ..........................................104.1
 67 Thailand .....................................103.6
 68 Latvia .........................................102.4
 69 Ecuador .....................................102.2
 70 Australia .....................................101.0
 71 France .......................................100.7
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 South Africa ...............................100.5
 73 Peru ...........................................100.1
 74 Morocco ....................................100.1
 75 Azerbaijan ....................................99.0
 76 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................98.9
 77 Venezuela ....................................96.2
 78 Colombia .....................................96.1
 79 Japan ..........................................95.4
 80 Cyprus .........................................93.7
 81 Algeria .........................................92.4
 82 Paraguay .....................................91.7
 83 Indonesia .....................................91.7
 84 Mauritius ......................................91.7
 85 Georgia ........................................91.4
 86 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................91.2
 87 Mongolia ......................................91.1
 88 United States ...............................89.9
 89 Dominican Republic .....................89.6
 90 Moldova .......................................88.6
 91 Egypt ...........................................87.1
 92 Tajikistan ......................................86.4
 93 Philippines ...................................85.7
 94 Gambia, The ................................85.5
 95 Turkey ..........................................84.9
 96 Sri Lanka .....................................83.2
 97 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............82.7
 98 Mexico .........................................80.6
 99 Benin ...........................................79.9
 100 Mauritania ....................................79.3
 101 Puerto Rico ..................................78.3
 102 Côte d’Ivoire ................................76.1
 103 Cape Verde .................................75.0
 104 Guyana ........................................73.6
 105 Bolivia ..........................................72.3
 106 Ghana ..........................................71.5
 107 Canada ........................................70.7
 108 Lebanon ......................................68.0
 109 Namibia .......................................67.2
 110 Senegal .......................................67.1
 111 Costa Rica ...................................65.1
 112 Nicaragua ....................................65.1
 113 China ...........................................64.0
 114 Belize ...........................................62.3
 115 Swaziland ....................................61.8
 116 Kenya ..........................................61.6
 117 India .............................................61.4
 118 Zimbabwe ....................................61.2
 119 Syria ............................................57.8
 120 Cambodia ....................................57.7
 121 Pakistan .......................................57.1
 122 Nigeria .........................................55.1
 123 Timor-Leste .................................53.4
 124 Mali ..............................................48.4
 125 Tanzania ......................................46.8
 126 Angola .........................................46.7
 127 Bangladesh ..................................46.2
 128 Yemen .........................................46.1
 129 Lesotho .......................................45.5
 130 Cameroon ....................................44.1
 131 Zambia ........................................41.6
 132 Haiti .............................................40.0
 133 Uganda ........................................38.4
 134 Madagascar .................................37.2
 135 Burkina Faso ................................34.7
 136 Rwanda .......................................33.4
 137 Mozambique ................................30.9
 138 Nepal ...........................................30.7
 139 Chad ............................................23.8
 140 Malawi .........................................20.4
 141 Burundi ........................................13.7
 142 Ethiopia ..........................................8.3
6.01 Mobile telephone subscriptions
Mobile telephone subscriptions (post-paid and pre-paid) per 100 population  |  2010
SOURCE: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  361 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Iceland .........................................95.0
 2 Norway ........................................93.4
 3 Netherlands .................................90.7
 4 Luxembourg ................................90.0
 4 Sweden .......................................90.0
 6 Denmark ......................................88.7
 7 Finland .........................................86.9
 8 United Kingdom ...........................85.0
 9 Switzerland ..................................83.9
 10 Korea, Rep. .................................83.7
 11 New Zealand ...............................83.0
 12 Germany ......................................82.0
 13 Canada ........................................81.6
 13 Qatar ...........................................81.6
 15 France .........................................80.1
 16 Slovak Republic ...........................79.4
 17 Japan ..........................................78.2
 18 United Arab Emirates ...................78.0
 19 Australia .......................................76.0
 20 Belgium .......................................75.0
 21 Estonia .........................................74.1
 22 United States ...............................74.0
 23 Austria .........................................72.7
 24 Hong Kong SAR ..........................72.0
 25 Taiwan, China ..............................71.5
 26 Latvia ...........................................71.1
 27 Singapore ....................................71.0
 28 Barbados .....................................70.2
 29 Slovenia .......................................70.0
 30 Ireland ..........................................69.9
 31 Czech Republic ...........................68.8
 32 Israel ............................................67.2
 33 Spain ...........................................65.8
 34 Hungary .......................................65.3
 35 Malta ...........................................63.0
 36 Poland .........................................62.3
 37 Lithuania ......................................62.1
 38 Oman ..........................................62.0
 39 Croatia .........................................60.3
 40 Malaysia .......................................56.3
 41 Bahrain ........................................55.0
 42 Italy ..............................................53.7
 43 Cyprus .........................................53.0
 44 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............52.0
 44 Montenegro .................................52.0
 46 Macedonia, FYR ..........................51.9
 47 Portugal .......................................51.1
 48 Brunei Darussalam .......................50.0
 49 Morocco ......................................49.0
 50 Trinidad and Tobago ....................48.5
 51 Uruguay .......................................47.7
 52 Bulgaria .......................................46.2
 53 Azerbaijan ....................................46.0
 54 Puerto Rico ..................................45.3
 55 Albania .........................................45.0
 55 Chile ............................................45.0
 55 Ukraine ........................................45.0
 58 Greece .........................................44.4
 59 Armenia .......................................44.0
 60 Russian Federation ......................43.0
 61 Panama .......................................42.8
 62 Saudi Arabia ................................41.0
 63 Serbia ..........................................40.9
 64 Brazil ............................................40.7
 65 Moldova .......................................40.0
 66 Romania ......................................39.9
 67 Turkey ..........................................39.8
 68 Dominican Republic .....................39.5
 69 Kuwait .........................................38.3
 70 Jordan .........................................38.0
 71 Tunisia .........................................36.8
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Colombia .....................................36.5
 72 Costa Rica ...................................36.5
 74 Argentina .....................................36.0
 75 Venezuela ....................................35.7
 76 China ...........................................34.3
 76 Peru .............................................34.3
 78 Kazakhstan ..................................34.0
 79 Suriname .....................................31.6
 80 Mexico .........................................31.1
 81 Lebanon ......................................31.0
 82 Cape Verde .................................30.0
 83 Guyana ........................................29.9
 84 Ecuador .......................................29.0
 85 Nigeria .........................................28.4
 86 Mauritius ......................................28.3
 87 Vietnam .......................................27.6
 88 Georgia ........................................26.9
 89 Egypt ...........................................26.7
 90 Jamaica .......................................26.1
 91 Kenya ..........................................25.9
 92 Philippines ...................................25.0
 93 Thailand .......................................21.2
 94 Syria ............................................20.7
 95 Bolivia ..........................................20.0
 95 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................20.0
 97 Paraguay .....................................19.8
 98 Pakistan .......................................16.8
 99 Senegal .......................................16.0
 100 El Salvador...................................15.9
 101 Belize ...........................................14.0
 102 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................13.0
 102 Rwanda .......................................13.0
 104 Mongolia ......................................12.9
 105 Algeria .........................................12.5
 105 Uganda ........................................12.5
 107 Yemen .........................................12.4
 108 South Africa .................................12.3
 109 Sri Lanka .....................................12.0
 110 Tajikistan ......................................11.6
 111 Zimbabwe ....................................11.5
 112 Honduras .....................................11.1
 113 Tanzania ......................................11.0
 114 Guatemala ...................................10.5
 115 Angola .........................................10.0
 115 Nicaragua ....................................10.0
 115 Zambia ........................................10.0
 118 Indonesia .......................................9.9
 119 Ghana ............................................9.6
 120 Gambia, The ..................................9.2
 121 Haiti ...............................................8.4
 122 Swaziland ......................................8.0
 123 Nepal .............................................7.9
 124 India ...............................................7.5
 125 Namibia .........................................6.5
 126 Botswana ......................................6.0
 127 Mozambique ..................................4.2
 128 Cameroon ......................................4.0
 129 Lesotho .........................................3.9
 130 Bangladesh ....................................3.7
 131 Benin .............................................3.1
 132 Mauritania ......................................3.0
 133 Mali ................................................2.7
 134 Côte d’Ivoire ..................................2.6
 135 Malawi ...........................................2.3
 136 Burundi ..........................................2.1
 137 Chad ..............................................1.7
 137 Madagascar ...................................1.7
 139 Burkina Faso ..................................1.4
 140 Cambodia ......................................1.3
 141 Ethiopia ..........................................0.8
 142 Timor-Leste ...................................0.2
6.02 Internet users
Percentage of individuals using the Internet  |  2010
SOURCE: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
362  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
1 Iceland .........................................93.0
2 Netherlands .................................92.0
3 Norway ........................................90.9
4 Luxembourg ................................90.2
5 Qatar ...........................................89.6
6 Sweden .......................................89.5
7 Denmark ......................................88.0
8 Bahrain ........................................87.0
9 Switzerland ..................................86.9
10 Germany ......................................85.7
11 Singapore ....................................84.0
12 Canada ........................................83.9
13 New Zealand ...............................83.9
14 Japan ..........................................83.4
15 United Kingdom ...........................82.6
16 Finland .........................................82.0
17 Korea, Rep. .................................81.8
18 Australia .......................................81.1
19 Brunei Darussalam .......................79.6
20 Hong Kong SAR ..........................77.9
21 Israel ............................................77.0
22 Belgium .......................................76.7
23 Ireland ..........................................76.5
24 France .........................................76.4
25 Austria .........................................76.2
26 United Arab Emirates ...................76.0
27 United States ...............................75.5
28 Malta ...........................................73.1
29 Slovak Republic ...........................72.2
30 Taiwan, China ..............................71.7
31 Slovenia .......................................70.5
32 Estonia .........................................69.2
33 Poland .........................................69.0
34 Spain ...........................................68.7
35 Hungary .......................................66.4
36 Italy ..............................................64.8
37 Czech Republic ...........................64.1
38 Latvia ...........................................62.8
39 Barbados .....................................61.4
40 Cyprus .........................................60.5
41 Macedonia, FYR ..........................60.3
42 Croatia .........................................60.0
43 Portugal .......................................59.5
44 Lithuania ......................................59.2
45 Saudi Arabia ................................57.3
46 Puerto Rico ..................................55.0
47 Greece .........................................53.4
48 Trinidad and Tobago ....................53.1
49 Uruguay .......................................52.8
50 Jordan .........................................51.4
51 Serbia ..........................................50.9
52 Russian Federation ......................50.0
53 Romania ......................................47.9
54 Chile ............................................46.8
55 Oman ..........................................45.6
56 Turkey ..........................................44.2
57 Costa Rica ...................................41.3
58 Malaysia .......................................41.0
59 Syria ............................................40.4
60 Argentina .....................................40.0
61 Mauritius ......................................37.7
62 Kuwait .........................................37.5
63 Moldova .......................................36.9
64 China ...........................................35.4
65 Bulgaria .......................................35.1
66 Brazil ............................................34.9
67 Morocco ......................................34.2
68 Egypt ...........................................34.0
69 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................33.7
70 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............33.7
71 Montenegro .................................32.0
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Lebanon ......................................31.7
 73 Ukraine ........................................30.7
 74 Suriname .....................................29.9
 75 Mexico .........................................29.8
 76 Ecuador .......................................27.0
 77 Colombia .....................................26.1
 78 Kazakhstan ..................................25.1
 79 Thailand .......................................22.8
 80 Peru .............................................22.7
 81 Mongolia ......................................22.3
 82 Azerbaijan ....................................21.5
 83 Armenia .......................................21.0
 84 Algeria .........................................20.0
 84 Jamaica .......................................20.0
 86 Panama .......................................19.8
 87 Paraguay .....................................19.3
 88 South Africa .................................18.3
 89 Georgia ........................................18.2
 90 Venezuela ....................................17.3
 91 Bolivia ..........................................17.0
 92 Tunisia .........................................17.0
 93 Dominican Republic .....................16.4
 94 Guatemala ...................................15.8
 95 Albania .........................................15.6
 96 Namibia .......................................15.4
 97 Nigeria .........................................15.4
 98 Vietnam .......................................14.2
 99 El Salvador...................................13.3
 100 Philippines ...................................13.1
 101 Pakistan .......................................13.0
 102 Honduras .....................................12.9
 103 Sri Lanka .....................................12.3
 104 Cape Verde .................................11.3
 105 Indonesia .....................................10.8
 106 Swaziland ....................................10.7
 107 Ghana ............................................9.1
 108 Belize1 ...........................................8.2
 109 Nicaragua ......................................8.2
 110 Mozambique ..................................7.5
 111 Angola ...........................................7.1
 112 Guyana ..........................................6.5
 113 Botswana ......................................6.5
 114 India ...............................................6.1
 115 Haiti ...............................................5.9
 116 Gambia, The ..................................5.7
 117 Senegal .........................................5.7
 118 Cameroon ......................................5.4
 119 Zimbabwe ......................................5.3
 120 Lesotho .........................................5.0
 121 Malawi ...........................................4.5
 122 Cambodia ......................................4.3
 123 Nepal .............................................4.2
 124 Kenya ............................................4.1
 125 Kyrgyz Republic .............................4.0
 126 Yemen ...........................................4.0
 127 Bangladesh ....................................3.1
 128 Mali ................................................3.0
 129 Mauritania ......................................3.0
 130 Tajikistan ........................................2.9
 131 Tanzania ........................................2.6
 132 Benin .............................................2.5
 133 Zambia ..........................................2.4
 134 Burkina Faso ..................................2.1
 135 Uganda ..........................................2.1
 136 Côte d’Ivoire ..................................1.8
 137 Ethiopia ..........................................1.4
 138 Madagascar ...................................1.4
 139 Chad ..............................................0.6
 140 Rwanda .........................................0.5
 n/a Burundi ..........................................n/a
 n/a Timor-Leste ...................................n/a
6.03 Households with a personal computer
Percentage of households equipped with a personal computer  |  2010
SOURCE: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition)
1 2000
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  363 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Korea, Rep. .................................96.8
 2 Iceland .........................................92.0
 3 Netherlands .................................90.9
 4 Luxembourg ................................90.3
 5 Norway ........................................89.8
 6 Sweden .......................................88.3
 7 Switzerland ..................................86.4
 8 Denmark ......................................86.1
 9 Qatar ...........................................84.0
 10 Germany ......................................82.5
 11 Singapore ....................................82.0
 12 Japan ..........................................81.3
 13 Finland .........................................80.5
 14 United Kingdom ...........................79.6
 15 New Zealand ...............................79.0
 16 Canada ........................................78.2
 17 Hong Kong SAR ..........................76.4
 18 Australia .......................................74.1
 19 Bahrain ........................................74.0
 20 France .........................................73.6
 21 Austria .........................................72.9
 22 Belgium .......................................72.7
 23 Ireland ..........................................71.7
 24 United States ...............................71.6
 25 Brunei Darussalam .......................71.3
 26 Malta ...........................................70.4
 27 Israel ............................................69.0
 28 Slovenia .......................................68.1
 29 Estonia .........................................67.8
 30 Slovak Republic ...........................67.5
 31 Taiwan, China ..............................67.2
 32 United Arab Emirates ...................65.0
 33 Poland .........................................63.4
 34 Lithuania ......................................60.6
 35 Czech Republic ...........................60.5
 35 Hungary .......................................60.5
 37 Latvia ...........................................59.8
 38 Spain ...........................................59.1
 39 Italy ..............................................59.0
 40 Croatia .........................................56.5
 41 Malaysia .......................................55.6
 42 Saudi Arabia ................................54.4
 43 Cyprus .........................................53.7
 43 Portugal .......................................53.7
 45 Barbados .....................................51.0
 46 Puerto Rico ..................................50.0
 47 Macedonia, FYR ..........................49.2
 48 Greece .........................................46.4
 49 Romania ......................................42.2
 50 Russian Federation ......................42.1
 51 Turkey ..........................................41.6
 52 Serbia ..........................................40.2
 53 Azerbaijan ....................................35.3
 54 Syria ............................................35.2
 55 Chile ............................................35.0
 56 Moldova .......................................34.7
 57 Uruguay .......................................33.3
 58 Bulgaria .......................................33.1
 59 Kuwait .........................................31.6
 60 Egypt ...........................................31.2
 61 Lebanon ......................................29.7
 62 Mauritius ......................................29.0
 63 Oman ..........................................27.7
 64 Brazil ............................................27.1
 65 Morocco ......................................25.5
 66 Costa Rica ...................................24.1
 67 China ...........................................23.7
 68 Kazakhstan ..................................23.2
 69 Mexico .........................................22.2
 70 Jordan .........................................22.1
 71 Argentina .....................................21.3
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Montenegro .................................21.2
 73 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................20.8
 74 Ukraine ........................................20.7
 75 Trinidad and Tobago ....................19.8
 76 Colombia .....................................19.3
 77 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............18.1
 78 Georgia ........................................16.6
 79 Armenia .......................................15.0
 80 Peru .............................................14.0
 81 Paraguay .....................................13.8
 82 Vietnam .......................................12.5
 83 Suriname .....................................11.9
 84 Jamaica .......................................11.8
 84 Panama .......................................11.8
 86 Albania .........................................11.7
 87 Ecuador .......................................11.5
 88 Thailand .......................................11.4
 89 Philippines ...................................10.1
 89 South Africa .................................10.1
 91 Algeria .........................................10.0
 92 Venezuela ......................................9.7
 93 Nigeria ...........................................9.0
 94 El Salvador.....................................8.0
 95 Pakistan .........................................8.0
 96 Tunisia ...........................................7.7
 97 Mongolia ........................................7.7
 98 Dominican Republic .......................7.6
 99 Honduras .......................................6.0
 100 Sri Lanka .......................................5.9
 101 Angola ...........................................5.7
 102 Guyana ..........................................5.1
 103 Senegal .........................................4.5
 104 India ...............................................4.2
 105 Kenya ............................................4.0
 106 Zimbabwe ......................................4.0
 107 Bolivia ............................................3.9
 107 Namibia .........................................3.9
 109 Indonesia .......................................3.9
 110 Swaziland ......................................3.6
 111 Cape Verde ...................................3.5
 112 Kyrgyz Republic .............................3.2
 113 Gambia, The ..................................3.2
 114 Guatemala .....................................3.0
 115 Yemen ...........................................2.9
 116 Malawi ...........................................2.9
 117 Botswana ......................................2.8
 118 Haiti ...............................................2.7
 119 Bangladesh ....................................2.6
 120 Nicaragua ......................................2.6
 121 Zambia ..........................................2.0
 122 Cameroon ......................................1.5
 123 Mauritania ......................................1.4
 124 Lesotho .........................................1.3
 125 Mali ................................................1.2
 125 Nepal .............................................1.2
 127 Madagascar ...................................1.1
 128 Côte d’Ivoire ..................................1.1
 129 Mozambique ..................................1.1
 130 Tanzania ........................................0.7
 131 Ghana ............................................0.4
 132 Uganda ..........................................0.4
 133 Cambodia ......................................0.4
 134 Ethiopia ..........................................0.3
 135 Burkina Faso ..................................0.2
 136 Tajikistan ........................................0.2
 137 Chad ..............................................0.2
 138 Rwanda .........................................0.1
 139 Benin .............................................0.1
 n/a Belize .............................................n/a
 n/a Burundi ..........................................n/a
 n/a Timor-Leste ...................................n/a
6.04 Households with Internet access
Percentage of households with Internet access at home  |  2010
SOURCE: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
364  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
1 Netherlands .................................38.1
2 Switzerland ..................................37.9
3 Denmark ......................................37.7
4 Korea, Rep. .................................35.7
5 Norway ........................................35.3
6 Iceland .........................................34.1
7 France .........................................34.0
8 Luxembourg ................................33.2
9 Sweden .......................................31.8
10 Germany ......................................31.7
11 United Kingdom ...........................31.6
12 Belgium .......................................31.5
13 Hong Kong SAR ..........................29.9
14 Canada ........................................29.8
15 Finland .........................................28.6
16 Malta ...........................................28.0
17 United States ...............................27.6
18 Japan ..........................................26.9
19 Israel ............................................25.1
20 Estonia .........................................25.1
21 Singapore ....................................24.9
22 New Zealand ...............................24.9
23 Slovenia .......................................24.2
24 Australia .......................................24.2
25 Austria .........................................23.9
26 Spain ...........................................22.9
27 Taiwan, China ..............................22.7
28 Italy ..............................................21.9
29 Ireland ..........................................21.1
30 Lithuania ......................................20.6
31 Barbados .....................................20.6
32 Greece .........................................19.9
33 Hungary .......................................19.6
34 Latvia ...........................................19.3
35 Portugal .......................................19.2
36 Croatia .........................................18.3
37 Cyprus .........................................17.6
38 Puerto Rico ..................................14.7
39 Bulgaria .......................................14.5
40 Czech Republic ...........................14.5
41 Romania ......................................13.9
42 Poland .........................................13.0
43 Slovak Republic ...........................12.7
44 Macedonia, FYR ..........................12.5
45 Serbia ..........................................11.2
46 Russian Federation ......................11.0
47 Uruguay .......................................10.9
48 Trinidad and Tobago ....................10.8
49 United Arab Emirates ...................10.5
50 Chile ............................................10.5
51 Mexico .........................................10.0
52 Turkey ............................................9.7
53 Argentina .......................................9.6
54 China .............................................9.4
55 Kazakhstan ....................................8.9
56 Montenegro ...................................8.3
57 Qatar .............................................8.2
58 Bosnia and Herzegovina ................8.2
59 Panama .........................................7.8
60 Moldova .........................................7.5
61 Malaysia .........................................7.3
62 Brazil ..............................................6.8
63 Ukraine ..........................................6.5
64 Costa Rica .....................................6.2
65 Mauritius ........................................6.1
66 Georgia ..........................................5.8
67 Colombia .......................................5.6
68 Saudi Arabia ..................................5.5
69 Brunei Darussalam .........................5.4
70 Venezuela ......................................5.4
71 Bahrain ..........................................5.4
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Azerbaijan ......................................5.0
 73 Lebanon ........................................4.7
 74 Thailand .........................................4.6
 75 Tunisia ...........................................4.6
 76 Jamaica .........................................4.3
 77 Vietnam .........................................4.1
 78 Dominican Republic .......................3.6
 79 Albania ...........................................3.3
 80 Cape Verde ...................................3.2
 81 Jordan ...........................................3.2
 82 Peru ...............................................3.1
 83 Suriname .......................................3.0
 84 Belize .............................................2.9
 85 El Salvador.....................................2.8
 86 Armenia .........................................2.8
 87 Mongolia ........................................2.6
 88 Algeria ...........................................2.5
 89 Philippines .....................................1.8
 90 Guatemala .....................................1.8
 91 Egypt .............................................1.8
 92 Kuwait ...........................................1.7
 93 Oman ............................................1.6
 94 Morocco ........................................1.6
 95 Guyana ..........................................1.5
 96 South Africa ...................................1.5
 97 Ecuador .........................................1.4
 98 Sri Lanka .......................................1.1
 99 Honduras .......................................1.0
 100 Bolivia ............................................1.0
 101 India ...............................................0.9
 102 Nicaragua ......................................0.8
 103 Indonesia .......................................0.8
 104 Iran, Islamic Rep. ...........................0.7
 105 Senegal .........................................0.6
 106 Botswana ......................................0.6
 107 Paraguay .......................................0.4
 108 Namibia .........................................0.4
 109 Yemen ...........................................0.3
 110 Syria ..............................................0.3
 111 Pakistan .........................................0.3
 112 Kyrgyz Republic .............................0.3
 113 Zimbabwe ......................................0.3
 114 Cambodia ......................................0.3
 115 Ghana ............................................0.2
 116 Nepal .............................................0.2
 117 Mauritania ......................................0.2
 118 Uganda ..........................................0.2
 119 Swaziland ......................................0.1
 120 Angola ...........................................0.1
 121 Burkina Faso ..................................0.1
 122 Zambia ..........................................0.1
 123 Tajikistan ........................................0.1
 124 Nigeria ...........................................0.1
 125 Mozambique ..................................0.1
 126 Timor-Leste ...................................0.0
 127 Bangladesh ....................................0.0
 128 Benin .............................................0.0
 129 Côte d'Ivoire ..................................0.0
 130 Malawi ...........................................0.0
 131 Madagascar ...................................0.0
 132 Rwanda .........................................0.0
 133 Gambia, The ..................................0.0
 134 Lesotho .........................................0.0
 135 Mali ................................................0.0
 136 Kenya ............................................0.0
 137 Tanzania ........................................0.0
 138 Cameroon ......................................0.0
 139 Ethiopia ..........................................0.0
 140 Burundi ..........................................0.0
 141 Chad ..............................................0.0
 142 Haiti1 .............................................0.0
6.05 Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions
Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions per 100 population  |  2010
SOURCE: International Telecommunication Union, The World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2010 (December 2010 edition)
1 2008
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  365 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Korea, Rep. .................................78.0
 2 Sweden .......................................71.7
 3 Japan ..........................................64.6
 4 Finland .........................................60.7
 5 Israel ............................................55.8
 6 Australia .......................................53.1
 7 Norway ........................................52.5
 8 United States ...............................50.6
 9 Singapore ....................................48.4
 10 Denmark ......................................46.4
 11 United Kingdom ...........................38.2
 12 Ireland ..........................................35.4
 13 Brunei Darussalam .......................33.6
 14 Poland .........................................31.3
 15 Switzerland ..................................31.0
 16 Canada ........................................30.4
 17 Hong Kong SAR ..........................29.4
 18 Bahrain ........................................27.1
 19 Estonia .........................................25.9
 20 Austria .........................................24.9
 21 Portugal .......................................24.1
 22 Montenegro .................................22.0
 23 Spain ...........................................18.6
 24 New Zealand ...............................18.3
 25 France .........................................18.1
 26 Luxembourg ................................17.6
 27 Italy ..............................................16.8
 28 Oman ..........................................16.7
 29 Latvia ...........................................15.9
 30 Croatia .........................................15.5
 31 Slovenia .......................................15.5
 32 Germany ......................................15.4
 33 Iceland .........................................12.7
 34 Taiwan, China ..............................12.4
 35 Lithuania ......................................12.0
 36 Saudi Arabia ................................11.7
 37 Malta ...........................................11.7
 38 Georgia ........................................11.3
 39 Botswana ....................................10.4
 40 Malaysia .......................................10.4
 41 Hungary .......................................10.1
 42 Uruguay .........................................9.7
 43 Qatar .............................................9.6
 44 Romania ........................................9.4
 45 Chile ..............................................9.0
 46 Namibia .........................................8.8
 47 Ecuador .........................................8.3
 48 Belgium .........................................8.0
 49 Mauritius ........................................7.9
 50 Netherlands ...................................7.5
 51 Venezuela ......................................7.5
 52 Slovak Republic .............................7.2
 53 Turkey ............................................7.1
 54 Macedonia, FYR ............................6.5
 55 Brazil ..............................................6.3
 56 Argentina .......................................6.1
 57 Cyprus ...........................................5.9
 58 Kuwait ...........................................5.9
 59 South Africa ...................................5.8
 60 Dominican Republic .......................5.1
 61 Greece ...........................................4.9
 62 Peru ...............................................4.5
 63 Paraguay .......................................4.3
 64 Puerto Rico ....................................4.2
 65 Honduras .......................................4.2
 66 Serbia ............................................4.1
 67 Czech Republic .............................3.8
 68 Bulgaria .........................................3.8
 69 Armenia .........................................3.7
 70 Colombia .......................................3.7
 71 El Salvador.....................................3.6
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 United Arab Emirates .....................3.5
 73 Russian Federation ........................3.4
 74 Moldova .........................................3.2
 75 Guatemala .....................................3.0
 76 Morocco ........................................2.8
 77 Bolivia ............................................2.7
 78 Jamaica .........................................2.4
 79 Mongolia ........................................2.3
 80 Philippines .....................................2.3
 81 Sri Lanka .......................................1.9
 82 China .............................................1.8
 82 Nicaragua ......................................1.8
 84 Panama .........................................1.6
 85 Indonesia .......................................1.5
 86 Angola ...........................................1.5
 87 Mexico ...........................................1.5
 88 Nigeria ...........................................1.0
 89 Kenya ............................................0.9
 90 Cambodia ......................................0.7
 91 Egypt .............................................0.7
 91 Gambia, The ..................................0.7
 93 Thailand .........................................0.7
 94 Tajikistan ........................................0.6
 95 Azerbaijan ......................................0.6
 96 Ghana ............................................0.6
 96 Ukraine ..........................................0.6
 98 Lesotho .........................................0.5
 99 Senegal .........................................0.5
 100 Rwanda .........................................0.5
 101 Mozambique ..................................0.4
 102 Jordan ...........................................0.3
 103 Vietnam .........................................0.3
 104 Malawi ...........................................0.2
 105 Timor-Leste ...................................0.2
 106 Cameroon ......................................0.2
 107 India ...............................................0.1
 107 Tanzania ........................................0.1
 109 Syria ..............................................0.1
 110 Madagascar ...................................0.1
 111 Zimbabwe ......................................0.1
 112 Tunisia ...........................................0.0
 113 Ethiopia ..........................................0.0
 113 Kazakhstan ....................................0.0
 113 Kyrgyz Republic .............................0.0
 113 Nepal .............................................0.0
 117 Mauritania ......................................0.0
 117 Uganda ..........................................0.0
 n/a Albania ...........................................n/a
 n/a Algeria ...........................................n/a
 n/a Bangladesh ....................................n/a
 n/a Barbados .......................................n/a
 n/a Belize .............................................n/a
 n/a Benin .............................................n/a
 n/a Bosnia and Herzegovina ................n/a
 n/a Burkina Faso ..................................n/a
 n/a Burundi ..........................................n/a
 n/a Cape Verde ...................................n/a
 n/a Chad ..............................................n/a
 n/a Costa Rica .....................................n/a
 n/a Côte d'Ivoire ..................................n/a
 n/a Guyana ..........................................n/a
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
 n/a Iran, Islamic Rep. ...........................n/a
 n/a Lebanon ........................................n/a
 n/a Mali ................................................n/a
 n/a Pakistan .........................................n/a
 n/a Suriname .......................................n/a
 n/a Swaziland ......................................n/a
 n/a Trinidad and Tobago ......................n/a
 n/a Yemen ...........................................n/a
 n/a Zambia ..........................................n/a
6.06 Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions
Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions per 100 population  |  2010
SOURCE: Informa Telecoms & Media
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
366  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 5.1 7
 1 Iceland ....................................... 6.7
 2 Denmark .................................... 6.6
 3 United Kingdom ......................... 6.5
 4 Sweden ..................................... 6.4
 5 Canada ...................................... 6.3
 6 Norway ...................................... 6.2
 7 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 6.2
 8 Puerto Rico ................................ 6.2
 9 Netherlands ............................... 6.2
 10 Switzerland ................................ 6.2
 11 United States ............................. 6.2
 12 New Zealand ............................. 6.2
 13 Austria ....................................... 6.1
 14 Finland ....................................... 6.1
 15 Qatar ......................................... 6.1
 16 Singapore .................................. 6.1
 17 Estonia ....................................... 6.1
 18 Malta ......................................... 6.1
 19 Tunisia ....................................... 6.1
 20 Australia ..................................... 6.1
 21 Bahrain ...................................... 6.1
 22 Luxembourg .............................. 6.0
 23 Taiwan, China ............................ 6.0
 24 Belgium ..................................... 6.0
 25 Malaysia ..................................... 5.9
 26 France ....................................... 5.9
 27 Panama ..................................... 5.9
 28 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.9
 29 Chile .......................................... 5.8
 30 Lithuania .................................... 5.8
 31 Uruguay ..................................... 5.8
 32 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.8
 33 Azerbaijan .................................. 5.8
 34 Portugal ..................................... 5.8
 35 Ireland ........................................ 5.8
 36 Czech Republic ......................... 5.8
 37 Albania ....................................... 5.8
 38 Lebanon .................................... 5.8
 39 Montenegro ............................... 5.8
 40 Germany .................................... 5.8
 41 Philippines ................................. 5.7
 42 Barbados ................................... 5.7
 43 Israel .......................................... 5.7
 44 Morocco .................................... 5.7
 45 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.7
 46 Venezuela .................................. 5.7
 47 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 5.7
 48 Indonesia ................................... 5.7
 49 Jordan ....................................... 5.6
 50 Costa Rica ................................. 5.6
 51 Italy ............................................ 5.6
 52 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 5.6
 53 Slovak Republic ......................... 5.5
 54 Georgia ...................................... 5.5
 55 Brazil .......................................... 5.5
 56 Egypt ......................................... 5.4
 57 Argentina ................................... 5.4
 58 Spain ......................................... 5.4
 59 Kuwait ....................................... 5.4
 60 Bulgaria ..................................... 5.4
 61 Guatemala ................................. 5.3
 62 El Salvador................................. 5.3
 63 Dominican Republic ................... 5.3
 64 Latvia ......................................... 5.3
 65 Cyprus ....................................... 5.2
 66 Nigeria ....................................... 5.2
 67 Slovenia ..................................... 5.2
 68 Japan ........................................ 5.2
 69 Kenya ........................................ 5.2
 70 Honduras ................................... 5.2
 71 Jamaica ..................................... 5.2
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 5.1 7
 72 Oman ........................................ 5.2
 73 Turkey ........................................ 5.2
 74 Mauritius .................................... 5.2
 75 Colombia ................................... 5.1
 76 Romania .................................... 5.1
 77 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.1
 78 Mexico ....................................... 5.1
 79 Peru ........................................... 5.1
 80 Croatia ....................................... 5.1
 81 Hungary ..................................... 5.1
 82 South Africa ............................... 5.1
 83 Gambia, The .............................. 5.1
 84 Greece ....................................... 5.0
 85 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 5.0
 86 Algeria ....................................... 5.0
 87 Guyana ...................................... 5.0
 88 Thailand ..................................... 5.0
 89 China ......................................... 4.9
 90 India ........................................... 4.9
 91 Madagascar ............................... 4.9
 92 Senegal ..................................... 4.8
 93 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 4.8
 94 Cape Verde ............................... 4.8
 95 Pakistan ..................................... 4.8
 96 Moldova ..................................... 4.8
 97 Russian Federation .................... 4.8
 98 Belize ......................................... 4.7
 99 Haiti ........................................... 4.7
 100 Mongolia .................................... 4.7
 101 Ecuador ..................................... 4.7
 102 Armenia ..................................... 4.7
 103 Benin ......................................... 4.7
 104 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 4.6
 105 Namibia ..................................... 4.6
 106 Suriname ................................... 4.6
 107 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.6
 108 Cambodia .................................. 4.6
 109 Botswana .................................. 4.5
 110 Vietnam ..................................... 4.5
 111 Malawi ....................................... 4.5
 112 Ghana ........................................ 4.5
 113 Paraguay ................................... 4.5
 114 Nicaragua .................................. 4.4
 115 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.4
 116 Ukraine ...................................... 4.4
 117 Zambia ...................................... 4.4
 118 Rwanda ..................................... 4.4
 119 Poland ....................................... 4.4
 120 Swaziland .................................. 4.4
 121 Serbia ........................................ 4.3
 122 Bangladesh ................................ 4.3
 123 Bolivia ........................................ 4.2
 124 Timor-Leste ............................... 4.2
 125 Lesotho ..................................... 4.1
 126 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.1
 127 Nepal ......................................... 4.1
 128 Cameroon .................................. 4.0
 129 Uganda ...................................... 3.9
 130 Angola ....................................... 3.9
 131 Tanzania .................................... 3.8
 132 Mozambique .............................. 3.8
 133 Mauritania .................................. 3.7
 134 Syria .......................................... 3.7
 135 Mali ............................................ 3.6
 136 Tajikistan .................................... 3.6
 137 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.5
 138 Yemen ....................................... 3.4
 139 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.2
 140 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.1
 141 Chad .......................................... 3.0
 142 Burundi ...................................... 2.6
6.07 Use of virtual social networks
How widely used are virtual social networks (e.g., Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn) for professional and personal communication in your country? 
[1 = not used at all; 7 = used widely]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
7th pillar 
Business usage
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
368  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.8 7
 1 Sweden ..................................... 6.5
 2 Iceland ....................................... 6.3
 3 Japan ........................................ 6.3
 4 Switzerland ................................ 6.2
 5 Norway ...................................... 6.1
 6 Israel .......................................... 6.1
 7 Qatar ......................................... 6.0
 8 Korea, Rep. ............................... 6.0
 9 Denmark .................................... 6.0
 10 Singapore .................................. 6.0
 11 Finland ....................................... 6.0
 12 Austria ....................................... 5.9
 13 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.9
 14 Germany .................................... 5.9
 15 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.9
 16 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.9
 17 New Zealand ............................. 5.9
 18 United States ............................. 5.9
 19 Australia ..................................... 5.8
 20 Bahrain ...................................... 5.7
 21 Netherlands ............................... 5.7
 22 United Kingdom ......................... 5.7
 23 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.7
 24 Luxembourg .............................. 5.7
 25 France ....................................... 5.6
 26 Belgium ..................................... 5.6
 27 Portugal ..................................... 5.6
 28 Malaysia ..................................... 5.6
 29 Canada ...................................... 5.6
 30 South Africa ............................... 5.5
 31 Senegal ..................................... 5.5
 32 Panama ..................................... 5.5
 33 Puerto Rico ................................ 5.5
 34 Malta ......................................... 5.5
 35 Ireland ........................................ 5.5
 36 Estonia ....................................... 5.5
 37 Jordan ....................................... 5.4
 38 Barbados ................................... 5.4
 39 Kuwait ....................................... 5.4
 40 Chile .......................................... 5.4
 41 India ........................................... 5.3
 42 Sri Lanka ................................... 5.2
 43 Cyprus ....................................... 5.2
 44 Turkey ........................................ 5.2
 45 Czech Republic ......................... 5.2
 46 Spain ......................................... 5.2
 47 Guatemala ................................. 5.2
 48 Brazil .......................................... 5.2
 49 Oman ........................................ 5.2
 50 Tunisia ....................................... 5.1
 51 Namibia ..................................... 5.1
 52 Philippines ................................. 5.1
 53 Lithuania .................................... 5.0
 54 Indonesia ................................... 5.0
 55 Costa Rica ................................. 5.0
 56 Mauritius .................................... 5.0
 57 Dominican Republic ................... 5.0
 58 Slovak Republic ......................... 5.0
 59 Hungary ..................................... 4.9
 60 Kenya ........................................ 4.9
 61 China ......................................... 4.9
 62 Peru ........................................... 4.9
 63 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.9
 64 Cape Verde ............................... 4.8
 65 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 4.8
 66 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.8
 67 Honduras ................................... 4.8
 68 Lebanon .................................... 4.8
 69 Rwanda ..................................... 4.8
 70 Syria .......................................... 4.8
 71 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.8
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.8 7
 72 Jamaica ..................................... 4.7
 73 Albania ....................................... 4.7
 74 Morocco .................................... 4.7
 75 Thailand ..................................... 4.7
 76 Uruguay ..................................... 4.7
 77 Cambodia .................................. 4.7
 78 Egypt ......................................... 4.7
 79 Nigeria ....................................... 4.7
 80 Croatia ....................................... 4.7
 81 Mexico ....................................... 4.6
 82 Ukraine ...................................... 4.6
 83 Colombia ................................... 4.6
 84 Slovenia ..................................... 4.6
 85 El Salvador................................. 4.6
 86 Zambia ...................................... 4.6
 87 Gambia, The .............................. 4.6
 88 Vietnam ..................................... 4.6
 89 Greece ....................................... 4.6
 90 Mongolia .................................... 4.5
 91 Botswana .................................. 4.5
 92 Pakistan ..................................... 4.5
 93 Argentina ................................... 4.5
 94 Latvia ......................................... 4.5
 95 Bangladesh ................................ 4.4
 96 Guyana ...................................... 4.4
 97 Uganda ...................................... 4.4
 98 Mozambique .............................. 4.4
 99 Montenegro ............................... 4.4
 100 Poland ....................................... 4.3
 101 Benin ......................................... 4.3
 102 Italy ............................................ 4.3
 103 Ecuador ..................................... 4.3
 104 Malawi ....................................... 4.2
 105 Venezuela .................................. 4.2
 106 Burkina Faso .............................. 4.2
 107 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 4.2
 108 Cameroon .................................. 4.2
 109 Ghana ........................................ 4.2
 110 Paraguay ................................... 4.2
 111 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.2
 112 Mali ............................................ 4.2
 113 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.1
 114 Armenia ..................................... 4.1
 115 Georgia ...................................... 4.1
 116 Nepal ......................................... 4.1
 117 Romania .................................... 4.1
 118 Nicaragua .................................. 4.0
 119 Tajikistan .................................... 4.0
 120 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.0
 121 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.0
 122 Lesotho ..................................... 4.0
 123 Yemen ....................................... 4.0
 124 Suriname ................................... 3.9
 125 Tanzania .................................... 3.9
 126 Moldova ..................................... 3.9
 127 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.9
 128 Swaziland .................................. 3.9
 129 Belize ......................................... 3.9
 130 Russian Federation .................... 3.8
 131 Madagascar ............................... 3.8
 132 Haiti ........................................... 3.8
 133 Angola ....................................... 3.7
 134 Algeria ....................................... 3.7
 135 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.7
 136 Serbia ........................................ 3.7
 137 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.6
 138 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.6
 139 Bolivia ........................................ 3.6
 140 Mauritania .................................. 3.6
 141 Chad .......................................... 3.6
 142 Burundi ...................................... 3.2
7.01 Firm-level technology absorption
To what extent do businesses in your country absorb new technology? [1 = not at all; 7 = aggressively absorb]  |  2010–2011 weighted 
average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  369 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.2 7
 1 Japan ........................................ 5.8
 2 Switzerland ................................ 5.8
 3 Germany .................................... 5.7
 4 Sweden ..................................... 5.7
 5 Finland ....................................... 5.6
 6 Israel .......................................... 5.3
 7 United States ............................. 5.2
 8 France ....................................... 5.1
 9 Denmark .................................... 5.1
 10 Netherlands ............................... 5.0
 11 Qatar ......................................... 5.0
 12 Austria ....................................... 4.8
 13 United Kingdom ......................... 4.8
 14 Belgium ..................................... 4.7
 15 Taiwan, China ............................ 4.7
 16 Luxembourg .............................. 4.5
 17 Norway ...................................... 4.5
 18 Iceland ....................................... 4.4
 19 Malaysia ..................................... 4.3
 20 Korea, Rep. ............................... 4.3
 21 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.3
 22 Singapore .................................. 4.3
 23 China ......................................... 4.2
 24 Canada ...................................... 4.1
 25 Czech Republic ......................... 4.0
 26 Italy ............................................ 4.0
 27 Australia ..................................... 4.0
 28 Slovenia ..................................... 3.9
 29 New Zealand ............................. 3.8
 30 Indonesia ................................... 3.8
 31 Brazil .......................................... 3.8
 32 United Arab Emirates ................. 3.8
 33 Ireland ........................................ 3.8
 34 Estonia ....................................... 3.7
 35 India ........................................... 3.6
 36 Spain ......................................... 3.5
 37 Portugal ..................................... 3.5
 38 Russian Federation .................... 3.5
 39 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 3.5
 40 Costa Rica ................................. 3.4
 41 Hungary ..................................... 3.4
 42 Ukraine ...................................... 3.4
 43 Latvia ......................................... 3.4
 44 Tunisia ....................................... 3.4
 45 Puerto Rico ................................ 3.4
 46 South Africa ............................... 3.4
 47 Kenya ........................................ 3.3
 48 Lithuania .................................... 3.3
 49 Poland ....................................... 3.3
 50 Sri Lanka ................................... 3.3
 51 Pakistan ..................................... 3.3
 52 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.2
 53 Montenegro ............................... 3.2
 54 Nigeria ....................................... 3.2
 55 Tanzania .................................... 3.2
 56 Thailand ..................................... 3.2
 57 Oman ........................................ 3.2
 58 Vietnam ..................................... 3.2
 59 Colombia ................................... 3.2
 60 Cyprus ....................................... 3.2
 61 Armenia ..................................... 3.1
 62 Gambia, The .............................. 3.1
 63 Malta ......................................... 3.1
 64 Croatia ....................................... 3.1
 65 Uruguay ..................................... 3.0
 66 Chile .......................................... 3.0
 67 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.0
 68 Tajikistan .................................... 3.0
 69 Guatemala ................................. 3.0
 70 Bolivia ........................................ 3.0
 71 Turkey ........................................ 3.0
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.2 7
 72 Mongolia .................................... 3.0
 73 Guyana ...................................... 3.0
 74 Senegal ..................................... 3.0
 75 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 3.0
 76 Mexico ....................................... 3.0
 77 Argentina ................................... 2.9
 78 Romania .................................... 2.9
 79 Benin ......................................... 2.9
 80 Rwanda ..................................... 2.9
 81 Malawi ....................................... 2.9
 82 Bulgaria ..................................... 2.9
 83 Egypt ......................................... 2.8
 84 Slovak Republic ......................... 2.8
 85 Cambodia .................................. 2.8
 86 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 2.8
 87 Ecuador ..................................... 2.8
 88 Honduras ................................... 2.8
 89 Mauritius .................................... 2.8
 90 Kuwait ....................................... 2.8
 91 Barbados ................................... 2.7
 92 Jordan ....................................... 2.7
 93 Ghana ........................................ 2.7
 94 Zambia ...................................... 2.7
 95 Philippines ................................. 2.7
 96 Greece ....................................... 2.7
 97 Jamaica ..................................... 2.7
 98 Panama ..................................... 2.7
 99 Peru ........................................... 2.7
 100 Suriname ................................... 2.6
 101 Kazakhstan ................................ 2.6
 102 Namibia ..................................... 2.6
 103 Georgia ...................................... 2.6
 104 Botswana .................................. 2.6
 105 Mali ............................................ 2.6
 106 Lebanon .................................... 2.6
 107 Moldova ..................................... 2.6
 108 Morocco .................................... 2.6
 109 Chad .......................................... 2.6
 110 Serbia ........................................ 2.5
 111 Nicaragua .................................. 2.5
 112 Uganda ...................................... 2.5
 113 Madagascar ............................... 2.5
 114 Cameroon .................................. 2.5
 115 El Salvador................................. 2.5
 116 Paraguay ................................... 2.4
 117 Bahrain ...................................... 2.4
 118 Mauritania .................................. 2.4
 119 Albania ....................................... 2.4
 120 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 2.4
 121 Bangladesh ................................ 2.4
 122 Zimbabwe .................................. 2.4
 123 Venezuela .................................. 2.4
 124 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.4
 125 Ethiopia ...................................... 2.3
 126 Dominican Republic ................... 2.3
 127 Mozambique .............................. 2.3
 128 Burkina Faso .............................. 2.3
 129 Nepal ......................................... 2.3
 130 Haiti ........................................... 2.3
 131 Belize ......................................... 2.3
 132 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.2
 133 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.2
 134 Syria .......................................... 2.1
 135 Swaziland .................................. 2.1
 136 Lesotho ..................................... 2.1
 137 Cape Verde ............................... 2.1
 138 Algeria ....................................... 2.0
 139 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.0
 140 Burundi ...................................... 1.8
 141 Angola ....................................... 1.6
 142 Yemen ....................................... 1.5
7.02 Capacity for innovation
In your country, how do companies obtain technology? [1 = exclusively from licensing or imitating foreign companies; 7 = by conducting 
formal research and pioneering their own new products and processes]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
370  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Sweden .....................................310.7
 2 Switzerland ................................286.4
 3 Finland .......................................276.1
 4 Israel ..........................................234.4
 5 Denmark ....................................209.4
 6 Japan ........................................207.4
 7 Germany ....................................202.5
 8 Netherlands ...............................202.5
 9 Korea, Rep. ...............................160.9
 10 Austria .......................................143.9
 11 Norway ......................................143.8
 12 United States .............................137.5
 13 Singapore ..................................123.0
 14 France .......................................110.0
 15 Luxembourg ..............................103.3
 16 Belgium .....................................102.1
 17 Iceland .........................................96.0
 18 United Kingdom ...........................92.5
 19 Ireland ..........................................89.8
 20 Australia .......................................83.1
 21 Canada ........................................77.4
 22 New Zealand ...............................75.2
 23 Slovenia .......................................65.6
 24 Italy ..............................................51.6
 25 Spain ...........................................35.0
 26 Estonia .........................................34.2
 27 Hungary .......................................22.0
 28 Czech Republic ...........................18.3
 29 Malta ...........................................12.9
 30 Latvia ...........................................12.5
 31 Portugal .......................................12.1
 32 Barbados .....................................11.5
 33 Croatia .........................................10.1
 34 Malaysia .........................................9.5
 35 Cyprus ...........................................9.4
 36 Greece ...........................................9.2
 37 South Africa ...................................6.7
 38 China .............................................6.5
 39 Lithuania ........................................6.2
 40 Slovak Republic .............................6.0
 41 Turkey ............................................5.8
 42 Poland ...........................................5.7
 43 Russian Federation ........................5.4
 44 United Arab Emirates .....................4.5
 45 Chile ..............................................3.6
 46 Bulgaria .........................................3.6
 47 Brazil ..............................................2.7
 48 Saudi Arabia ..................................2.1
 49 Bosnia and Herzegovina ................2.1
 50 Ukraine ..........................................2.1
 51 Bahrain ..........................................2.1
 52 Uruguay .........................................2.1
 53 Trinidad and Tobago ......................2.0
 54 Brunei Darussalam .........................1.9
 55 Belize .............................................1.8
 56 Romania ........................................1.7
 57 Costa Rica .....................................1.7
 58 Mexico ...........................................1.6
 59 Macedonia, FYR ............................1.5
 60 Georgia ..........................................1.5
 61 Qatar .............................................1.3
 62 Armenia .........................................1.2
 63 India ...............................................1.2
 64 Kazakhstan ....................................1.1
 65 Colombia .......................................1.1
 66 Argentina .......................................1.1
 67 Lebanon ........................................0.9
 68 Tunisia ...........................................0.8
 69 Sri Lanka .......................................0.7
 70 Moldova .........................................0.7
 71 Jamaica .........................................0.7
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Thailand .........................................0.6
 73 Egypt .............................................0.6
 74 Morocco ........................................0.6
 75 Jordan ...........................................0.5
 76 Guatemala .....................................0.5
 77 Panama .........................................0.4
 78 Oman ............................................0.4
 79 El Salvador.....................................0.4
 80 Syria ..............................................0.4
 81 Azerbaijan ......................................0.4
 82 Kuwait ...........................................0.4
 83 Dominican Republic .......................0.4
 84 Philippines .....................................0.3
 85 Namibia .........................................0.3
 86 Cameroon ......................................0.2
 87 Lesotho .........................................0.2
 88 Peru ...............................................0.2
 89 Mongolia ........................................0.2
 90 Swaziland ......................................0.2
 91 Algeria ...........................................0.2
 92 Suriname .......................................0.2
 93 Ecuador .........................................0.2
 94 Venezuela ......................................0.1
 95 Kenya ............................................0.1
 96 Vietnam .........................................0.1
 97 Zimbabwe ......................................0.1
 98 Paraguay .......................................0.1
 99 Iran, Islamic Rep. ...........................0.1
 100 Indonesia .......................................0.1
 101 Kyrgyz Republic .............................0.1
 102 Mauritius ........................................0.1
 103 Zambia ..........................................0.0
 104 Chad ..............................................0.0
 105 Yemen ...........................................0.0
 106 Bolivia ............................................0.0
 107 Senegal .........................................0.0
 108 Ghana ............................................0.0
 109 Burkina Faso ..................................0.0
 110 Benin .............................................0.0
 111 Haiti ...............................................0.0
 112 Nepal .............................................0.0
 113 Pakistan .........................................0.0
 114 Angola ...........................................0.0
 115 Bangladesh ....................................0.0
 116 Nigeria ...........................................0.0
 117 Tanzania ........................................0.0
 118 Uganda ..........................................0.0
 119 Albania ...........................................0.0
 119 Botswana ......................................0.0
 119 Burundi ..........................................0.0
 119 Cambodia ......................................0.0
 119 Cape Verde ...................................0.0
 119 Côte d’Ivoire ..................................0.0
 119 Ethiopia ..........................................0.0
 119 Gambia, The ..................................0.0
 119 Guyana ..........................................0.0
 119 Honduras .......................................0.0
 119 Madagascar ...................................0.0
 119 Malawi ...........................................0.0
 119 Mali ................................................0.0
 119 Mauritania ......................................0.0
 119 Montenegro ...................................0.0
 119 Mozambique ..................................0.0
 119 Nicaragua ......................................0.0
 119 Rwanda .........................................0.0
 119 Serbia ............................................0.0
 119 Tajikistan ........................................0.0
 119 Timor-Leste ...................................0.0
 n/a Hong Kong SAR ............................n/a
 n/a Puerto Rico ....................................n/a
 n/a Taiwan, China ................................n/a
7.03 PCT patent applications
Number of applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) per million population  |  2008–09 average
SOURCE: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Patent Database, December 2011
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  371 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 5.0 7
 1 Sweden ..................................... 6.5
 2 Korea, Rep. ............................... 6.4
 3 Estonia ....................................... 6.3
 4 United Kingdom ......................... 6.3
 5 Iceland ....................................... 6.2
 6 Denmark .................................... 6.2
 7 Lithuania .................................... 6.2
 8 United States ............................. 6.1
 9 Taiwan, China ............................ 6.1
 10 Canada ...................................... 6.1
 11 Norway ...................................... 6.1
 12 Switzerland ................................ 6.1
 13 Japan ........................................ 6.0
 14 Finland ....................................... 6.0
 15 Netherlands ............................... 6.0
 16 Australia ..................................... 6.0
 17 New Zealand ............................. 6.0
 18 Austria ....................................... 5.9
 19 Qatar ......................................... 5.9
 20 Singapore .................................. 5.9
 21 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.9
 22 France ....................................... 5.9
 23 Czech Republic ......................... 5.9
 24 Malta ......................................... 5.8
 25 Israel .......................................... 5.8
 26 Belgium ..................................... 5.8
 27 Malaysia ..................................... 5.8
 28 Germany .................................... 5.8
 29 Brazil .......................................... 5.7
 30 Luxembourg .............................. 5.7
 31 Slovak Republic ......................... 5.7
 32 Ireland ........................................ 5.6
 33 Puerto Rico ................................ 5.6
 34 Portugal ..................................... 5.5
 35 Slovenia ..................................... 5.5
 36 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.5
 37 Sri Lanka ................................... 5.5
 38 Chile .......................................... 5.5
 39 Barbados ................................... 5.5
 40 Bahrain ...................................... 5.5
 41 Panama ..................................... 5.5
 42 Oman ........................................ 5.4
 43 Latvia ......................................... 5.4
 44 Kazakhstan ................................ 5.3
 45 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.3
 46 South Africa ............................... 5.3
 47 Guatemala ................................. 5.3
 48 Poland ....................................... 5.3
 49 China ......................................... 5.3
 50 Senegal ..................................... 5.3
 51 Costa Rica ................................. 5.2
 52 Bulgaria ..................................... 5.2
 53 Vietnam ..................................... 5.2
 54 Croatia ....................................... 5.2
 55 Turkey ........................................ 5.1
 56 India ........................................... 5.1
 57 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.1
 58 Thailand ..................................... 5.1
 59 Ukraine ...................................... 5.1
 60 Hungary ..................................... 5.0
 61 Spain ......................................... 5.0
 62 Mexico ....................................... 5.0
 63 Uruguay ..................................... 5.0
 64 Cyprus ....................................... 5.0
 65 El Salvador................................. 5.0
 66 Jamaica ..................................... 5.0
 67 Colombia ................................... 5.0
 68 Montenegro ............................... 5.0
 69 Honduras ................................... 5.0
 70 Kenya ........................................ 5.0
 71 Italy ............................................ 5.0
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 5.0 7
 72 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 5.0
 73 Russian Federation .................... 4.9
 74 Albania ....................................... 4.9
 75 Mauritius .................................... 4.9
 76 Jordan ....................................... 4.9
 77 Indonesia ................................... 4.9
 78 Rwanda ..................................... 4.9
 79 Romania .................................... 4.9
 80 Guyana ...................................... 4.9
 81 Belize ......................................... 4.8
 82 Tunisia ....................................... 4.8
 83 Namibia ..................................... 4.8
 84 Dominican Republic ................... 4.8
 85 Argentina ................................... 4.8
 86 Cambodia .................................. 4.8
 87 Zambia ...................................... 4.7
 88 Peru ........................................... 4.7
 89 Philippines ................................. 4.7
 90 Lebanon .................................... 4.7
 91 Kuwait ....................................... 4.7
 92 Georgia ...................................... 4.6
 93 Mongolia .................................... 4.6
 94 Cameroon .................................. 4.6
 95 Greece ....................................... 4.6
 96 Egypt ......................................... 4.6
 97 Botswana .................................. 4.6
 98 Cape Verde ............................... 4.6
 99 Gambia, The .............................. 4.5
 100 Suriname ................................... 4.5
 101 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.5
 102 Morocco .................................... 4.5
 103 Ghana ........................................ 4.5
 104 Mozambique .............................. 4.5
 105 Ecuador ..................................... 4.5
 106 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.5
 107 Nigeria ....................................... 4.5
 108 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 4.4
 109 Moldova ..................................... 4.4
 110 Uganda ...................................... 4.4
 111 Pakistan ..................................... 4.3
 112 Paraguay ................................... 4.3
 113 Armenia ..................................... 4.3
 114 Benin ......................................... 4.2
 115 Malawi ....................................... 4.2
 116 Venezuela .................................. 4.2
 117 Bangladesh ................................ 4.2
 118 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.2
 119 Tajikistan .................................... 4.2
 120 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 4.2
 121 Haiti ........................................... 4.1
 122 Nepal ......................................... 4.1
 123 Lesotho ..................................... 4.1
 124 Burkina Faso .............................. 4.0
 125 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.0
 126 Timor-Leste ............................... 4.0
 127 Swaziland .................................. 3.9
 128 Bolivia ........................................ 3.9
 129 Nicaragua .................................. 3.9
 130 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.9
 131 Madagascar ............................... 3.9
 132 Syria .......................................... 3.8
 133 Mali ............................................ 3.8
 134 Serbia ........................................ 3.8
 135 Tanzania .................................... 3.8
 136 Burundi ...................................... 3.7
 137 Yemen ....................................... 3.6
 138 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.6
 139 Mauritania .................................. 3.5
 140 Angola ....................................... 3.4
 141 Algeria ....................................... 3.1
 142 Chad .......................................... 2.9
7.04 Extent of business Internet use
To what extent do companies within your country use the Internet for their business activities? (e.g., buying and selling goods, interacting 
with customers and suppliers) [1 = not at all; 7 = extensively]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
372  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.0 7
 1 Switzerland ................................ 5.6
 2 Sweden ..................................... 5.5
 3 Denmark .................................... 5.5
 4 Singapore .................................. 5.4
 5 Norway ...................................... 5.4
 6 Japan ........................................ 5.3
 7 Luxembourg .............................. 5.3
 8 Finland ....................................... 5.3
 9 Malaysia ..................................... 5.2
 10 Netherlands ............................... 5.1
 11 Bahrain ...................................... 5.0
 12 United States ............................. 5.0
 13 Belgium ..................................... 5.0
 14 Austria ....................................... 5.0
 15 United Kingdom ......................... 4.9
 16 Germany .................................... 4.9
 17 Australia ..................................... 4.9
 18 Canada ...................................... 4.9
 19 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.8
 20 Israel .......................................... 4.8
 21 Iceland ....................................... 4.8
 22 Ireland ........................................ 4.7
 23 New Zealand ............................. 4.7
 24 Qatar ......................................... 4.7
 25 United Arab Emirates ................. 4.7
 26 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 4.7
 27 South Africa ............................... 4.7
 28 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.6
 29 Costa Rica ................................. 4.6
 30 Taiwan, China ............................ 4.6
 31 Gambia, The .............................. 4.5
 32 Albania ....................................... 4.5
 33 Brazil .......................................... 4.4
 34 Philippines ................................. 4.4
 35 France ....................................... 4.4
 36 Barbados ................................... 4.4
 37 Chile .......................................... 4.4
 38 Tunisia ....................................... 4.4
 39 Czech Republic ......................... 4.3
 40 Mauritius .................................... 4.3
 41 Korea, Rep. ............................... 4.3
 42 Oman ........................................ 4.3
 43 Panama ..................................... 4.3
 44 Botswana .................................. 4.3
 45 China ......................................... 4.2
 46 Estonia ....................................... 4.2
 47 Guatemala ................................. 4.2
 48 Jamaica ..................................... 4.2
 49 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.2
 50 Namibia ..................................... 4.2
 51 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 4.1
 52 Indonesia ................................... 4.1
 53 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.1
 54 Rwanda ..................................... 4.1
 55 Poland ....................................... 4.1
 56 Thailand ..................................... 4.1
 57 Malta ......................................... 4.1
 58 Nigeria ....................................... 4.1
 59 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.1
 60 Guyana ...................................... 4.1
 61 Suriname ................................... 4.0
 62 Kenya ........................................ 4.0
 63 India ........................................... 4.0
 64 Latvia ......................................... 4.0
 65 Lithuania .................................... 4.0
 66 Montenegro ............................... 4.0
 67 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.0
 68 Mongolia .................................... 4.0
 69 Cyprus ....................................... 4.0
 70 Honduras ................................... 4.0
 71 Malawi ....................................... 3.9
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.0 7
 72 Portugal ..................................... 3.9
 73 Uruguay ..................................... 3.9
 74 Morocco .................................... 3.9
 75 Peru ........................................... 3.9
 76 Argentina ................................... 3.9
 77 El Salvador................................. 3.9
 78 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.9
 79 Romania .................................... 3.8
 80 Mexico ....................................... 3.8
 81 Ghana ........................................ 3.8
 82 Russian Federation .................... 3.8
 83 Slovenia ..................................... 3.8
 84 Colombia ................................... 3.7
 85 Zambia ...................................... 3.7
 86 Turkey ........................................ 3.7
 87 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.7
 88 Lesotho ..................................... 3.7
 89 Angola ....................................... 3.7
 90 Spain ......................................... 3.7
 91 Tanzania .................................... 3.6
 92 Swaziland .................................. 3.6
 93 Ecuador ..................................... 3.6
 94 Venezuela .................................. 3.6
 95 Cameroon .................................. 3.6
 96 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.6
 97 Cambodia .................................. 3.6
 98 Lebanon .................................... 3.6
 99 Dominican Republic ................... 3.6
 100 Uganda ...................................... 3.6
 101 Paraguay ................................... 3.5
 102 Kuwait ....................................... 3.5
 103 Jordan ....................................... 3.5
 104 Nicaragua .................................. 3.5
 105 Armenia ..................................... 3.5
 106 Georgia ...................................... 3.5
 107 Vietnam ..................................... 3.5
 108 Tajikistan .................................... 3.5
 109 Pakistan ..................................... 3.5
 110 Benin ......................................... 3.4
 111 Hungary ..................................... 3.4
 112 Senegal ..................................... 3.4
 113 Bolivia ........................................ 3.4
 114 Greece ....................................... 3.4
 115 Madagascar ............................... 3.3
 116 Cape Verde ............................... 3.3
 117 Ukraine ...................................... 3.3
 118 Moldova ..................................... 3.3
 119 Mozambique .............................. 3.3
 120 Italy ............................................ 3.3
 121 Bangladesh ................................ 3.3
 122 Mali ............................................ 3.3
 123 Belize ......................................... 3.2
 124 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.2
 125 Croatia ....................................... 3.2
 126 Algeria ....................................... 3.1
 127 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.1
 128 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.1
 129 Chad .......................................... 3.1
 130 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.1
 131 Egypt ......................................... 3.0
 132 Serbia ........................................ 2.9
 133 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 2.9
 134 Ethiopia ...................................... 2.9
 135 Yemen ....................................... 2.9
 136 Nepal ......................................... 2.9
 137 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.7
 138 Burkina Faso .............................. 2.7
 139 Burundi ...................................... 2.6
 140 Syria .......................................... 2.6
 141 Mauritania .................................. 2.4
 142 Haiti ........................................... 2.3
7.05 Extent of staff training
To what extent do companies in your country invest in training and employee development?  [1 = hardly at all; 7 = to a great extent]  |  2010–
2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
8th pillar 
Government usage
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
374  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.6 7
 1 Singapore .................................. 6.3
 2 Sweden ..................................... 6.1
 3 Rwanda ..................................... 6.1
 4 Malta ......................................... 6.1
 5 Luxembourg .............................. 6.1
 6 Taiwan, China ............................ 6.0
 7 Bahrain ...................................... 6.0
 8 Qatar ......................................... 6.0
 9 Malaysia ..................................... 5.9
 10 Finland ....................................... 5.9
 11 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.9
 12 Portugal ..................................... 5.9
 13 Estonia ....................................... 5.7
 14 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.7
 15 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.7
 16 United Kingdom ......................... 5.6
 17 Switzerland ................................ 5.6
 18 China ......................................... 5.6
 19 Oman ........................................ 5.5
 20 Sri Lanka ................................... 5.5
 21 Tunisia ....................................... 5.5
 22 Denmark .................................... 5.5
 23 Senegal ..................................... 5.5
 24 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.5
 25 Gambia, The .............................. 5.4
 26 Cape Verde ............................... 5.4
 27 New Zealand ............................. 5.4
 28 Australia ..................................... 5.4
 29 Barbados ................................... 5.4
 30 Azerbaijan .................................. 5.4
 31 United States ............................. 5.3
 32 Israel .......................................... 5.3
 33 Vietnam ..................................... 5.3
 34 Norway ...................................... 5.3
 35 Mauritius .................................... 5.3
 36 Germany .................................... 5.3
 37 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.3
 38 Canada ...................................... 5.2
 39 Uruguay ..................................... 5.2
 40 Iceland ....................................... 5.2
 41 Austria ....................................... 5.2
 42 India ........................................... 5.1
 43 France ....................................... 5.1
 44 Japan ........................................ 5.1
 45 Netherlands ............................... 5.1
 46 Turkey ........................................ 5.1
 47 Jordan ....................................... 5.0
 48 Panama ..................................... 5.0
 49 Bangladesh ................................ 5.0
 50 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.9
 51 Belgium ..................................... 4.9
 52 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.9
 53 Mongolia .................................... 4.9
 54 Mali ............................................ 4.9
 55 Jamaica ..................................... 4.9
 56 Namibia ..................................... 4.9
 57 Chile .......................................... 4.9
 58 Benin ......................................... 4.8
 59 Guyana ...................................... 4.8
 60 Cambodia .................................. 4.8
 61 Botswana .................................. 4.8
 62 Albania ....................................... 4.8
 63 Ireland ........................................ 4.7
 64 Montenegro ............................... 4.7
 65 Russian Federation .................... 4.7
 66 Mozambique .............................. 4.7
 67 Brazil .......................................... 4.7
 68 Uganda ...................................... 4.6
 69 Kenya ........................................ 4.6
 70 Lithuania .................................... 4.6
 71 Egypt ......................................... 4.6
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.6 7
 72 Slovenia ..................................... 4.6
 73 Morocco .................................... 4.6
 74 Dominican Republic ................... 4.6
 75 Burkina Faso .............................. 4.6
 76 Armenia ..................................... 4.5
 77 Ethiopia ...................................... 4.5
 78 Georgia ...................................... 4.5
 79 Tajikistan .................................... 4.5
 80 Indonesia ................................... 4.5
 81 Zambia ...................................... 4.5
 82 Cyprus ....................................... 4.5
 83 Colombia ................................... 4.5
 84 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.5
 85 Costa Rica ................................. 4.4
 86 Moldova ..................................... 4.4
 87 Ghana ........................................ 4.4
 88 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 4.4
 89 Hungary ..................................... 4.4
 90 South Africa ............................... 4.3
 91 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.3
 92 Serbia ........................................ 4.3
 93 Thailand ..................................... 4.2
 94 Spain ......................................... 4.2
 95 Syria .......................................... 4.2
 96 Mexico ....................................... 4.2
 97 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.2
 98 Latvia ......................................... 4.2
 99 Croatia ....................................... 4.2
 100 Philippines ................................. 4.2
 101 Peru ........................................... 4.2
 102 Malawi ....................................... 4.2
 103 Pakistan ..................................... 4.1
 104 Cameroon .................................. 4.1
 105 Czech Republic ......................... 4.1
 106 Greece ....................................... 4.0
 107 Timor-Leste ............................... 4.0
 108 Tanzania .................................... 4.0
 109 Suriname ................................... 4.0
 110 Zimbabwe .................................. 4.0
 111 Nigeria ....................................... 4.0
 112 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.9
 113 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.9
 114 Kuwait ....................................... 3.9
 115 Poland ....................................... 3.9
 116 Honduras ................................... 3.9
 117 Ecuador ..................................... 3.9
 118 Ukraine ...................................... 3.8
 119 Angola ....................................... 3.8
 120 Italy ............................................ 3.8
 121 Venezuela .................................. 3.8
 122 Chad .......................................... 3.7
 123 Algeria ....................................... 3.7
 124 Nepal ......................................... 3.6
 125 Madagascar ............................... 3.6
 126 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.6
 127 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.6
 128 Romania .................................... 3.5
 129 Mauritania .................................. 3.5
 130 Lesotho ..................................... 3.4
 131 Bolivia ........................................ 3.4
 132 El Salvador................................. 3.4
 133 Guatemala ................................. 3.4
 134 Argentina ................................... 3.3
 135 Burundi ...................................... 3.1
 136 Belize ......................................... 3.1
 137 Nicaragua .................................. 3.1
 138 Swaziland .................................. 3.0
 139 Yemen ....................................... 2.9
 140 Haiti ........................................... 2.9
 141 Paraguay ................................... 2.9
 142 Lebanon .................................... 2.6
8.01 Government prioritization of ICT
How much priority does the government in your country place on information and communication technologies? [1 = weak priority; 7 = high 
priority]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  375 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.9 7
 1 Singapore .................................. 5.9
 2 Qatar ......................................... 5.7
 3 Rwanda ..................................... 5.7
 4 Malta ......................................... 5.6
 5 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.5
 6 Bahrain ...................................... 5.4
 7 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.4
 8 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.4
 9 Sweden ..................................... 5.4
 10 Malaysia ..................................... 5.4
 11 Oman ........................................ 5.2
 12 Luxembourg .............................. 5.2
 13 Portugal ..................................... 5.1
 14 Azerbaijan .................................. 5.0
 15 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.0
 16 China ......................................... 5.0
 17 Denmark .................................... 4.9
 18 Estonia ....................................... 4.9
 19 New Zealand ............................. 4.9
 20 Finland ....................................... 4.9
 21 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.9
 22 Cape Verde ............................... 4.8
 23 Australia ..................................... 4.8
 24 Montenegro ............................... 4.6
 25 Tunisia ....................................... 4.6
 26 Gambia, The .............................. 4.6
 27 United States ............................. 4.6
 28 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 4.6
 29 United Kingdom ......................... 4.6
 30 Chile .......................................... 4.6
 31 Kenya ........................................ 4.5
 32 Norway ...................................... 4.5
 33 Iceland ....................................... 4.5
 34 Panama ..................................... 4.5
 35 India ........................................... 4.5
 36 Switzerland ................................ 4.4
 37 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.4
 38 Senegal ..................................... 4.4
 39 Israel .......................................... 4.4
 40 Uruguay ..................................... 4.4
 41 France ....................................... 4.3
 42 Japan ........................................ 4.3
 43 Netherlands ............................... 4.3
 44 Vietnam ..................................... 4.3
 45 Barbados ................................... 4.3
 46 Uganda ...................................... 4.2
 47 Germany .................................... 4.2
 48 Austria ....................................... 4.2
 49 Colombia ................................... 4.2
 50 Mauritius .................................... 4.2
 51 Jordan ....................................... 4.2
 52 Morocco .................................... 4.2
 53 Canada ...................................... 4.2
 54 Botswana .................................. 4.2
 55 Ethiopia ...................................... 4.2
 56 Indonesia ................................... 4.1
 57 Cyprus ....................................... 4.1
 58 Cambodia .................................. 4.1
 59 Albania ....................................... 4.1
 60 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.1
 61 Zambia ...................................... 4.1
 62 Bangladesh ................................ 4.1
 63 Guyana ...................................... 4.1
 64 Ireland ........................................ 4.0
 65 Brazil .......................................... 4.0
 66 Belgium ..................................... 4.0
 67 Tajikistan .................................... 4.0
 68 Mali ............................................ 3.9
 69 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.9
 70 Costa Rica ................................. 3.9
 71 Lithuania .................................... 3.9
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 3.9 7
 72 Nigeria ....................................... 3.9
 73 Dominican Republic ................... 3.9
 74 Armenia ..................................... 3.8
 75 Mozambique .............................. 3.8
 76 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.8
 77 Jamaica ..................................... 3.8
 78 Turkey ........................................ 3.8
 79 Malawi ....................................... 3.8
 80 Mexico ....................................... 3.7
 81 Namibia ..................................... 3.7
 82 Mongolia .................................... 3.7
 83 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.7
 84 Puerto Rico ................................ 3.7
 85 Ghana ........................................ 3.7
 86 Ecuador ..................................... 3.6
 87 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.6
 88 Georgia ...................................... 3.6
 89 Thailand ..................................... 3.6
 90 Tanzania .................................... 3.6
 91 Benin ......................................... 3.6
 92 Pakistan ..................................... 3.5
 93 Peru ........................................... 3.5
 94 Russian Federation .................... 3.5
 95 Hungary ..................................... 3.5
 96 Egypt ......................................... 3.5
 97 Syria .......................................... 3.5
 98 South Africa ............................... 3.5
 99 Spain ......................................... 3.5
 100 Philippines ................................. 3.4
 101 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.4
 102 Slovenia ..................................... 3.4
 103 Latvia ......................................... 3.4
 104 Honduras ................................... 3.4
 105 Cameroon .................................. 3.3
 106 Czech Republic ......................... 3.3
 107 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.3
 108 Moldova ..................................... 3.2
 109 Kuwait ....................................... 3.2
 110 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.2
 111 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.2
 112 Italy ............................................ 3.2
 113 Chad .......................................... 3.2
 114 Croatia ....................................... 3.2
 115 Nepal ......................................... 3.2
 116 Poland ....................................... 3.1
 117 Romania .................................... 3.0
 118 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.0
 119 Greece ....................................... 3.0
 120 Serbia ........................................ 3.0
 121 Angola ....................................... 3.0
 122 Ukraine ...................................... 3.0
 123 Bolivia ........................................ 2.9
 124 El Salvador................................. 2.9
 125 Suriname ................................... 2.9
 126 Mauritania .................................. 2.9
 127 Guatemala ................................. 2.9
 128 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 2.8
 129 Venezuela .................................. 2.8
 130 Lesotho ..................................... 2.8
 131 Madagascar ............................... 2.8
 132 Paraguay ................................... 2.7
 133 Algeria ....................................... 2.7
 134 Swaziland .................................. 2.7
 135 Argentina ................................... 2.6
 136 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.5
 137 Nicaragua .................................. 2.5
 138 Burundi ...................................... 2.4
 139 Belize ......................................... 2.4
 140 Haiti ........................................... 2.3
 141 Lebanon .................................... 2.2
 142 Yemen ....................................... 2.0
8.02 Importance of ICT to government vision of the future
To what extent does the government have a clear implementation plan for utilizing information and communication technologies to improve 
your country’s overall competitiveness? [1 = no plan; 7 = clear plan]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
376  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Korea, Rep. .................................1.00
 2 United States ...............................0.94
 3 Canada ........................................0.88
 4 United Kingdom ...........................0.77
 5 Australia .......................................0.77
 5 Spain ...........................................0.77
 7 Norway ........................................0.74
 8 Bahrain ........................................0.73
 9 Colombia .....................................0.71
 10 Singapore ....................................0.69
 11 France .........................................0.68
 12 Netherlands .................................0.68
 13 Denmark ......................................0.67
 13 Japan ..........................................0.67
 15 New Zealand ...............................0.64
 16 Malaysia .......................................0.63
 17 Belgium .......................................0.63
 18 Chile ............................................0.61
 19 Israel ............................................0.58
 20 Mongolia ......................................0.56
 21 Germany ......................................0.55
 22 Jordan .........................................0.53
 23 Egypt ...........................................0.53
 24 Kazakhstan ..................................0.53
 24 Sweden .......................................0.53
 26 Hungary .......................................0.50
 27 Estonia .........................................0.50
 28 Ireland ..........................................0.50
 29 Lithuania ......................................0.48
 29 Tunisia .........................................0.48
 31 Finland .........................................0.48
 31 Uruguay .......................................0.48
 33 Austria .........................................0.48
 34 Malta ...........................................0.47
 35 Kuwait .........................................0.46
 36 Czech Republic ...........................0.45
 37 Switzerland ..................................0.44
 38 Mexico .........................................0.44
 39 El Salvador...................................0.43
 40 Croatia .........................................0.42
 41 Latvia ...........................................0.42
 41 Romania ......................................0.42
 43 Argentina .....................................0.41
 44 Bulgaria .......................................0.41
 44 Peru .............................................0.41
 46 Slovenia .......................................0.40
 47 Iceland .........................................0.40
 48 Philippines ...................................0.39
 49 Poland .........................................0.39
 49 Portugal .......................................0.39
 51 Luxembourg ................................0.38
 52 Cyprus .........................................0.37
 53 Brazil ............................................0.37
 53 China ...........................................0.37
 53 India .............................................0.37
 53 Oman ..........................................0.37
 57 Dominican Republic .....................0.37
 58 Bangladesh ..................................0.36
 58 Greece .........................................0.36
 60 Slovak Republic ...........................0.35
 60 Turkey ..........................................0.35
 60 Ukraine ........................................0.35
 63 Angola .........................................0.34
 63 Trinidad and Tobago ....................0.34
 65 Thailand .......................................0.33
 66 Russian Federation ......................0.33
 67 Azerbaijan ....................................0.32
 67 Côte d’Ivoire ................................0.32
 69 Macedonia, FYR ..........................0.32
 70 Ecuador .......................................0.32
 70 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................0.32
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Montenegro .................................0.31
 73 Albania .........................................0.31
 73 Saudi Arabia ................................0.31
 75 Guatemala ...................................0.31
 75 South Africa .................................0.31
 77 Bolivia ..........................................0.30
 77 Costa Rica ...................................0.30
 77 Venezuela ....................................0.30
 77 Vietnam .......................................0.30
 81 Honduras .....................................0.30
 81 Mauritius ......................................0.30
 81 Moldova .......................................0.30
 84 Italy ..............................................0.29
 85 Brunei Darussalam .......................0.28
 85 Panama .......................................0.28
 87 Qatar ...........................................0.28
 88 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............0.28
 89 Cape Verde .................................0.27
 90 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................0.27
 90 Lebanon ......................................0.27
 92 Lesotho .......................................0.26
 92 Paraguay .....................................0.26
 94 Sri Lanka .....................................0.26
 95 Nicaragua ....................................0.25
 96 United Arab Emirates ...................0.25
 97 Georgia ........................................0.25
 97 Pakistan .......................................0.25
 99 Indonesia .....................................0.24
 100 Kenya ..........................................0.24
 100 Morocco ......................................0.24
 102 Jamaica .......................................0.23
 103 Serbia ..........................................0.22
 104 Barbados .....................................0.20
 104 Botswana ....................................0.20
 104 Ethiopia ........................................0.20
 107 Mali ..............................................0.18
 108 Guyana ........................................0.18
 109 Senegal .......................................0.18
 110 Armenia .......................................0.17
 110 Rwanda .......................................0.17
 110 Tanzania ......................................0.17
 113 Mozambique ................................0.17
 114 Nepal ...........................................0.17
 115 Madagascar .................................0.17
 116 Belize ...........................................0.16
 117 Burkina Faso ................................0.16
 118 Cameroon ....................................0.15
 119 Ghana ..........................................0.15
 120 Cambodia ....................................0.14
 121 Timor-Leste .................................0.13
 122 Zimbabwe ....................................0.13
 123 Benin ...........................................0.12
 124 Zambia ........................................0.10
 125 Uganda ........................................0.10
 126 Algeria .........................................0.10
 127 Nigeria .........................................0.10
 128 Mauritania ....................................0.09
 128 Tajikistan ......................................0.09
 130 Gambia, The ................................0.08
 131 Namibia .......................................0.07
 132 Yemen .........................................0.05
 133 Burundi ........................................0.04
 133 Syria ............................................0.04
 135 Suriname .....................................0.02
 136 Chad ............................................0.02
 136 Haiti .............................................0.02
 138 Malawi .........................................0.02
 139 Swaziland ....................................0.00
 n/a Hong Kong SAR ............................n/a
 n/a Puerto Rico ....................................n/a
 n/a Taiwan, China ................................n/a
8.03 Government Online Service Index
The  Government Online Service Index assesses the quality of government’s delivery of online services on a 0-to-1 (best) scale  |  2010
SOURCE: United Nations, UN E-Government Survey 2010: Leveraging e-Government at a Time of Financial and Economic Crisis
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
9th pillar 
Economic impacts
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
378  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.4 7
 1 Sweden ..................................... 6.2
 2 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.9
 3 United Kingdom ......................... 5.9
 4 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.8
 5 Singapore .................................. 5.8
 6 France ....................................... 5.7
 7 Estonia ....................................... 5.7
 8 Norway ...................................... 5.6
 9 Switzerland ................................ 5.6
 10 United States ............................. 5.6
 11 Finland ....................................... 5.6
 12 Iceland ....................................... 5.5
 13 Malaysia ..................................... 5.5
 14 Canada ...................................... 5.5
 15 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.4
 16 Netherlands ............................... 5.4
 17 Denmark .................................... 5.4
 18 Qatar ......................................... 5.4
 19 Israel .......................................... 5.4
 20 Portugal ..................................... 5.4
 21 Malta ......................................... 5.4
 22 Austria ....................................... 5.4
 23 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.4
 24 Germany .................................... 5.4
 25 Chile .......................................... 5.2
 26 Lithuania .................................... 5.2
 27 Australia ..................................... 5.2
 28 Japan ........................................ 5.2
 29 Brazil .......................................... 5.2
 30 Bahrain ...................................... 5.2
 31 Luxembourg .............................. 5.2
 32 New Zealand ............................. 5.2
 33 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.1
 34 Uruguay ..................................... 5.1
 35 India ........................................... 5.0
 36 Ireland ........................................ 5.0
 37 Belgium ..................................... 5.0
 38 China ......................................... 5.0
 39 Rwanda ..................................... 5.0
 40 Costa Rica ................................. 5.0
 41 Vietnam ..................................... 4.9
 42 Spain ......................................... 4.9
 43 Senegal ..................................... 4.9
 44 Panama ..................................... 4.9
 45 Guatemala ................................. 4.9
 46 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.8
 47 Oman ........................................ 4.8
 48 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.8
 49 Barbados ................................... 4.8
 50 Tunisia ....................................... 4.8
 51 Dominican Republic ................... 4.8
 52 Peru ........................................... 4.8
 53 Nigeria ....................................... 4.8
 54 Cyprus ....................................... 4.7
 55 Colombia ................................... 4.7
 56 Kenya ........................................ 4.7
 57 South Africa ............................... 4.7
 58 Mexico ....................................... 4.7
 59 Turkey ........................................ 4.7
 60 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.7
 61 Montenegro ............................... 4.7
 62 Mauritius .................................... 4.6
 63 Slovenia ..................................... 4.6
 64 Thailand ..................................... 4.6
 65 Cape Verde ............................... 4.5
 66 Mongolia .................................... 4.5
 67 Jordan ....................................... 4.5
 68 Philippines ................................. 4.5
 69 Honduras ................................... 4.5
 70 Jamaica ..................................... 4.5
 71 Indonesia ................................... 4.5
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.4 7
 72 El Salvador................................. 4.4
 73 Gambia, The .............................. 4.4
 74 Czech Republic ......................... 4.4
 75 Argentina ................................... 4.4
 76 Albania ....................................... 4.4
 77 Cambodia .................................. 4.3
 78 Uganda ...................................... 4.3
 79 Ghana ........................................ 4.3
 80 Slovak Republic ......................... 4.3
 81 Italy ............................................ 4.3
 82 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 4.3
 83 Hungary ..................................... 4.2
 84 Latvia ......................................... 4.2
 85 Benin ......................................... 4.2
 86 Egypt ......................................... 4.2
 87 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.2
 88 Bulgaria ..................................... 4.2
 89 Croatia ....................................... 4.2
 90 Mali ............................................ 4.2
 91 Poland ....................................... 4.2
 92 Zambia ...................................... 4.1
 93 Cameroon .................................. 4.1
 94 Burkina Faso .............................. 4.1
 95 Ecuador ..................................... 4.1
 96 Ukraine ...................................... 4.1
 97 Pakistan ..................................... 4.0
 98 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.0
 99 Greece ....................................... 4.0
 100 Bangladesh ................................ 4.0
 101 Guyana ...................................... 4.0
 102 Malawi ....................................... 4.0
 103 Romania .................................... 4.0
 104 Mozambique .............................. 4.0
 105 Georgia ...................................... 3.9
 106 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.9
 107 Paraguay ................................... 3.9
 108 Venezuela .................................. 3.9
 109 Armenia ..................................... 3.9
 110 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.8
 111 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.8
 112 Russian Federation .................... 3.8
 113 Morocco .................................... 3.8
 114 Botswana .................................. 3.8
 115 Tajikistan .................................... 3.8
 116 Madagascar ............................... 3.7
 117 Tanzania .................................... 3.7
 118 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.6
 119 Bolivia ........................................ 3.6
 120 Kuwait ....................................... 3.6
 121 Nicaragua .................................. 3.6
 122 Nepal ......................................... 3.6
 123 Moldova ..................................... 3.6
 124 Namibia ..................................... 3.6
 125 Lebanon .................................... 3.6
 126 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.5
 127 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.5
 128 Haiti ........................................... 3.4
 129 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.4
 130 Belize ......................................... 3.3
 131 Serbia ........................................ 3.2
 132 Suriname ................................... 3.2
 133 Chad .......................................... 3.2
 134 Angola ....................................... 3.1
 135 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.1
 136 Burundi ...................................... 3.1
 137 Lesotho ..................................... 3.1
 138 Mauritania .................................. 3.0
 139 Syria .......................................... 2.9
 140 Swaziland .................................. 2.6
 141 Algeria ....................................... 2.5
 142 Yemen ....................................... 2.2
9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products
To what extent are information and communication technologies creating new business models, services, and products in your country?  [1 
= not at all; 7 = significantly]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  379 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Finland .......................................125.0
 2 Sweden .....................................117.8
 3 Israel ............................................91.6
 4 Japan ..........................................88.1
 5 Netherlands .................................69.3
 6 Korea, Rep. .................................68.4
 7 Switzerland ..................................60.5
 8 Singapore ....................................58.5
 9 United States ...............................48.6
 10 Germany ......................................45.6
 11 Denmark ......................................44.1
 12 Norway ........................................36.6
 13 Ireland ..........................................33.8
 14 Austria .........................................31.6
 15 France .........................................31.5
 16 Canada ........................................29.5
 17 United Kingdom ...........................28.2
 18 Australia .......................................24.0
 19 Belgium .......................................21.7
 20 Luxembourg ................................17.1
 21 Estonia .........................................16.4
 22 New Zealand ...............................14.8
 23 Slovenia .........................................9.2
 24 Italy ................................................8.8
 25 Iceland ...........................................8.4
 26 Spain .............................................7.6
 27 Hungary .........................................6.3
 28 Malta .............................................4.4
 29 Malaysia .........................................4.0
 30 Czech Republic .............................3.2
 31 Cyprus ...........................................3.0
 32 China .............................................2.9
 33 Portugal .........................................2.8
 34 Barbados .......................................2.7
 35 Slovak Republic .............................2.0
 36 Greece ...........................................1.9
 37 Croatia ...........................................1.7
 38 South Africa ...................................1.4
 39 Poland ...........................................1.3
 40 Russian Federation ........................1.2
 41 United Arab Emirates .....................1.2
 42 Latvia .............................................1.1
 43 Lithuania ........................................0.9
 44 Turkey ............................................0.9
 45 Bulgaria .........................................0.8
 46 Romania ........................................0.8
 47 Saudi Arabia ..................................0.7
 48 Chile ..............................................0.5
 49 Ukraine ..........................................0.4
 50 Trinidad and Tobago ......................0.4
 51 Lebanon ........................................0.4
 52 Brazil ..............................................0.3
 53 Macedonia, FYR ............................0.3
 54 Qatar .............................................0.3
 55 Kuwait ...........................................0.3
 56 India ...............................................0.3
 57 Kazakhstan ....................................0.2
 58 Armenia .........................................0.2
 59 Georgia ..........................................0.2
 60 Jordan ...........................................0.2
 61 Namibia .........................................0.2
 62 Swaziland ......................................0.2
 63 Mexico ...........................................0.2
 64 Morocco ........................................0.2
 65 Tunisia ...........................................0.2
 66 Argentina .......................................0.2
 67 Costa Rica .....................................0.2
 68 Jamaica .........................................0.2
 69 Sri Lanka .......................................0.2
 70 Panama .........................................0.1
 71 Bahrain ..........................................0.1
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Dominican Republic .......................0.1
 73 Colombia .......................................0.1
 74 Cameroon ......................................0.1
 75 Belize .............................................0.1
 76 Philippines .....................................0.1
 77 Thailand .........................................0.1
 78 Egypt .............................................0.1
 79 Mauritius ........................................0.1
 80 Azerbaijan ......................................0.1
 81 Syria ..............................................0.0
 82 Oman ............................................0.0
 83 Algeria ...........................................0.0
 84 Paraguay .......................................0.0
 85 Guatemala .....................................0.0
 86 Senegal .........................................0.0
 87 Kenya ............................................0.0
 88 Vietnam .........................................0.0
 89 Venezuela ......................................0.0
 90 Zimbabwe ......................................0.0
 91 Ecuador .........................................0.0
 92 Iran, Islamic Rep. ...........................0.0
 93 Pakistan .........................................0.0
 94 Indonesia .......................................0.0
 95 Nigeria ...........................................0.0
 96 Albania ...........................................0.0
 96 Angola ...........................................0.0
 96 Bangladesh ....................................0.0
 96 Benin .............................................0.0
 96 Bolivia ............................................0.0
 96 Bosnia and Herzegovina ................0.0
 96 Botswana ......................................0.0
 96 Brunei Darussalam .........................0.0
 96 Burkina Faso ..................................0.0
 96 Burundi ..........................................0.0
 96 Cambodia ......................................0.0
 96 Cape Verde ...................................0.0
 96 Chad ..............................................0.0
 96 Côte d’Ivoire ..................................0.0
 96 El Salvador.....................................0.0
 96 Ethiopia ..........................................0.0
 96 Gambia, The ..................................0.0
 96 Ghana ............................................0.0
 96 Guyana ..........................................0.0
 96 Haiti ...............................................0.0
 96 Honduras .......................................0.0
 96 Kyrgyz Republic .............................0.0
 96 Lesotho .........................................0.0
 96 Madagascar ...................................0.0
 96 Malawi ...........................................0.0
 96 Mali ................................................0.0
 96 Mauritania ......................................0.0
 96 Moldova .........................................0.0
 96 Mongolia ........................................0.0
 96 Montenegro ...................................0.0
 96 Mozambique ..................................0.0
 96 Nepal .............................................0.0
 96 Nicaragua ......................................0.0
 96 Peru ...............................................0.0
 96 Rwanda .........................................0.0
 96 Serbia ............................................0.0
 96 Suriname .......................................0.0
 96 Tajikistan ........................................0.0
 96 Tanzania ........................................0.0
 96 Timor-Leste ...................................0.0
 96 Uganda ..........................................0.0
 96 Uruguay .........................................0.0
 96 Yemen ...........................................0.0
 96 Zambia ..........................................0.0
 n/a Hong Kong SAR ............................n/a
 n/a Puerto Rico ....................................n/a
 n/a Taiwan, China ................................n/a
9.02 PCT ICT patent applications
Number of applications for information and communication technology–related patents filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) per 
million population  |  2008–09 average
SOURCE: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Patent Database, December 2011
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
380  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.1 7
 1 Sweden ..................................... 5.8
 2 United States ............................. 5.6
 3 United Kingdom ......................... 5.6
 4 Singapore .................................. 5.5
 5 Norway ...................................... 5.4
 6 Qatar ......................................... 5.4
 7 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.4
 8 Denmark .................................... 5.4
 9 Malaysia ..................................... 5.3
 10 Estonia ....................................... 5.3
 11 Netherlands ............................... 5.3
 12 Canada ...................................... 5.3
 13 Finland ....................................... 5.2
 14 Iceland ....................................... 5.2
 15 France ....................................... 5.2
 16 Israel .......................................... 5.2
 17 Switzerland ................................ 5.2
 18 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.2
 19 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.2
 20 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.1
 21 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.1
 22 Malta ......................................... 4.9
 23 Lithuania .................................... 4.9
 24 Australia ..................................... 4.9
 25 Germany .................................... 4.9
 26 Uruguay ..................................... 4.9
 27 Belgium ..................................... 4.9
 28 Luxembourg .............................. 4.9
 29 New Zealand ............................. 4.9
 30 Portugal ..................................... 4.9
 31 Ireland ........................................ 4.8
 32 India ........................................... 4.8
 33 China ......................................... 4.8
 34 Brazil .......................................... 4.8
 35 Chile .......................................... 4.8
 36 Senegal ..................................... 4.7
 37 Austria ....................................... 4.7
 38 Guatemala ................................. 4.7
 39 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.6
 40 Colombia ................................... 4.6
 41 Tunisia ....................................... 4.6
 42 Bahrain ...................................... 4.6
 43 Panama ..................................... 4.5
 44 Oman ........................................ 4.5
 45 Costa Rica ................................. 4.5
 46 Montenegro ............................... 4.5
 47 Kenya ........................................ 4.5
 48 Rwanda ..................................... 4.5
 49 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.5
 50 Spain ......................................... 4.5
 51 Mexico ....................................... 4.4
 52 Honduras ................................... 4.4
 53 Dominican Republic ................... 4.4
 54 Japan ........................................ 4.4
 55 Indonesia ................................... 4.4
 56 Peru ........................................... 4.4
 57 El Salvador................................. 4.3
 58 South Africa ............................... 4.3
 59 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.3
 60 Philippines ................................. 4.2
 61 Nigeria ....................................... 4.2
 62 Thailand ..................................... 4.2
 63 Argentina ................................... 4.2
 64 Barbados ................................... 4.2
 65 Albania ....................................... 4.2
 66 Turkey ........................................ 4.2
 67 Jordan ....................................... 4.2
 68 Mauritius .................................... 4.1
 69 Cyprus ....................................... 4.1
 70 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.1
 71 Jamaica ..................................... 4.1
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.1 7
 72 Slovenia ..................................... 4.1
 73 Cape Verde ............................... 4.1
 74 Egypt ......................................... 4.1
 75 Gambia, The .............................. 4.1
 76 Latvia ......................................... 4.0
 77 Slovak Republic ......................... 4.0
 78 Czech Republic ......................... 4.0
 79 Croatia ....................................... 3.9
 80 Vietnam ..................................... 3.9
 81 Pakistan ..................................... 3.9
 82 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.9
 83 Ecuador ..................................... 3.9
 84 Poland ....................................... 3.9
 85 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.9
 86 Mali ............................................ 3.9
 87 Kazakhstan ................................ 3.8
 88 Uganda ...................................... 3.8
 89 Zambia ...................................... 3.8
 90 Malawi ....................................... 3.8
 91 Ukraine ...................................... 3.8
 92 Italy ............................................ 3.7
 93 Cambodia .................................. 3.7
 94 Paraguay ................................... 3.7
 95 Mongolia .................................... 3.7
 96 Armenia ..................................... 3.7
 97 Guyana ...................................... 3.7
 98 Bolivia ........................................ 3.7
 99 Russian Federation .................... 3.7
 100 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 3.7
 101 Ghana ........................................ 3.7
 102 Morocco .................................... 3.6
 103 Hungary ..................................... 3.6
 104 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 3.6
 105 Bangladesh ................................ 3.6
 106 Mozambique .............................. 3.6
 107 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.6
 108 Venezuela .................................. 3.6
 109 Nicaragua .................................. 3.5
 110 Namibia ..................................... 3.5
 111 Moldova ..................................... 3.5
 112 Georgia ...................................... 3.5
 113 Romania .................................... 3.5
 114 Kuwait ....................................... 3.5
 115 Tanzania .................................... 3.5
 116 Nepal ......................................... 3.4
 117 Benin ......................................... 3.4
 118 Madagascar ............................... 3.4
 119 Botswana .................................. 3.4
 120 Cameroon .................................. 3.4
 121 Tajikistan .................................... 3.3
 122 Greece ....................................... 3.3
 123 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.3
 124 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.2
 125 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.2
 126 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.2
 127 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.1
 128 Lebanon .................................... 3.1
 129 Suriname ................................... 3.1
 130 Belize ......................................... 3.0
 131 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.0
 132 Lesotho ..................................... 3.0
 133 Serbia ........................................ 2.9
 134 Chad .......................................... 2.9
 135 Haiti ........................................... 2.8
 136 Mauritania .................................. 2.7
 137 Syria .......................................... 2.7
 138 Angola ....................................... 2.6
 139 Yemen ....................................... 2.6
 140 Burundi ...................................... 2.5
 141 Swaziland .................................. 2.4
 142 Algeria ....................................... 2.1
9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models
To what extent are information and communication technologies creating new organizational models (virtual teams, remote working, tele-
commuting, etc.) within businesses in your country? [1 = not at all; 7 = significantly]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  381 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Barbados6 ...................................57.6
 2 Singapore ....................................51.0
 3 Netherlands .................................47.2
 4 Switzerland ..................................47.1
 5 Iceland .........................................46.0
 6 Denmark ......................................45.1
 7 Sweden .......................................44.5
 8 Finland .........................................43.8
 9 Norway ........................................43.5
 10 Belgium .......................................43.4
 11 New Zealand ...............................42.9
 12 Australia .......................................42.9
 13 United Kingdom ...........................42.5
 14 Canada ........................................42.4
 15 Germany ......................................41.9
 16 Israel ............................................41.3
 17 France .........................................40.8
 18 Russian Federation ......................40.7
 19 Czech Republic ...........................40.5
 20 Latvia ...........................................40.2
 21 Lithuania ......................................39.6
 22 Italy ..............................................39.6
 23 Ireland ..........................................38.8
 24 Estonia .........................................38.8
 25 Slovenia .......................................38.0
 26 Japan ..........................................37.8
 27 Austria .........................................36.7
 28 Hungary .......................................36.7
 29 United States ...............................36.3
 30 United Arab Emirates ...................36.1
 31 Hong Kong SAR ..........................36.0
 32 Montenegro7 ...............................35.9
 33 Malta ...........................................35.9
 34 Slovak Republic ...........................34.6
 35 Greece .........................................33.5
 36 Poland .........................................32.8
 37 Spain ...........................................32.4
 38 Ukraine ........................................32.1
 39 Puerto Rico ..................................31.9
 40 Lebanon9.....................................31.9
 41 Cyprus .........................................31.4
 42 Chile ............................................30.6
 43 Egypt9 .........................................30.3
 44 Croatia .........................................30.1
 45 Serbia ..........................................28.7
 46 Bulgaria .......................................28.6
 47 Brunei Darussalam5 .....................28.4
 48 Kazakhstan ..................................28.3
 49 Moldova .......................................28.2
 50 Costa Rica ...................................27.4
 51 Malaysia .......................................26.8
 52 Macedonia, FYR ..........................25.5
 53 Portugal .......................................24.4
 54 Oman2 .........................................24.3
 55 Qatar9..........................................24.2
 56 Armenia3 .....................................24.1
 57 Venezuela ....................................23.9
 58 South Africa .................................23.7
 59 Saudi Arabia ................................22.9
 60 Trinidad and Tobago7 ..................22.8
 61 Korea, Rep. .................................22.4
 62 Georgia9 ......................................22.2
 63 Turkey ..........................................22.1
 64 Romania ......................................21.8
 65 Suriname6 ...................................21.6
 66 Colombia .....................................21.6
 67 Uruguay9 .....................................21.4
 68 Bahrain ........................................20.7
 69 Belize7 .........................................20.4
 70 Azerbaijan ....................................20.3
 71 Mongolia ......................................20.2
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 72 Jamaica .......................................20.1
 73 Philippines ...................................19.7
 74 Sri Lanka .....................................19.7
 75 Pakistan .......................................19.5
 76 Brazil9 ..........................................19.3
 77 Algeria6 ........................................19.1
 78 Kuwait7 ........................................18.7
 79 Peru .............................................18.5
 80 Mexico .........................................18.4
 81 Kyrgyz Republic8 .........................18.3
 82 Ecuador8 .....................................18.1
 83 Argentina8 ...................................17.7
 84 Panama .......................................17.7
 85 Botswana8 ...................................17.1
 86 Yemen7 .......................................17.0
 87 Namibia6 .....................................16.9
 88 Dominican Republic9 ...................15.8
 89 Mauritius ......................................15.8
 90 Syria9...........................................15.5
 91 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................15.0
 92 Nicaragua8 ..................................14.8
 93 Bolivia9 ........................................14.3
 94 Paraguay .....................................14.0
 95 Honduras7 ...................................12.8
 96 Guyana4 ......................................12.7
 97 El Salvador9 .................................12.5
 98 Ethiopia8 ......................................12.4
 99 Thailand .......................................10.8
 100 Indonesia .......................................7.4
 101 Vietnam6 ........................................7.4
 102 China7 ...........................................7.4
 103 Bangladesh7 ..................................7.3
 104 Morocco ........................................6.8
 105 Zambia2 .........................................6.0
 106 Lesotho1 ........................................6.0
 107 Nepal3 ...........................................4.8
 108 Uganda5 ........................................4.3
 109 Tanzania8 ......................................2.6
 110 Cambodia6 ....................................2.5
 111 Madagascar7 .................................2.4
 n/a Albania ...........................................n/a
 n/a Angola ...........................................n/a
 n/a Benin .............................................n/a
 n/a Bosnia and Herzegovina ................n/a
 n/a Burkina Faso ..................................n/a
 n/a Burundi ..........................................n/a
 n/a Cameroon ......................................n/a
 n/a Cape Verde ...................................n/a
 n/a Chad ..............................................n/a
 n/a Côte d’Ivoire ..................................n/a
 n/a Gambia, The ..................................n/a
 n/a Ghana ............................................n/a
 n/a Guatemala .....................................n/a
 n/a Haiti ...............................................n/a
 n/a India ...............................................n/a
 n/a Jordan ...........................................n/a
 n/a Kenya ............................................n/a
 n/a Luxembourg ..................................n/a
 n/a Malawi ...........................................n/a
 n/a Mali ................................................n/a
 n/a Mauritania ......................................n/a
 n/a Mozambique ..................................n/a
 n/a Nigeria ...........................................n/a
 n/a Rwanda .........................................n/a
 n/a Senegal .........................................n/a
 n/a Swaziland ......................................n/a
 n/a Taiwan, China ................................n/a
 n/a Tajikistan ........................................n/a
 n/a Timor-Leste ...................................n/a
 n/a Tunisia ...........................................n/a
 n/a Zimbabwe ......................................n/a
9.04 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities
Share of workforce employed in knowledge intensive activities (%)  |  2008
SOURCE: Authors’ calculations based on International Labour Organization LaborSta database (access December 15th, 2011)
1 1999 2 2000 3 2001 4 2002 5 2003 6 2004 7 2005 8 2006 9 2007
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
Data Tables
10th pillar 
Social impacts
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
384  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.5 7
 1 Sweden ..................................... 6.3
 2 Qatar ......................................... 6.2
 3 Singapore .................................. 6.1
 4 Taiwan, China ............................ 6.1
 5 Switzerland ................................ 6.0
 6 Korea, Rep. ............................... 6.0
 7 Iceland ....................................... 6.0
 8 Denmark .................................... 6.0
 9 Estonia ....................................... 5.9
 10 Luxembourg .............................. 5.9
 11 Norway ...................................... 5.9
 12 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.8
 13 Bahrain ...................................... 5.8
 14 Malta ......................................... 5.7
 15 Austria ....................................... 5.7
 16 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.7
 17 Netherlands ............................... 5.7
 18 France ....................................... 5.6
 19 Finland ....................................... 5.6
 20 Malaysia ..................................... 5.6
 21 Israel .......................................... 5.6
 22 Portugal ..................................... 5.6
 23 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.5
 24 Oman ........................................ 5.5
 25 Belgium ..................................... 5.5
 26 Germany .................................... 5.5
 27 United Kingdom ......................... 5.4
 28 Canada ...................................... 5.4
 29 United States ............................. 5.3
 30 Australia ..................................... 5.3
 31 China ......................................... 5.3
 32 Barbados ................................... 5.3
 33 New Zealand ............................. 5.3
 34 Chile .......................................... 5.3
 35 Tunisia ....................................... 5.2
 36 Uruguay ..................................... 5.2
 37 Lithuania .................................... 5.1
 38 Cyprus ....................................... 5.1
 39 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.1
 40 Spain ......................................... 5.0
 41 Turkey ........................................ 4.9
 42 Japan ........................................ 4.9
 43 Rwanda ..................................... 4.9
 44 Slovenia ..................................... 4.9
 45 Gambia, The .............................. 4.8
 46 Panama ..................................... 4.8
 47 Czech Republic ......................... 4.8
 48 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.7
 49 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.7
 50 Vietnam ..................................... 4.7
 51 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.7
 52 Ireland ........................................ 4.6
 53 Cape Verde ............................... 4.6
 54 Brazil .......................................... 4.6
 55 Costa Rica ................................. 4.6
 56 Kenya ........................................ 4.6
 57 Mongolia .................................... 4.6
 58 Jordan ....................................... 4.6
 59 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.5
 60 Nigeria ....................................... 4.5
 61 Jamaica ..................................... 4.5
 62 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.4
 63 Latvia ......................................... 4.4
 64 Hungary ..................................... 4.4
 65 Montenegro ............................... 4.4
 66 Italy ............................................ 4.4
 67 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 4.4
 68 Senegal ..................................... 4.4
 69 India ........................................... 4.4
 70 Colombia ................................... 4.4
 71 Peru ........................................... 4.3
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.5 7
 72 Thailand ..................................... 4.3
 73 Mauritius .................................... 4.3
 74 Guyana ...................................... 4.3
 75 Croatia ....................................... 4.3
 76 Bulgaria ..................................... 4.3
 77 Georgia ...................................... 4.3
 78 Indonesia ................................... 4.3
 79 Guatemala ................................. 4.2
 80 Tajikistan .................................... 4.2
 81 Botswana .................................. 4.2
 82 Malawi ....................................... 4.2
 83 Cambodia .................................. 4.2
 84 Romania .................................... 4.2
 85 Egypt ......................................... 4.2
 86 Mexico ....................................... 4.2
 87 Greece ....................................... 4.2
 88 Albania ....................................... 4.2
 89 Slovak Republic ......................... 4.2
 90 Kuwait ....................................... 4.1
 91 Namibia ..................................... 4.1
 92 Mali ............................................ 4.1
 93 Dominican Republic ................... 4.1
 94 Poland ....................................... 4.1
 95 Morocco .................................... 4.1
 96 Ukraine ...................................... 4.0
 97 Mozambique .............................. 4.0
 98 El Salvador................................. 4.0
 99 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.0
 100 Ecuador ..................................... 3.9
 101 Benin ......................................... 3.9
 102 Uganda ...................................... 3.9
 103 Ghana ........................................ 3.9
 104 Zambia ...................................... 3.9
 105 Bangladesh ................................ 3.9
 106 Philippines ................................. 3.9
 107 Serbia ........................................ 3.9
 108 Madagascar ............................... 3.9
 109 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.8
 110 Armenia ..................................... 3.8
 111 Russian Federation .................... 3.8
 112 Moldova ..................................... 3.8
 113 Pakistan ..................................... 3.8
 114 Honduras ................................... 3.8
 115 South Africa ............................... 3.7
 116 Tanzania .................................... 3.7
 117 Argentina ................................... 3.6
 118 Burkina Faso .............................. 3.6
 119 Ethiopia ...................................... 3.6
 120 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.5
 121 Belize ......................................... 3.5
 122 Cameroon .................................. 3.5
 123 Chad .......................................... 3.5
 124 Venezuela .................................. 3.5
 125 Nicaragua .................................. 3.4
 126 Bolivia ........................................ 3.4
 127 Nepal ......................................... 3.4
 128 Syria .......................................... 3.4
 129 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.3
 130 Paraguay ................................... 3.3
 131 Lesotho ..................................... 3.2
 132 Suriname ................................... 3.2
 133 Algeria ....................................... 3.1
 134 Mauritania .................................. 3.1
 135 Zimbabwe .................................. 3.1
 136 Lebanon .................................... 3.1
 137 Swaziland .................................. 3.1
 138 Angola ....................................... 3.1
 139 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.9
 140 Haiti ........................................... 2.9
 141 Burundi ...................................... 2.6
 142 Yemen ....................................... 2.1
10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services
To what extent are information and communication technologies enabling access for all citizens to basic services (health, education, financial 
services, etc.) in your country? [1 = do not enable access at all, 7 = enable access significantly]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  385 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.2 7
 1 Iceland ....................................... 6.6
 2 Sweden ..................................... 6.4
 3 Estonia ....................................... 6.4
 4 Finland ....................................... 6.4
 5 Netherlands ............................... 6.3
 6 Singapore .................................. 6.3
 7 Qatar ......................................... 6.3
 8 Denmark .................................... 6.2
 9 Switzerland ................................ 6.2
 10 Korea, Rep. ............................... 6.2
 11 Uruguay ..................................... 6.2
 12 United Kingdom ......................... 6.1
 13 Taiwan, China ............................ 6.1
 14 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 6.1
 15 Canada ...................................... 6.1
 16 Malta ......................................... 6.0
 17 Norway ...................................... 5.9
 18 Austria ....................................... 5.9
 19 Australia ..................................... 5.9
 20 Belgium ..................................... 5.9
 21 Czech Republic ......................... 5.8
 22 Luxembourg .............................. 5.8
 23 New Zealand ............................. 5.8
 24 United States ............................. 5.8
 25 Slovenia ..................................... 5.8
 26 Portugal ..................................... 5.7
 27 Lithuania .................................... 5.7
 28 China ......................................... 5.7
 29 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.7
 30 Barbados ................................... 5.5
 31 Hungary ..................................... 5.4
 32 Bahrain ...................................... 5.4
 33 Israel .......................................... 5.3
 34 Latvia ......................................... 5.3
 35 Slovak Republic ......................... 5.3
 36 Malaysia ..................................... 5.2
 37 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 5.1
 38 Cyprus ....................................... 5.0
 39 Japan ........................................ 4.9
 40 Saudi Arabia .............................. 4.9
 41 Germany .................................... 4.9
 42 Vietnam ..................................... 4.9
 43 Croatia ....................................... 4.8
 44 Oman ........................................ 4.8
 45 Chile .......................................... 4.8
 46 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.8
 47 Bulgaria ..................................... 4.8
 48 Poland ....................................... 4.7
 49 Indonesia ................................... 4.7
 50 Spain ......................................... 4.6
 51 France ....................................... 4.6
 52 Jordan ....................................... 4.6
 53 Tunisia ....................................... 4.5
 54 Thailand ..................................... 4.5
 55 Montenegro ............................... 4.5
 56 Panama ..................................... 4.5
 57 Albania ....................................... 4.4
 58 Romania .................................... 4.4
 59 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.4
 60 Ireland ........................................ 4.3
 61 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 4.3
 62 Russian Federation .................... 4.3
 63 Moldova ..................................... 4.3
 64 Turkey ........................................ 4.3
 65 Kuwait ....................................... 4.2
 66 Costa Rica ................................. 4.2
 67 Georgia ...................................... 4.1
 68 Colombia ................................... 4.1
 69 Mongolia .................................... 4.1
 70 Ukraine ...................................... 4.1
 71 Senegal ..................................... 4.1
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.2 7
 72 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.0
 73 Philippines ................................. 4.0
 74 India ........................................... 4.0
 75 Mauritius .................................... 4.0
 76 Peru ........................................... 3.9
 77 Rwanda ..................................... 3.9
 78 Greece ....................................... 3.9
 79 Italy ............................................ 3.8
 80 Gambia, The .............................. 3.8
 81 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.8
 82 Mexico ....................................... 3.8
 83 Serbia ........................................ 3.8
 84 Jamaica ..................................... 3.8
 85 Lebanon .................................... 3.8
 86 Brazil .......................................... 3.8
 87 Morocco .................................... 3.8
 88 Azerbaijan .................................. 3.7
 89 Kenya ........................................ 3.7
 90 Pakistan ..................................... 3.7
 91 Belize ......................................... 3.6
 92 Armenia ..................................... 3.6
 93 Botswana .................................. 3.5
 94 Tajikistan .................................... 3.5
 95 Cambodia .................................. 3.5
 96 Cape Verde ............................... 3.4
 97 Sri Lanka ................................... 3.4
 98 Guyana ...................................... 3.4
 99 Venezuela .................................. 3.4
 100 South Africa ............................... 3.4
 101 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 3.4
 102 Guatemala ................................. 3.3
 103 Dominican Republic ................... 3.3
 104 Nigeria ....................................... 3.3
 105 Benin ......................................... 3.3
 106 Argentina ................................... 3.3
 107 Egypt ......................................... 3.3
 108 Ecuador ..................................... 3.2
 109 Mali ............................................ 3.2
 110 Ghana ........................................ 3.2
 111 Namibia ..................................... 3.2
 112 Honduras ................................... 3.2
 113 Bolivia ........................................ 3.2
 114 El Salvador................................. 3.1
 115 Nepal ......................................... 3.1
 116 Zambia ...................................... 3.0
 117 Uganda ...................................... 3.0
 118 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 2.9
 119 Tanzania .................................... 2.7
 120 Syria .......................................... 2.7
 121 Ethiopia ...................................... 2.7
 122 Mozambique .............................. 2.7
 123 Malawi ....................................... 2.7
 124 Nicaragua .................................. 2.6
 125 Algeria ....................................... 2.6
 126 Suriname ................................... 2.5
 127 Swaziland .................................. 2.5
 128 Bangladesh ................................ 2.5
 129 Zimbabwe .................................. 2.5
 130 Timor-Leste ............................... 2.5
 131 Cameroon .................................. 2.4
 132 Madagascar ............................... 2.4
 133 Paraguay ................................... 2.3
 134 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 2.2
 135 Mauritania .................................. 2.1
 136 Lesotho ..................................... 2.0
 137 Burkina Faso .............................. 1.9
 138 Haiti ........................................... 1.7
 139 Chad .......................................... 1.6
 140 Angola ....................................... 1.6
 141 Yemen ....................................... 1.5
 142 Burundi ...................................... 1.3
10.02 Internet access in schools
How would you rate the level of access to the Internet in schools in your country? [1 = very limited; 7 = extensive]  |  2010–2011 weighted 
average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
4: Data Tables
386  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.2 7
 1 Singapore .................................. 6.1
 2 Qatar ......................................... 6.0
 3 Sweden ..................................... 5.9
 4 United Arab Emirates ................. 5.8
 5 Taiwan, China ............................ 5.7
 6 Korea, Rep. ............................... 5.7
 7 Malta ......................................... 5.6
 8 Bahrain ...................................... 5.6
 9 Estonia ....................................... 5.6
 10 Malaysia ..................................... 5.5
 11 Portugal ..................................... 5.5
 12 Austria ....................................... 5.5
 13 Saudi Arabia .............................. 5.5
 14 Rwanda ..................................... 5.5
 15 Chile .......................................... 5.4
 16 Oman ........................................ 5.3
 17 Hong Kong SAR ........................ 5.3
 18 Iceland ....................................... 5.3
 19 Denmark .................................... 5.3
 20 Switzerland ................................ 5.3
 21 Finland ....................................... 5.2
 22 Norway ...................................... 5.2
 23 Luxembourg .............................. 5.1
 24 New Zealand ............................. 5.1
 25 Israel .......................................... 5.1
 26 France ....................................... 5.1
 27 Cape Verde ............................... 5.1
 28 Netherlands ............................... 5.0
 29 United Kingdom ......................... 4.9
 30 Canada ...................................... 4.9
 31 China ......................................... 4.9
 32 United States ............................. 4.9
 33 Lithuania .................................... 4.8
 34 Turkey ........................................ 4.8
 35 Senegal ..................................... 4.8
 36 Tunisia ....................................... 4.8
 37 Sri Lanka ................................... 4.8
 38 Montenegro ............................... 4.7
 39 Ireland ........................................ 4.7
 40 Georgia ...................................... 4.7
 41 Uruguay ..................................... 4.7
 42 Brazil .......................................... 4.7
 43 Gambia, The .............................. 4.6
 44 Australia ..................................... 4.6
 45 Panama ..................................... 4.6
 46 Germany .................................... 4.6
 47 Azerbaijan .................................. 4.5
 48 Jordan ....................................... 4.5
 49 Cyprus ....................................... 4.5
 50 Brunei Darussalam ..................... 4.5
 51 Colombia ................................... 4.5
 52 Barbados ................................... 4.5
 53 India ........................................... 4.5
 54 Mauritius .................................... 4.4
 55 Spain ......................................... 4.4
 56 Kenya ........................................ 4.4
 57 Dominican Republic ................... 4.4
 58 Belgium ..................................... 4.4
 59 Albania ....................................... 4.4
 60 Mali ............................................ 4.4
 61 Slovenia ..................................... 4.3
 62 Mexico ....................................... 4.3
 63 Botswana .................................. 4.3
 64 Jamaica ..................................... 4.3
 65 Tajikistan .................................... 4.3
 66 Japan ........................................ 4.2
 67 Vietnam ..................................... 4.2
 68 Kazakhstan ................................ 4.2
 69 Indonesia ................................... 4.2
 70 Uganda ...................................... 4.2
 71 Thailand ..................................... 4.2
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE 1 MEAN 4.2 7
 72 Peru ........................................... 4.1
 73 Puerto Rico ................................ 4.1
 74 Costa Rica ................................. 4.1
 75 Mongolia .................................... 4.1
 76 Macedonia, FYR ........................ 4.1
 77 Ecuador ..................................... 4.1
 78 Iran, Islamic Rep. ....................... 4.1
 79 Burkina Faso .............................. 4.1
 80 Cambodia .................................. 4.1
 81 Ethiopia ...................................... 4.1
 82 Czech Republic ......................... 4.0
 83 Morocco .................................... 4.0
 84 Hungary ..................................... 4.0
 85 Zambia ...................................... 4.0
 86 Guyana ...................................... 4.0
 87 Egypt ......................................... 3.9
 88 Italy ............................................ 3.9
 89 South Africa ............................... 3.9
 90 Mozambique .............................. 3.9
 91 Armenia ..................................... 3.8
 92 Bulgaria ..................................... 3.8
 93 Malawi ....................................... 3.8
 94 Honduras ................................... 3.8
 95 Nigeria ....................................... 3.8
 96 Greece ....................................... 3.8
 97 Russian Federation .................... 3.8
 98 Latvia ......................................... 3.8
 99 Tanzania .................................... 3.7
 100 Trinidad and Tobago .................. 3.7
 101 Guatemala ................................. 3.7
 102 Kuwait ....................................... 3.7
 103 Philippines ................................. 3.7
 104 Bangladesh ................................ 3.6
 105 Pakistan ..................................... 3.6
 106 Slovak Republic ......................... 3.6
 107 Ukraine ...................................... 3.6
 108 El Salvador................................. 3.6
 109 Benin ......................................... 3.6
 110 Ghana ........................................ 3.6
 111 Poland ....................................... 3.5
 112 Serbia ........................................ 3.5
 113 Timor-Leste ............................... 3.5
 114 Moldova ..................................... 3.5
 115 Croatia ....................................... 3.5
 116 Cameroon .................................. 3.5
 117 Bolivia ........................................ 3.4
 118 Côte d’Ivoire .............................. 3.4
 119 Paraguay ................................... 3.4
 120 Bosnia and Herzegovina ............ 3.3
 121 Namibia ..................................... 3.3
 122 Romania .................................... 3.3
 123 Syria .......................................... 3.3
 124 Mauritania .................................. 3.3
 125 Argentina ................................... 3.2
 126 Venezuela .................................. 3.2
 127 Nepal ......................................... 3.2
 128 Madagascar ............................... 3.0
 129 Chad .......................................... 3.0
 130 Lesotho ..................................... 3.0
 131 Angola ....................................... 3.0
 132 Nicaragua .................................. 2.9
 133 Belize ......................................... 2.8
 134 Burundi ...................................... 2.8
 135 Kyrgyz Republic ......................... 2.7
 136 Zimbabwe .................................. 2.6
 137 Algeria ....................................... 2.6
 138 Swaziland .................................. 2.6
 139 Haiti ........................................... 2.6
 140 Lebanon .................................... 2.5
 141 Suriname ................................... 2.5
 142 Yemen ....................................... 2.3
10.03 ICT use and government efficiency
To what extent has the use of information and communication technologies by the government improved the efficiency of government 
services in your country? [1 = no effect; 7 = has generated considerable improvements]  |  2010–2011 weighted average
SOURCE: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 and 2011 editions
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  387 
4: Data Tables
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 1 Korea, Rep. .................................1.00
 2 Australia .......................................0.91
 3 Spain ...........................................0.83
 4 New Zealand ...............................0.77
 4 United Kingdom ...........................0.77
 6 Japan ..........................................0.76
 6 United States ...............................0.76
 8 Canada ........................................0.73
 9 Estonia .........................................0.69
 9 Singapore ....................................0.69
 11 Bahrain ........................................0.67
 12 Malaysia .......................................0.66
 13 Denmark ......................................0.64
 14 Germany ......................................0.61
 15 France .........................................0.60
 15 Netherlands .................................0.60
 17 Belgium .......................................0.59
 18 Kazakhstan ..................................0.56
 19 Lithuania ......................................0.53
 20 Slovenia .......................................0.51
 21 Austria .........................................0.50
 21 Norway ........................................0.50
 23 Cyprus .........................................0.49
 23 Sweden .......................................0.49
 25 Croatia .........................................0.46
 26 Colombia .....................................0.44
 26 Ireland ..........................................0.44
 28 Kyrgyz Republic ...........................0.43
 28 Mongolia ......................................0.43
 30 Finland .........................................0.41
 30 Israel ............................................0.41
 32 China ...........................................0.37
 32 Mexico .........................................0.37
 34 Chile ............................................0.34
 34 Malta ...........................................0.34
 36 Guatemala ...................................0.31
 36 Hungary .......................................0.31
 38 Bulgaria .......................................0.30
 38 Nicaragua ....................................0.30
 38 Tunisia .........................................0.30
 41 Brazil ............................................0.29
 41 Egypt ...........................................0.29
 41 Jordan .........................................0.29
 44 Latvia ...........................................0.27
 44 Lebanon ......................................0.27
 44 Portugal .......................................0.27
 47 Greece .........................................0.26
 47 Ukraine ........................................0.26
 47 Uruguay .......................................0.26
 50 Poland .........................................0.24
 51 Kenya ..........................................0.23
 51 Kuwait .........................................0.23
 53 Italy ..............................................0.21
 53 Macedonia, FYR ..........................0.21
 53 Turkey ..........................................0.21
 56 Argentina .....................................0.20
 56 Bolivia ..........................................0.20
 56 Costa Rica ...................................0.20
 56 India .............................................0.20
 56 Moldova .......................................0.20
 56 Switzerland ..................................0.20
 62 Dominican Republic .....................0.19
 62 Philippines ...................................0.19
 62 Romania ......................................0.19
 62 South Africa .................................0.19
 66 Azerbaijan ....................................0.17
 66 Brunei Darussalam .......................0.17
 66 Cape Verde .................................0.17
 66 Côte d’Ivoire ................................0.17
 66 Luxembourg ................................0.17
 66 Pakistan .......................................0.17
RANK COUNTRY/ECONOMY VALUE
 66 Peru .............................................0.17
 73 Cameroon ....................................0.16
 73 Ecuador .......................................0.16
 73 Montenegro .................................0.16
 73 Oman ..........................................0.16
 77 Sri Lanka .....................................0.14
 77 Venezuela ....................................0.14
 79 Albania .........................................0.13
 79 Czech Republic ...........................0.13
 79 Honduras .....................................0.13
 79 Indonesia .....................................0.13
 79 Morocco ......................................0.13
 79 Qatar ...........................................0.13
 79 Russian Federation ......................0.13
 79 Trinidad and Tobago ....................0.13
 79 United Arab Emirates ...................0.13
 88 Cambodia ....................................0.11
 88 Mali ..............................................0.11
 88 Mauritania ....................................0.11
 88 Mozambique ................................0.11
 92 Panama1 .....................................0.11
 92 Swaziland1 ..................................0.11
 94 Bangladesh ..................................0.10
 94 Barbados .....................................0.10
 94 Belize ...........................................0.10
 94 Botswana ....................................0.10
 94 Saudi Arabia ................................0.10
 99 Ghana ..........................................0.09
 99 Guyana ........................................0.09
 99 Jamaica .......................................0.09
 99 Lesotho .......................................0.09
 99 Thailand .......................................0.09
 99 Vietnam .......................................0.09
 105 Angola .........................................0.07
 105 Benin ...........................................0.07
 105 El Salvador...................................0.07
 105 Iran, Islamic Rep. .........................0.07
 105 Slovak Republic ...........................0.07
 105 Uganda ........................................0.07
 111 Burkina Faso ................................0.06
 111 Chad ............................................0.06
 111 Georgia ........................................0.06
 111 Madagascar .................................0.06
 111 Mauritius ......................................0.06
 111 Nepal ...........................................0.06
 117 Armenia .......................................0.04
 117 Bosnia and Herzegovina ..............0.04
 117 Ethiopia ........................................0.04
 117 Iceland .........................................0.04
 117 Serbia ..........................................0.04
 117 Tanzania ......................................0.04
 117 Yemen .........................................0.04
 124 Rwanda .......................................0.03
 124 Tajikistan ......................................0.03
 124 Zimbabwe ....................................0.03
 127 Haiti1 ...........................................0.02
 127 Malawi1 .......................................0.02
 129 Algeria .........................................0.01
 129 Burundi ........................................0.01
 129 Gambia, The ................................0.01
 129 Namibia .......................................0.01
 129 Nigeria .........................................0.01
 129 Paraguay .....................................0.01
 129 Senegal .......................................0.01
 129 Syria ............................................0.01
 129 Timor-Leste .................................0.01
 138 Suriname .....................................0.00
 138 Zambia ........................................0.00
 n/a Hong Kong SAR ............................n/a
 n/a Puerto Rico ....................................n/a
 n/a Taiwan, China ................................n/a
10.04 E-Participation Index
The E-Participation Index assesses the quality, relevance, usefulness, and willingness of government websites for providing online information 
and participatory tools and services to their citizens. Scores range from 0 to 1 (best).  |  2010
SOURCE: United Nations, UN E-Government Survey 2010: Leveraging e-Government at a Time of Financial and Economic Crisis
1 2008
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  389
The present section complements the data tables by 
providing additional information for all 53 indicators that 
enter the composition of the Networked Readiness Index 
2012.
The number next to the indicator corresponds to the 
number of the data table that reports ranks and scores 
for all economies on this particular indicator.
The data used in this Report represent the most 
recent available figures from various international agen-
cies and national authorities at the time when the data 
collection took place. It is possible that some data have 
been updated or revised since then.
1st pillar: Political and regulatory environment
1.01 Effectiveness of law-making bodies
How effective is your national parliament/congress as a law-
making institution? [1 = very ineffective; 7 = very effective—
among the best in the world] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
1.02 Laws relating to ICT
How would you assess your country’s laws relating to the use 
of information and communication technologies (e.g., electronic 
commerce, digital signatures, consumer protection)? [1 = 
nonexistent; 7 = well developed] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
1.03 Judicial independence
To what extent is the judiciary in your country independent 
from influences of members of government, citizens, or firms? 
[1 = heavily influenced; 7 = entirely independent] | 2010–2011 
weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
1.04 Efficiency of legal framework in settling disputes
How efficient is the legal framework in your country for private 
businesses to settle disputes? [1 = extremely inefficient; 7 = 
highly efficient] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
1.05 Efficiency of legal framework in challenging regulations
How efficient is the legal framework in your country for private 
businesses to challenge the legality of government actions and/
or regulations? [1 = extremely inefficient; 7 = highly efficient] | 
2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
Technical Notes and Sources
 1.06 Intellectual property protection
How would you rate intellectual property protection, including 
anti-counterfeiting measures, in your country? [1 = very weak; 7 
= very strong] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 1.07 Software piracy rate
Unlicensed software units as a percentage of total software 
units installed | 2010
This measure covers piracy of all packaged software that runs on 
personal computers (PCs), including desktops, laptops, and ultra-
portables, including netbooks. This includes operating systems; 
systems software such as databases and security packages; 
business applications; and consumer applications such as games, 
personal finance, and reference software. The study does not 
include software that runs on servers or mainframes. For more 
information about the methodology, refer to the study available at 
http://portal.bsa.org/globalpiracy2010/.
Source: Business Software Alliance/International Data 
Corporation, Eighth Annual BSA Global Software Piracy Study 
(May 2011)
 1.08 Number of procedures to enforce a contract
Number of procedures to resolve a dispute, counted from the 
moment the plaintiff files a lawsuit in court until payment | 2011
The list of procedural steps compiled for each economy traces 
the chronology of a commercial dispute before the relevant court. 
A procedure is defined as any interaction, required by law or 
commonly used in practice, between the parties or between them 
and the judge or court officer. This includes steps to file and serve 
the case, steps for trial and judgment, and steps necessary to 
enforce the judgment. For more details about the methodology 
employed and the assumptions made to compute this indicator, 
visit http://www.doingbusiness.org/methodologysurveys/.
Source: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing 
Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
 1.09 Time to enforce a contract
Number of days to resolve a dispute, counted from the moment 
the plaintiff decides to file the lawsuit in court until payment | 
2011
Time is recorded in calendar days, counted from the moment 
the plaintiff decides to file the lawsuit in court until payment. 
This includes both the days when actions take place and the 
waiting periods between. For more details about the methodology 
employed and the assumptions made to compute this indicator, 
visit http://www.doingbusiness.org/methodologysurveys/.
Source: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing 
Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
© 2012 World Economic Forum
390  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Technical Notes and Sources
2nd pillar: Business and innovation environment
2.01 Availability of latest technologies
To what extent are the latest technologies available in your 
country? [1 = not available; 7 = widely available] | 2010–2011 
weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
2.02 Venture capital availability
In your country, how easy is it for entrepreneurs with innovative 
but risky projects to find venture capital? [1 = very difficult; 7 = 
very easy] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
2.03 Total tax rate
Sum of profit tax, labor tax and social contributions, property 
taxes, turnover taxes, and other taxes, as a share (%) of 
commercial profits | 2011
The total tax rate measures the amount of taxes and mandatory 
contributions borne by the business in the second year of 
operation, expressed as a share of commercial profit. Doing 
Business 2012 reports the total tax rate for calendar year 2010. 
The total amount of taxes borne is the sum of all the different 
taxes and contributions payable after accounting for allowable 
deductions and exemptions. The taxes withheld (such as personal 
income tax) or collected by the company and remitted to the 
tax authorities (such as value-added tax, sales tax, or goods 
and service tax) but not borne by the company are excluded. 
The taxes included can be divided into 5 categories: profit or 
corporate income tax, social contributions and labor taxes paid 
by the employer (in respect of which all mandatory contributions 
are included, even if paid to a private entity such as a requited 
pension fund), property taxes, turnover taxes, and other taxes 
(such as municipal fees and vehicle and fuel taxes). For more 
details about the methodology employed and the assumptions 
made to compute this indicator, visit http://www.doingbusiness.
org/methodologysurveys/.
Source: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing 
Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
2.04 Time required to start a business
Number of days required to start a business | 2011
Time is recorded in calendar days. The measure captures the 
median duration that incorporation lawyers indicate is necessary 
in practice to complete a procedure with minimum follow-up with 
government agencies and no extra payments. For more details 
about the methodology employed and the assumptions made 
to compute this indicator, visit http://www.doingbusiness.org/
methodologysurveys/.
Source: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing 
Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
2.05 Number of procedures required to start a business
Number of procedures required to start a business | 2011
A procedure is defined as any interaction of the company 
founders with external parties (e.g., government agencies, 
lawyers, auditors, or notaries). For details about the methodology 
employed and the assumptions made to compute this indicator, 
visit http://www.doingbusiness.org/methodologysurveys/.
Source: World Bank/International Finance Corporation, Doing 
Business 2012: Doing Business in a More Transparent World
2.06 Intensity of local competition
How would you assess the intensity of competition in the local 
markets in your country? [1 = limited in most industries; 7 = 
intense in most industries] | 2008–2009 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 2.07 Tertiary education enrollment rate
Gross tertiary education enrollment rate (%) | 2009
Tertiary enrollment rate is the ratio of total enrollment, regardless 
of age, to the population of the age group that officially 
corresponds to the tertiary education level. Tertiary education, 
whether or not leading to an advanced research qualification, 
normally requires, as a minimum condition of admission, the 
successful completion of education at the secondary level.
Sources: United Nations Education, Science and Culture 
Organization (UNESCO), UNESCO Institute for Statistics Data 
Centre (accessed November 11, 2011); World Bank, World 
Development Indicators 2009; national sources
 2.08 Quality of management schools
How would you assess the quality of management or business 
schools in your country? [1 = poor; 7 = excellent—among the 
best in the world) | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 2.09 Government procurement of advanced technology 
products
Do government procurement decisions foster technology 
innovation in your country? [1 = no, not at all; 7 = yes, 
extremely effectively] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
3rd pillar: Infrastructure and digital content
 3.01 Electricity production
Electricity production (kWh) per capita | 2008
Electricity production is measured at the terminals of all alternator 
sets in a station. In addition to hydropower, coal, oil, gas, and 
nuclear power generation, it covers generation by geothermal, 
solar, wind, and tide and wave energy as well as that from 
combustible renewables and waste. Production includes the 
output of electricity plants designed to produce electricity only, as 
well as that of combined heat and power plants. Total electricity 
production is then divided by total population. Population figures 
are from the United Nations Division of Economic and Social 
Affairs (retrieved November 10, 2011).
Sources: The World Bank, World Development Indicators Online 
(accessed October 10, 2011); US Central Intelligence Agency 
(CIA), The World Factbook (accessed October 11, 2011)
 3.02 Mobile network coverage rate
Percentage of total population covered by a mobile network 
signal | 2010
This indicator measures the percentage of inhabitants who are 
within range of a mobile cellular signal, irrespective of whether 
or not they are subscribers. This is calculated by dividing the 
number of inhabitants within range of a mobile cellular signal by 
the total population. Note that this is not the same as the mobile 
subscription density or penetration.
Source: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 
2011 edition)
 3.03 International Internet bandwidth per Internet user
International Internet bandwidth (kb/s) per Internet user | 2010
International Internet bandwidth is the sum of capacity of all 
Internet exchanges offering international bandwidth measured in 
kilobits per second (kb/s).
Source: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 
2011 edition)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  391
Technical Notes and Sources
3.04 Secure Internet servers
Secure Internet servers per million population | 2010
Secure Internet servers are servers using encryption technology in 
Internet transactions.
Source: The World Bank, World Development Indicators Online 
(accessed October 10, 2011); national sources
3.05 Accessibility of digital content
In your country, how accessible is digital content (e.g., text and 
audiovisual content, software products) via multiple platforms 
(e.g., fixed-line Internet, wireless Internet, mobile network, 
satellite, etc.)? [1 = not accessible at all; 7 = widely accessible] 
| 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
4th pillar: Affordability
4.01 Mobile cellular tariffs
Average per-minute cost of different types of mobile cellular 
calls (PPP $) | 2010
This measure is constructed by first taking the average per-minute 
cost of a local call to another mobile cellular phone on the same 
network (on-net) and on another network (off-net). This amount 
is then averaged with the per-minute cost of a local call to a 
fixed telephone line. All the tariffs are for calls placed during peak 
hours and based on a basic, representative mobile cellular pre-
paid subscription service. The amount is adjusted for purchasing 
power parity (PPP) and expressed in current international 
dollars. PPP figures were sourced from the World Bank’s World 
Development Indicators Online (retrieved November 13, 2011) 
and the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook 
(September 2011 edition).
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on International 
Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT 
Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition); national 
sources
4.02 Fixed broadband Internet tariffs
Monthly subscription charge for fixed (wired) broadband 
Internet service (PPP $) | 2010
Fixed (wired) broadband is considered any dedicated connection 
to the Internet at downstream speeds equal to, or greater than, 
256 kilobits per second, using DSL. The amount is adjusted 
for purchasing power parity (PPP) and expressed in current 
international dollars. PPP figures were sourced from the World 
Bank’s World Development Indicators Online (retrieved November 
13, 2011) and the International Monetary Fund’s World Economic 
Outlook (September 2011 edition).
Sources: Authors’ calculations based on International 
Telecommunication Union, ITU World Telecommunication/ICT 
Indicators Database 2011 (December 2011 edition); national 
sources
4.03 Internet and telephony sectors competition index
Level of competition index for Internet services, international 
long distance services, and mobile telephone services on a 
0-to-2 (best) scale | As of October 2011
This variable measures the degree of liberalization in 19 categories 
of ICT services, including 3G telephony, retail Internet access 
services, international long distance calls, and international 
gateways. For each economy, the level of competition in each 
of the categories is assessed as follows: monopoly, partial 
competition, and full competition. The results reflect the situation 
as of 2010. The index is calculated as the average of points 
obtained in each of the 19 categories. Full liberalization across all 
categories yields a score of 2, the best possible score.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU), ITU World Telecommunication 
Regulatory Database (accessed October 10, 2011)
5th pillar: Skills
 5.01 Quality of the educational system
How well does the educational system in your country meet the 
needs of a competitive economy? [1 = not well at all; 7 = very 
well] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 5.02 Quality of math and science education
How would you assess the quality of math and science 
education in your country’s schools? [1 = poor; 7 = excellent—
among the best in the world) | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 5.03 Secondary enrollment rate
Gross secondary education enrollment rate | 2009
The reported value corresponds to the ratio of total secondary 
enrollment, regardless of age, to the population of the age 
group that officially corresponds to the secondary education 
level. Secondary education (ISCED levels 2 and 3) completes 
the provision of basic education that began at the primary 
level, and aims to lay the foundations for lifelong learning and 
human development, by offering more subject- or skills-oriented 
instruction using more specialized teachers.
Sources: United Nations Education, Science and Culture 
Organization (UNESCO), UNESCO Institute for Statistics Data 
Centre (accessed November 11, 2011); national sources; UNICEF 
ChildInfo.org Country Profiles (accessed January 23, 2012)
 5.04 Adult literacy rate
Adult literacy rate (%) | 2009
Adult literacy is defined as the percentage of the population 
aged 15 years and over who can both read and write with 
understanding a short, simple statement on his/her everyday 
life. Whenever data come from economies classified by the 
World Bank as high income, we assume a rate of 99 percent, in 
accordance with the approach adopted by the United Nations 
Development Programme (UNDP) in calculating the 2009 edition 
of the Human Development Index.
Sources: United Nations Education, Science and Culture 
Organization (UNESCO), UNESCO Institute for Statistics Data 
Centre (accessed October 11, 2011); The World Bank, EdStats 
Database (accessed October 11, 2011); national sources
6th pillar: Individual usage
 6.01 Mobile telephone subscriptions
Mobile telephone subscriptions (post-paid and pre-paid) per 
100 population | 2010
A mobile telephone subscription refers to a subscription to a 
public mobile telephone service that provides access to the 
Public Switched Telephone Network using cellular technology, 
including number of pre-paid SIM cards active during the past 
three months. This includes both analog and digital cellular 
systems (IMT-2000, Third Generation, 3G) and 4G subscriptions, 
but excludes mobile broadband subscriptions via data cards 
or USB modems. Subscriptions to public mobile data services, 
private trunked mobile radio, telepoint or radio paging, and 
telemetry services are also excluded. It includes all mobile cellular 
subscriptions that offer voice communications.
Source: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 
2011 edition)
© 2012 World Economic Forum
392  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Technical Notes and Sources
6.02 Internet users
Percentage of individuals using the Internet | 2010
Internet users are people with access to the worldwide network.
Source: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 
2011 edition)
6.03 Households with a personal computer
Percentage of households equipped with a personal computer 
| 2010
The proportion of households with a computer is calculated 
by dividing the number of households with a computer by the 
total number of households. A computer refers to a desktop or 
a laptop computer. It does not include equipment with some 
embedded computing abilities such as mobile cellular phones, 
personal digital assistants (PDAs), or television sets.
Source: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 
2011 edition)
6.04 Households with Internet access
Percentage of households with Internet access at home | 2010
The share of households with Internet access at home is 
calculated by dividing the number of in-scope households with 
Internet access by the total number of in-scope households.
Source: International Telecommunication Union, ITU World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2011 (December 
2011 edition)
6.05 Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions
Fixed broadband Internet subscriptions per 100 population | 
2010
This refers to total fixed (wired) broadband Internet subscriptions 
(that is, subscriptions to high-speed access to the public 
Internet—a TCP/IP connection—at downstream speeds equal to, 
or greater than 256 kb/s).
Source: International Telecommunication Union, The World 
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2010 (December 
2010 edition)
6.06 Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions
Mobile broadband Internet subscriptions per 100 population | 
2010
Mobile broadband subscriptions refers to active SIM cards or, 
on CDMA networks, connections accessing the Internet at 
consistent broadband speeds of over 512 kb/s, which includes 
cellular technologies such as HSPA, EV-DO, and above. This 
includes connections being used in any type of device able to 
access mobile broadband networks, including smartphones, USB 
modems, mobile hotspots, or other mobile-broadband connected 
devices.
Source: Informa Telecoms & Media
6.07 Use of virtual social networks
How widely used are virtual social networks (e.g., Facebook, 
Twitter, LinkedIn) for professional and personal communication 
in your country? [1 = not used at all; 7 = used widely] | 2010–
2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
7th pillar: Business usage
 7.01 Firm-level technology absorption
To what extent do businesses in your country absorb new 
technology? [1 = not at all; 7 = aggressively absorb] | 2010–
2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 7.02 Capacity for innovation
In your country, how do companies obtain technology? [1 = 
exclusively from licensing or imitating foreign companies; 7 = 
by conducting formal research and pioneering their own new 
products and processes] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 7.03 PCT patent applications
Number of applications filed under the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty (PCT) per million population | 2008–09 average
This measures the total count of applications filed under the 
Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), by priority date and country 
of residence of the inventor(s), using fractional count if an 
application is filed by inventors residing in different countries. The 
average count of applications filed in 2008 and 2009 is divided 
by population, using figures from the United Nations Division of 
Economic and Social Affairs (retrieved November 10, 2011).
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), Patent Database, December 2011
 7.04 Extent of business Internet use
To what extent do companies within your country use the 
Internet for their business activities? (e.g., buying and selling 
goods, interacting with customers and suppliers) [1 = not at all; 
7 = extensively] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 7.05 Extent of staff training
To what extent do companies in your country invest in training 
and employee development? [1 = hardly at all; 7 = to a great 
extent] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
8th pillar: Government usage
 8.01 Government prioritization of ICT
How much priority does the government in your country place 
on information and communication technologies? [1 = weak 
priority; 7 = high priority] | 2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 8.02 Importance of ICT to government vision of the future
To what extent does the government have a clear 
implementation plan for utilizing information and 
communication technologies to improve your country’s overall 
competitiveness? [1 = no plan; 7 = clear plan] | 2010–2011 
weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  393
Technical Notes and Sources
8.03 Government Online Service Index
The Government Online Service Index assesses the quality 
of government’s delivery of online services on a 0-to-1 (best) 
scale | 2010
This index captures a government’s performance in delivering 
online services to the citizens. There are four stages of service 
delivery (Emerging, Enhanced, Transactional, and Connected). 
Online services are assigned to each stage according to 
their degree of sophistication, from the more basic to the 
more sophisticated. In each country, the performance of the 
government in each of the four stages is measured as the number 
of services provided as a percentage of the maximum services 
in the corresponding stage. Examples of services include online 
presence, deployment of multimedia content, governments’ 
solicitation of citizen input, widespread data sharing, and use of 
social networking. For more details about the methodology, visit 
the UN’s Global E-Government Survey 2010’s page at http://
www2.unpan.org/egovkb/global_reports/10report.htm.
Source: United Nations, UN E-Government Survey 2010: 
Leveraging e-Government at a Time of Financial and Economic 
Crisis
9th pillar: Economic impacts
9.01 Impact of ICT on new services and products
To what extent are information and communication 
technologies creating new business models, services, and 
products in your country? [1 = not at all; 7 = significantly] | 
2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
9.02 PCT ICT patent applications
Number of applications for information and communication 
technology–related patents filed under the Patent Cooperation 
Treaty (PCT) per million population | 2008–09 average
This measures the number of applications in the technology 
domain of information and communication technologies (ICT) filed 
under the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT), by priority date and 
country of residence of the inventor(s), using fractional count if an 
application is filed by inventors residing in different countries. The 
average count of applications filed in 2008 and 2009 is divided 
by population, using figures from the United Nations Division of 
Economic and Social Affairs (retrieved November 10, 2011).
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD), Patent Database, December 2011
9.03 Impact of ICT on new organizational models
To what extent are information and communication 
technologies creating new organizational models (virtual teams, 
remote working, tele-commuting, etc.) within businesses in 
your country? [1 = not at all; 7 = significantly] | 2010–2011 
weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
9.04 Employment in knowledge-intensive activities
Share of workforce employed in knowledge intensive activities 
(%) | 2008
Count of people employed in categories 0 to 3 as a percentage 
of total people employed, according to ISCO-1968, ISCO-88, 
and NSCO (excluding 0 Armed forces in ISCO-88). Categories 
included: ISCO-1968: (0/1) Professional, technical and related 
workers; (2) Administrative and managerial workers; and (3) 
Clerical and related workers. ISCO-88: (1) Legislators, senior 
officials, and managers; (2) Professionals, and (3) Technicians and 
associate professionals.
Source: Authors’ calculations based on International Labour 
Organization LaborSta database (access December 15th, 2011)
10th pillar: Social impacts
 10.01 Impact of ICT on access to basic services
To what extent are information and communication 
technologies enabling access for all citizens to basic services 
(health, education, financial services, etc.) in your country? [1 
= do not enable access at all, 7 = enable access significantly] | 
2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 10.02 Internet access in schools
How would you rate the level of access to the Internet in 
schools in your country? [1 = very limited; 7 = extensive] | 
2010–2011 weighted average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 10.03 ICT use and government efficiency
To what extent has the use of information and communication 
technologies by the government improved the efficiency of 
government services in your country? [1 = no effect; 7 = has 
generated considerable improvements] | 2010–2011 weighted 
average
Source: World Economic Forum, Executive Opinion Survey, 2010 
and 2011 editions
 10.04 E-Participation Index
The E-Participation Index assesses, on a 0-to-1 (best) 
scale, the quality, relevance, usefulness, and willingness of 
government websites for providing online information and 
participatory tools and services to their citizens | 2010
The E-Participation Index captures the extent to which 
governments create an environment in which citizens can be 
more active and support their governments. The index takes 
into account e-participation in all its aspects ranging from 
e-information to e-consultation and e-decision making. For 
more details about the methodology, visit the UN’s Global 
E-Government Survey 2010’s page at http://www2.unpan.org/
egovkb/global_reports/10report.htm.
Source: United Nations, UN E-Government Survey 2010: 
Leveraging e-Government at a Time of Financial and Economic 
Crisis
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  395
About the Authors
Rasim M. Alguliyev
Rasim M. Alguliyev is the Director of the Institute of 
Information Technology of the Azerbaijan National 
Academy of Sciences. He has been actively involved 
in the implementation of governmental policy on 
information society, a number of strategic projects, and 
the improvement of the national Internet infrastructure. He 
has developed the principles of establishing virtual private 
networks with changing structures, models, and algorithms 
for the selection of an optimal structure for their distributed 
authentication systems. He is the Editor-in-Chief of the 
Problems of Information Technology and the Problems of 
the Information Society journals.
Ben Anderson
Ben Anderson is the Deputy Director of the Centre for 
Research on Economic Sociology and Innovation (CRESI). 
He has used techniques from cognitive psychology, 
anthropology, sociology, and ethnography during his time 
as an academic and commercial research scientist engaged 
in user studies, human-computer interaction, and applied 
social research. Before joining the University of Essex 
in 2002, he ran Digital Living, a BT program of applied 
social science research based on a longitudinal household 
panel that included quantitative surveys, time-use diaries, 
ethnographic studies, and customer data capture (call 
records and Internet usage logs). The resulting analysis was 
fed to BT’s consumer market research, consumer products, 
joint venture, strategy, and R&D organizations. He has 
consulted to UK Cabinet Office/Social Exclusion Unit and 
No 10 Policy Unit, Ofcom, HSBC, DCFS, Citizens Online, 
and various bluechips on the subject of consumer market 
strategies. More recently he has focused on secondary data 
analysis, including the use of time-use diary data to analyze 
social change and the use of spatial micro-simulation to 
produce small area estimates of ICT usages, household 
expenditure, and income deprivation. Dr Anderson’s current 
research interests are in the co-evolution of technologies 
and social practices with a particular focus on variations 
in processes of co-adaptation and self-organization 
across time and space. Originally from a natural sciences 
background, Dr Anderson has a BSc in Biology and 
Computer Science (Southampton University, United 
Kingdom) and a PhD in Computer Studies (Loughborough 
University, United Kingdom).
Scott C. Beardsley
Scott C. Beardsley is a Director in McKinsey & Company’s 
Brussels Office and a member of McKinsey’s global 
Board of Directors (Shareholders Council). Since joining 
the firm in 1989, he has been particularly active in 
helping clients around the world on a range of strategy, 
regulation, stakeholder management, business in 
society, and performance transformation topics in the 
telecommunications, technology, and media sectors. 
He is a global leader of McKinsey’s Telecommunications 
Practice, and has been the leader of McKinsey’s Strategy 
Practice in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa for the past 
seven years. He has co-chaired the personnel committees 
that elect and evaluate McKinsey partners as well as the 
committee that elects Directors (Senior Partners). Currently 
he leads all the leadership development, training, and 
learning programs for McKinsey’s consultants globally. 
He has recently led a variety of internal research initiatives 
on such topics as regulatory and government strategy; 
stakeholder and reputation strategy; leadership; McKinsey 
Technology Initiative on topics such as collaboration, crowd 
sourcing, and social networking; leveraging technology for 
world-class knowledge management; telecommunications 
transformation and performance improvement; and next-
generation telecommunications regulation. A frequent 
public speaker, he has also published editorials in the 
Wall Street Journal and the Financial Times as well 
as numerous articles in the McKinsey Quarterly and 
related publications on a variety of telecommunications, 
broadband, interactions, and strategy topics, and 
has appeared in television broadcasts on broadband, 
telecommunications competition, and deregulation. He 
has contributed to seven books related to regulatory 
strategy, ICT, and networked readiness, and delivered 
presentations for the World Economic Forum at Davos on 
digital readiness and telecommunications sector reform, 
as well as the future of telecommunications regulation. 
Prior to joining McKinsey, Mr Beardsley was Editor and 
Marketing Manager at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology (MIT) Sloan Management Review. Additionally, 
he worked in the strategic sales and product marketing 
functions for Advanced Micro Devices and Analog Devices 
of the semiconductor industry. Mr Beardsley is Chairman 
of the Board of Directors of the American Chamber of 
Commerce in Belgium, and on the Board of Directors 
of St John’s International School in Waterloo, Belgium. 
He was a Henry S. Dupont III Scholar (highest honors) 
for outstanding academic performance at the MIT Sloan 
School of Management, where he graduated with an MBA 
in Corporate Strategy and Marketing. He holds a Bachelor 
of Science in Electrical Engineering magna cum laude from 
Tufts University (United States), where he achieved highest 
honors.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
396  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
About the Authors
Phillippa Biggs
Phillippa Biggs is an Economist and qualified ICAEW 
accountant. She has worked for the United Nations for 
10 years: first at the UNCTAD’s Science and Technology 
for Development Section and later as a consultant with 
UNIDO in Tanzania and Egypt. She is now Coordinator 
of the ITU/UNESCO Broadband Commission for Digital 
Development. She researches and analyzes developments 
in broadband, VoIP, and 3G markets around the world. She 
is editor and contributing author to a number of reports, 
including ITU’s Confronting the Crisis reports (www.itu.
int/crisis2009), the Status of VoIP report, ITU’s World 
Telecommunication Development Report 2010, ITU’s Trends 
in Telecommunication Reform 2009, and ITU/UNCTAD’s 
World Information Society Reports (www.itu.int/wisr). Ms 
Biggs has a Natural Sciences Honours Degree from the 
University of Cambridge and a Master in Economics for 
Development from the University of Oxford (both in the 
United Kingdom), where she won the Oxford University 
Prize for the Best Overall Performance in her degree. She 
also holds Diplomas in Economics and Statistics from the 
UK Open University.
Beñat Bilbao-Osorio
Beñat Bilbao-Osorio is an Associate Director and 
Economist of the Centre for Global Competitiveness 
and Performance at the World Economic Forum. 
In this capacity, he carries out research on national 
competitiveness issues with a special geographical focus 
on Latin America and Iberia. In addition, he analyzes the 
role of innovation and information and communication 
technologies (ICT) on fostering competitiveness and 
well-being, and is Co-Editor of The Global Information 
Technology Report. Prior to joining the Forum, Dr Bilbao-
Osorio worked at the Directorate General Research and 
Innovation of the European Commission, where he was 
responsible for economic analysis of European Innovation 
Policy; at the Directorates of Science, Technology and 
Industry, and Education of the OECD, where he worked 
on innovation-related topics; and at the International Trade 
Centre (UNCTAD/WTO), where he performed international 
trade competitiveness analysis. His main research fields 
are ICT, innovation, skills, and economic development, 
where he has published extensively. Dr Bilbao-Osorio holds 
a Bachelor degree in Economics from the Universidad 
Comercial de Deusto (Spain), a Master in European Studies 
from the Université Catholique de Louvain (Belgium), and 
a PhD in Economic Geography from the London School of 
Economic and Political Science (United Kingdom).
William Bold
William Bold serves as Senior Vice President of 
Government Affairs for Qualcomm Incorporated. In 
this capacity, he manages the company’s public policy 
agenda and its relationships with government entities and 
related organizations at the international, federal, state, 
and local levels. He manages a global group working in 
Belgium, Brazil, China, France, Germany, Hong Kong, 
India, Italy, Japan, Korea, South Africa, the United States, 
and the United Kingdom. Prior to joining Qualcomm, 
he worked as Director of Public Policy for the California 
Health Care Institute, a trade association representing 
California’s biomedical industry and certain multinational 
pharmaceutical and medical device companies. He 
developed the Institute’s public advocacy program and 
was responsible for the industry’s relations with federal and 
state public officials. Prior to that, he served as Legislative 
Director to United States Congresswoman Lynn Schenk (D-
CA), and managed Congresswoman Schenk’s legislative 
agenda. He is a graduate of the University of California, 
Berkeley (United States), with a Bachelor of Arts in Political 
Economies of Industrial Societies.
Frederico Carvalho
Frederico Carvalho is a Solutions Director in Intel’s World 
Ahead organization. His responsibilities span the European, 
Middle East, and African (EMEA) regions, where he engages 
governments and telecommunications organizations as well 
as technology ecosystem partners on strategies to increase 
technology and broadband Internet adoption. His work 
extends to helping establish communications, education, 
healthcare, small business, and other programs that can 
transform through the better application of technology. In 
prior roles, during his 13-year Intel career, Mr Carvalho was 
tasked with creating and implementing Intel’s business 
development expansion strategy for the sub-Saharan Africa 
region. Working out of South Africa from 2008 to 2010, 
he established and developed numerous relationships 
with governments and business leaders, incorporating 
technology in the region. Earlier roles at Intel included 
establishing Intel’s reseller channel in Portugal, which led 
him to occupy the role of Intel’s Country Manager for 
Portugal. In 2005, Mr Carvalho was asked to relocate to 
Spain to manage a regional team responsible for delivering 
on Intel’s enterprise business objectives.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  397
About the Authors
Rob Claxton
Rob Claxton is a Principal Researcher working in BT’s 
Research and Technology department. He has spent his 
career with BT in a variety of technology roles, including 
developing software for BT’s Intelligent Network platform. 
Since 2005, Mr Claxton’s research work has focused on 
network science and the analysis of large-scale networks 
derived from communications data. He has a particular 
interest in the applications of community-finding algorithms 
and the analysis of networks in a spatial context. In 
collaboration with university partners, he has co-authored 
papers on these subjects that have been published in 
Science and PLos ONE. He graduated from the University 
of York (United Kingdom) with an MEng in Electronic 
Systems Engineering.
William Davidson
William Davidson is Senior Vice President of Global 
Marketing and Investor Relations for Qualcomm 
Incorporated. In this role, he provides leadership for 
Qualcomm’s marketing and public relations efforts 
worldwide and is the primary liaison with the media, 
investment community, and Qualcomm shareholders. 
He has more than 25 years of experience in technical 
sales, marketing, and general management roles in the 
telecommunications industry. He spent 13 years at Bell 
Atlantic, which included substantial experience within the 
wireline business at New Jersey Bell, and subsequently 
served as vice president of wireless data sales and 
marketing for Bell Atlantic Mobile. Mr Davidson serves as a 
board member for CommNexus, CONNECT, the San Diego 
Police Foundation, and the San Diego Regional Chamber 
of Commerce and is the board chair for the Institute for 
Communication Technology Management at USC.
Yavuz Demirci
Yavuz Demirci is an Associate Principal in McKinsey & 
Company’s Istanbul Office. He joined the firm in 1999, 
and was transferred to McKinsey’s Chicago Office for 
two years in 2004. Mr Demirci’s primary areas of focus 
are telecommunications and energy industries. During his 
career at McKinsey, he has worked in strategy, operations, 
and marketing areas. He holds an MBA from Carnegie-
Mellon (United States) and a BA in Management from Koc 
University (Turkey).
Soumitra Dutta
Soumitra Dutta is the Roland Berger Chaired Professor of 
Business and Technology at INSEAD and the Founding 
Director of INSEAD eLab, a center of excellence in the 
digital economy. From July 2012, he will join the Samuel 
Curtis Graduate School of Management at Cornell 
University as its 11th Dean. His current research is on 
technology strategy and innovation at both corporate and 
national policy levels. Professor Dutta has been the co-
editor of The Global Information Technology Report for the 
last 10 years. He has won several awards for research and 
pedagogy and is actively involved in policy development 
at national and European levels. His research has been 
showcased in the international media and he has taught 
in and consulted with international corporations. Professor 
Dutta obtained his PhD in Computer Science and his MSc 
in Business Administration from the University of California 
at Berkeley (United States).
Bahjat El-Darwiche
Bahjat El-Darwiche is a Partner with Booz & Company 
and a member of the firm’s Communications, Media, and 
Technology Practice. He has over 17 years of experience 
in the telecommunications industry, acquired through 
various engagements with policymakers, regulators, 
telecommunications operators, and investors in the Middle 
East, Europe, North America, and Asia. Mr El-Darwiche has 
managed a number of strategy and operations assignments 
in the telecommunications and ICT space, primarily in the 
context of sector-level development strategies, institutional 
and regulatory reforms, strategy-based transformations, 
and new business ventures focused on policy development, 
strategic planning, business development, operating models 
design, and program and performance management. Mr 
El-Darwiche is the author of a number of reference reports 
on next-generation regulation, digital highways, and new 
business and operating models, and a regular contributor to 
the World Economic Forum’s Global Information Technology 
Report. Mr El-Darwiche holds a State Engineering Diploma 
from the École Polytechnique with a major in Economics 
and Finance, and a Master in Telecommunications from the 
École Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications (both 
in France).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
398  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
About the Authors
Luis Enriquez
Luis Enriquez is a Director in McKinsey & Company’s 
Brussels Office, where he has worked primarily in the 
infrastructure and regulated industries, focusing on 
regulation, operations and pricing in telecommunications 
(fixed and mobile businesses), and energy. He co-
leads McKinsey’s global efforts in regulation, regulatory 
economics, and stakeholder management and has led 
the firm’s functional knowledge initiatives in emerging 
regulatory areas, including regulatory management best 
practices, organizational models, and key tools and 
capabilities to support regulatory strategy. He co-leads the 
global infrastructure initiative in telecommunications and 
McKinsey’s regulatory strategy function. He has worked 
in approximately 60 countries on multiple regulatory 
and stakeholder management topics in regulated and 
unregulated industries, and is currently leading a cross-
industry internal task force to gather global lessons in 
regulatory management and strategy across industries. 
He has collaborated with ITU, the World Economic 
Forum (where he has co-authored a contribution to The 
Global Information Technology Report since its inception), 
government panels and regulatory agencies on multiple 
issues. He has published perspectives on major topics such 
as regulatory strategy, market dominance remedies, and the 
regulation of infrastructure in major newspapers and other 
publications. Prior to joining McKinsey, Mr Enriquez worked 
extensively in liberalization, company restructuring, and 
regulation issues in Europe, the United States, and Latin 
America. He assisted the Ministry of Finance of the Czech 
Republic in developing price regulations to support the 
privatization of Czech Telecom (then SPT Telecom) in 1994, 
and taught courses and seminars on issues surrounding 
liberalization, competition, and interconnection. He worked 
in the Office of Plans and Policy with the Chief Economist 
of the US Federal Communications Commission during the 
implementation of the 1996 Telecommunications Act. He 
has worked with US telecommunications and energy firms 
on multiple regulatory topics ranging from incremental cost 
pricing, rate base regulation, wholesale pricing models, 
and price cap regulation to interconnection, unbundling 
and collocation, and the pricing of broadband services. Mr 
Enriquez has a BA in Economics from Harvard University 
and did his doctoral work in Economics at the University 
of California at Berkeley (both in the United States), where 
he focused on the economic dynamics of interconnection 
among telecommunications networks.
John Fredette
John Fredette is a member of Alcatel-Lucent’s Corporate 
Communications organization, where he is helping 
to re-invent the “voice” of the company through the 
development of written materials that convey complex 
and technologically sophisticated subjects in a way that is 
readily understood and appreciated by the average reader, 
anywhere in the world. Previously Mr Fredette served in a 
variety of communications roles at Alcatel-Lucent geared 
toward educating internal audiences about the operations 
of various key segments of the business, most recently 
managing internal communications for the company’s 
Applications Group. Prior to this, Mr Fredette managed 
supplier communications to drive understanding and active 
alignment with corporate strategy and goals through written 
communications, multi-media productions, and special 
events. Mr Fredette received his Bachelor degree in Art 
History and History from the University of Pittsburgh and 
his Master of Science in Journalism from West Virginia 
University. He is currently pursuing documentary studies at 
Duke University (all in the United States).
Roman Friedrich
Roman Friedrich is a Partner with Booz & Company, 
where he specializes in strategic transformation in fixed-
line, convergent, and mobile communications; sales and 
marketing; new company build-up support; program 
management; technology-based transformation; and 
wargaming. Based in Dusseldorf and Stockholm, Dr 
Friedrich’s geographic focus extends throughout northwest 
and continental Europe, where he is a recognized thought 
leader in telecommunications strategy, commercial 
strategies, and operations and performance improvement 
for communications and technology clients. Prior to joining 
the firm, he worked as a scientist in the field of theoretical 
elementary particle physics at the Gesellschaft fuer 
Schwerionenforschung and the University of Tübingen (both 
in Germany). Dr Friedrich earned a PhD in Physics from the 
University of Tübingen and a Diploma from the Technical 
University of Darmstadt (Germany).
Sandeep Ganediwalla
Sandeep Ganediwalla is an Associate in the 
Communications, Media, and Technology Practice at Booz 
& Company. He has more than nine years of experience 
in strategy and information technology (IT) consulting 
gained across Middle East, Africa, Asia, North America, 
and Europe. Mr Ganediwalla’s engagements have included 
the development of ICT programs for governments and 
corporate strategy for telecommunications operators and 
IT service providers. He holds an MBA from HEC Paris and 
a Bachelor of Engineering from the University of Mumbai 
(India).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  399
About the Authors
Thierry Geiger
Thierry Geiger is an Economist and Associate Director with 
the Centre for Global Competitiveness and Performance at 
the World Economic Forum. He leads the competitiveness 
research on Asia, supervises the development and 
computation of a wide range of composite indicators, 
and heads the Centre’s technical assistance and capacity 
building program. His areas of expertise are private 
sector development, international trade, and applied 
economics. Mr Geiger is a co-author of the Forum’s 
flagship publications The Global Competitiveness Report, 
The Global Information Technology Report, and The Global 
Enabling Trade Report. He is the lead author of several 
regional and country studies. Prior to joining the Forum, he 
worked for the World Trade Organization and Caterpillar 
Inc. He is Co-Founder of Procab Studio, a Geneva-based 
IT company. A Swiss national, Mr Geiger holds a BA in 
Economics from the University of Geneva (Switzerland), an 
MA in Economics from the University of British Columbia 
(Canada), and was a Fellow of the Forum’s Global 
Leadership Programme.
Neena Gill
Neena Gill is Vice President of Corporate Affairs for the 
European and Asia Pacific regions at SAS, where she 
helps national governments identify innovative ways to 
transform their information technology (IT) systems with 
analytics and participate in social transformation initiatives 
for the new digital age. Prior to joining SAS, Ms Gill spent 
10 years as a member of the European Parliament (MEP), 
where she steered legislative activities that focused on 
IT and was an active member of the Budget, Legal, and 
Industry committees. She was the United Kingdom’s first 
female Asian MEP to hold this position and was elected 
to represent the West Midlands region of England. During 
her tenure she spent three years as the President of the 
European Parliament delegation for relations with India, five 
years as the President of the South Asia delegation, and 
two years as a member of the Association of Southeast 
Asian Nations (ASEAN). Ms Gill also served as a chief 
executive in public housing for 13 years before becoming a 
member of the European Parliament.
Ruc Guo
Roc Guo is a Senior Market Analyst at Huawei 
Technologies. He joined the company in 1999. For the 
first 10 years he focused on the telecommunications 
industry, especially the carriers’ business model, and how 
technology development changes that business model. 
Over the last two years, his research has expanded to 
include ICT, with a special interest in the government’s 
perspective on ICT.
Galib I. Gurbanov
Galib I. Gurbanov is a Co-Founder and Managing Director 
of Azerin LLC, the first ISP in Azerbaijan. For more than a 
decade he has been Chairman of the Azerbaijan Internet 
Society, a coalition of Internet-related businesses and 
nongovernmental organizations, universities, and research 
institutes with the aim of coordinating and strengthening 
the development of the Azerbaijan segment of the global 
Internet, including content management and the protection 
of the rights of Internet users.
Mehmet Güvendi
Mehmet Güvendi is a Principal in McKinsey & Company’s 
Istanbul Office. He joined the firm in March 1999. During 
his career at McKinsey, he has worked in the strategy, 
regulation, operations, and information technology (IT) areas 
in a number of industries, including telecommunications. 
Before joining McKinsey, Mr Güvendi was an IT Group 
Manager at Procter & Gamble Company. He worked as an 
IT manager for six years in Western Europe, North America, 
and Turkey. He led multi-functional global process design 
teams for planning and managed several major global pilot 
projects around the world. Mr Güvendi also managed a 
data center and a multinational communications network 
and was in charge of IT systems and operations at several 
manufacturing sites. He is a member of the Prime Ministry 
Telecom Special Expertise Committee for the development 
of the Turkish National Five-Year Development Plan. He is 
the Chairman of the Advisory Council of Bilkent University 
Engineering School. He has been asked for expert opinion 
on various regulatory issues (payments, pharmaceuticals, 
and telecommunications) by the Turkish Government, the 
Competition Board, and the European Commission. He has 
published a number of articles on telecommunications and 
regulatory affairs in general, and co-authored chapters in 
the World Economic Forum’s Global Information Technology 
Report. Mr Güvendi holds a BS with high honors in 
Industrial Engineering from Bilkent University, Ankara 
(Turkey).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
400  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
About the Authors
Mikael Hagström
Mikael Hagström is Executive Vice President of the 
European, Middle Eastern, African, and Asia Pacific 
regions at SAS, the leader in business analytics software 
and services. He is responsible for harnessing current 
market potential, preparing the organization for the future, 
and providing a culture where innovation can flourish. 
A noted authority on the multinational business climate, 
Mr Hagström holds the elected position of Chair of the 
American Chamber of Commerce to the European Union 
(AmCham EU) Executive Council, which is composed 
of senior executives from 18 of the largest American 
multinational corporations operating in Europe, and advises 
the most senior policymakers in Europe. He also serves as 
a member of the board of directors of the Atlantic Council 
and a member of the Executive Committee that functions 
as the US Council for International Business (USCIB)’s 
board of directors. Because of his wide-ranging business 
acumen, Mr Hagström is a frequent speaker at events such 
as those of the World Economic Forum, Horasis global 
business meetings, the Tällberg Forum, the UN Climate 
Change Conference, and more.
Ivan Huang
Ivan Huang is a Senior Marketing Manager at the cross-
industry development department within the Strategy & 
Marketing Division at Huawei Technologies. He joined 
Huawei in 2001, and is now responsible for the strategies 
development across industries. He leads cross-division 
projects in the company on topics such as bridging the 
digital divide and climate change. Mr Huang is active in 
industry collaboration; he is Huawei’s daily representative 
at the Broadband Commission under the United Nations 
and helps to advocate ICT for all. He has also participated 
in several projects with the World Economic Forum. Mr 
Huang is a member of the Green Strategy Committee in 
Huawei and has participated in several green initiatives 
organized by international organizations such as GeSI and 
the Broadband Commission.
Toby Johnson
Toby Johnson is a Communications Professional with 15+ 
years experience in the tech space. He has edited various 
trade magazines, taking freelance commissions for more 
mainstream media. For the best part of 10 years he has 
worked in communications at the UN’s specialized agency 
for ICTs, International Telecommunication Union (ITU, at 
www.itu.int). At ITU he has led a new era of outreach, 
championing new media and pro-active relations. He sits 
on various international steering committees, such as the 
UN Habitat’s World Urban Campaign. He also played a 
critical role in the development and presentation to the 
UN Secretary General of the first report of the Broadband 
Commission for Digital Development.
Raul Katz
Raul Katz is an Adjunct Professor in the Finance and 
Economics Division of Columbia Business School and 
Director of Business Strategy Research at the Columbia 
Institute for Tele-Information. In addition, he is President 
of Telecom Advisory Services LLC, a consulting firm 
specializing in strategic and economic analysis in the 
information and communication technology industries. 
In 2004, after 20 years of service, Dr Katz retired as a 
Lead Partner of Booz Allen Hamilton, where he led the 
Telecommunications Practice in North and South America 
and was a member of its Leadership Team. He holds a 
PhD in Management Science and Political Science and an 
MS in Communications Technology and Policy from MIT 
(United States), as well as a Maîtrise in Political Science 
and a Maîtrise in Communications Science, both from the 
University of Paris-Sorbonne (France).
Xie Liangjian
Xie Liangjian has been a Marketing Analyst at Huawei 
Technologies since 2007. He is engaged in wireless 
products lifecycle management, which aims to define 
effective product life cycle planning, adjustment, and 
termination to seek an optimal balance between profits, 
cost, and customer satisfaction. His tasks currently include 
ICT-related areas, with a special focus on financial ICT 
solutions.
Youlia Lozanova
Youlia Lozanova is currently working as a 
Telecommunication/ICT Regulatory Analyst with the 
Development Sector of International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU), where she has worked since 2005. Her 
main areas of interest are regulatory reform and policy 
development in the ICT sector. Before joining ITU, she 
spent three years as a Researcher in Sofia University and 
two years with public media in Bulgaria. Over the last 
seven years, Ms Lozanova has specialized in the area 
of ICT development, policy, and regulation and has co-
authored material in several reports, including the World 
Information Society Report 2006 and 2007; Trends in 
Telecommunication Reform 2008, 2009, 2010–11, and 
2012; and the ITU Broadband Atlas (coming soon). Ms 
Lozanova holds a Political Science Honours Degree from 
Sofia University (Bulgaria) and a Master in Public Policy 
Management and a Master in Development Studies from 
the University of Geneva (Switzerland).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  401
About the Authors
Revital Marom
Revital Marom has more than 20 years of hands-on 
international experience in the telecommunications and 
IT sectors. Ms Marom currently leads the Market and 
Consumer Insight group helping Alcatel-Lucent and its 
customers anticipate and profit from technological and 
market changes with a specific focus on global and local 
consumer behavior. Prior to joining Alcatel-Lucent, Ms 
Marom was the Director of the Ericsson ConsumerLab 
North America. Her accomplishments with Ericsson include 
leading LTE and UMTS Market Research initiatives for AT&T, 
Verizon, Sprint, Telia-Sonora, Telenor, Cable and Wireless, 
Digicel, and others. Her experience also includes serving 
as a lecturer/fellow at INSEAD in the area of Technology 
Management; heading the research group at Thesus, 
France Telecom business school; and developing and 
implementing research and e-business strategies for clients 
such as AMD, ABB, 3M, and British Telecom. Ms Marom 
is a frequent guest speaker on telecommunications trends 
and consumer behavior at many telecommunications, IT, 
and international marketing events.
Stagg Newman
Stagg Newman provides technology, regulatory, and 
strategic advice and analysis to McKinsey clients globally 
as a McKinsey Advisor, a position he has held since 2005 
except for a nine-month assignment with the US Federal 
Communications Commission (FCC). Dr Newman recently 
served as Chief Technologist on the US FCC National 
Broadband Team that developed Connecting America: The 
National Broadband Plan, a report to Congress and the 
President on the US broadband state of deployment and 
future plans. He also served as an advisor to the Obama 
Transition Team on telecommunications policy. From 2000 
to 2005, Dr Newman served McKinsey & Company as 
Senior Telecom Expert, working with hundreds of client 
teams worldwide. He provided technical leadership for 
the firm’s knowledge development efforts, particularly 
in broadband access, high-speed wireless, and the 
intersection of technology and regulation. He represented 
McKinsey on the Technology Advisory Council of the US 
FCC, where he led the Broadband Working Group that 
assessed broadband access platforms and presented 
The State of Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless 
Technology: The Next Half Decade, which analyzed 3G, 
WiFi Mesh, and WiMax technologies. In 2007, he was 
CTO of Frontline Wireless, a start-up designed to win US 
700 MHz spectrum and build out a 4G network to serve 
public safety and commercial interests. Dr Newman was 
Chief Technologist at the FCC in 1998 and 1999, where he 
advised the commissioners and senior staffers on strategic 
technology issues. He championed the “unregulation” of the 
Internet, an Internet-friendly spectrum policy, and policies 
that encouraged technology innovation and investment. 
He started his telecommunications career with Bell Labs 
in 1976 and worked for various descendents of AT&T in 
voice, data, and video communications. From 1994 to 
1997 he was Vice President, Network Technology and 
Architecture, Applied Research at Bellcore, where he led 
the wireless, optical networking, and network access 
technology and architecture research. Prior to that he 
led the network technology organization responsible for 
technical specifications, certification, and conformance 
testing. Dr Newman received his BS from Davidson College 
and his MS and PhD from Cornell University in math (both 
in the United States).
Francesc Pedró
Francesc Pedró joined UNESCO’s education sector in 
Paris (France) in 2010, where he leads the work on policy 
advice, including national policy reviews and comparative 
research, the monitoring of the right to education, and the 
policy work on technology in education. Prior to that, he 
worked at the OECD Centre for Educational Research and 
Innovation (CERI). In his capacity as Senior Policy Analyst, 
he was responsible for a number of projects including the 
Teaching and Learning International Survey (TALIS) and the 
New Millennium Learners Project. He was also in charge 
of the reviews of educational R&D in OECD countries and 
of a project on Systemic Innovation in Education. Dr Pedró 
was formerly Professor of Comparative Education and 
Public Policy at the Pompeu Fabra University (Barcelona) 
and Academic Director of its program for educational 
quality. He also acted as pro-vice chancellor of educational 
research and innovation at the Open University of Catalonia 
(Barcelona), the first Internet-based European public 
university. His most recent publications are Are the New 
Millennium Learners Making the Grade? Technology Use 
and Educational Performance in PISA (2010), Inspired by 
Technology, Driven by Pedagogy (2010), and Connected 
Minds (forthcoming). Dr Pedró received his MEd from 
the Autonomous University of Barcelona and a PhD in 
Comparative Education from UNED (Madrid). Later he did 
a postdoc in Comparative Public Policy at the University of 
London Institute of Education (United Kingdom).
Jon Reades
Jon Reades is a Research Associate at the Centre for 
Advanced Spatial Analysis at University College London 
(UCL), where his work leverages professional experience 
with data processing (ETL) systems and database mining. 
Following eight years as an ICT consultant, Dr Reades 
returned to academia to pursue a PhD in Urban Planning at 
the Bartlett School of Planning (United Kingdom) in which 
he examined sought to connect globalization to clusters of 
specialized businesses activity across the United Kingdom. 
This research seeks to provide a more holistic and 
integrated view of London’s embedding in a wider regional 
economy, and to highlight the importance of face-to-face 
and electronic interaction within and between sectors.
Karim Sabbagh
Karim Sabbagh is a Senior Partner with Booz & Company 
and the global leader of the Communications, Media, and 
Technology Practice. He has over 20 years of management 
consulting experience in deregulation strategies, 
privatization, strategy-based transformation, mergers and 
acquisitions, investment strategies, and operating and 
governance models. Dr Sabbagh’s engagements have 
included economic master planning for telecommunications 
and media clients and the development of technology 
incubators for economic development programs. He is a 
member of the advisory council of the School of Business 
Administration of the American University in Dubai. He is a 
member of the firm’s Marketing Advisory Council and also 
the chairman of the Ideation Center that serves as the firm’s 
think tank in the Middle East. Dr Sabbagh holds a PhD with 
honors in Strategic Management from Century University 
(United States) and both an MBA in Finance and a BBA 
with distinction in Marketing from the American University of 
Beirut (Lebanon).
© 2012 World Economic Forum
402  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
About the Authors
Sergio Sandoval
Sergio Sandoval is an Associate Principal in McKinsey & 
Company’s Brussels Office. Mr Sandoval joined the firm in 
late 2001 and has been part of McKinsey’s global efforts 
in regulation, regulatory economics, and stakeholder 
management for the past five years. He is also part 
of the core leadership of McKinsey’s Next Generation 
Telecommunication Infrastructure Initiative. Mr Sandoval 
has been a lead author in the annual Global Information 
Technology Report of the World Economic Forum since 
2005. The articles have focused on topics of regulation, 
next-generation networks, and the economic impact of 
high-speed broadband networks. He is also the key liaison 
between McKinsey and the European Union. His Brussels-
based location allows him to maintain high-level contacts 
and get information first hand from key European industry 
stakeholders such as the European Telecommunication 
Network Operators Association (ETNO), the European 
Competitors Association (ECTA), the Center for European 
Political Studies (CEPS), and Euroactiv. Prior to joining 
McKinsey, Mr Sandoval worked with Colombia’s Presidency 
of the Republic as Economic Advisor to the President. He 
obtained a BS and an MA in Economics from Los Andes 
University (Colombia), and an MBA with high honours from 
Solvay Business School (Belgium).
Milind Singh
Milind Singh is a Principal in the Communications, Media, 
and Technology Practice at Booz & Company. He has more 
than 10 years of strategy and operations experience gained 
across North America, Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Middle 
East. Mr Singh has worked with governments in defining 
their sector policies and development strategies, advised 
operators on their corporate strategies and operational 
turnaround programs, and helped investors develop and 
execute their sector investments and acquisition strategies. 
He holds an MBA from the University of Oxford (United 
Kingdom) and a Bachelor in Engineering from the University 
of Bombay (India).
Kurt Steinert
Kurt Steinert has more than 20 years of experience in 
corporate public relations, advocacy communications, 
and non-profit management with a focus on high-tech, 
international security, and global environmental issues. 
Over the past decade Mr Steinert has held a number 
of senior communications roles in Alcatel-Lucent, most 
recently serving as Director of Corporate Communications, 
leading a team of writers tasked with shifting the overall 
positioning, messaging, and “voice” of all communications 
materials produced by the company. Among other roles, 
Mr Steinert previously served as Head of Communications 
for the company’s Solutions Organization, where he was 
responsible for external and internal communications in 
support of the company’s initiatives in a variety of emerging 
technology sectors. Prior to this, Mr Steinert helped 
manage a program that brought together leading members 
of the Washington DC press corps with senior government 
officials involved in defense and foreign policy for frank 
discussions on the most pressing issues of the day. Mr 
Steinert received his Bachelor’s degree in Journalism and 
Environmental Public Policy from Rutgers University, The 
State University of New Jersey (United States).
Malin Strandell-Janson
Malin Strandell-Jansson is a Knowledge Specialist in 
McKinsey & Company’s Stockholm Office. She is part 
of McKinsey & Company’s Global Tech, Media and 
Telecoms research team. Her main industry focus is 
mobile telecommunications with special expertise in 
regulation and strategy. Mrs Strandell-Jansson held the 
position of team leader for all analysts focusing on mobile 
telecommunications research between 2006 and 2010. 
She has also served as the first alert and coordinator for 
McKinsey’s marketing and sales special interest group. Prior 
to joining McKinsey & Company, Mrs Strandell-Jansson 
worked for Ericsson assisting the EMEA management; and 
the European Commission at the Information Society DG, 
XIII, where she was involved in the development of the data 
protection directive. Before that she worked on contract 
law issues for one of the largest IT companies in Finland. 
She also wrote her Master’s thesis for them on the topic 
“The International Copyright Protection of Software.” Mrs 
Strandell-Jansson holds a Master of Law from Stockholm 
University (Sweden) and a Political Science degree with a 
major in International Law from Åbo Akademi (Finland).
Nancy Sundberg
Nancy Sundberg is a Senior Programme Officer. She has 
been involved in telecommunications/ICT reform for more 
than 15 years working for International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU). At ITU she coordinates and is a contributing 
author to regulatory publications such as Trends in 
Telecommunications Reform. She is a co-organizer of the 
BDT’s annual Global Symposium for Regulators (GSR) 
and is also actively involved in the organization of regional 
events and the Training Programme for Regulators and 
Policy-Makers. She is coordinating further developments 
of the ITU infoDev online ICT regulation toolkit. She is also 
managing methods of information gathering and sharing, 
including the annual regulatory survey, the regulatory 
database on the ITU’s ICT Eye portal, and the Broadband 
Universe portal. Ms Sundberg has prepared a number of 
reports, articles, and presentations on sector reform that 
she has delivered in several regulatory meetings around the 
world.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  403
About the Authors
Chris S. Thomas
Considered one of Intel’s visionaries driving future directions 
for industry and computing, Chris S. Thomas directs 
a worldwide team of solutions architects establishing 
technology solutions for Intel’s “Next Billion” customers. His 
team develops strategies and architectures for education, 
healthcare, small business, communications, and other 
areas. He engages governments, industry, NGOs, and 
development agencies worldwide in the effective use of 
IT for emerging markets and has participated in World 
Economic Forum’s Information Technology, Internet 
Security, and Cloud Computing activities. Mr Thomas is well 
known for driving computer industry standardization and 
next-generation solutions, including founding the Desktop 
Management Task Force (DMTF), directing Intel’s Distributed 
Enterprise Architecture Lab, and architecting core 
technologies behind the LANDesk™ Management Suite. 
He is also co-author of the book Mashup Corporations. 
Mr Thomas is a member of the Board of Directors of 
Agilix Labs Inc. developing the BrainHoney™ Learning 
Environment and a member of the Strategic Advisory 
Boards of the Innovation Value Institute (IVI) and Community 
Health Awareness Council (CHAC). He received a BS 
in Computer Science and a BA in Spanish from Carroll 
College in Waukesha, Wisconsin (United States).
Oleg Timchenko
Oleg Timchenko is a Principal in McKinsey & Company’s 
Kiev Office. Since joining the firm in 1999, he has worked 
with clients in the metals, transportation, banking, 
telecommunications, and retail industries. His recent work 
has been primarily in the telecommunications sector. Prior 
to joining McKinsey, Mr Timchenko worked with United 
Financial Group as an equity analyst. Mr Timchenko has 
obtained his MBA from Wharton School, University of 
Pennsylvania (United States), where he was designated 
Palmer Scholar, and a BA and an MA in International 
Economics from the Institute of International Relations, Kiev 
National University (Ukraine).
Wim Torfs
Wim Torfs is a Principal with McKinsey & Company. He 
joined the Brussels Office in mid 2003 and transferred to 
the Dubai Office at the beginning of 2007. His main focus is 
on pricing and regulation. Besides his career with McKinsey 
& Company, Mr Torfs has been a consultant with Bureau 
van Dijk Management Consultants in Brussels, where he 
was an expert in market liberalization issues. Mr Torfs holds 
a degree in Commercial Engineering from the University of 
Antwerp (Belgium) and a Master of Business Administration 
from the Vlerick Leuven Ghent Management School 
(Belgium).
Louis Witters
Louis Witters is part of the Market and Consumer Insight 
team at Alcatel-Lucent, where he has responsibilities in 
the areas of market analysis, market sizing, and growth 
and core programs initiatives. Previously Mr Witters has 
held a variety of roles in product and consumer segments 
at Alcatel-Lucent. His responsibilities have included 
commercial activities in the transmission and public 
switching field, market analysis and market sizing of key 
markets and key product segments, product rationalization, 
and strategy definition for regional markets. He graduated 
from the Catholic University of Leuven (Belgium) in 
Criminology, Sociology, and Law. He also graduated from 
the University of Nanjing (China) in Chinese Economy.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  405
The World Economic Forum’s Centre for Global 
Competitiveness and Performance is pleased to  
acknowledge and thank the following organizations  
as its valued Partner Institutes, without which the  
realization of The Global Information Technology  
Report 2012 would not have been feasible:
Albania
Institute for Contemporary Studies (ISB)
Artan Hoxha, President
Elira Jorgoni, Senior Expert and Project Manager
Endrit Kapaj, Researcher
Algeria
Centre de Recherche en Economie Appliquée pour le 
Développement (CREAD)
Youcef Benabdallah, Assistant Professor
Yassine Ferfera, Director
Angola
MITC Investimentos
Estefania Jover, Senior Adviser
South Africa-Angola Chamber of Commerce (SA-ACC)
Roger Ballard-Tremeer, Hon Chief Executive
Argentina
IAE—Universidad Austral
Cristian Alonso, Project Manager
Eduardo Luis Fracchia, Professor
Armenia
Economy and Values Research Center
Manuk Hergnyan, Chairman
Sevak Hovhannisyan, Board Member and Senior Associate
Gohar Malumyan, Research Associate
Australia
Australian Industry Group
Carola Lehmer, Senior Research Coordinator
Heather Ridout, Chief Executive
Nikki Wilson, Administrative Assistant
Austria
Austrian Institute of Economic Research (WIFO)
Karl Aiginger, Director
Gerhard Schwarz, Coordinator, Survey Department
Azerbaijan
Azerbaijan Marketing Society
Fuad Aliyev, Project Manager
Ashraf Hajiyev, Consultant
Bahrain
Bahrain Competitiveness Council, Bahrain Economic 
Development Board
Nada Azmi, Manager, Economic Planning and Development
Mohammed bin Essa Al-Khalifa, Chief Executive
Maryam Matter, Coordinator, Economic Planning and 
Development
Bangladesh
Centre for Policy Dialogue (CPD)
Mustafizur Rahman, Executive Director
Khondaker Golam Moazzem, Senior Research Fellow
Kishore Kumer Basak, Research Associate
Barbados
Arthur Lewis Institute for Social and Economic Studies, 
University of West Indies (UWI)
Andrew Downes, Director
Belgium
Vlerick Leuven Gent Management School
Priscilla Boairdi, Associate, Competence Centre 
Entrepreneurship, Governance and Strategy
Wim Moesen, Professor
Leo Sleuwaegen, Professor, Competence Centre 
Entrepreneurship, Governance and Strategy
Benin
CAPOD—Conception et Analyse de Politiques de 
Développement
Epiphane Adjovi, Director
Maria-Odile Attanasso, Deputy Coordinator
Fructueux Deguenonvo, Researcher
Bosnia and Herzegovina
MIT Center, School of Economics and Business in Sarajevo, 
University of Sarajevo
Zlatko Lagumdzija, Professor
Zeljko Sain, Executive Director
Jasmina Selimovic, Assistant Director
Botswana
Botswana National Productivity Centre
Letsogile Batsetswe, Research Consultant and Statistician
Parmod Chandna, Acting Executive Director
Phumzile Thobokwe, Manager, Information and Research 
Services Department
Brazil
Fundação Dom Cabral
Marina Araújo, Economist and Researcher, The 
Competitiveness and Innovation Center
Carlos Arruda, Executive Director, International Advisory 
Council and Professor, The Competitiveness and  
Innovation Center
Fabiana Madsen, Economist and Researcher, The 
Competitiveness and Innovation Center
Movimento Brasil Competitivo (MBC)
Erik Camarano, Director President
Nikelma Moura, Communications Assistant
Tatiana Ribeiro, Project Coordinator
Brunei Darussalam
Ministry of Industry and Primary Resources
Pehin Dato Yahya Bakar, Minister
Dato Dr Amin Abdullah, Permanent Secretary
Bulgaria
Center for Economic Development
Anelia Damianova, Senior Expert
Partner Institutes
© 2012 World Economic Forum
406  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Partner Institutes
Burkina Faso
lnstitut Supérieure des Sciences de la Population (ISSP), 
University of Ouagadougou
Samuel Kabore, Economist and Head of Development 
Strategy and Population Research
Burundi
University Research Centre for Economic and Social 
Development (CURDES), National University of Burundi
Banderembako Deo, Director
Gilbert Niyongabo, Dean, Faculty of Economics & 
Management
Cambodia
Economic Institute of Cambodia
Sok Hach, President
Seiha Neou, Research Manager
Sokheng Sam, Researcher
Cameroon
Comité de Compétitivité (Competitiveness Committee)
Lucien Sanzouango, Permanent Secretary
Canada
The Conference Board of Canada
Michael R. Bloom, Vice-President, Organizational 
Effectiveness & Learning
Anne Golden, President and Chief Executive Officer
P. Derek Hughes, Senior Research Associate
Cape Verde
INOVE RESEARCH—Investigação e Desenvolvimento, Lda
Sara Mendes, Senior Researcher
Júlio Delgado, Partner and Senior Researcher
Frantz Tavares, Partner and Chief Executive Officer
Chad
Groupe de Recherches Alternatives et de Monitoring du Projet 
Pétrole-Tchad-Cameroun (GRAMP-TC)
Antoine Doudjidingao, Researcher
Gilbert Maoundonodji, Director
Celine Nénodji Mbaipeur, Programme Officer
Chile
Universidad Adolfo Ibáñez
Fernando Larrain Aninat, Director of the Master in 
Management and Public Policy, School of Government
Camila Chadwick, Project Coordinator
Leonidas Montes, Dean, School of Government
China
Institute of Economic System and Management
National Development and Reform Commission
Zhou Haichun, Deputy Director and Professor
Chen Wei, Research Fellow
Dong Ying, Professor
China Center for Economic Statistics Research,  
Tianjin University of Finance and Economics
Lu Dong, Professor
Hongye Xiao, Professor
Bojuan Zhao, Professor
Huazhang Zheng, Associate Professor
Colombia
National Planning Department
Alvaro Edgar Balcazar, Entrepreneurial Development Director
Hernando José Gómez, General Director
Nelson Fabián Villareal Rincón, Advisor
Colombian Council of Competitiveness
Rosario Córdoba, President
Côte d’Ivoire
Chambre de Commerce et d’Industrie de Côte d’Ivoire
Jean-Louis Billon, President
Jean-Louis Giacometti, Technical Advisor to the President
Mamadou Sarr, Director General
Croatia
National Competitiveness Council
Jadranka Gable, Project Administrator
Kresimir Jurlin, Research Associate
Mira Lenardic, Senior Advisor
Cyprus
Cyprus College Research Center
Bambos Papageorgiou, Head of Socioeconomic and 
Academic Research
cdbbank—The Cyprus Development Bank
Maria Markidou-Georgiadou, Manager, International Business 
Banking
Czech Republic
CMC Graduate School of Business
Tomas Janca, Executive Director
Denmark
Innoption EMEA ApS
Carsten Snedker, Managing Partner
Ecuador
ESPAE Graduate School of Management, Escuela Superior 
Politécnica del Litoral (ESPOL)
Elizabeth Arteaga, Project Assistant
Virginia Lasio, Director
Sara Wong, Professor
Egypt
The Egyptian Center for Economic Studies
Iman Al-Ayouty, Senior Economist
Omneia Helmy, Deputy Director of Research and Lead 
Economist
Magda Kandil, Executive Director and Director of Research
Estonia
Estonian Institute of Economic Research
Evelin Ahermaa, Head of Economic Research Sector
Marje Josing, Director
Estonian Development Fund
Kitty Kubo, Head of Foresight
Ott Pärna, Chief Executive Officer
Ethiopia
African Institute of Management, Development and 
Governance
Tegegne Teka, General Manager
Finland
ETLA—The Research Institute of the Finnish Economy
Petri Rouvinen, Research Director
Markku Kotilainen, Research Director
Pekka Ylä-Anttila, Managing Director
France
HEC School of Management, Paris
Bertrand Moingeon, Professor and Deputy Dean
Bernard Ramanantsoa, Professor and Dean
Gambia, The
Gambia Economic and Social Development Research Institute 
(GESDRI)
Makaireh A. Njie, Director
Georgia
Business Initiative for Reforms in Georgia
Tamara Janashia, Executive Director
Giga Makharadze, Founding Member of the Board of Directors
Mamuka Tsereteli, Founding Member of the Board of Directors
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  407
Partner Institutes
Germany
IW Consult GmbH, Cologne Institute for Economic Research
Adriana Sonia Neligan, Head of Department
WHU—Otto Beisheim School of Management, Vallendar
Ralf Fendel, Professor of Monetary Economics
Michael Frenkel, Professor, Chair of Macroeconomics and 
International Economics
Ghana
Association of Ghana Industries (AGI)
Patricia Djorbuah, Projects Officer
Cletus Kosiba, Executive Director
Nana Owusu-Afari, President
Greece
SEV Hellenic Federation of Enterprises
Michael Mitsopoulos, Coordinator, Research and Analysis
Thanasis Printsipas, Economist, Research and Analysis
Guatemala
FUNDESA
Edgar A. Heinemann, President of the Board of Directors
Pablo Schneider, Economic Director
Juan Carlos Zapata, General Manager
Guyana
Institute of Development Studies, University of Guyana
Karen Pratt, Research Associate
Clive Thomas, Director
Haiti
Private Sector Economic Forum
Edouard Baussan, Deputy Coordinator
Reginald Boulos, Coordinator
Bernard Craan, Secretary General
Hong Kong SAR
Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce
David O’Rear, Chief Economist
Federation of Hong Kong Industries
Alexandra Poon, Director
The Chinese General Chamber of Commerce
Hungary
KOPINT-TÁRKI Economic Research Ltd.
Peter Vakhal, Project Manager
Éva Palócz, Chief Executive Officer
Iceland
Innovation Center Iceland
Karl Fridriksson, Managing Director of Human Resources and 
Marketing
Ardis Armannsdottir, Marketing Manager
Thorsteinn I. Sigfusson, Director
India
Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
Chandrajit Banerjee, Director General
Marut Sengupta, Deputy Director General
Gantakolla Srivastava, Head, Financial Services
Indonesia
Center for Industry, SME & Business Competition Studies, 
University of Trisakti
Tulus Tambunan, Professor and Director
Iran, Islamic Republic of
The Centre for Economic Studies and Surveys (CESS), Iran 
Chamber of Commerce, Industries and Mines
Hammed Roohani, Director
Ireland
Competitiveness Survey Group, Department of Economics, 
University College Cork
Eleanor Doyle, Professor, Department of Economics
Niall O’Sullivan
Bernadette Power
National Competitiveness Council
Adrian Devitt, Manager
Michelle Nic Gearailt, Assistant Economist
Israel
Manufacturers’ Association of Israel (MAI)
Shraga Brosh, President
Dan Catarivas, Director
Amir Hayek, Managing Director
Italy
SDA Bocconi School of Management
Secchi Carlo, Full Professor of Economic Policy, Bocconi 
University
Paola Dubini, Associate Professor, Bocconi University
Francesco A. Saviozzi, SDA Assistant Professor, 
Strategic and Entrepreneurial Management Department
Jamaica
Mona School of Business (MSB), The University of the West 
Indies
Patricia Douce, Project Administrator
Evan Duggan, Executive Director and Professor
William Lawrence, Director, Professional Services Unit
Japan
Keio University in cooperation with Keizai Doyukai Keizai 
(Japan Association of Corporate Executives)
Yoko Ishikura, Professor,Graduate School of Media Design, 
Keio University
Kiyohiko Ito, Managing Director, Keizai Doyukai
Heizo Takenaka, Director, Global Security Research Institute, 
Keio University
Jordan
Ministry of Planning & International Cooperation
Jordan National Competitiveness Team
Mukhallad Omari, Director of Policies and Studies Department
Aktham Al-Zubi, Senior Researcher
Kawther Al-Zou’bi, Head of Competitiveness Division
Kazakhstan
JSC “National Analytical Centre of the Government of the 
Republic of Kazakhstan”
Takhir Aslyaliyev, Project Manager
Ayana Manasova, Chairperson
Alikhan Yerzhanov, Expert Analyst
Kenya
Institute for Development Studies, University of Nairobi
Mohamud Jama, Director and Associate Professor
Paul Kamau, Senior Research Fellow
Dorothy McCormick, Research Professor
Korea, Republic of
College of Business School, Korea Advanced Institute of 
Science and Technology KAIST
Ingoo Han, Senior Associate Dean and Professor
Byungtae Lee, Acting Dean
Professor Kayla Jisoo Lee, Manager, Exchange Programme
Korea Development Institute
Joohee Cho, Senior Research Associate 
Yongsoo Lee, Head, Policy Survey Unit
Kuwait
Kuwait National Competitiveness Committee
Adel Al-Husainan, Committee Member
Fahed Al-Rashed, Committee Chairman
Sayer Al-Sayer, Committee Member
© 2012 World Economic Forum
408  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Partner Institutes
Kyrgyz Republic
Economic Policy Institute “Bishkek Consensus”
Lola Abduhametova, Program Coordinator
Marat Tazabekov, Chairman
Latvia
Institute of Economics, Latvian Academy of Sciences
Helma Jirgena, Director
Irina Curkina, Researcher
Lebanon
Bader Young Entrepreneurs Program 
Antoine Abou-Samra, Managing Director
Hiba Zunji, Assistant
Lesotho
Private Sector Foundation of Lesotho
O.S.M. Moosa, Chaiperson 
Tiisetso Sekhonyana, Researcher
Lindiwe Sephomolo, Chief Executive Officer
Lithuania
Statistics Lithuania
Vilija Lape
.
niene
.
, Director General
Gediminas Samuolis, Head, Knowledge Economy and Special 
Surveys Statistics Division
Ona Grigiene
.
, Deputy Head, Knowledge Economy and 
Special Surveys Statistics Division
Luxembourg
Chamber of Commerce of the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
François-Xavier Borsi, Attaché, Economic Department
Carlo Thelen, Chief Economist, Member of the Managing 
Board
Christel Chatelain, Attachée, Economic Department
Macedonia, FYR
National Entrepreneurship and Competitiveness Council 
(NECC)
Dejan Janevski, Project Coordinator
Zoran Stavreski, President of the Managing Board
Saso Trajkoski, Executive Director
Madagascar
Centre of Economic Studies, University of Antananarivo
Ravelomanana Mamy Raoul, Director
Razato Rarijaona Simon, Executive Secretary
Malawi
Malawi Confederation of Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry
Hope Chavula, Public Private Dialogue Manager
Chancellor L. Kaferapanjira, Chief Executive Officer
Malaysia
Institute of Strategic and International Studies (ISIS)
Mahani Zainal Abidin, Chief Executive
Steven C.M. Wong, Senior Director, Economics
Malaysia Productivity Corporation (MPC)
Mohd Razali Hussain, Director General
Lee Saw Hoon, Senior Director
Mali
Groupe de Recherche en Economie Appliquée et Théorique 
(GREAT)
Massa Coulibaly, Coordinator
Malta
Competitive Malta—Foundation for National Competitiveness
Margrith Lutschg-Emmenegger, Vice President
Adrian Said, Chief Coordinator
Caroline Sciortino, Research Coordinator
Mauritania
Centre d’Information Mauritanien pour le Développement 
Economique et Technique (CIMDET/CCIAM)
Khira Mint Cheikhnani, Director
Lô Abdoul, Consultant and Analyst
Habib Sy, Analyst
Mauritius
Joint Economic Council of Mauritius
Raj Makoond, Director
Board of Investment
Kevin Bessondyal, Assistant Director, Planning and Policy
Dev Chamroo, Director, Planning and Policy
Raju Jaddoo, Managing Director
Mexico
Center for Intellectual Capital and Competitiveness
Erika Ruiz Manzur, Executive Director
René Villarreal Arrambide, President and Chief Executive 
Officer
Jesús Zurita González, General Director
Instituto Mexicano para la Competitividad (IMCO)
Priscila Garcia, Researcher
Manuel Molano, Deputy General Director
Juan E. Pardinas, General Director
Ministry of the Economy
Jose Antonio Torre, Undersecretary for Competitiveness and 
Standardization
Enrique Perret Erhard, Technical Secretary for 
Competitiveness 
Narciso Suarez, Research Director, Secretary for 
Competitiveness
Moldova
Academy of Economic Studies of Moldova (AESM)
Grigore Belostecinic, Rector
Centre for Economic Research (CER)
Corneliu Gutu, Director
Mongolia
Open Society Forum (OSF)
Munkhsoyol Baatarjav, Manager of Economic Policy
Erdenejargal Perenlei, Executive Director
Montenegro
Institute for Strategic Studies and Prognoses (ISSP)
Maja Drakic, Project Manager
Petar Ivanovic, Chief Executive Officer
Veselin Vukotic, President
Morocco
Université Hassan II, LASAARE
Fouzi Mourji, Professor of Economics
General Confederation of Moroccan Entreprise (CGEM) 
Mounir Ferram, Delegate Director 
Mozambique
EconPolicy Research Group, Lda.
Peter Coughlin, Director
Donaldo Miguel Soares, Researcher
Ema Marta Soares, Assistant
Namibia
Institute for Public Policy Research (IPPR)
Graham Hopwood, Executive Director
Nepal
Centre for Economic Development and Administration (CEDA)
Ramesh Chandra Chitrakar, Professor and Country 
Coordinator
Bharat Pokharel, Project Director and Executive Director
Mahendra Raj Joshi, Member
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  409
Partner Institutes
Netherlands
INSCOPE: Research for Innovation, Erasmus University 
Rotterdam
Frans A. J. Van den Bosch, Professor
Henk W. Volberda, Director and Professor
New Zealand
Business New Zealand
Phil O’Reilly, Chief Executive
The New Zealand Institute
Catherine Harland, Project Leader
Rick Boven, Director
Nigeria
Nigerian Economic Summit Group (NESG)
Frank Nweke Jr., Director General
Chris Okpoko, Associate Director, Research
Foluso Phillips, Chairman
Norway
BI Norwegian School of Management
Eskil Goldeng, Researcher
Torger Reve, Professor
Oman
The International Research Foundation
Salem Ben Nasser Al-Ismaily, Chairman
Public Authority for Investment Promotion and Export 
Development (PAIPED)
Mehdi Ali Juma, Expert for Economic Research
Pakistan
Competitiveness Support Fund
Maryam Jawaid, Communication Specialist
Imran Khan, Economist 
Shahab Khawaja, Chief Executive Officer
Paraguay
Centro de Análisis y Difusión de Economia Paraguaya 
(CADEP)
Dionisio Borda, Research Member
Fernando Masi, Director
María Belén Servín, Research Member
Peru
Centro de Desarrollo Industrial (CDI), Sociedad Nacional  
de Industrias
Néstor Asto, Project Director
Luis Tenorio, Executive Director
Philippines
Makati Business Club (MBC)
Marc P. Opulencia, Deputy Director
Michael B. Mundo, Chief Economist
Peter Angelo V. Perfecto, Executive Director
In cooperation with the Management Association of  
the Philippines (MAP)
Arnold P. Salvador, Executive Director
Poland
Economic Institute, National Bank of Poland
Jarosław T. Jakubik, Deputy Director
Piotr Boguszewski, Advisor
Portugal
PROFORUM, Associação para o Desenvolvimento da 
Engenharia
Ilídio António de Ayala Serôdio, Vice President of the Board of 
Directors
Fórum de Administradores de Empresas (FAE)
Paulo Bandeira, General Director
Pedro do Carmo Costa, Member of the Board of Directors
Esmeralda Dourado, President of the Board of Directors
Puerto Rico
Puerto Rico 2000, Inc.
Suzette M. Jimenez, President
Francisco Montalvo Fiol, Project Coordinator
Qatar
Qatari Businessmen Association (QBA)
Issa Abdul Salam Abu Issa, Secretary-General
Sarah Abdallah, Deputy General Manager
Romania
Group of Applied Economics (GEA)
Liviu Voinea, Executive Director
Irina Zgreaban, Program Coordinator
Russian Federation
Bauman Innovation & Eurasia Competitiveness Institute
Katerina Marandi, Programme Manager
Alexey Prazdnichnykh, Principal and  Managing Director
Stockholm School of Economics, Russia
Igor Dukeov, Area Principal
Carl F. Fey, Associate Dean of Research
Rwanda
Private Sector Federation
Roger Munyampenda, Chief Executive Officer
Vincent S. Safari, Director, Trade and Policy Advocacy
Saudi Arabia
National Competitiveness Center (NCC)
Awwad Al-Awwad, President
Khaldon Mahasen, Vice President
Senegal
Centre de Recherches Economiques Appliquées (CREA),
University of Dakar
Diop Ibrahima Thione, Director
Serbia
Foundation for the Advancement of Economics (FREN)
Mihail Arandarenko, Chairman of the Board of Directors
Katarina Bojie, Project Coordinator
Bojan Ristic, Researcher
Singapore
Economic Development Board
Angeline Poh, Director Planning
Cheng Wai San, Head, Research & Statistics Unit
Slovak Republic
Business Alliance of Slovakia (PAS)
Robert Kicina, Executive Director
Slovenia
Institute for Economic Research
Sonja Uršic, Senior Researcher
Peter Stanovnik, Professor
University of Ljubljana, Faculty of Economics
Mateja Drnovšek, Professor
Aleš Vahcic, Professor
South Africa
Business Leadership South Africa
Friede Dowie, Director
Michael Spicer, Chief Executive Officer
Business Unity South Africa
Coenraad Bezuidenhout, Executive Director for Economic 
Policy
Jerry Vilakazi, Chief Executive Officer
Spain
IESE Business School, International Center for 
Competitiveness
María Luisa Blázquez, Research Associate
Enrique de Diego, Research Assistant
Antoni Subirà, Professor
© 2012 World Economic Forum
410  |  The Global Information Technology Report 2012
Partner Institutes
Sri Lanka
Institute of Policy Studies
Ayodya Galappattige, Research Officer
Saman Kelegama, Executive Director
Dilani Hirimuthugodage, Research Officer
Swaziland
Federation of Swaziland Employers and Chamber of 
Commerce
Zodwa Mabuza, Chief Executive Officer
Mduduzi Lokotfwako, Research Analyst
Nyakwesi Motsa, Administration & Finance Manager
Sweden
International University of Entrepreneurship and Technology
Niclas Adler, President
Switzerland
University of St. Gallen, Executive School of Management, 
Technology and Law (ES-HSG)
Beat Bechtold, Communications Manager
Rubén Rodriguez Startz, Head of Project
Syria
Planning and International Cooperation Commission (PICC)
Amer Housni Loutfi, Head
Syrian Enterprise and Business Centre (SEBC)
Noha Chuck, Chief Executive Officer
National Competitiveness Observatory (NCO)
Rami Zaatari, Team Leader
Taiwan, China
Council for Economic Planning and Development, Executive 
Yuan
Liu, Y. Christina, Minister
Hung, J. B., Director, Economic Research Department
Shieh, Chung Chung, Researcher, Economic Research 
Department
Tajikistan
The Center for Sociological Research “Zerkalo”
Qahramon Baqoev, Director
Gulnora Beknazarova, Researcher
Alikul Isoev, Sociologist and Economist
Tanzania
Research on Poverty Alleviation (REPOA)
Joseph Semboja, Professor and Executive Director
Lucas Katera, Director, Commissioned Research
Cornel Jahari, Researcher, Commissioned Research 
Department
Thailand
Sasin Graduate Institute of Business Administration, 
Chulalongkorn University
Pongsak Hoontrakul, Senior Research Fellow
Toemsakdi Krishnamra, Director of Sasin
Piyachart Phiromswad, Faculty of Economics
Thailand Development Research Institute (TDRI)
Somchai Jitsuchon, Research Director
Chalongphob Sussangkarn, Distinguished Fellow
Yos Vajragupta, Senior Researcher
Timor-Leste
East Timor Development Agency (ETDA)
Jose Barreto Goncalves, Survey Supervisor
Januario Mok, Survey Field Officer
Palmira Pires, Director
Trinidad and Tobago
Arthur Lok Jack Graduate School of Business
Miguel Carillo, Executive Director
Harrylal Nirmala, Director, International Centre
The Competitiveness Company
Rolph Balgobin, Chairman
Tunisia
Institut Arabe des Chefs d’Entreprises
Majdi Hassen, Executive Counsellor
Chekib Nouira, President
Turkey
TUSIAD Sabanci University Competitiveness Forum
Izak Atiyas, Director 
Selcuk Karaata, Vice Director
Uganda
Kabano Research and Development Centre
Robert Apunyo, Program Manager
Delius Asiimwe, Executive Director
Catherine Ssekimpi, Research Associate
Ukraine
CASE Ukraine, Center for Social and Economic Research
Dmytro Boyarchuk, Executive Director
Vladimir Dubrovskiy, Leading Economist
United Arab Emirates
Abu Dhabi Department of Economic Development
H.E. Mohammed Omar Abdulla, Undersecretary 
Dubai Economic Council
H.E. Hani Al Hamly, Secretary General
Emirates Competitiveness Council
H.E. Abdulla Nasser Lootah, Secretary General
Institute for Social and Economic Research (ISER),  
Zayed University
Mouawiya Alawad, Director
United Kingdom
LSE Enterprise Ltd, London School of Economics and  
Political Science
Adam Austerfield, Director of Projects
Niccolo Durazzi, Project Officer
Robyn Klingler Vidra, Researcher
Uruguay
Universidad ORT
Isidoro Hodara, Professor
Venezuela
CONAPRI—Venezuelan Council for Investment Promotion
Eduardo Porcarelli, Executive Director
Litsay Guerrero, Economic Affairs and Investor Services Manager
Vietnam
Central Institute for Economic Management (CIEM)
Dinh Van An, President
Phan Thanh Ha, Deputy Director, Department of
Macroeconomic Management
Pham Hoang Ha, Senior Researcher, Department of
Macroeconomic Management
Institute for Development Studies in HCMC (HIDS)
Nguyen Trong Hoa, Professor and President
Du Phuoc Tan, Head of Department
Trieu Thanh Son, Researcher
Yemen
Yemeni Businessmen Club YBC
Ahmed Abu Bakr Bazara, Chairman
Ali Saeed Mahmoud Al-Azaki, Executive Director
Margret Arning, Consultant
Zambia
Institute of Economic and Social Research (INESOR), 
University of Zambia
Patricia Funjika, Research Fellow
Jolly Kamwanga, Senior Research Fellow and Project 
Coordinator
Mubiana Macwan’gi, Director and Professor
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  411
Partner Institutes
Zimbabwe
Graduate School of Management, University of Zimbabwe
A. M. Hawkins, Professor
Belize, Bolivia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, 
El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama
INCAE Business School, Latin American Center for 
Competitiveness and Sustainable Development (CLACDS)
Arturo Condo, Rector
Lawrence Pratt, Director, CLACDS
Marlene de Estrella, Director of External Relations
Víctor Umaña, Researcher and Project Manager, CLACDS
Latvia, Lithuania
Stockholm School of Economics in Riga
Karlis Kreslins, Executive MBA Programme Director
Anders Paalzow, Rector
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
The Global Information Technology Report 2012  |  413
Booz & Company is a leading global management consulting firm, helping the world’s top 
businesses, governments, and organizations. Our founder, Edwin Booz, defined the profession 
when he established the first management consulting firm in 1914.
Today, with more than 3,300 people in 61 offices around the world, we bring foresight and 
knowledge, deep functional expertise, and a practical approach to building capabilities and 
delivering real impact. We work closely with our clients to create and deliver essential advantage. 
The independent White Space report ranked Booz & Company #1 among consulting firms for 
“the best thought leadership” in 2010.
For our management magazine strategy+business, visit strategy-business.com.
For the Ideation Center, Booz & Company’s leading think tank in the Middle East, visit 
ideationcenter.com.
Visit booz.com and booz.com/me to learn more about Booz & Company.
Huawei Technologies is a leading telecom solutions provider. Through continuous customer-
centric innovation, the company has established end-to-end advantages in telecom network 
infrastructure, application and software, professional services and devices. With comprehensive 
strengths in wireline, wireless and IP technologies, Huawei has gained a leading position in 
the All-IP convergence age. Huawei’s products and solutions have been deployed in over 100 
countries and have served 45 of the world’s top 50 telecom operators, as well as one-third of 
the world’s population. Huawei’s vision is to enrich life through communication. By leveraging 
its experience and expertise in the telecom sector, the company helps bridge the digital divide 
and gives people the opportunity to join the information age, regardless of their geographic 
origin. In order to tackle increasing climate challenges, Huawei has deployed a wide range of 
green solutions that enable customers to reduce power consumption and carbon emissions, 
contributing to the sustainable development of the social economy and the environment.
http://www.huawei.com
The World Economic Forum would like to thank Booz & Company 
and Huawei Technologies for their invaluable support of this Report.
© 2012 World Economic Forum
© 2012 World Economic Forum
World Economic Forum
91–93 route de la Capite
CH-1223 Cologny/Geneva
Switzerland 
Tel.:  +41 (0) 22 869 1212
Fax: +41 (0) 22 786 2744
contact@weforum.org
www.weforum.org
Information and communication technologies (ICT) has evolved into a key enabling infrastructure 
across industries while proving to be a powerful driver of enhanced living conditions and opportunities 
around the globe. ICT has changed the world dramatically over the last decade or so, and it is bound 
to continue to do so at an even higher rate going forward.
The Global Information Technology Report 2012, the 11th in the series, analyzes in detail many of the 
drivers and impacts of living in a hyperconnected world. Over the past decade, the Report has 
become the most comprehensive and respected international assessment of the preparedness of 
economies to leverage the networked economy, providing a unique platform for public-private 
dialogue on best policies and for determining what actions will further national ICT readiness and 
innovation potential.
Through the evolved methodological framework of the Networked Readiness Index (NRI), the Report 
measures the extent to which 142 economies, from both the developed and developing worlds, take 
advantage of ICT and other new technologies to increase their growth and well-being. The NRI 
identifies the most relevant factors driving ICT readiness and impacts, providing policymakers, 
business leaders, and civil society at large with a useful tool for designing national strategies for 
increased networked readiness and for benchmarking their country’s performance against other 
relevant comparators.
The Global Information Technology Report 2012 features the latest computation and rankings of the 
NRI and, in referring to this year’s theme, dives deeper into the main drivers and impacts of an 
ICT-enabled hyperconnected world, including several essays on the topic.  As in previous years, it also 
showcases a number of ICT development stories of particular interest. In addition, the Report includes 
detailed profiles for the 142 economies covered this year together with data tables for each of the 53 
indicators used in the computation of the NRI.
The Report is the result of a long-standing collaboration between the World Economic Forum and 
INSEAD, dating back to 2002.
Written in a nontechnical language and style, the Report appeals to a large audience made up of 
policymakers, business leaders, academics, and different organizations of civil society. In line with 
other projects of the World Economic Forum’s Centre for Global Competitiveness and Performance, 
the Report brings together a range of leading academics, experts, and industry leaders.
The full Report can be downloaded at www.weforum.org/gitr.

