AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 1
MATHEMATICS AND COMPUTERS IN
SIMULATION
Transactions of IMACS
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
.
XXX
.
•       Description
•       Audience
•       Impact Factor
•       Abstracting and Indexing
•       Editorial Board
•       Guide for Authors
p.1
p.1
p.1
p.2
p.2
p.4
ISSN: 0378-4754
DESCRIPTION
.
The aim of the journal is to provide an international forum for the dissemination of up-to-date
information in the fields of the mathematics and computers, in particular (but not exclusively) as
they apply to the dynamics of systems, their simulation and scientific computation in general.
Published material ranges from short, concise research papers to more general tutorial articles.
Mathematics and Computers in Simulation, published monthly, is the official organ of IMACS,
the International Association for Mathematics and Computers in Simulation (Formerly AICA). This
Association, founded in 1955 and legally incorporated in 1956 is a member of FIACC (the Five
International Associations Coordinating Committee), together with IFIP, IFAV, IFORS and IMEKO.
Topics covered by the journal include mathematical tools in:
•The foundations of systems modelling
•Numerical analysis and the development of algorithms for simulation
They also include considerations about computer hardware for simulation and about special software
and compilers.
The journal also publishes articles concerned with specific applications of modelling and simulation
in science and engineering, with relevant applied mathematics, the general philosophy of systems
simulation, and their impact on disciplinary and interdisciplinary research.
The journal includes a Book Review section -- and a "News on IMACS" section that contains a Calendar
of future Conferences/Events and other information about the Association.
AUDIENCE
.
Simulation Specialists, Applied Mathematicians, Statisticians, Systems Analysts
IMPACT FACTOR
.
2016: 1.218 © Thomson Reuters Journal Citation Reports 2017
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 2
ABSTRACTING AND INDEXING
.
ACM Computing Reviews
CAD/CAM Abstracts
COMPENDEX
CompuScience
Cambridge Scientific Abstracts
Computer Abstracts
Current Contents/CompuMath
Current Contents/Engineering, Computing & Technology
Mathematical Reviews
INSPEC Information Services
Research Alert
SCISEARCH
Science Citation Index
Statistical Theory and Method Abstracts
Web of Science
Zentralblatt MATH
Scopus
EDITORIAL BOARD
.
Editor-in-Chief:
C. Lécot, Lab. de Mathématiques, Université Savoie Mont Blanc, Campus Scientifique; UMR 5127 CNRS, F-73376,
Le Bourget-du-Lac, France
R.M. Spitaleri, Ist. per le Applicazioni del Calcolo (IAC), Mauro Picone, National Research Council of Italy (CNR),
viale Del Policlinico 137, 00161, Roma, Italy
Founding Editor and Editor Emeritus:
R. Vichnevetsky
R. Beauwens
Senior Editors:
M. McAleer, Econometric Inst., Erasmus Universiteit, Postbus 1738, 3000 DR, Rotterdam, Netherlands
(Computational Finance and Risk Analysis)
E. Mosekilde, Dept. of Physics, Danmarks Tekniske Universitet (DTU), Building 309, Room 126, DK-2800,
Lyngby, Denmark
(Dynamical systems)
S.P. Norsett, Dept. of Mathematical Sciences, Norwegian University of Science & Technology NTNU, Sentralbygg
2, Alfred Getz' vei 1, Gløshaugen, NO-7491, Trondheim, Norway
(Numerical ODEs)
L. Oxley, Waikato Management School, University of Waikato, Private Bag 3105, 3240, Hamilton, New Zealand
(Economic Modelling)
A. Preumont, CP 165 50, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), Av. F-D Roosevelt 50, 1050, Bruxelles, Belgium
(Mechanical Systems - Robotics)
K.K. Sabelfeld, Analysis & Stochastics, Weierstrass Institute for Applied Analysis and Stochastics (WIAS),
Mohrenstr. 39, 10117, Berlin, Germany
(Monte Carlo Methods)
S. Steinberg, Dept. of Mathematics and Statistics, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico, NM
87131, USA
(Symbolic Computation)
T. Taha, Computer Science, UGA, 415 GSRC, Athens, Georgia, GA 30602-7404, USA
(Nonlinear Systems and Wave Propagation)
Editors:
G. Albrecht, Universidad Nacional de Colombia, sede Medellin, Colombia
V.N. Alexandrov, Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain
K.-H. Brakhage, RWTH Aachen University (RWTH), Aachen, Germany
J. Cao, Southeast University, Nanjing, China
M. Caporin, Università degli Studi di Padova, Padova, Italy
F. Chan, Curtin University, Perth, Western Australia, Australia
C.L. Chang, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan, ROC
C. Christara, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 3
C. Clason, Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, Graz, , Austria
P. Congedo, Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique (INRIA), France
L. Gardini, Università degli Studi di Urbino, Urbino, Italy
R. Garrappa, Università degli Studi di Bari Aldo Moro, Bari, Italy
J.M. Guerrero, Aalborg University, Aalborg, Denmark
M. Iannelli, Università di Trento, Povo (Trento), Italy
A.J. Jakeman, Australian National University, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia
L.O. Jay, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA
M. Kirby, The University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
B. Koren, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, Netherlands
P.L. Kunsch, Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Brussels, Belgium
A. Lejay, Institut National de Recherche en Informatique et en Automatique (INRIA), Vandoeuvre les Nancy,
France
D. Malchiodi, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
M. Mascagni, Florida State University, Tallahassee, Florida, USA
K. Meerbergen, KU Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium
E. Monmasson, Université de Cergy-Pontoise, Cergy-Pontoise, France
D. Negrut, University of Wisconsin at Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
T. Perez Amaral, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
E. Roanes-Lozano, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
B Robyns, Ecole des Hautes études d’Ingénieur (HEI), Lille, France
R. Serban, Wisconsin Applied Computing Center, Madison, Wisconsin, USA
B. Simeon, Technische Universität Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern, Germany
J.M. Sousa, Universidade de Lisboa, São João De Deus, Lisboa, Portugal
F. Toschi, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Eindhoven, Netherlands
I. Troch, Technische Universität Wien, Wien, Austria
A. Tura, National Research Council of Italy (CNR), Padova, Italy
J. Vignes, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Sorbonne Universités, Paris, France
P.A. Whitlock, City University of New York (CUNY), Brooklyn, New York, USA
Publisher
M. Cruz
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 4
GUIDE FOR AUTHORS
.
INTRODUCTION
The aim of the journal is to provide an international forum for the dissemination of up-to-date
information in the fields of the mathematics and computers, in particular (but not exclusively) as
they apply to the dynamics of systems, their simulation and scientific computation in general. Topics
covered by the journal include mathematical tools in: The foundations of systems modelling
Numerical analysis and the development of algorithms for simulation They also include considerations
about computer hardware for simulation and about special software and compilers. The journal also
publishes articles concerned with specific applications of modelling and simulation in science and
engineering, with relevant applied mathematics, the general philosophy of systems simulation, and
their impact on disciplinary and interdisciplinary research.
Types of paper
Published material ranges from short, concise research papers to more general tutorial articles.
Submission checklist
You can use this list to carry out a final check of your submission before you send it to the journal for
review. Please check the relevant section in this Guide for Authors for more details.
Ensure that the following items are present:
One author has been designated as the corresponding author with contact details:
• E-mail address
• Full postal address
All necessary files have been uploaded:
Manuscript:
• Include keywords
• All figures (include relevant captions)
• All tables (including titles, description, footnotes)
• Ensure all figure and table citations in the text match the files provided
• Indicate clearly if color should be used for any figures in print
Graphical Abstracts / Highlights files (where applicable)
Supplemental files (where applicable)
Further considerations
• Manuscript has been 'spell checked' and 'grammar checked'
• All references mentioned in the Reference List are cited in the text, and vice versa
• Permission has been obtained for use of copyrighted material from other sources (including the
Internet)
• Relevant declarations of interest have been made
• Journal policies detailed in this guide have been reviewed
• Referee suggestions and contact details provided, based on journal requirements
For further information, visit our Support Center.
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
Ethics in publishing
Please see our information pages on Ethics in publishing and Ethical guidelines for journal publication.
Declaration of interest
All authors must disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations
that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work. Examples of potential conflicts of interest include
employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, paid expert testimony, patent applications/
registrations, and grants or other funding. If there are no conflicts of interest then please state this:
'Conflicts of interest: none'. More information.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 5
Submission declaration and verification
Submission of an article implies that the work described has not been published previously (except
in the form of an abstract or as part of a published lecture or academic thesis or as an electronic
preprint, see 'Multiple, redundant or concurrent publication' section of our ethics policy for more
information), that it is not under consideration for publication elsewhere, that its publication is
approved by all authors and tacitly or explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was
carried out, and that, if accepted, it will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in English or
in any other language, including electronically without the written consent of the copyright-holder. To
verify originality, your article may be checked by the originality detection service CrossCheck.
Changes to authorship
Authors are expected to consider carefully the list and order of authors before submitting their
manuscript and provide the definitive list of authors at the time of the original submission. Any
addition, deletion or rearrangement of author names in the authorship list should be made only
before the manuscript has been accepted and only if approved by the journal Editor. To request such
a change, the Editor must receive the following from the corresponding author: (a) the reason
for the change in author list and (b) written confirmation (e-mail, letter) from all authors that they
agree with the addition, removal or rearrangement. In the case of addition or removal of authors,
this includes confirmation from the author being added or removed.
Only in exceptional circumstances will the Editor consider the addition, deletion or rearrangement of
authors after the manuscript has been accepted. While the Editor considers the request, publication
of the manuscript will be suspended. If the manuscript has already been published in an online issue,
any requests approved by the Editor will result in a corrigendum.
Copyright
Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' (see
more information on this). An e-mail will be sent to the corresponding author confirming receipt of
the manuscript together with a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' form or a link to the online version
of this agreement.
Subscribers may reproduce tables of contents or prepare lists of articles including abstracts for internal
circulation within their institutions. Permission of the Publisher is required for resale or distribution
outside the institution and for all other derivative works, including compilations and translations. If
excerpts from other copyrighted works are included, the author(s) must obtain written permission
from the copyright owners and credit the source(s) in the article. Elsevier has preprinted forms for
use by authors in these cases.
For open access articles: Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete an
'Exclusive License Agreement' (more information). Permitted third party reuse of open access articles
is determined by the author's choice of user license.
Author rights
As an author you (or your employer or institution) have certain rights to reuse your work. More
information.
Elsevier supports responsible sharing
Find out how you can share your research published in Elsevier journals.
Role of the funding source
You are requested to identify who provided financial support for the conduct of the research and/or
preparation of the article and to briefly describe the role of the sponsor(s), if any, in study design; in
the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; and in the decision to
submit the article for publication. If the funding source(s) had no such involvement then this should
be stated.
Funding body agreements and policies
Elsevier has established a number of agreements with funding bodies which allow authors to comply
with their funder's open access policies. Some funding bodies will reimburse the author for the Open
Access Publication Fee. Details of existing agreements are available online.
Open access
This journal offers authors a choice in publishing their research:
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 6
Open access
• Articles are freely available to both subscribers and the wider public with permitted reuse.
• An open access publication fee is payable by authors or on their behalf, e.g. by their research funder
or institution.
Subscription
• Articles are made available to subscribers as well as developing countries and patient groups through
our universal access programs.
• No open access publication fee payable by authors.
Regardless of how you choose to publish your article, the journal will apply the same peer review
criteria and acceptance standards.
For open access articles, permitted third party (re)use is defined by the following Creative Commons
user licenses:
Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)
Lets others distribute and copy the article, create extracts, abstracts, and other revised versions,
adaptations or derivative works of or from an article (such as a translation), include in a collective
work (such as an anthology), text or data mine the article, even for commercial purposes, as long
as they credit the author(s), do not represent the author as endorsing their adaptation of the article,
and do not modify the article in such a way as to damage the author's honor or reputation.
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND)
For non-commercial purposes, lets others distribute and copy the article, and to include in a collective
work (such as an anthology), as long as they credit the author(s) and provided they do not alter or
modify the article.
The open access publication fee for this journal is USD 1450, excluding taxes. Learn more about
Elsevier's pricing policy: https://www.elsevier.com/openaccesspricing.
Green open access
Authors can share their research in a variety of different ways and Elsevier has a number of
green open access options available. We recommend authors see our green open access page for
further information. Authors can also self-archive their manuscripts immediately and enable public
access from their institution's repository after an embargo period. This is the version that has been
accepted for publication and which typically includes author-incorporated changes suggested during
submission, peer review and in editor-author communications. Embargo period: For subscription
articles, an appropriate amount of time is needed for journals to deliver value to subscribing customers
before an article becomes freely available to the public. This is the embargo period and it begins from
the date the article is formally published online in its final and fully citable form. Find out more.
This journal has an embargo period of 24 months.
Language (usage and editing services)
Please write your text in good English (American or British usage is accepted, but not a mixture of
these). Authors who feel their English language manuscript may require editing to eliminate possible
grammatical or spelling errors and to conform to correct scientific English may wish to use the English
Language Editing service available from Elsevier's WebShop.
Submission
Our online submission system guides you stepwise through the process of entering your article
details and uploading your files. The system converts your article files to a single PDF file used in
the peer-review process. Editable files (e.g., Word, LaTeX) are required to typeset your article for
final publication. All correspondence, including notification of the Editor's decision and requests for
revision, is sent by e-mail.
Additional information
There are no page charges.
PREPARATION
Use of word processing software
It is important that the file be saved in the native format of the word processor used. The text
should be in single-column format. Keep the layout of the text as simple as possible. Most formatting
codes will be removed and replaced on processing the article. In particular, do not use the word
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 7
processor's options to justify text or to hyphenate words. However, do use bold face, italics, subscripts,
superscripts etc. When preparing tables, if you are using a table grid, use only one grid for each
individual table and not a grid for each row. If no grid is used, use tabs, not spaces, to align columns.
The electronic text should be prepared in a way very similar to that of conventional manuscripts (see
also the Guide to Publishing with Elsevier). Note that source files of figures, tables and text graphics
will be required whether or not you embed your figures in the text. See also the section on Electronic
artwork.
To avoid unnecessary errors you are strongly advised to use the 'spell-check' and 'grammar-check'
functions of your word processor.
LaTeX
You are recommended to use the Elsevier article class elsarticle.cls
http://www.ctan.org/tex-archive/macros/latex/contrib/elsarticle. to prepare your manuscript and
BibTeX http://www.bibtex.org to generate your bibliography. For detailed submission instructions,
templates and other information on LaTeX, see http://www.elsevier.com/latex Please use model1b-
num-names.bst as bibliographic style.
Essential title page information
• Title. Concise and informative. Titles are often used in information-retrieval systems. Avoid
abbreviations and formulae where possible.
• Author names and affiliations. Please clearly indicate the given name(s) and family name(s)
of each author and check that all names are accurately spelled. Present the authors' affiliation
addresses (where the actual work was done) below the names. Indicate all affiliations with a lower-
case superscript letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the appropriate address.
Provide the full postal address of each affiliation, including the country name and, if available, the
e-mail address of each author.
• Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence at all stages of refereeing
and publication, also post-publication. Ensure that the e-mail address is given and that contact
details are kept up to date by the corresponding author.
• Present/permanent address. If an author has moved since the work described in the article was
done, or was visiting at the time, a 'Present address' (or 'Permanent address') may be indicated as
a footnote to that author's name. The address at which the author actually did the work must be
retained as the main, affiliation address. Superscript Arabic numerals are used for such footnotes.
Abstract
A concise and factual abstract is required. The abstract should state briefly the purpose of the
research, the principal results and major conclusions. An abstract is often presented separately from
the article, so it must be able to stand alone. An abstract must be accessible to all readers of the
journal without need to consult the literature. For this reason, reference citations should be avoided.
Also, non-standard or uncommon abbreviations should be avoided, but if essential they must be
defined at their first mention in the abstract itself.
Highlights
Highlights are a short collection of bullet points that convey the core findings of the article. Highlights
are optional and should be submitted in a separate editable file in the online submission system.
Please use 'Highlights' in the file name and include 3 to 5 bullet points (maximum 85 characters,
including spaces, per bullet point). You can view example Highlights on our information site.
Keywords
Immediately after the abstract, provide a maximum of 6 keywords, using American spelling and
avoiding general and plural terms and multiple concepts (avoid, for example, 'and', 'of'). Be sparing
with abbreviations: only abbreviations firmly established in the field may be eligible. These keywords
will be used for indexing purposes.
Abbreviations
Define abbreviations that are not standard in this field in a footnote to be placed on the first page
of the article. Such abbreviations that are unavoidable in the abstract must be defined at their first
mention there, as well as in the footnote. Ensure consistency of abbreviations throughout the article.
Acknowledgements
Collate acknowledgements in a separate section at the end of the article before the references and do
not, therefore, include them on the title page, as a footnote to the title or otherwise. List here those
individuals who provided help during the research (e.g., providing language help, writing assistance
or proof reading the article, etc.).
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 8
Formatting of funding sources
List funding sources in this standard way to facilitate compliance to funder's requirements:
Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers xxxx, yyyy];
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA [grant number zzzz]; and the United States Institutes
of Peace [grant number aaaa].
It is not necessary to include detailed descriptions on the program or type of grants and awards. When
funding is from a block grant or other resources available to a university, college, or other research
institution, submit the name of the institute or organization that provided the funding.
If no funding has been provided for the research, please include the following sentence:
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or
not-for-profit sectors.
Units
Follow internationally accepted rules and conventions: use the international system of units (SI). If
other units are mentioned, please give their equivalent in SI.
Math formulae
Please submit math equations as editable text and not as images. Present simple formulae in
line with normal text where possible and use the solidus (/) instead of a horizontal line for small
fractional terms, e.g., X/Y. In principle, variables are to be presented in italics. Powers of e are often
more conveniently denoted by exp. Number consecutively any equations that have to be displayed
separately from the text (if referred to explicitly in the text).
Footnotes
Footnotes should be used sparingly. Number them consecutively throughout the article. Many word
processors can build footnotes into the text, and this feature may be used. Otherwise, please indicate
the position of footnotes in the text and list the footnotes themselves separately at the end of the
article. Do not include footnotes in the Reference list.
Electronic artwork
General points
• Make sure you use uniform lettering and sizing of your original artwork.
• Embed the used fonts if the application provides that option.
• Aim to use the following fonts in your illustrations: Arial, Courier, Times New Roman, Symbol, or
use fonts that look similar.
• Number the illustrations according to their sequence in the text.
• Use a logical naming convention for your artwork files.
• Provide captions to illustrations separately.
• Size the illustrations close to the desired dimensions of the published version.
• Submit each illustration as a separate file.
A detailed guide on electronic artwork is available.
You are urged to visit this site; some excerpts from the detailed information are given here.
Formats
If your electronic artwork is created in a Microsoft Office application (Word, PowerPoint, Excel) then
please supply 'as is' in the native document format.
Regardless of the application used other than Microsoft Office, when your electronic artwork is
finalized, please 'Save as' or convert the images to one of the following formats (note the resolution
requirements for line drawings, halftones, and line/halftone combinations given below):
EPS (or PDF): Vector drawings, embed all used fonts.
TIFF (or JPEG): Color or grayscale photographs (halftones), keep to a minimum of 300 dpi.
TIFF (or JPEG): Bitmapped (pure black & white pixels) line drawings, keep to a minimum of 1000 dpi.
TIFF (or JPEG): Combinations bitmapped line/half-tone (color or grayscale), keep to a minimum of
500 dpi.
Please do not:
• Supply files that are optimized for screen use (e.g., GIF, BMP, PICT, WPG); these typically have a
low number of pixels and limited set of colors;
• Supply files that are too low in resolution;
• Submit graphics that are disproportionately large for the content.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 9
Color artwork
Please make sure that artwork files are in an acceptable format (TIFF (or JPEG), EPS (or PDF), or
MS Office files) and with the correct resolution. If, together with your accepted article, you submit
usable color figures then Elsevier will ensure, at no additional charge, that these figures will appear
in color online (e.g., ScienceDirect and other sites) regardless of whether or not these illustrations
are reproduced in color in the printed version. For color reproduction in print, you will receive
information regarding the costs from Elsevier after receipt of your accepted article. Please
indicate your preference for color: in print or online only. Further information on the preparation of
electronic artwork.
Figure captions
Ensure that each illustration has a caption. Supply captions separately, not attached to the figure. A
caption should comprise a brief title (not on the figure itself) and a description of the illustration. Keep
text in the illustrations themselves to a minimum but explain all symbols and abbreviations used.
Tables
Please submit tables as editable text and not as images. Tables can be placed either next to the
relevant text in the article, or on separate page(s) at the end. Number tables consecutively in
accordance with their appearance in the text and place any table notes below the table body. Be
sparing in the use of tables and ensure that the data presented in them do not duplicate results
described elsewhere in the article. Please avoid using vertical rules and shading in table cells.
References
Citation in text
Please ensure that every reference cited in the text is also present in the reference list (and vice
versa). Any references cited in the abstract must be given in full. Unpublished results and personal
communications are not recommended in the reference list, but may be mentioned in the text. If these
references are included in the reference list they should follow the standard reference style of the
journal and should include a substitution of the publication date with either 'Unpublished results' or
'Personal communication'. Citation of a reference as 'in press' implies that the item has been accepted
for publication.
Web references
As a minimum, the full URL should be given and the date when the reference was last accessed. Any
further information, if known (DOI, author names, dates, reference to a source publication, etc.),
should also be given. Web references can be listed separately (e.g., after the reference list) under a
different heading if desired, or can be included in the reference list.
Data references
This journal encourages you to cite underlying or relevant datasets in your manuscript by citing them
in your text and including a data reference in your Reference List. Data references should include the
following elements: author name(s), dataset title, data repository, version (where available), year,
and global persistent identifier. Add [dataset] immediately before the reference so we can properly
identify it as a data reference. The [dataset] identifier will not appear in your published article.
References in a special issue
Please ensure that the words 'this issue' are added to any references in the list (and any citations in
the text) to other articles in the same Special Issue.
Reference Style
Text: Indicate references by number(s) in square brackets in line with the text. The actual authors
can be referred to, but the reference number(s) must always be given.
Example: "..... as demonstrated [3,6]. Barnaby and Jones [8] obtained a different result ...."
List: Number the references (number in square brackets) in the list sorted alphabetically.
Examples:
Reference to a journal publication:
[1] J. van der Geer, J.A.J. Hanraads, R.A. Lupton, The art of writing a scientific article, J. Sci. Commun.
163 (2000) 51–59.
Reference to a book:
[2] W. Strunk Jr., E.B. White, The Elements of Style, third ed., Macmillan, New York, 1979.
Reference to a chapter in an edited book:
[3] G.R. Mettam, L.B. Adams, in: B.S. Jones, R.Z. Smith (Eds.), Introduction to the Electronic Age,
E-Publishing, Inc. New York, 1994, pp. 281–304.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 10
Journal abbreviations source
Journal names should be abbreviated according to the List of Title Word Abbreviations.
Video
Elsevier accepts video material and animation sequences to support and enhance your scientific
research. Authors who have video or animation files that they wish to submit with their article are
strongly encouraged to include links to these within the body of the article. This can be done in the
same way as a figure or table by referring to the video or animation content and noting in the body
text where it should be placed. All submitted files should be properly labeled so that they directly
relate to the video file's content. In order to ensure that your video or animation material is directly
usable, please provide the files in one of our recommended file formats with a preferred maximum size
of 150 MB. Video and animation files supplied will be published online in the electronic version of your
article in Elsevier Web products, including ScienceDirect. Please supply 'stills' with your files: you can
choose any frame from the video or animation or make a separate image. These will be used instead
of standard icons and will personalize the link to your video data. For more detailed instructions please
visit our video instruction pages. Note: since video and animation cannot be embedded in the print
version of the journal, please provide text for both the electronic and the print version for the portions
of the article that refer to this content.
Supplementary material
Supplementary material such as applications, images and sound clips, can be published with your
article to enhance it. Submitted supplementary items are published exactly as they are received (Excel
or PowerPoint files will appear as such online). Please submit your material together with the article
and supply a concise, descriptive caption for each supplementary file. If you wish to make changes to
supplementary material during any stage of the process, please make sure to provide an updated file.
Do not annotate any corrections on a previous version. Please switch off the 'Track Changes' option
in Microsoft Office files as these will appear in the published version.
AudioSlides
The journal encourages authors to create an AudioSlides presentation with their published article.
AudioSlides are brief, webinar-style presentations that are shown next to the online article on
ScienceDirect. This gives authors the opportunity to summarize their research in their own words
and to help readers understand what the paper is about. More information and examples are
available. Authors of this journal will automatically receive an invitation e-mail to create an AudioSlides
presentation after acceptance of their paper.
Interactive plots
This journal enables you to show an Interactive Plot with your article by simply submitting a data
file. Full instructions.
AFTER ACCEPTANCE
Proofs
One set of page proofs (as PDF files) will be sent by e-mail to the corresponding author (if we do
not have an e-mail address then paper proofs will be sent by post) or, a link will be provided in the
e-mail so that authors can download the files themselves. Elsevier now provides authors with PDF
proofs which can be annotated; for this you will need to download the free Adobe Reader, version 9
(or higher). Instructions on how to annotate PDF files will accompany the proofs (also given online).
The exact system requirements are given at the Adobe site.
If you do not wish to use the PDF annotations function, you may list the corrections (including replies
to the Query Form) and return them to Elsevier in an e-mail. Please list your corrections quoting line
number. If, for any reason, this is not possible, then mark the corrections and any other comments
(including replies to the Query Form) on a printout of your proof and scan the pages and return via e-
mail. Please use this proof only for checking the typesetting, editing, completeness and correctness
of the text, tables and figures. Significant changes to the article as accepted for publication will only
be considered at this stage with permission from the Editor. We will do everything possible to get your
article published quickly and accurately. It is important to ensure that all corrections are sent back
to us in one communication: please check carefully before replying, as inclusion of any subsequent
corrections cannot be guaranteed. Proofreading is solely your responsibility.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/matcom 11
Offprints
The corresponding author will, at no cost, receive a customized Share Link providing 50 days free
access to the final published version of the article on ScienceDirect. The Share Link can be used
for sharing the article via any communication channel, including email and social media. For an
extra charge, paper offprints can be ordered via the offprint order form which is sent once the
article is accepted for publication. Both corresponding and co-authors may order offprints at any
time via Elsevier's Webshop. Corresponding authors who have published their article open access do
not receive a Share Link as their final published version of the article is available open access on
ScienceDirect and can be shared through the article DOI link.
AUTHOR INQUIRIES
Visit the Elsevier Support Center to find the answers you need. Here you will find everything from
Frequently Asked Questions to ways to get in touch.
You can also check the status of your submitted article or find out when your accepted article will
be published.
© Copyright 2014 Elsevier | http://www.elsevier.com

