International Journal of Advanced Computer Research (ISSN (print): 2249-7277   ISSN (online): 2277-7970)  
Volume-4 Number-2 Issue-15 June-2014 
582          
 
A Research Paper on Simulation Model for Teaching and Learning Process in 
Higher Education 
 
S. S. Rai
1
, Anil T. Gaikwad
2
, R.V. Kulkarni
3 
 
 
Abstract  
 
The Research paper entitled above gives trace on 
Simulation Model for Teaching and Learning. This 
is the important area in which the teaching and 
learning can be benefited. The teaching methods 
involve three types of methods like lecturing method; 
Computer based teaching method and mixed 
teaching methods. The researcher has studied the 
methods used by teachers and method preferred by 
the students they have also returned the rules to find 
out the quality of the teaching and learning. The 
results are found by Chi. Square test for the teaching 
and learning methods. The respondents taken for the 
study were 100 teachers and students were 100. The 
final results are very surprising and it suggests using 
both Computers based and lecturing method of 
teaching learning process. The simulation model is 
designed by the researcher to find out the best 
method of the teaching and learning process in 
higher education. The main objective of the paper is 
to trace on the best method of the teaching and 
learning so that the output of the teaching method is 
improved and students are benefited by this. The 
objectives of this paper are to study various types of 
teaching and learning methods used by higher 
educational Institutes, study the ideas and the best 
way of teaching suggested by expert teachers, to 
study the ideas of students who are good in learning 
and to develop a simulation model and verify using 
100 examples for teaching and learning. 
 
Keywords 
 
Rule based System, Quality, higher education, expert 
system, Chi Square Test, Teaching Methods. 
 
 
This work was supported by both researchers and Research 
Guide  
Manuscript received May 20, 2014. 
S. S. Rai Assistant Professor, Department of Computer 
Applications. Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune 
Institute of Management, Kolhapur. 
Anil T. Gaikwad  Associate Professor Department of Computer 
Applications Bharati Vidyapeeth Deemed University, Pune.   
Institute of Management,Kolhapur –Maharashtra.                                                
R. V. Kulkarni Professor and Head (Research Guide) 
Department of Computer Studies Chh. Shahu Institute of Business 
Education and Research (SIBER) Kolhapur-Mah.-India. 
1. Introduction 
 
The motive of the research is to enhance the quality 
of teaching learning process in higher educational 
institutes. The researcher proposes the role of 
knowledge base system and simulation technique to 
achieve the objective. Teaching and learning process 
is the methodology of various types of techniques of 
teaching and learning which is being used by teachers 
as well as students in the Education. Continuous 
quality improvement was originally based on the 
quality assurance (QA) paradigm. Teaching 
experiences in colleges have shown that Quality 
Assurance programs are based on knowledge base 
system technology. 
 
Simulation is the imitation of some real thing, state of 
affairs, or process. The act of simulating something 
generally entails representing certain key 
characteristics or behaviours of a selected physical or 
abstract system. The proposed knowledge based 
system is intended to supplement, but not replace, 
traditional teaching and learning techniques such as 
lectures and laboratory sessions. This knowledge 
base system will present an analysis of teaching and 
learning quality improvement. 
 
2. Objective of the study 
 
In present research endeavour entitled above, the 
objectives have been considered as follows. 
1. To study the various types of teaching 
methodology used in higher education. 
2. To study the ideas and the best way of 
teaching suggested by expert teachers. 
3. To study the ideas of students who are good 
in learning.  
4. To develop a simulation model and verify 
using 100 examples for teaching and 
learning. 
 
3. Scope of the study 
 
To acquire the knowledge from expert teachers and 
develop a rule based system and simulation model for 
teaching and learning process. Such type of system 
can be used in analysis of teaching and learning 
International Journal of Advanced Computer Research (ISSN (print): 2249-7277   ISSN (online): 2277-7970)  
Volume-4 Number-2 Issue-15 June-2014 
583          
 
process in any institute for improving the quality of 
teaching and learning by using rule based (IF-THEN) 
format and can also be able to produce analysis of 
teaching and learning process of the institute. 
 
4. Methodology of the study 
 
The present study has been completed using field 
survey method, in the field survey method the 
researcher has approached institutes of Kolhapur and 
collected method of teaching from teachers and 
students.  Statistical methods are used to analyse the 
data for the students and teachers under study [7].  
 
5. What is Simulation? 
 
Simulation is the imitation of the operation of a real-
world process or system over time. The act of 
simulating something first requires that a model be 
developed; this model represents the key 
characteristics or behaviors of the selected physical 
or abstract system or process. The model represents 
the system itself, whereas the simulation represents 
the operation of the system over time [1]. Simulation 
is a particular type of modeling, building a model is 
well recognized way of understanding the world; it is 
a simplification of some structure or a system. On the 
other hand, it can be a prediction, a substitute for 
experimental learning [3]. 
 
6. Computer Simulation 
 
Computer Simulation is nowadays widely used in 
business organizations to perform various tasks in the 
Business process. Computer simulation is the 
discipline of designing a model of an actual 
theoretical system, executing it on a digital computer 
and analyzing the execution output. A simulation 
model is actually a mathematical model calculating 
the impact of certain inputs and decisions on 
outcomes [2]. 
 
A computer simulation is an attempt to model a real-
life or hypothetical situation on a computer so that it 
can be studied to see how the system works. By 
changing variables in the simulation, predictions may 
be made about the behavior of the system. It is a tool 
to virtually investigate the behavior of the system 
under study. 
 
 
 
7. Computer science 
 
In computer science, simulation has some specialized 
meanings: Alan Turing used the term "simulation" to 
refer to what happens when a universal machine 
executes a state transition table (in modern 
terminology, a computer runs a program) that 
describes the state transitions, inputs and outputs of a 
subject discrete-state machine. The computer 
simulates the subject machine. Accordingly, in 
theoretical computer science the term simulation is a 
relation between state transition systems, useful in 
the study of operational semantics. Computer Science 
deals with complex phenomenon of coding the 
problem with the particular objectives and making 
the environment real like situation.  
 
8. Simulation in education and 
training 
 
Simulation is extensively used for educational 
purposes. It is frequently used by way of adaptive 
hypermedia. Simulation is often used in the training 
of civilian and military personnel [3]. The Simulation 
can be used in the teaching of various subjects in 
science and other faculties. The various methods of 
simulations also are used in teaching and learning 
methods. In this paper the authors have used to find 
out best method of teaching and learning.  
 
9. Introduction about teaching and 
learning Method 
 
9.1 Introduction: The teaching and learning are the 
most important process in education. The best 
use of student‟s time and teachers resources will 
have positive impact on this process.  The 
variety of teaching and learning methods which 
is used within a course is an important ingredient 
in creating a course with interest to students. A 
course with a large proportion of its teaching 
taking place in lectures will need to have a high 
level of intrinsic interest to students to keep them 
engaged. Over the past few years, a wide range 
of different teaching and learning methods have 
been introduced and tested to develop the skills 
of the student‟s community in the Institutes.   
9.2 Lecture Method: Lectures are still the most 
important and widely used teaching methods in 
the higher educational Institutes. The advantages 
and drawbacks are their in this method. The 
students concentration is not checked in this 
International Journal of Advanced Computer Research (ISSN (print): 2249-7277   ISSN (online): 2277-7970)  
Volume-4 Number-2 Issue-15 June-2014 
584          
 
methods nor their is participation of students in 
this method. Fifty-minute lectures remain the 
core teaching method for most undergraduate 
courses. Their role is best suited to providing an 
overview of the subject matter and stimulating 
interest in it, rather than disseminating facts. 
Lecturing to large classes is a skill which not all 
staff has acquired and some are not comfortable 
in this role, and so, where possible, a course 
organiser is advised to try to spread the lecturing 
load so as to favour those staff with best skill at 
it, although freedom of action in this respect is 
often limited! All students appreciate good 
quality lectures. 
9.3 Tutorials and Seminars: Tutorials and seminars 
are also widely used to teach the subjects with 
more difficulty level in higher educational 
Institutes. After the lecture, this is probably the 
next most widely used teaching method. The 
distinction between what is a tutorial and what is 
a seminar is woolly - to some it depends upon 
size (i.e. „a 20 person group cannot be a tutorial 
as it is too big and is therefore a seminar‟) 
whereas to others the seminar has a different 
structure (speaker + audience) and different 
objectives. There is certainly greater divergence 
for tutorials. Methods, they hold out promise for 
those courses where students are difficult to 
bring together or to enable exchanges between 
face-to-face sessions. The active nature of the 
tutorial/seminar makes it the main source for 
students to acquire some of the „personal 
transferable skills‟, e.g. in presentation and group 
work.  
9.4 Laboratory and Practical Classes: The 
Practical Subjects are supported by Lab work 
and practical assignments for the students. Thus 
the subjects properly planned in the course are 
liked by the students and they are understood in 
good way. For science subjects, laboratory (lab) 
work is an essential ingredient of the course and 
some component of this is generally preserved, 
even though the amount may fall. In addition to 
the experience of lab work, students often derive 
a lot of their contact with staff in the lab setting, 
and compensation for this may be needed if lab 
time is significantly reduced. High quality lab 
work is expensive to provide, and it is important 
that we are sure that students do indeed gain all 
that they might from it, especially as the number 
of students present may have increased. 
 
9.5 Other Teaching Methods: Other methods that 
may be considered are numerous, including: 
• Workbooks, diaries, and lab notebooks; 
• Computer-based methods; 
• Fieldwork; 
• Independent learning tasks; 
• Essays, dissertations and projects; 
• Library searches; 
• Portfolios; 
• Posters; 
• Videos. 
Judicious use of them gives students the chance 
to use a variety of learning techniques so that 
each gets one or more which suits them best. If 
you find a possible method but are unsure how 
best to introduce it to your course, search out 
someone who has used it and pick their brains. 
You will probably find that TLA Centre can 
point you to such people, even if they may not be 
in the University of Edinburgh [4].  
9.6 Students with Disabilities: The Students with 
various disabilities also have to be treated with 
utmost care to give them more knowledge and 
this will create the interest in these students. The 
University has growing numbers of students with 
disabilities (e.g. dyslexia) who may present 
particular challenges to courses with large 
numbers of students. For example, a profoundly 
deaf student may be able to follow a lecture with 
the help of a sign language interpreter, but will 
not be able to take notes at the same time. A 
blind student may need special help with 
practical sessions. It is not possible to give 
detailed general advice on making the variety of 
teaching and learning methods described in.  
9.7 Computer Supported Learning: Computer 
supported learning is also used by students and 
teachers in the Institutes. The Computer can be 
used for PowerPoint presentation and database 
handling. The  course organiser‟s responsibility, 
in consultation with colleagues contributing to 
the course, to co-ordinate the availability of 
resources in the Library (books and reprints in 
the short-term loan collection) all other aspects 
of resource-based learning will require forward 
planning with which the course organiser will 
have to be involved. Various learning 
technologies (such as computer and multi-media 
resources) are increasingly being used in support 
of the learning process, presenting new 
challenges and opportunities for staff and 
students. A major resource being used more 
frequently is the World Wide Web (WWW) [5]. 
International Journal of Advanced Computer Research (ISSN (print): 2249-7277   ISSN (online): 2277-7970)  
Volume-4 Number-2 Issue-15 June-2014 
585          
 
9.8 Useful Contact Addresses for Technology in 
Teaching and Learning: The Computers in 
Teaching Initiative Support Service (CTISS), 
principally through its various academic subject 
centres, provides support with the 
implementation of learning technologies across 
higher education institutions within the UK. 
Activities of the various centres differ to some 
extent, but most run workshops on subject-
specific and generic aspects of IT use in 
teaching, publish a periodic journal or 
newsletter, and maintain a collection of resource 
materials in their particular subject domain. 
CTISS also publishes, twice a year, the major 
international journal Active Learning, which is 
free to academic staff in all UK higher education 
institutions. To subscribe, request a subscription 
form from CTISS through the contact routes 
listed below. The CTI Support Service can be 
Computers in Teaching Support Service. 
 
10. Student Assessment 
 
The Students assessment for his various qualities in 
education system is important and use of the 
computer system to assess the students‟ performance 
will improve the quality of teaching and learning 
process in the Institutes. Each student will write an 
answer to one of the questions. This writing will be 
assessed holistically. The teacher should note 
grammatical errors on the students‟ writing, and write 
the proper spelling of words in the margins. But the 
teacher‟s role in the assessment is to encourage the 
student to develop his/her ideas more. The teacher 
should write a paragraph asking the student some 
interesting questions which challenge the student to 
think a little more carefully about his/her answer [6]. 
 
11. Rules for the Simulation 
 
The simulation rules are written by finding the 
problem domain. The Rules can be written using if 
then else statements.  
  
11.1 Introduction: Simulation model can be used as 
a tool in teaching and learning process in various 
institutes with educational purpose. Simulation 
model helps in decision making on the basis of 
conditions entered. Simulation model gives the 
opportunity to experiment with events and a 
sense of reality in information science. The 
simulation model for teaching and learning 
process. This simulation model is developed on 
the basis of data collected by various students 
and teachers which are being used by various 
teachers and students in teaching and learning 
process. On the basis of entered data and the 
design objectives, syllabus, time and curriculum 
the outcome of simulation will be presented. The 
outcome of that simulation model depends upon 
the teaching methodology used by the teachers 
and the learning methodology used by the 
students. The outcome of simulation model can 
be excellent, very good, good, satisfactory and 
unsatisfactory for the given teaching and 
learning process. The simulation model is 
calculating all the teaching and learning process 
which is being used by teachers and students. 
The outcome of the simulation model will be 
achieved by rule based system which works on 
the basis of IF and THEN conditions.  Teacher‟s 
activity will be entered like Experience of the 
teacher, subject knowledge of the teacher time 
management of the teacher way of maintaining 
intelligence level of the students according to 
their class level, communication skill of the 
teacher, interaction of the teacher with the 
student    and feedback of all class students about 
the teacher. In student field the various activities 
of the students like learning activity of the 
students, level of the student‟s use of information 
technology of the students and active 
participation of the students and the feedback of 
the teacher about students. In educational 
practices interaction of the students and faculty 
and the feedback of the students and faculty will 
be entered in design part of the simulation the 
design of syllabus will be defined and the 
curriculum of the course will also be entered. 
 
Table 1.0: Table showing teaching methods 
 
On the basis of entered teachers students educational 
practices and design the outcome will be displayed. 
Sr.No. 
Random Numbers 
from Excel (observed) 
Teaching Method 
used 
1 3 1 
2 87 3 
3 68 3 
4 50 2 
5 8 1 
6 52 2 
7 8 1 
8 41 2 
9 77 3 
10 85 3 
International Journal of Advanced Computer Research (ISSN (print): 2249-7277   ISSN (online): 2277-7970)  
Volume-4 Number-2 Issue-15 June-2014 
586          
 
The outcome will follow the rule based system and 
on the basis of rule based system the decision will be 
produced. The outcome can be Excellent, very good, 
good, Satisfactory and unsatisfactory which is 
producing the result of teaching and learning process. 
 
Monte-Carlo Simulation model for teaching 
methodology. 
 
Table 1.1: Frequency table for methods used by 
teachers 
 
S
r. 
N
o  
Metho
ds for 
Teachi
ng 
Freq
ue 
ncy 
(f) 
Probabilit
y(p) 
P= f/N 
Cumula 
tive 
Probabilit
y(cp) 
Rand
om 
No. 
Interv
al 
1 Lecturi
ng 
Metho
d 
22 0.31 0.31 00-30 
2 compu
ter 
Based 
19 0.27 0.59 31-58 
3 Both 
Metho
d 
29 0.41 1.00 59-99 
 
Total          
N= 
70 1.00 
 
 
 
 
 
Observation No.1: Monte-Carlo simulation model 
Verification result for 10 teachers teaching 
methods 
 
 
 
Figure No.1: Monte-Carlo simulation model 
Verification result for 10 teachers teaching 
methods 
 
Observation  No.2: Monte-Carlo simulation model 
Verification result for 10 teachers teaching 
methods 
Table 2.0 
 
Sr. No. 
Random Numbers from 
Excel (observed) 
Teaching 
Method used 
1 74 3 
2 65 3 
3 17 1 
4 14 1 
5 43 2 
6 97 3 
7 84 3 
8 31 2 
9 37 2 
10 24 1 
 
 
 
Figure No.2: Monte-Carlo simulation model 
Verification result for 10 teachers teaching 
methods 
 
Fig 2 also tells that the majority (40%) of the teachers 
used computer based and lecturing both methods for 
teaching. 
 
Observation No.3: Monte-Carlo simulation model 
Verification result for 100 teachers teaching 
methods 
 
 
 
Figure No.3: Monte-Carlo simulation model 
Verification result for Used teaching methods for 
100 samples. 
 
Fig 3 represents same result of 100 entries that also 
represents that the majority (40%) of the teachers 
used computer based and lecturing both methods for 
teaching. 
International Journal of Advanced Computer Research (ISSN (print): 2249-7277   ISSN (online): 2277-7970)  
Volume-4 Number-2 Issue-15 June-2014 
587          
 
Table 2.1: Frequency table for methods preferred 
by students 
 
Methods 
for 
Teaching 
Frequ 
ency 
(f) 
Proba 
bility(p) 
P= f/N 
Cumu 
lative 
Proba 
bility(cp) 
Random 
 No.  
Interval 
Lecturing 
Method 
10 0.17 0.17 0-16 
computer 
Based 
21 0.35 0.52 17-51 
Both 
method 
29 0.48 1.00 52-99 
Total    N= 60 1.00 
  
 
12. Conclusion and Future Scope 
 
The teaching and learning is the most important 
activity in education system the study to find out 
which among them is best was the aim of the 
research. The mixed way of teaching and learning 
which involves teaching using technology Computer 
based and without using technology is mostly used 
by various teachers for teaching and learning process 
in higher education. Learning also is found effective 
by using mixed teaching method. The research can be 
extended by using other sectors in education filed for 
Primary education and other professional education 
courses. The study was conducted for one particular 
city. It can extend to other cities.  
Abbreviations: TQM-Total Quality Management, 
QA-Quality Assurance. 
 
References 
 
[1] Bo Xu and Haiyan Yan   “Case Study Method of 
Teaching under Web-based Learning 
Environment “International Conference on 
Computer Science and Software Engineering 
978-0-7695-3336--2008. 
[2] Boubouka M., Verginis I., Grigoriadou M., Zafiri 
I. “Towards the enhancement of the learning 
process with different types of case based 
activities” Ninth IEEE International Conference 
on Advanced Learning Technologies-2008. 
[3] Dan W. Patterson, “Introduction to Artificial 
Intelligence and expert system”, fourty edition, 
Pentice-hall of India pvt ltd. New Delhi-2010. 
[4] John C. Reis (1998) “Experiments with Various 
Teaching      Methodologies” 0-7803-4762-5/98 
IEEE FIE Conference.1998. 
[5] Jose Jesus Castro-Schez, Ester del Castillo, Julian 
Hortolano, and Alfredo Rodriguez,“Designing 
and Using Software Tools for Educational 
Purposes: FLAT, a Case Study” IEEE 
Transactions on Education, vol. 52, no. 1,2009. 
[6] K Kotiadis “Computer simulation in management 
science” Mike Pidd 5th edition, Journal of 
Simulation Wiley, ISBN 0-470-09230-0-2006. 
[7] Kothari C.R - “Research methodology and 
techniques, second edition, wishwa prakashan- 
pp-45-48.-2012. 
[8] S.S. Rai, R.V. Kulkarni, “Role of Knowledgebase 
System and Simulation in teaching and learning 
process for Selected Institutes in Kolhapur 
District”. M. Phil Thesis Shivaji University, 
Kolhapur.-2011. 
[9] sciencedirect.com onlinelibrary.wiley.com 
link.springer.com pnas.org. 
 
Mr.  S. S. Rai Born on 20th March 
1982. at Buxar District in Bihar. He has 
teaching and research experience of 6 
years at PG at Bharati Vidyapeeth 
Instiute of Management, Kolhapur. He 
did MCA, M.Phil and is active in 
various social activities through NSS Cell of the Institute. 
He has published number of research papers in 
International and National Journals of repute. He has 
attended 4 National Conferences and presented papers in 
the Conference on his special subject in Computer 
Applications. 
 
Prof. Anil Gaikwad born on 19th 
August 1970 , Completed his schooling 
from Sainik School Satara and has 
teaching experience of 18 years for 
MCA and BCA Students of the Institute 
of Management Kolhapur. He has 
completed MCM.MCA, MBA and M.Phil. and he is 
Pursuing Ph.D. degree from Shivaji University Kolhapur. 
He has published 13 Research Papers in International 
Journal of repute. He is also reviewer for 3 International 
Journals in the area of Computer Applications and 
Computer Management. He is Member of NSS Advisory 
committee of the University and is working as Programme 
officer in the Institute of Management Kolhapur. 
 
Dr.  R. V. Kulkarni Professor and 
Head Department of Computer Studies 
SIBER Kolhapur. Dr. R.V. Kulkarni is 
renowned academician and research 
guide in State of Maharashtra. He has 
rich experience in publication of 
Research Articles in International and National journal of 
Repute. He is recognized guide for Ph.D. and M.Phil. under 
Computer Applications and Computer Management 
subjects for various Universities  in Maharashtra. He is 
member of Expert Committee for Research Presentation as 
Subject Expert in Computer Applications. He also provides 
consultancy to Banks and other professional Bodies in 
Computer Application Area. He has chaired and attended 
International and National Conferences on Artificial 
Intelligence and Expert System in Cities of Maharashtra 
State. 
 
 
 
Author‟s Photo 

