ISSN 1479-4403 257 ©Academic Conferences Ltd 
Reference this paper as: 
Gorra, A, and Finlay, J. “Podcasting to Support Students Using a Business Simulation” Electronic Journal of e-
Learning Volume 7 Issue 3 2009, (pp257 - 264), available online at www.ejel.org 
Podcasting to Support Students Using a Business 
Simulation 
Andrea Gorra and Janet Finlay 
CETL, ALiC, Leeds Metropolitan University, UK 
a.gorra@leedsmet.ac.uk 
j.finlay@leedsmet.ac.uk 
 
Abstract: Audio or video podcasts can be a useful tool to supplement practical exercises such as business 
simulations. In this paper, we discuss a case study in which different types of podcast were utilised to support the 
delivery of a course in international business. The students work in groups and run a fictional company using 
business simulation software, which gives them the opportunity to evaluate their decision making skills. A number 
of podcasts were used as reusable learning objects for different student cohorts. Faculty members produced 
visually enhanced audio podcasts offering tutor discussions of key elements of the computer-assisted business 
simulation used by the students. The podcasts were made available via the virtual learning environment 
(Blackboard Vista), as well as for subscription by web browser-based RSS readers, such as Google and 
downloadable RSS readers, such as iTunes. Our evaluation of this approach to using podcasts takes into 
account pedagogic and technical issues. Firstly, faculty members involved in this case study were interviewed to 
obtain their views and experiences on the process of producing podcasts as well as the suitability of podcasts to 
support their teaching. Secondly, students were surveyed and interviewed about the value of the podcasts and 
the way in which they were used. This work is on-going and initial informal student feedback indicates that the 
podcasts engaged the students and supported their understanding of the international business module. This 
paper presents a snapshot of the current findings which generally support the value of this innovative way of 
using podcasting for learning and teaching. 
 
Keywords: podcasting, reusable learning resources, e-learning, web 2.0, visually-enhanced audio, business 
simulation 
1. Introduction 
In this paper we present our findings from an on-going evaluation of a case study in which audio 
podcasts enhanced with visual media were used with students on Business courses to supplement 
practical group activities as part of a computer-based business simulation. We begin by outlining the 
rationale behind our use of podcasting in this context and the manner in which we designed them. We 
then discuss the case study in more detail before presenting our results and highlighting some 
observations for the use of podcasting based on our experience to this point. 
2. Podcasting to support active group learning 
It is generally accepted that the most effective educational interventions actively engage students in 
their learning (for example Biggs, 2003).  Such engagement requires both action and thought on the 
part of students and is facilitated by guided group collaboration (Slavin, 1995).  In line with these 
principles, students in Leeds Business School undertake a group-based interactive business 
simulation, as part of their module on Business Analysis and Practice. This is a complex and realistic 
activity, where student teams work in a ‘live’ market place consisting of all student companies, with 
other European Manufacturers acting as background ‘competition’ in the market. It was therefore felt 
that additional and flexible learning resources should be provided to support the activity. We 
anticipated that by offering such resources in form of podcasts, the students would be able to better 
understand the underlying principles of the business simulation and be able to make more informed 
business decisions. 
 
Podcasts have a number of potential benefits in this situation (for a detailed discussion of the benefits 
of podcasting, see Salmon and Nie, 2008). They are continuously available and can be used flexibly 
by students, both via fixed and mobile technologies.  Additionally the use of audio-visual and the 
novel presentation of material enhances both learning and motivation (Salmon and Nie, 2008). They 
can provide a realistic simulation of the activity, offering students a model from which to progress. 
Where the subject matter warrants, they can also be repackaged and reused as learning objects 
(Barritt and Alderman, 2004) for different modules. This is significant in our context, as the same case 
study is also used at Level 3 and postgraduate levels. Producing learning objects that are applicable 
to different levels of student is a recognised issue (e.g. Finlay et al., 2008) and podcasts are no 
Electronic Journal of e-Learning Volume 7 Issue 3 2009, (257 - 264) 
 
exception (Salmon, 2008). Podcasts can be produced at relatively low cost and there is, for example, 
open source freeware software available for producing audio recordings in mp3 format.  
 
For these reasons we decided to develop a series of podcasts to support the team activity. There are 
a number of decisions to make in determining what type of podcast is most appropriate. We have 
applied the 10-factor design model of Edirisingha et al. (2008) to our scenario to help elaborate the 
design decisions made (see Table 1). Characterising the podcasts in this way is helpful to position 
them in relation to other work in the area.  
Table 1: Interactive business simulation podcasts categorised according to Edirisingha et al.’s 10 
factor design model 
Edirisingha et al.’s 10 Factors The interactive business simulation podcasts 
1. The purpose or pedagogical rationale Enhanced support for group-based active learning. 
2. The medium used Visually enhanced audio. Audio recording overlaid 
onto static visuals to illustrate team activity. 
3. The convergence (integration with other (e)learning Podcasts provide support to a face to face group-
based interactive business simulation, alongside 
lectures and other sessions. 
4. The authors and contributors of content Podcasts produced by module leader and features 
role play by other members of course team. No 
contribution from students. 
5. The structure of podcasting (frequency and timing) The podcasts were offered in short episodes each 
covering a different element of the simulation 
exercise. 
6. The reusability of content The podcasts were designed to be reusable with 
different student groups across levels all using the 
same case study. 
7. The length Average length 8 minutes. 
8. The style Staff role-played the team activity students were to 
undertake. Presented as a group discussion. 
9. The framework of content organisation Each podcast focuses on one element of the team 
activity, which is introduced at the start of each 
episode. 
10. The access system Delivered via the virtual learning environment and 
also made available via an RSS feed for 
subscription. 
3. The business simulation case study 
The case study we are considering aims to investigate the use of podcasts to support students in the 
Business School at Leeds Metropolitan University.  We are primarily looking at the use of podcasting 
for students in their second year of study (Level 2), taking the module Business Analysis and Practice. 
The students taking this module study various courses in the Business School, such as BA (Hons) 
Business Studies and BA (Hons) Marketing. Additionally, the podcasts are used to supplement 
teaching materials for students of two other courses: Strategic Decision Making (Level 3) and for a 
Diploma in Management studies at postgraduate level. These podcasts are therefore used as 
reusable learning resources, as they are utilised for three student cohorts with approximately 700 
students in total. It is possible to offer the podcasts to students studying at such a range of different 
levels, as the podcasts' main focus is to support the learner using a computer-based business 
simulation.  
 
The students typically work in groups of five to run a fictional car manufacturing company using this 
computer-based simulation. The interactive business simulation is complex, as the student teams are 
working in a 'live' market place consisting of all student companies with other European 
Manufacturers (e.g. Volkswagen, Ford) acting as background competition in the market.  The 
podcasts cover some of the issues and decisions that the student groups have to make when 
producing a business plan and using the simulation software. These issues include, for example, task 
specific issues, such as how to choose the “Mission, Vision and Objectives” for a company, and 
management issues, such as how to deal with missing team members in a student group. 
www.ejel.org 258 ©Academic Conferences Ltd 
 
Andrea Gorra and Janet Finlay 
 
4. Development and delivery of podcasts 
In order to produce a series of podcasts, four members of the faculty conducted a role play in which 
they followed a semi-structured script to discuss some of key elements of the business simulation 
software. The role play was digitally audio recorded and stored as an hour long mp3 file. This file was 
then split into seven audio files, according to the subject under discussion. For editing the audio file 
we used Audacity, a free open source software package1. Visuals, such as screenshots of lecture 
slides and business objectives from actual companies, such as Microsoft, were then added to each of 
the files with help of screen video capture software2 (see Figure 1 for an example of a podcast). In the 
finalised version of the podcast, the students could listen to their tutors' voices and view the still 
images relevant to the content discussed. 
  
Figure 1: A podcast shown on an iPod (left image) and in the QuickTime media player on a PC (right) 
Each of the podcasts was made available via the virtual learning environment (Blackboard Vista) and 
the podcast files could be viewed directly in an internet browser. In addition, the podcasts were 
offered to the students via RSS-based subscription. This meant that the students could ‘subscribe’ to 
the podcasts via web browser-based RSS readers, such as Google and downloadable RSS readers, 
such as iTunes. Once a student had subscribed to the podcast series, new ‘episodes’ of the podcasts 
would automatically download to the student’s computer and if available to their portable music player 
or iPod. 
5. Evaluation of podcasts - views of students and faculty 
Five interviews with faculty members have taken place to date. The module leader has been 
interviewed twice; once before the start of the project and then at a midway point. The other three 
faculty members, who were involved in the role play, were each interviewed several weeks into the 
project. All four members of staff were asked about their expectations, views and experiences on 
using podcasting for learning and teaching. They were encouraged to talk about what they perceived 
as benefits and possible negative aspects of podcasting for faculty and students.  
 
In addition to capturing the views of faculty, students were also consulted. Surveys and interviews 
with the different student cohorts have been initiated,. An eight question survey was distributed to the 
large student cohort of the second year Business Analysis and Practice course via the virtual learning 
environment (Blackboard Vista), and the same survey was handed out in paper-based format to 16 
students studying at postgraduate level. In addition, a focus group was conducted with 10 students on 
the International Business course taught at Level 3; all of these students were non-native English 
speakers. 
 
                                                     
1 Available from http://audacity.sourceforge.net/. 
2 We used Camtasia Studio (http://www.techsmith.com/camtasia.asp ) but free open source software is also 
available, such as http://camstudio.org/  
www.ejel org 259 ISSN 1479-4403 
 
Electronic Journal of e-Learning Volume 7 Issue 3 2009, (257 - 264) 
 
Finally, a second survey was handed out to the large Level 2 Business Analysis and Practice cohort 
of approximately 500 students in the last week of the academic year. This paper-based survey aimed 
to elicitate the students' views on the podcasts made available to them during the semester. This end 
of year survey received a much larger response rate, probably due to the fact that it was handed out 
in paper format during the assessment week. 177 out of 476 students filled in the survey which equals 
a response rate of 37.2%. 
 
Results, based on views of faculty and students, confirm our expectations in terms of the benefits of 
student motivation and supporting learning styles, as well as flexibility. Mobility is perceived to be less 
important to students. In addition we found unexpected outcomes in the staff learning (development) 
that occurred through the process. An issue that arose was the perception that podcasts were 
perhaps less beneficial to weaker students, providing learning enhancement only to stronger, more 
motivated students. This is an issue that requires further research to address. 
5.1 Learning enhancement and motivation 
Findings from the first survey of Level 2 Business Analysis and Practice students provided an early 
indication of student views, with the majority of respondents perceiving the podcasts to be useful. Out 
of seventeen students who responded to the survey, two found the podcasts ‘very useful’, eleven 
‘somewhat useful’, and four ‘not useful at all’.  
 
Faculty members identified supporting learning around specific issues and supplementing existing 
materials as some of the main benefits of the podcasts, as well as practical management of the role 
play activity. 
“I thought it was really useful because although it was a role play, we had several 
learning points that we wanted to get over to students, so we made sure that we asked 
each other questions in the role play that we thought they were likely to ask. So it’s … a 
bit like a “frequently asked questions” and also to show the students that even when the 
lecturers sit down to do something, they don’t all agree and how they resolve a 
disagreement.” 
(Staff 2, female) 
Initial findings from the postgraduate survey indicate that students also agreed on the benefits of 
being presented with information in different formats, including multi-media, though some still 
appreciated the ‘traditional’ paper-based format: 
“I think it is a good idea to present information in as many different formats as possible” 
“A useful learning aid but: prefer to read and take notes” 
(Survey comments from postgraduate students) 
This is a reminder that we should avoid emphasising a single medium and ensure that all our 
resources take account of different learning styles and preferences.  
 
This view was also supported by faculty. In the interviews, all faculty members considered the 
question of whether podcasts could replace lectures and tutorials but were sceptical about this, as 
they saw them as different media. This is confirmed by existing research which has argued that the 
use of podcasts does not discourage students' lecture attendance (Hatch and Burd, 2008). Instead, 
faculty perceived podcasts as means to enhance the student experience, to be  
“part of that mix of blended learning. […] the students expect that when they go to X-
stream [the virtual learning environment] and have a look at something … there’s 
something other than PowerPoint slides.”  
(Staff 3, male) 
Another member of faculty also mentioned student expectations and saw the primary benefits of 
podcasts in that they suited students’ different learning styles. 
“[..] varying the mode of delivery is very good for keeping people’s attention. I think that 
students these days, well young people these days, are more used to visual and verbal 
stimulus than reading. And because students have all got different learning styles some 
of them will learn a lot more from hearing than they will from reading for example.” 
www.ejel.org 260 ©Academic Conferences Ltd 
 
Andrea Gorra and Janet Finlay 
 
(Staff 2, female) 
The focus groups with the international students also highlighted the motivational aspects of using 
new and novel technologies in their studies, and, again, the value of multimodal resources: 
Female student 1: I haven’t used podcasts very often in the past but I think, in general, it 
is a good idea. I’d like to use them …. And the combination of audio and visuals, the 
combination of both is very good. 
Female student 3: new technology I think, it’s also a new thing to learn.  
(Focus group, International students, Level 3) 
The majority of the Level 2 Business Analysis and Practice students (149 out of 177) who responded 
to the end of year survey stated that they would like to see more podcasts to support their studies. 
Additional comments were "it's really appreciated how tutors put more work in to help us", "Keep 
podcasts!",  “It appeals to a more interactive generation of students” and “It is a good idea, makes a 
change slides and sheet" which demonstrates the enthusiasm of the students for the use of 
multimedia files as supplementary learning materials. 
5.2 Flexibility in learning 
Flexibility was cited by both staff and students as a key benefit of podcasting. Faculty members 
mentioned that the students could replay the podcasts after the lecture to help their understanding 
and in preparation for exams:  
“Benefits from the students’ point of view is that they can …dip in whenever they like. 
And if they don’t understand something, they can replay. Whereas you can’t replay a 
lecture.”  
(Staff 3, male) 
The focus groups with the international students also pointed to the benefits of being able to replay 
the podcasts: 
Female student 2: … it’s good that you can repeat it as often as you want.  
Female student 1: It is a very individual thing. And if you can’t come to a lecture you can 
do it at home …. 
(Focus group, International students, Level 3) 
The postgraduate students made similar comments about being able to catch up with help of 
podcasts in case they had to miss a lecture. 
"Useful as an overview or if you miss a lecture. Anything to help is appreciated!" 
(Survey comment from postgraduate student) 
In line with these findings, the end of year survey with the large Level 2 cohort confirmed that “being 
able to re-play the podcasts” was perceived to be the ‘most useful’ feature of the podcasts by 66 
students (see Figure 2). This was followed by “study in own time” as the second ‘most useful’ 
characteristic of podcasts by 54 students. However, the respondents also indicated that they did not 
necessarily perceive the podcasts to be helpful for ‘increasing their motivation and interest’ in their 
studies, as only 15 students perceived this as ‘most useful’. 
 
Figure 2: Responses to a survey questions by Level 2 Business Analysis and Practice students 
(N=177, multiple responses were possible) 
www.ejel org 261 ISSN 1479-4403 
 
Electronic Journal of e-Learning Volume 7 Issue 3 2009, (257 - 264) 
 
5.3 Mobility 
Our findings from both students and faculty data collections suggest that the learners preferred to 
access the podcasts via their laptops or PCs and not via portable multimedia players such as iPods.  
 
For example, students of the large second year cohort indicated in the final survey that only 8 out of 
177 watched the podcasts on an iPod or similar multimedia player. In contrast, 123 stated that they 
had viewed the video files on a laptop or PC. One possible reason for this may be the low ownership 
of multimedia players by the students. According to the students’ responses, only 33 students out of 
the 177 owned a portable player, capable of playing video, while the majority (118 students) owned 
an audio only portable player.  
 
This backs up our previous findings on using podcasts with another group of students (Finlay et al., 
2008), and is supported by other studies. For example Wingkvist and Alexander (2007) suggest that 
the learners preferred to access the podcasts via their laptops or PCs. This casts some question over 
whether mobility is always a key perceived benefit of this type of resource. 
 
The surveys showed that all 17 Business Analysis and Practice students, as well as the 9 
postgraduate students, who responded to the survey, had watched the podcasts via their PC or laptop 
and did not download them to iPods or similar. The focus group with the Level 3 explored these 
issues in more detail: 
Female student 4: you use your iPod when you want to relax and not study. 
Female student 5: I don’t think it makes sense to sit on the bus and listen to important 
stuff from school or university. 
Female student 4: I think you have to listen to it again when you are at home. 
Male student 2: because we have the lecture all day here and then on the bus we just 
want to relax. 
(Focus group, International students, Level 3) 
It does seem that both students and faculty were, at best, ambivalent about the value of the mobility 
aspect of podcasting. As one faculty member commented: “but then it doesn’t matter whether they put 
it on an iPod or not. But I think, everybody has got a laptop these days, so they don’t need an iPod” 
(Staff 2, female). 
5.4 Learning benefits for staff 
One of the aims of the module leader was for his staff to “broaden their horizon away from ‘this is 
what we do’, you know very traditional approaches.” (Staff 1, male) and indeed this appears to have 
been achieved. All faculty members reported that they enjoyed taking part in the role play and felt it 
was useful to students. For some however it was more than simply enjoyable, but became a learning 
experience for them as well: 
“Well, I found it interesting, me […] I’ve never done anything like this before. […] I found it 
beneficial as a learning tool. And it was good to listen to other lecturers play out their 
role. In fact, they were really getting into their roles. They others seem to have done this 
before but it was new for me.”  
(Staff 4, male) 
This was not an outcome we expected and it may be simply a factor of the type of group podcast 
made by this team, but it reflects positively on the activity as a whole for all concerned. 
5.5 Support for all students 
Even though faculty believed that the students generally welcomed the podcasts “That role play really 
went down well, judging from the students I’ve talked to, they said they learned a lot from it.” (Staff 4, 
male), they also made a distinction between the stronger, more motivated students and the weaker or 
less motivated ones, as the following comments show: 
“The ones that are focused and they are there anyway, they don’t need all this extra help. 
It’s the ones that never turn up because they can’t get out of bed or had too much the 
www.ejel.org 262 ©Academic Conferences Ltd 
 
Andrea Gorra and Janet Finlay 
 
night before. It’s those that podcasts would be really beneficial [for] but the attenders and 
the focused students, they … embrace it.” 
(Staff 4, male) 
“I think the better students will take advantage more than the weaker ones. Because you 
can see when you are teaching say a group of 20, there are probably about 8 or so who 
are really keyed into what you are saying and so on. And those students I think would be 
the ones who make the most [use].” 
(Staff 1, male) 
This highlights the need to see the podcasts as an additional resource but also to make the podcasts 
easily accessible to students, as adding additional materials to the virtual learning environment 
“requires the students to be more proactive” (Staff 2, female).  
 
One of the postgraduate students emphasised the need of easy access to the podcasts: 
“Good idea- just need to make sure I know where and how to access them” 
(Survey comment from postgraduate student) 
6. Conclusion 
This paper has presented preliminary findings from our on-going research into the use of podcasting 
to support teaching and learning in higher education. Faculty and students agree that the podcasts 
are beneficial in terms of appealing to students with different learning preferences and providing 
enhanced motivation to study. However, we have found that the students value flexibility of use over 
mobility. In other words, the learners perceive it as very beneficial to watch podcasts outside the 
lecture time, either because a class was missed or because they want to review the key concepts. 
However, initial findings show that learners are less interested in accessing podcasts ‘on the move’. 
We will be exploring this further during the remainder of this research project. 
 
We encountered some unexpected outcomes in terms of staff development, with the use of new 
technologies and joint production of (multi-media) lecture materials providing the scope for faculty 
peer-learning. 
 
The other finding that we will explore further in this on-going research project is the question of how to 
ensure podcasts support all students, not just those who are already highly motivated. Offering 
additional materials in form of podcasts requires the students to be proactive and take action to view 
and download them, possibly therefore excluding weaker or less motivated students.  
 
One suggestion from a student was to integrate the podcasts into the face to face contact time with 
tutors.  
“Would have preferred to watch the podcast in lectures and then have a group discussion 
afterwards.” 
(Survey comment from postgraduate student) 
It may therefore be beneficial not only to let the students make use of the podcasts in their own time 
but also to blend this medium into the face to face contact time in order to engage all students. We 
will be investigating this issue further.  
 
In summary, from our early experience on this project, we have found visually enhanced audio 
podcasts to be very useful as a supplement to face to face interaction and other materials. The 
podcasts are perceived to provide valuable support for the case study activity and the use of a novel 
technology, with the flexibility it has, is motivating. However it is critical that students can access 
podcasts quickly and easily, and it may be helpful to integrate them into face to face class activities, to 
allow students to benefit more consistently from their use. 
7. References 
Barritt, C. and Alderman Jr., F.  L. (2004) Creating a reusable learning objects strategy leveraging information 
and learning in a knowledge economy.  Pfeiffer. 
Biggs, J. (2003) Teaching for quality learning (2nd edition), Buckingham: Society for Research into Higher 
Education and Open University Press. 
www.ejel org 263 ISSN 1479-4403 
 
Electronic Journal of e-Learning Volume 7 Issue 3 2009, (257 - 264) 
 
www.ejel.org 264 ©Academic Conferences Ltd 
 
Edirisingha, P., Salmon, G. and Nie, M. (2008) Developing pedagogical podcasts. In Podcasting for Learning in 
Universities, eds. G. Salmon and P. Edirisingha, Open University Press, 153-168. 
Finlay, J., Soosay, M., Thomson, S., Chawawa, M., Moore, D., Renshaw, J.A., Gorra, A. and Sheridan Ross, J. 
(2008) Video-based learning objects for teaching human-computer interaction at different levels. In 
Proceedings of the 9th Annual Conference of the HEA Information and Computer Sciences Subject Centre, 
ed. H. White, August 2008, 194-198 
Hatch, A. and Burd, L. (2008) Augmenting Learning Through Filmed Interviews and Screen-Casting, In 
Proceedings of the 9th Annual Conference of the HEA Information and Computer Sciences Subject Centre, 
ed. H. White, August 2008, 71-76 
Salmon, G. (2008) The Future of Podcasting. In Podcasting for Learning in Universities, eds. G. Salmon and P. 
Edirisingha, Open University Press, 169-177. 
Salmon, G. and Nie, M. (2008) Doubling the Life of iPods. In Podcasting for Learning in Universities, eds. G. 
Salmon and P. Edirisingha, Open University Press, 1-11. 
Slavin, R. (1995) Cooperative Learning: Theory, Research, and Practice, Second Edition, Merrill. 
Wingkvist, A., Alexander, J. (2007) Was it Pod Worthy? A Preparatory Plan for Evaluating Podcasting in Higher 
Education. Available from <http://www.cosc.canterbury.ac.nz/~jma142/research/PodWorthy.pdf>, Last 
accessed 16 February 2009.  

