Simulation & Gaming
41(1) 51 –71
© The Author(s) 2010
Reprints and permission: http://www. 
sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/1046878109353473
http://sg.sagepub.com
Gender, Simulation, and 
Gaming: Research Review
and Redirections
Jennifer Jenson1 and Suzanne de Castell2
Abstract
This review of gender and gameplay research over the past three decades documents 
a set of persistent methodological repetitions that have systematically impeded its 
progress since the inception of this trajectory of research. The first is, in fact, a refusal 
to consider gender at all: Conflating gender with sex impedes possibilities to identify 
nonstereotypical engagements by girls and women. Second is the persistent attempt to 
identify sex-specific “patterns” of play and play preferences “characteristic” of girls and 
women mainly to support and promote these in the name of “gender equity,” whether 
in women’s involvement in the game industry as designers, in the development and 
marketing of “games for girls,” or the access and uses of digital games for education, 
training, and entertainment. Third, it is found that “gender” is an issue in research 
studies only long enough to dismiss it as a significant variable, which in turn makes any 
deeper critical interrogation unproductive.
Keywords
boys, consumers, design, digital games, femininity, gameplay, gamers, games, games industry, 
gender, gender stereotypes, girls, identity, masculinity, men, methodology, players, popular 
culture, progress, sex, technology, women
The difficulty for novelists and playwrights concerned with the promotion and devel-
opment of a central female character, wrote Henry James in his introduction to The 
Portrait of a Lady, is that they are “typical, none the less, of a class difficult, in the 
individual case, to make a centre of interest” (p. 48). To imagine giving center stage to 
1York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
2Simon Fraser University, Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada
Corresponding Author:
Jennifer Jenson, Faculty of Education, York University, 1023 TEL, 4700 Keele Street, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada M3J 1P3
Email: jjenson@edu.yorku.ca
52  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
a female character, a heroine who, as George Eliot put it, “In these frail vessels is 
borne onward through the ages the treasure of human affection”1 was at the time for 
authors, and still clearly is today for designers and developers of digital games, persis-
tently difficult.
In 1981, an article in Simulation & Gaming documents, as a pedagogical and cur-
ricular bias in contemporary business simulations, the finding that women did not 
value as much as their male classmates the use of computer-based simulations as an 
integral part of their course (Chisholm & Krisnakumar, 1981). The researchers’ expressed 
concern was that, as more women took business courses, games and simulation-based 
curriculum and pedagogy would need to be “adjusted” in order to accommodate their 
viewpoints and preferences. If we consider what has been learned from gender and 
gaming research over the past 20+ years, it is instructive to begin by noting that, 
details aside, their article could as well have been written today.
We present in this review, accordingly, a “cautionary” (Belloc, 1923/1936) overview 
of research on gender and simulation/games that points out persistent methodological 
biases endemic to nearly every inquiry in which “gender” holds prominence of place. 
These methodological “potholes” on the long road to understanding significant inter-
play across the fields of gender studies and simulation and gaming research largely 
explain, we demonstrate, the tiresome and worrying persistence of familiar themes 
and unremarkable findings from which research in this field has seldom wavered.
Common Research Pitfalls: Gender as Lack 
and Gender as Superfluity
The first, and arguably the largest and deepest of these research pitfalls is to construe 
and study gender as lack. Naive gender ontologies, in which existence is bifurcated 
into sexes and sexes into two, necessarily interrogate the “second sex” (de Beauvoir, 
1949/1973) in terms of lack (Phipps, 2007). Our review connects gender and gaming 
studies with prior, more extensive research on gender and technology more generally 
and undertakes to illustrate how this systematic methodological bias means that noth-
ing much that is new can be learned either about gender or about games and simulations, 
as through persistently descriptive accounts of girls/women and gaming, familiar gender 
assumptions and truisms are reaffirmed.
The second research pitfall is gender as superfluity. Gender is invoked in such studies 
merely to dismiss it as an insignificant factor. Much current quantitative research, includ-
ing reports on the number of women/girls playing video games, tends to fall into this 
category of research, which, bent on the inevitably reassuring counting and calculating 
of what is, does not problematize nor deeply interrogate either of its axiomatic terms.
From neither of these methodological orientations has much been able to be learned, 
either about gender or about simulation/gaming, since neither term is, by virtue of either 
perspective’s methodological precommitments, the point or purpose of the inquiry.
Research that breaks out of these constraints does so first and foremost by recasting 
the purpose of gender and gaming research: Very different questions and ways of 
Jenson and de Castell 53
answering them become possible when researchers aim to destabilize and reorganize 
concepts and practices, rather than describe and reauthorize them.
Greater promise resides, we argue, with alternative and more productive frame-
works for gender and gaming inquiry. For example, McDermott and Varenne’s (2006) 
question of when is gender asks at what point and in what context is any particular 
enactment taken up and denominated as “gendered,” and actor-network analyses study 
how agency gets remediated through material conditions and technologies that afford 
competence, both typically and atypically. The review will conclude with potential 
“new directions” that might release the category of gender and thereby gender-based 
game research from the self-imposed stranglehold of repetition, inaction, and “lack” 
that already constitute what it is we know or think we know. That is, we will suggest 
that the next 10 years of gender and simulation/game research might invite, indeed, 
cultivate and demand, “surprise” (Becker, 1998) from our subjects and ourselves.
Normative Positions: Gender 
and Technologies
It is difficult, if not outright impossible, to shake loose deeply engrained, hegemonic 
normative discourses and practices that demarcate, delimit, and predominate everyday 
gendered subject positions, especially in relation to technologies. While not the explicit 
purpose of this review, it is necessary to foreground the work we will do here through 
the lens of this systemic recurrent feature of gender and technology studies more gen-
erally, as that had an early and sustained impact on how gender and gameplay was 
theorized.
Research on gender and technology has, in some sense, stalled in the past decade. 
The central issue remains untouched: that there is a relative paucity of women who 
“choose” computer science and engineering programs at the postsecondary level, that 
indeed these numbers have not increased in the past decade but decreased (Burrelli, 
2008; Dean, 2007), and that despite interventionist work, little has changed. In a review 
of international research on gender and technology over the past 30 years, Jane Abbiss 
(2008) broadly characterizes that work as being discursively situated in terms of “male 
norm and female deficit” (p. 2).
For example, researchers have documented consistent differences in computer use 
by males and females (American Association of University Women [AAUW], 1998, 
1999, 2000; Brosnan, 1999; Collis, Kass, & Kieren, 1989; Dugdale, DeKoven, & Ju, 
1998; Light, 1997; Lightbody & Durndell, 1996; Littleton & Bannert, 1999; Littleton 
& Hoyles, 2002; Siann, Macleod, Glissov, & Durndell, 1990; Sutton, 1991; H. Taylor 
& Mounfield, 1994). While administrators, teachers, parents, students and university-
based researchers alike have stressed the importance of the sciences and information 
technologies for the educational and vocational futures of all students, neither the 
number of girls enrolling in these subjects nor the number of women who go on to 
work in them has noticeably increased (Burrelli, 2008). If there is, in fact, any increase to 
be noticed, it is in the opposite direction as girls’ and women’s participation in especially 
54  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
computer science and engineering fields tends to be diminishing (Burrelli, 2008; 
Kramarae, 2001; Stabiner, 2003).
While it has been argued that technologies are gendered (Cockburn, 1992) as a 
result of the context or culture of their production, they also embody particular assum-
ptions about social relations. Writers such as Bryson and de Castell (1996), Cockburn 
(1992), and Wajcman (1991) outline ways in which women have not been alienated 
from technologies. Instead, they have sought to challenge what counts as “technol-
ogy” and have pointed out that often “technologies” are defined so as to exclude the 
technologies that women use and/or to “forget” women’s contributions to technologi-
cal innovation (e.g., Ada Lovelace’s construction of the “Analytical Engine”).2
Masculinity can be seen, on this view, to be constructed, at least partially, through 
assumptions related to technological skills and competence. Technological compe-
tence, so seen, has less to do with actual skills and more to do with construction of a 
gendered identity—that is, women lack technological competence to the extent that 
they seek to appropriately perform femininity; correlatively, men are technologically 
competent by virtue of their performance of masculinity.3 Cockburn (1992), Wajcman 
(1991), Turkle (1988), and Schofield (1995), to name a few, argued that one of the 
reasons that many women actively resist participation in masculinized technologies 
like computers is because it directly “threatens their identities as feminine,” and because 
these technologies are already categorized as activities that are appropriate for men. 
Technology cannot, therefore, be assumed to be a value-neutral tool that women and 
men use indiscriminately or free from social constructions of identity that continually 
(re)position them through markers like gender, race, nationality, or class. One different 
approach, then, to reading off the past 30 years of gender and technology research might 
be to do, as Abbiss (2008) suggests, and see it as discursively boxed in: “The inclina-
tion to blame females for their lack of involvement in the IT industry and in ‘hard’ 
computing courses is itself a reflection of the social structuring of gender and IT” (p. 162). 
This is no less the case in terms of gender and video games: The powerful association 
of masculine subjects as gamers and game designers as well as the presumption (through 
technologies generally) of (male) competence and ability have positioned women and girls 
unerringly as “less able,” “less competent,” and as “casual” gameplayers.
The Question of Gender: From 
Gender and IT to Gender and Video Games
We took the time to briefly overview work on gender and technology in order to show 
some of the foundational studies that work on gender and video games drew upon and 
from which it continues to draw. Another reason for this was to begin to show how the 
three areas we have chosen for organizing research on gender and gameplay over the 
past 20 years or so (i.e., female lack—of abilities, interest, use; axiomatic constructions 
of male/female; and new discursive positionings) are already present in and theorized 
by those doing work broadly on gender and technology. That research represents an 
invaluable starting point for research on gender and gameplay, providing insights and 
Jenson and de Castell 55
points of departure that we hope to show might be valuable for new work on gender 
and gameplay. It should be noted here that much of the focus of the field has been to 
investigate whether and how women/girls play games, who they play with, what they 
like to play, and so on.
This has been driven less by scholarly interest than by a perceived development and 
marketing question on the part of game developers with “how to get more women to 
buy games” as well as early work that construed play preferences as facts about “what 
women want” (de Castell & Bryson, 1998). This means, then, that there are few stud-
ies to date that focus exclusively on studying and theorizing the male gamer, as this has 
been the presumed “default” position from which much of the early work was done and 
later work has followed. Where possible, we will introduce some of the work that is 
out there on boys/men and gameplay. It should be noted, however, that much of this 
has been couched within a broader study of women/girls and gameplay.
Constructing the Female Gamer: 
Use, Attitudes, and Preferences
Work on gender and video game play is relatively scarce before the publication of 
Justine Cassell and Henry Jenkins’s (1998) edited collection From Barbie to Mortal 
Kombat. Prior to that, most of the research in the area of gender and computer game-
play had been confined to studies that were focused on the technological dimension of 
games, situating computer games as part of the larger domain of “gender and technol-
ogy” studies (Abbiss, 2008; Culley, 1993). Cassell and Jenkins’s (1998) collection, 
then, marked off “gender and video games” as a particular realm of study within the 
more general debates on gender and technology.
It is no accident that the early work on gender and gameplay arose out of an 
expressed concern for the perceived lack of women and girls in the field of computing 
(Cassell & Jenkins, 1998). Cassell and Jenkins theorized, and others have since (AAUW, 
2000), that perhaps one entry point for girls and women into the world of computing 
might be generated (as it appeared to have been in anecdotal accounts of their male 
peers) through the development of skill and interest in playing video games. Crosscut 
with market-driven interest in increasing “share’” and profitability by engaging an as 
yet largely “untapped” sector, what this “concern” materially and theoretically produced 
were accounts of gender and gameplay in terms of attitudes toward and preferences 
for certain types of games as well as documentation of who was playing games and 
how often.
In Cassell and Jenkins’s collection, the articles were concerned not only with this 
underrepresentation but also with what they saw as the strong potential of digital 
gameplay to assist technological familiarity and skill on behalf of the player. Here also 
was a discussion of “player preferences” (Cassell & Jenkins, 1998), that is, what sorts 
of games girls “liked” and “did not like” as well as a more nuanced discussion of the 
gendered nature of play itself (de Castell & Bryson, 1998). Following in the footsteps 
of the games industry focus on creating appealing titles for girls, girls’ preferences in 
56  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
games were unproblematically reported, for example, as being “collaborative” and 
“exploratory” and shying away from “confrontation” and “violence” (Grodal, 2000).
This black boxing of gender has been a recurring theme in gender and digital game 
studies since the late 1990s. In 2000, for example, THE SIMS was released and has 
since, through its expansions and the release of SIMS 2, been the top-selling PC game 
of all time. The industry, of course, took notice: Girls and women were buying and 
playing the game in record numbers. THE SIMS, and its franchise, it has since been 
argued, is successful as a “crossover hit” for a number of reasons:
1. Its design team included women.
2. Its premise is that of an elaborate dollhouse.
3. It provided different and frequent kinds of “interaction” that appealed to a 
female audience.
4. It was essentially nonviolent.
However, the success of THE SIMS did not lead to more appealing “games for girls,” 
and women continue to be radically underrepresented in the industry (International 
Game Developer’s Association [IGDA], 2005). That said, the success of THE SIMS, 
in part, renewed an interest in designing games for girls. Sheri Graner Ray’s (2004) 
work Gender Inclusive Game Design: Expanding the Market attempts to tackle the 
question of design of video games for a “nontraditional market” (e.g., women and girls) 
through an essentialized and highly stereotyped account of differences and preferences 
between male and female players and how designers can design more effectively to 
capture a female audience.
Taking a completely different tack, the academy has begun to move away from 
universalistic, stereotyped accounts of gender and gameplay. While girls and women 
certainly are less visible as gamers, that is not to say they are not playing (Bryce & 
Rutter, 2003; Carr, 2005; Jenson & de Castell, 2005; T. L. Taylor, 2006). They have 
been and are playing, supported in their play by their male relations (brothers, uncles, 
fathers, boyfriends, husbands), and have created communities of their own (e.g., Frag 
Dolls, Quake Grrls, Riot Grrls, and numerous all-female COUNTERSTRIKE com-
munities). Discourses around “preferences,” moreover, have moved from simple 
binaries (violence/no violence, collaborative/competitive—e.g., Ray, 2004; Turkle, 
1984/2005) to being seen as highly contextual and therefore dependent on social, 
cultural, and other quotidian factors rather than simply on what a girl might “like” or 
“dislike” in any enduring or dispositional way (Carr, 2005; Jenson & de Castell, 
2005; Krotoski, 2004; Yee, 2008). Gradually, it has begun to be clear that while girls 
and women do play, what and how they play is always negotiable, context dependent, 
and usually not necessarily in the company of other girls or female players. As Nick 
Yee (2008) concludes from his ongoing survey-based research on massively multi-
player online games like WORLD OF WARCRAFT:
The reality is that those men and women who currently play online games are 
overwhelmingly similar in terms of what they like to do with them. And 
Jenson and de Castell 57
stereotypical assumptions of gender motivations are either nonsignificant . . . or 
are dwarfed by differences in age. (pp. 94-95)
Female Gamers: It Is Those  
Who Choose Who Play
The relatively (compared with men and boys) smaller number of women and girls 
who play games has, as indicated above, led to documentation of their play in an 
explicitly focused way since the late 1990s. This work has tended to interview female 
gamers about their play (when, where, with whom) and their thoughts generally on the 
(presumed) masculinized culture of gameplay (Cassell & Jenkins, 1998; Cunningham, 
2000; Ivory & Wilkerson, 2002; Media Analysis Laboratory, 1998; Schott & Horrell, 
2000;Yates & Littleton, 2001). In these studies, researchers tend to interview small 
numbers of girls and women, and it therefore remains the case that it is still relatively 
difficult to get reliable data on the play practices of women and girls. This is primar-
ily because gender is often accorded statistical status to, analytically, dismiss it. In 
other words, in quantitative surveys of video game ownership and play, data disag-
gregated by gender are used to show that women and girls are playing games, a 
finding that then warrants analytical disinterest in further questions of what kinds 
of games, for how long, and in what relation to their male peers. So this “play or 
don’t play” data, if useful at all, only serve as a kind of “check mark,” justifying 
dismissal of what are quite possibly very different play patterns, preferences, and 
possibilities.
Two large, often-cited surveys that publish data on video game players in North 
America are the Kaiser Family Foundation (http://www.kff.org/entmedia/) and the 
Entertainment Software Association (http://www.theesa.com). According to Kaiser 
Family Foundation’s (2005) large survey (over 2,000 respondents and over 600 seven-
day media-use diaries) of media and children, the percentage of those girls surveyed 
who had a videogame console in their bedroom was 33 (63% of boys reported having 
a videogame console in their bedroom), while the percentage of girls with handheld 
videogames was 48 (63% of boys). What these statistics do not do is give a clear 
picture of what kind of videogame consoles and games respondents self-reported as 
having access to in their bedrooms (e.g., DANCE DANCE REVOLUTION? HALO 
3?). They did, however, ask respondents to indicate approximate time spent playing 
console and handheld games, concluding that there is a marked gender difference in 
terms of time spent on video game play:
Video games are clearly gender-typed. Boys are much more likely than girls to 
play video games on any given day (63% vs. 40%, respectively), and to spend 
more than an hour daily with video games (31% vs. 11%). Boys spend almost 
three times as much time as girls playing video games (1:12 vs. 0:25) . . . Similarly, 
boys spend triple the time that girls spend playing console games (48 minutes 
vs. 14 minutes), but just double the time for handheld games (24 minutes vs. 11 
minutes). (Kaiser Family Foundation, 2005, p. 33)
58  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
A similar issue arises in the surveys conducted by the Entertainment Software 
Association (ESA). ESA’s statistics are general, quantitative, and based on self-repor ting 
of over 1,200 households that were asked about who plays and what they play (ESA, 
2008). In their most recent survey of who plays, ESA reports that 40% of gameplayers 
are female and the average age of players is 35 years, with significantly more women 
aged 18 years or older reportedly playing games. What they do not do is aggregate 
what people reportedly play by gender or by age. While these statistics might give us 
a broad idea of the numbers of people who claim to play video games, it still elides 
divergence in play: There is a big difference between someone who repo rtedly plays 
online free puzzle games and someone else who is paying for multiple subscriptions 
to play multiple characters in persistent world, massively multiplayer online 
games.
As noted, a less quantitative approach has also been taken in relation to female 
gamers. In particular, work by Royse Joon, Undrahbuyan, Hopson, and Consalvo 
(2007) and Thornham (2008), for example, explicitly documents the contexts of play 
for adult women gamers, including more nuanced accounts of when they choose not 
to play. Their work is adding to a growing body of literature (Bryce & Rutter, 2003; 
T. L. Taylor, 2006) that argues that while women might not occupy central positions 
in relation to games and gameplay in mainstream popular and/or commercial culture, 
that does not mean that they are not participating either on the margins or, in rare 
cases, more centrally. In particular, research of this kind has argued, along lines similar 
to Liesbet van Zoonen (2002) that, “the decisive moment in the circuit of culture is in 
the moment of consumption, when technologies are domesticated in everyday lives” 
(p. 16). We need to know a great deal more than we do now about how, for girls and 
women, game technologies are “domesticated in everyday lives.” More specifically, 
we must investigate whether the “moments of game consumption,” for women and 
girls, are less domesticated than disruptive, suggesting instances less of domestication 
and more of a form of “trouble in the house” (aka gender disorder).
For many, and certainly in ongoing popular cultural terms, girls and women are 
nowadays seen to be central consumers of games. For example, in his 2007 keynote 
address to the Game Developers Conference in San Francisco, California, revered 
game designer Miyamoto (Nintendo; notable titles include MARIO, DONKEY KONG, 
BRAIN AGE) jokingly presented his wife as a measure of his success in designing 
new games: The more she liked playing, the further she registered on the “Wife-O-Meter.” 
True success arrives for Miyamoto when he discovers that she has gotten up in the 
night to cast votes on Nintendo’s “Everybody Votes” channel on the new Wii, further 
joking that “it would have been less surprising to find Donkey Kong ransacking his 
house” (Sinclair, 2007).
For girls, consumption is more difficult to assess in domestic spaces: It seems that 
girls tend to have limited access to gameplay technologies and are more often and more 
intensively parentally regulated when it comes to what they can and cannot play. They 
often “wait in line” behind male relations when it comes to accessing both time and 
technology (Jenson & de Castell, 2007; Walkerdine, 2006). Given the difficulties of 
approaching the study of girls in domestic spaces, studies of their gameplay consumption 
Jenson and de Castell 59
has been most often located outside the home: at school-based game clubs (Carr, 2007; 
Jenson & de Castell, 2006, 2007; Kafai, 2008; Pelletier, 2008; Walkerdine, 2006, 2007) 
[AQ: 1] and in LAN cafes (Beavis & Charles, 2007). What is common to much of 
this work is the perceived and documented tension between the male cultures of game-
play, which actively construct and become a site for the production of “contemporary 
masculinity,” (Walkerdine, 2008) [AQ: 2] and “technologies of a gendered-self” 
(Royse et al., 2007) that colocate and restructure the masculine/feminine binary to con-
struct female gamers as something other than marginalized players. The tension in much 
of this work is the difficulty of writing about and indeed coconstructing and reconstruct-
ing masculinities and femininities in ways that do not simply reinforce and solidify the 
very gender stereotypes their participants seem to be pushing against.
Interventionist Work: Challenging 
Representation in Games
While the possibilities for choosing a female character in a video game have certainly 
increased, it is still the case that they are highly underrepresented in digital games gener-
ally, tending specifically to be more obviously sexualized than male characters (Beasley 
& Standley, 2002; Dietz, 1998; Dill, Gentile, Richter, & Dill, 2005; Haninger & Thompson, 
2004; Ivory, 2006; Provenzo, 1991; Smith, Lachlan, & Tamborini, 2003). Stand out 
characters like Lara Croft of the TOMB RAIDER series and Samus Eran from the 
METROID series have been held up as examples of a changing tide in the video games 
industry toward drawing less passive, more powerful female characters for its still 
largely male audience to consume and play. While there might be more active roles for 
female characters, it is still the case that they are drawn as highly sexualized characters 
with oversized breasts and lips and very little clothing. Furthermore, when female char-
acters are drawn in lead roles, they are almost exclusively White (Jansz & Martis, 2007).
Some have argued that the video game industry has responded to a call for more and 
variable female character choices in games. Lara Croft (TOMB RAIDER series) or 
Sonya (MORTAL KOMBAT) are no longer the only “girls in town”—players can 
choose from a range of female characters in most role-playing games, in nearly all 
MMORPGS, and in a range of other titles from MARIO KART to DIGIMON RACING. 
That said, sports games continue to focus on male teams and players: the one exception 
being the Wii “Sports” title, which rotates between male and female Nonplayer Char-
acters. Interestingly, much of this work quickly passes over the fact that male characters 
in games tend to be as hypersexualized as their female counterparts.
Disrupting the Masculine Culture 
of Games: Female Game Designers
The “first wave” of interest in and research on girls and gaming saw gameplay as a 
conduit to and support for developing confidence and competence with new technolo-
gies. In its “second wave,” not merely playing games, but the more complex and 
demanding challenge of designing them, has been promoted as a way to encourage and 
60  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
support girls in both computer use as well as via some levels and kinds of programming. 
In Yasmin Kafai’s (1995) groundbreaking constructivist research on children as game 
designers, findings with respect to girls’ designs paralleled claims about girls’ “prefer-
ences,” and the same kinds of results appeared in the later work of Walkerdine, Thomas, 
and Studdert. (1998). Until quite recently, neither these nor similar smaller studies have 
taken explicitly into account the context in which and the experiential background from 
which these designs were arrived at. This oversight presupposes by default that, for girls 
and boys, the video game area represents a “level playing field.” We have little reason 
to suppose and many reasons to doubt that this is in fact the case. Until both theory and 
research explicitly and actively take prior differences and occurrent contextual factors 
seriously into account, we cannot expect to find much deviation from gender stereotyp-
ing that has thus far dominated theory and research concerning gender and gaming.
This is no less true for work that has tried to focus directly on the number of women 
who are involved in the video games industry generally. The industry has been widely 
criticized for not building games that appeal to girls and women as well as for not 
hiring and retaining more female employees in key game design positions. A recent 
survey by Electronic Arts (a leading game design company), for example, found that 
only 40% of teenage girls play console games (compared with 90% of boys), and most 
of those leave behind their game playing after a year (http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/
technology/5271852.stm). In an effort to encourage girls in the design and develop-
ment of games, there have been a number of intervention-focused research projects 
carried out in North America to help give girls programming skills. Among them are 
the Rapunsel project (Flannagan, Howe, & Nissenbaum, 2007), the use of ALICE and 
STORYTELLING ALICE (open source software that allow users to create 3D games) 
to learn programming (Kelleher, 2006), and Jill Denner’s work with middle school 
girls and digital game creation (Denner, Werner, Bean, & Tyner, 2005). [AQ: 3] 
In the video game industry, the IGDA (2005) reports in a large-scale survey on 
demographics of workers at game companies in North America that women represent 
only 11% of employees, with most of those positions located in Human Resources. 
While some are reporting that the industry is seeking out “new markets” and as such 
“more women” (Schiesel, 2007) and, concomitantly that in general companies are not 
aware of a “gender imbalance” (Edge Staff, 2008), it is still the case that the most 
blatant stereotypes about women and girls and gameplay are rehearsed in the media. 
In a story that ran in the New York Times, Olaf Wolters, managing director of BIU, the 
German interactive game association, an organizer of a gameplay tournament in Germany, 
is quoted as saying, “In Germany, we’re very traditional and it’s probably why the 
girls get the dolls and the boys get the Game Boys. That is why we have to work on 
the parents, so they bring in the girls” (Carvajal, 2006).
Sex-Aggregated Studies of  
Violence and Video Game Playing
Studies of violence and video game play intersect tangentially with gender, insofar as 
they tend to be constructed out of the “media effects” research tradition and, because 
Jenson and de Castell 61
of their psychological background, tended early on to disaggregate data by sex (Anderson, 
2004; Anderson & Bushman, 2001; Barlett, Anderson, & Swing, 2009; Bushman, 
2001; [AQ: 4] Eastin, 2006; Funk, 1993; Shibuya, Sakamoto, Ihori, & Yukawa, 
2008; Tamborini et al., 2004). Of note in this literature is the historical documentation 
of “little to no difference” between males and females at least when arguing that vio-
lent video game play initiates violent behaviors (much like watching violent TV does). 
For example, in their meta-analysis of the studies of the effects of violence and video 
game play, Anderson and Bushman (2001) found no sex-based differences for aggres-
sive behaviors.
Sociocultural Studies of 
Gameplay in Context
A number of recent studies have focused on girls/women (boys/men) playing games in 
home, school, and some (public) LAN contexts (Beavis & Charles, 2005, 2007; Carr, 
2007; Carr, Buckingham, Burn, & Schott, 2006; Jenson & de Castell, 2008; Walkerdine, 
2007). What unites this work is a qualitative approach to documentation of the research, 
which helps to “uncover” and, more importantly, outline how, where, when, why, and 
with whom girls and women are playing games. Much of this work argues that context 
is critical to an understanding of gender and gameplay (Dovey & Kennedy, 2006) and 
that much that has been written on what girls/women “prefer” to play is seriously dis-
rupted by attending closely to the lived practices and daily choices of women/girls as 
they play games (Carr, 2007; Jenson & de Castell, 2008; Kafai, 2008; Thornham, 2008).
Sociocultural studies of play tend to mobilize an understanding of gender identity 
as contingent and tenuous, performed differently by subjects working (and playing) in 
determinate contexts. Seeing digital gaming as a terrain where gender is enacted, 
indeed “performed,” requires attending to the ways players (including both “research-
ers” and “subjects”) engage with technologies that enable and constrain certain forms 
of experience,4 and change not only what and how they play but also how they interact 
with others as they become more competent at a particular game or genre. It also 
requires moving away from conceptualizations of gender either as insoluble, sex-
based difference or as monolithic and largely static categories (Ray, 2004).
Sociocultural studies are pushing back against taken-for-granted presumptions 
that are attributed to gender. More specific, they challenge commonly held assump-
tions that, for example:
• girls and women prefer a certain type of game,
• that they eschew violence and competition, and
• that they are not “interested” in playing games as much or as frequently as 
their male counterparts
Diane Carr (2005), for example, studied a girls game club in an all-girls’ school in 
which she examined the “relationships between taste, content, context and competence, 
in order to explore the multiple factors that feed into users’ choices and contribute to 
62  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
the formation of gaming preferences” (p. 466). She concludes, not with a reinscription 
of gendered gameplay preferences (e.g., what games the girls in her study most preferred 
to play), but instead by acknowledging that while it is possible to “map patterns” for play 
preferences, to do that assumes that they are stable instead of preferences being “an 
assemblage, made up of past access and positive experiences and subject to situation 
and context” (p. 479). Finally, and importantly, Carr stresses that,
What did become apparent was that the girls’ increasing gaming competencies 
enabled them to identify and access the different potential play experiences 
offered by specific games, and to selectively actualize these potentials according 
to circumstance and prerogative. This indicates that forms of competency under-
lie and inform our gaming preferences—whatever our gender. (p. 478)
It might well be, then, that competency has been too often misrecognized as some 
factual attribute for gender, and the more recent work of Jenson & de Castell (2008) 
supports this claim.
While there is then, a growing body of work on gender and gameplay that exam-
ines play in school-based contexts, there is still very little that documents home play 
or play in LANS (Beavis & Charles, 2007; Lin, 2008; Schott, 2006; [AQ: 5]
Thornham, 2008) as it relates in particular to group play and gender. Thornham’s eth-
nographic study of groups of households who play games offers the first larger scale 
study of this kind, and she argues persuasively that:
Returning video games to the home, and discussing them in terms of their socio-
cultural and discursive importance or shaping, is therefore a vital and necessary 
act if the lived cultures or cultural practices of video games are to be understood. 
This move also offers a more nuanced and socio-political account of gaming 
which encompasses primarily the consumption, but also production and market-
ing, elements of gaming. (p. 141)
In the work of Jo Bryce and Jason Rutter (2003, 2005), this “move” has led them to 
study how the physical spaces of gaming (arcades, living rooms, bedrooms) are materially 
and discursively positioned in ways that maintain boys as the “natural” users of game 
technologies.
These studies are further reinforced by a growing body of work that examines 
gameplay in other cultural contexts (Scandinavia, Japan, Taiwan, and Korea, for 
example) and at the kinds of differences that are culturally located. T. L. Taylor (2008) 
writes about new interventionist work being done in Scandinavia to disrupt and chal-
lenge the usual kinds of games that are produced by large commercial companies, 
Holin Lin (2008) studies the regulation and resistance to that regulation of female 
game players in Taiwan, and Mizuko Ito (2008) looks at the intersection of gender and 
gameplay within a Japanese “media mix” culture that celebrates a hybrid engagement 
and play with a usually rigid Japanese social structure. Ito concludes that masculine/
Jenson and de Castell 63
feminine binaries are much less rigid on closer inspection, stating that: “Despite the resil-
ience of gender-differentiated social and cultural structure in Japan, the on-the-ground 
dynamics of media mixing, media engagement and play are evidence of a shifting set 
of gender dynamics intersecting with gaming cultures” (p. 109).
New Directions? Steering Away 
From Stereotypes
In a 2008 characterization of gender and video games for an updated edited collection 
Beyond Barbie to Mortal Kombat, Henry Jenkins and Justine Cassells argue that the 
key issues for gender are focused still on girls play and that they have largely remained 
unchanged in the intervening 10 years, namely: “(a) the debate about whether girls do 
and can and should play video games and (b) the concern that women are still vastly 
underrepresented in the fields that design digital technology” (p. 5). As this review has 
indicated, of the growing body of research that has documented girls/women playing 
and (sometimes) making games that has taken shape in the past 10 years, much has 
continued to produce positivistic accounts of what women/girls want, what they prefer, 
and what they like. In some sense, this work has paralleled, as we have shown, the research 
on gender and technology generally, continuing to focus primarily on the documentation 
of “choice,” “lack of interest,” and “differing ability” from their generalized and 
technolo gically able male counterparts. Far fewer studies, as noted, examine male 
players (individually or as a group) and/or the masculine culture of digital game play, 
commerce, commercialization, and media specifically.
What remains in most of this work is a predominant, indeed, an almost intuitive 
reflex to crudely attribute “difference” as demarcated by male/female sex binaries.5 
This reflex is present in even the most current work on gender and digital game play 
and presents itself no less persistently in research that sees itself as assiduously 
attempting not to reinvoke gender-/sex-based stereotypes.
Both an operational and a conceptual misunderstanding seem to underpin much of 
this kind of work: In documenting (largely) qualitative research projects that involve 
both boys/girls and/or men/women, research accounts continue to compress gender-
based differences into sex-based difference necessarily coded as male or female. If, 
however, this research documented the range of possibilities for gender-based play 
(as one example), then the reporting on this research could more usefully include far 
more nuanced accounts of feminized male play or masculinized female play. Lacking 
such finer grained gender-based analyses, research reporting still produces the fol-
lowing familiar kind of account:
We found that male playtesters would figure out how to play the game, and 
progress from beginning to end whether or not they were particularly interested 
in it. Female playtesters were slow to learn and unmotivated to progress until the 
game content and story align better with themes and topics they found interest-
ing. (Heeter & Winn, 2008) [AQ: 6]
64  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
This kind of operational misunderstanding (which is ubiquitous and is not at all 
unique to Heeter and Winn’s, 2008, study) encourages the further persistent conceptual 
misunderstanding, that somehow all girls/women and all boys/men will have similar 
approaches under similar conditions. Such deeply structured presumptions of differ-
ence between and among girls/women and boys/men has sustained a persistent conce-
ptual stranglehold on identities as singular, immutable, unchangeable forces governing 
how we learn, how we think, and how we play. One very real implication of these 
forces has been made manifest in the past two International Digital Games Research 
Association Conference keynotes (DiGRA 2007, DiGRA 2009) in which all the 
prominent positions in the conference (keynotes) were given to male researchers, and 
this is entirely typical of conferences in this field, despite the fact that there are many 
women who do comparable, arguably more critical, digital games research.
In the future, the very real need for research on gender and gameplay that more 
carefully reports on, documents, and troubles identities of player, producers, and con-
sumers of digital games, especially in relation to gender, cannot be underestimated. In 
particular, this work would begin from the more nuanced theories of gender and iden-
tities that have been developed through postmodern, poststructural, feminist, postfeminist, 
queer theory, and theories of race and identity and then approach questions around 
gender and gameplay with a view to reporting on and accounting for those kinds of 
difference. While we can appreciate, understand, and indulge Henry James’ (1908/1986) 
lament in Portrait of a Lady over a writer’s “woman problem” in contriving central 
role for strong female characters, we ought surely to harden our hearts in the present 
day: There is really no excuse for the persistence in games studies research of concep-
tual frameworks that from the start make no room for girls and women such as these 
nor for seeing the myriad ways James’ “portrait” is reimposed, surveilled, and enforced 
for women and girls in those “decisive moments” of their everyday lives. Computer-
supported play and pleasure might allow for them, as it has so successfully done for 
men and boys, new forms of play and pleasure, new avenues for learning and creativ-
ity, and new and highly profitable careers. How can it be intellectually defensible, with 
the volume and variety of critical deconstructive analyses of both “sex” and “gender” 
that has in these intervening years come to be so freely available to researchers, that 
gender-focused research treads relatively acquiescently along its timeworn game-
paths? Our best hope of hardening our hearts to more of the same will come only once 
we sharpen our wits: It is high time we took seriously and operationalized in our 
research methodology and practice the fact that not all women need be ladies and not 
all ladies are “frail vessels.”
Acknowledgments
A special thanks to Nick Taylor, Helen Kennedy, and Gareth Schott for their careful reading and 
helpful comments on the article.
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interests with respect to the authorship and/or 
publication of this article. [AQ: 7]
Jenson and de Castell 65
Funding
The authors received the following financial support for the research and/or authorship of this 
article:
This work was supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada. 
[AQ: 8]
Notes
1. As quoted in James (1908/1986, p. 48).
2. Ada Lovelace is considered to be one of the founders of scientific computing.
3. This is not to say that relations to technological competence are only about “performing” 
some predetermined masculine/feminine binary, which would, of course, severely limit the 
possibilities for challenging or changing gender-technology relations. We do, however, want 
to call attention to those practices or “performances” of masculinity and/or femininity that 
are familiar, as Benston (1992) strongly argues, “male use of technology communicates 
power and control . . . The whole realm of technology and the communication around it 
reinforces ideas of women’s powerlessness” (p. 41). [AQ: 9]
4. This includes, importantly, assuming the control of in-game characters that are often hyper-
sexualized and racialized; see, for example, Kennedy (2002), N. Taylor, Jenson, and de 
Castell (2007), and Everett (2005).
5. Here we want to distinguish between sex and gender in much the same ways that Gayle 
Rubin (1975) [AQ: 10]did so long ago in “The Traffic of Women” in which she argues 
that we are all a part of a universal sex-gender system. She defines the sex-gender system as 
“the set of arrangement by which a society transforms biological sexuality into products of 
human activity and in which these transformed sexual needs are satisfied” (p. 159). In other 
words, the sex is a biological marker, gender is socially constructed and both categories are 
used to establish and maintain heteronormative hierarchies.
References
Abbiss, J. (2008). Rethinking the “problem” of gender and IT schooling: Discourses in litera-
ture. Gender and Education, 20, 153-165.
American Association of University Women. (1998). Separated by sex: A critical look at single-
sex education for girls. Washington, DC: American Association for University Women Edu-
cational Foundation.
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation & American Institutes for 
Research. (1999). Gender gaps: Where schools still fail our children. New York: Marlowe.
American Association of University Women Educational Foundation Commission on Technol-
ogy, Gender, and Teacher Education. (2000). Tech-savvy: Educating girls in the new com-
puter age. Washington, DC: Author.
Anderson, C. A. (2004). An update on the effects of violent video games. Journal of Adoles-
cence, 27, 113-122.
Anderson, C. A., & Bushman, B. J. (2001). Effects of violent video games on aggressive behav-
ior, aggressive cognition, aggressive affect, physiological arousal, and prosocial behavior: 
A meta-analytic review of the scientific literature. Psychological Science, 12, 353-359.
66  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
Barlett, C. P., Anderson, C. A., & Swing, E. L. (2009). Videogame effects—Confirmed, sus-
pected and speculative: A review of the evidence. Simulation & Gaming: An Interdisciplin-
ary Journal, 40, 377-403.
Beasley, B., & Stanley, T. C. (2002). Shirts vs. skins: Clothing as an indicator of gender role 
stereotyping in video games. Mass Communication & Society, 5, 279-293.
Beavis, C. (2005, June). Pretty good for a girl: Gender, identity and computer games. In 
S. de Castell & J. Jenson (Eds.), Changing views: World in play. Vancouver, British Colum-
bia, Canada: University of Vancouver. Retrieved March 28, 2009, from the DiGRA Digital 
Library Web site: http://www.digra.org/dl/db/06276.30483.pdf [AQ: 11]
Beavis, C., & Charles, C. (2005). Challenging notions of gendered game play: Teenagers play-
ing The Sims. Discourse: Studies in the Cultural Politics of Education, 26, 355-368.
Beavis, C., & Charles, C. (2007). Would the “real” girl gamer please stand up? Gender, LAN 
cafes and the reformulation of the “girl” gamer. Gender and Education, 19, 691-705.
Becker, H. S. (1998). Tricks of the trade: How to think about your research while you’re doing 
it. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Belloc, H. (1936). The bad child’s book of beasts: Together with more beasts for worse children 
and cautionary tales. London: Duckworth. (Original work published 1923)
Benston, M. (1992). Women’s voices/men’s voices: Technology as language. In G. Kirkup & 
L. S. Keller (Eds.), Inventing women: Science, technology and gender (pp. 15-28). Cam-
bridge, UK: Polity.
Brosnan, M. (1999). New methodology, and old story? Gender differences in the “draw-a-computer-
user” test. European Journal of Psychology of Education, 14, 375-385.
Bryce, J., & Rutter, J. (2003). The gendering of computer gaming: Experience and space. In 
S. Fleming, & Jones, I. (Eds.), Leisure cultures: Investigations in sport, media and technol-
ogy (pp. 3-22). Eastbourne, UK: Leisure Studies Association.
Bryce, J., & Rutter, J. (2005). Gendered gaming in gendered space. In J. Raessens & J. Goldstein 
(Eds.), Handbook of computer games studies (pp. 301-310). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bryson, M., & de Castell, S. (1996). Learning to make a difference: Gender, new technologies, 
and in/equity. Mind, Culture and Activity, 3, 119-135.
Burrelli, J. (2008, July). Thirty-three years of women in S&E faculty positions. Retrieved March 
28, 2009, from the National Science Foundation Web site: http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/
infbrief/nsf08308/nsf08308.pdf
Bushman, B. J., & Anderson, C. A. (2002). Violent video games and hostile expectations: 
A test of the general aggression model. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 
1679-1686. [AQ: 12]
Carr, D. (2005). Contexts, gaming pleasures, and gendered preferences. Simulation & Gaming: 
An Interdisciplinary Journal, 36, 464-482.
Carr, D. (2007). Computer games in classrooms and the question of cultural baggage. British 
Journal of Educational Technology, 38, 526-528.
Carr, D., Buckingham, D., Burn, A., & Schott, G. (2006). Computer games: Text, narrative and 
play. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
Carvajal, D. (2006, September 4). The game is on to woo the elusive female player. International 
Herald Tribune. Retrieved March 28, 2009, from http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/04/
technology/04games.html
Jenson and de Castell 67
Cassell, J., & Jenkins, H. (Eds). (1998). From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and computer 
games. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Cassell, J., & Jenkins, H. (2008). From Quake Girls to Desperate Housewives: A decade of gen-
der and computer games. In Y. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie 
and Mortal Kombat: New perspectives on gender and gaming (pp. 5-20). Cambridge: MIT 
Press. [AQ: 13]
Chisholm, T. A., & Krishnakumar, P. (1981). Are computer simulations sexist? Simulation & 
Gaming: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 12, 279-292
Cockburn, C. (1992). The circuit of technology: Gender, identity and power. In R. Silverstone 
& E. Hirsch (Eds.), Consuming technologies: Media and information in domestic spaces 
(pp. 33-42). London: Routledge.
Collis, B. A., Kass, H., & Kieren, T. (1989). National trends in computer use among Canadian 
secondary school students: Implications for cross-cultural analyses. Journal of Research on 
Computing in Education, 22(1), 77-89.
Culley, L. (1993). Gender equity and computing in secondary schools: Issues and strategies for 
teachers. In J. Beynon & H. Mackay (Eds.), Computers into classrooms: More questions 
than answers (pp. 147-159). London: Falmer Press.
Cunningham, H. (2000). Mortal Kombat and computer game girls. In J. Caldwell (Ed.), Elec-
tronic media and technoculture (pp. 213-226). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press.
de Beauvoir, S. (1973). The second sex (H. M. Parshley, Ed. & Trans.). New York: Vintage 
Books. (Original work published 1949)
de Castell, S., & Bryson, M. (1998). Retooling play: Dystopia, dysphoria, and difference. In 
J. Cassell & H. Jenkins (Eds.), From Barbie to Mortal Kombat: Gender and computer games 
(pp. 232-261). Cambridge: MIT Press.
de Castell, S., & Jenson, J. (2006a). Education, gaming and serious play: New attentional econ-
omies. In J. Weiss, J. Nolan, & P. Trifonas (Eds.), International handbook on virtual learn-
ing environments (pp. 999-1018). New York: Kluwer Academic. [AQ: 14]
de Castell, S., & Jenson, J. (2006b). No place like home: Sexuality, community and identity among 
street-involved “queer and questioning” youth. McGill Journal of Education, 41, 226-247. 
[AQ: 15]
Dean, C. (2007, April 17). Computer science takes steps to bring women into the fold. New York 
Times. Retrieved March 23, 2009, from http://www.nytimes.com/2007/04/17/science/17comp.
html
Dietz, T. L. (1998). An examination of violence and gender role portrayals in video games: 
Implications for gender socialization and aggressive behavior. Sex Roles, 38, 425-442.
Dill, K. E., Gentile, D. A., Richter, W. A., & Dill, J. C. (2005). Violence, sex, race and age 
in popular video games: A content analysis. In E. Cole & J. H. Daniel (Eds.), Featuring 
females: Feminist analyses of the media (pp. 115-130). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association.
Dovey, J., & Kennedy, H. (2006). Game cultures: Computer games as new media. New York: 
Open University Press.
Dugdale, S., DeKoven, E., & Ju, M. (1998). Computer course enrollment, home computer access, 
and gender: Relationships to high school students’ success with computer spreadsheet use for 
problem solving in pre-algebra. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 18(1), 49-62.
68  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
Eastin, M. S. (2006). Video game violence and the female player: Self- and opponent gender 
effects on presence and aggressive thoughts. Human Communication Research, 32, 351-372.
Edge Staff. (2008, March 10). Why the gender imbalance must be addressed. Retrieved March 28, 
2009, from http://www.edge-online.com/features/why-gender-imbalance-must-be-addressed
Entertainment Software Association. (2008). 2008 sales demographic and usage data: Essen-
tial facts about the computer and video game industry. Washington, DC: Author.
Everett, A. (2005). Serious play: Playing with race in contemporary gaming culture. In J. Raessens 
& J. Goldstein (Eds.), Handbook of computer game studies (pp. 311-326). Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Flanagan, M., Howe, D., & Nissenbaum, H. (2007). Design method outline for activist gam-
ing. In S. de Castell & J. Jenson (Eds), Worlds in play: International perspectives on digital 
games research (pp. 241-248). New York: Peter Lang.
Funk, J. B. (1993). Reevaluating the impact of video games. Clinical Pediatrics, 32, 86-90.
Grodal, T. (2000). Video games and the pleasure of control. In D. Zillman & P. Vorderer (Eds.), 
Media entertainment: The psychology of its appeal (pp. 197-213). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum.
Haninger, K., & Thompson, K. M. (2004, February 18). Content and ratings of teen-rated video 
games. Journal of the American Medical Association, 291, 856-865.
Heeter, C., & Winn, B. (2008). Gender identity, play style, and the design of games for class-
room learning. In Y. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal 
Kombat: New perspectives on gender and gaming (pp. 281-300). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Heintz-Knowles, K., & Henderson, J. (2002, August). Gender, violence and victimization in 
top-selling video games. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Association for Educa-
tion in Journalism and Mass Communication, Miami Beach, FL. [AQ: 16] 
International Game Developers Association. (2005). Game developer demographics: An explo-
ration of workforce diversity. Retrieved March 28, 2009, from http://www.igda.org/diversity/
report.php [AQ: 17]
Ito, M. (2008). Mobilizing the imagination in everyday play: The case of Japanese media mixes. 
In S. Livingstone & K. Drotner (Eds.), International handbook of children, media, and culture 
(pp. 397-412). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ivory, J. D. (2006). Still a man’s game: Gender representation in online reviews of video games. 
Mass Communication and Society, 9, 103-114.
Ivory, J. D., & Wilkerson, H. (2002, August). Video games are from Mars, not Venus: Gender, 
electronic game play and attitudes toward the medium. Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass Communication, Miami Beach, FL.
James, H. (1986). The portrait of a lady. London: Penguin Classics. (Original work published 
1908)
Jansz, J., & Martis, R. G. (2007). The Lara phenomenon: Powerful female characters in video 
games. Sex Roles, 56, 141.
Jenson, J., & de Castell, S. (2005). Her own boss: Gender and the pursuit of incompetent play. In 
S. de Castell & J. Jenson (Eds.), Changing views: World in play. Vancouver, British Colum-
bia, Canada: University of Vancouver. Retrieved March 28, 2009, from the DiGRA Digital 
Library Web site: http://www.digra.org/dl/db/06278.27455.pdf
Jenson and de Castell 69
Jenson, J., & de Castell, S. (2006, October). You’re going to die: Gender, performance and 
digital gameplay. Paper presented at the Computers and Advanced Technology in Education 
(CATE) Conference, Lima, Peru.
Jenson, J., & de Castell, S. (2007). Girls playing games: Rethinking stereotypes. Futureplay 
2007, November, 9-16.
Jenson, J., & de Castell, S. (2008). Theorizing gender and digital gameplay: Oversights, acci-
dents and surprises. Eludamos. Journal for Computer Game Culture, 2(1), 15-25.
Kafai, Y. B. (1995). Minds in play: Computer game design as a context for children’s learning. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kafai, Y. B. (2008). Genderplay in a tween gaming club. In Y. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner, & 
J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New perspectives on gender and gaming 
(pp. 111-124). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Kaiser Family Foundation. (2005). Kids & media @ the new millennium (Program for the Study 
of Entertainment Media and Health). Retrieved April 14, 2009, from http://www.kff.org/
entmedia/1535-index.cfm
Kelleher, C. A. (2006). Using 3D gaming technology to draw students into computer science. Paper 
presented at the Game Design and Technology Workshop and Conference, Liverpool, UK.
Kelleher, C. (2008). Using storytelling to introduce girls to computer programming. (2008). In 
Y. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New 
perspectives on gender and gaming (pp. 247-264). Cambridge: MIT Press. [AQ: 18] 
Kennedy, H. W. (2002). Lara Croft: Feminist icon or cyberbimbo? Game Studies, 2(2). Retrieved 
March 28, 2009, from http://www.gamestudies.org/0202/kennedy/
Kramarae, C. (2001). The third shift: Women learning online. Washington, DC: American Asso-
ciation for University Women Educational Foundation.
Krotoski, A. (2004). Chicks and joysticks: An exploration of women and gaming. London: 
Entertainment and Leisure Software Publishers Association.
Light, P. (1997). Computers for learning: Psychological perspectives. Journal of Child Psychol-
ogy and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines, 38, 497-504.
Lightbody, P., & Durndell, A. (1996). The masculine image of careers in science and technol-
ogy: Fact or fantasy? British Journal of Educational Psychology, 66, 231-246.
Lin, H. (2008). Body, space and gendered gaming experiences: A cultural geography of homes, 
dormitories and cybercafes. In Y. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie 
and Mortal Kombat: New perspectives on gender and gaming (pp. 67-81). Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Littleton, K., & Bannert, M. (1999). Situating differences: The case of gender and computer 
technology. In J. Bliss, R. Säljö, & P. Light (Eds.), Advances in learning and instruction 
series (pp. 171-182). Amsterdam: Pergamon.
Littleton, K., & Hoyles, C. (2002). The gendering of information technology. In N. Yelland, & 
A. Rubin (Eds.), Ghosts in the machine: Women’s voices in research with technology 
(pp. 3-32). New York: Peter Lang.
McDermott, R., & Varenne, H. (2006). Reconstructing culture in educational research. In 
G. Spindler & L. Hammond (Eds.), Innovations in educational ethnography: Theory, methods, 
and results (pp. 3-32). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
70  Simulation & Gaming 41(1)
Media Analysis Laboratory. (1998, October). Video game culture: Leisure and play preferences 
of B.C. teens. Burnaby, British Columbia, Canada: Simon Fraser University. Retrieved March 
28, 2009, from http://www.media-awareness.ca/english/resources/research_documents/studies/
video_games/video_game_culture.cfm
Phipps, A. (2007). Re-inscribing gender binaries: Deconstructing the dominant discourse around 
women’s equality in science, engineering, and technology. Sociological Review, 55, 511-528.
Provenzo, E. (1991). Video kids: Making sense of Nintendo. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
Ray, S. G. (2004). Gender inclusive game design: Expanding the market. Hingham, MA: 
Charles River Media.
Royce, P., Joon, L., Undrahbuyan, B., Hopson, M., & Consalvo, M. (2007). Women and games: 
Technologies of the gendered self. New Media & Society, 9, 555-576.
Schiesel, S. (2007, February 11). Game on: Hero returns to slay his dragons. New York Times. 
Retrieved March 28, 2009, from http://www.nytimes.com [AQ: 19]
Schofield, J. W. (1995). Computers and classroom culture. Cambridge, MA: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Schott, G. R., & Horrell, K. R. (2000). Girl gamers and their relationship with the gaming culture. 
Convergence: The International Journal of Research into New Media Technologies, 6(4), 36-53.
Shibuya, A., Sakamoto, A., Ihori, N., & Yukawa, S. (2008). The effects of the presence and 
contexts of video game violence on children: A longitudinal study in Japan. Simulation & 
Gaming: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 39, 528-539.
Siann, G., Macleod, H., Glissov, P., & Durndell, A. (1990). The effect of computer use on gen-
der differences in attitudes to computers. Computers & Education, 14, 183-191.
Sinclair, B. (2007, March 8). GDC 07: Miyamoto speaks. Gamespot. Retrieved March 28, 2009, from 
http://www.gamespot.com/wii/sports/wiisports/news.html?sid=6167078&cpage=37&prev_
button=1
Smith, S. L., Lachlan, K., & Tamborini, R. (2003). Popular video games: Quantifying the pre-
sentation of violence and its context. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 47(1), 
58. Retrieved March 26, 2009, from Gale database. [AQ: 20]
Stabiner, K. (2003, January 12). Where the girls aren’t. New York Times. Retrieved March 28, 
2009, from http://www.nytimes.com/2003/01/12/education/where-the-girls-aren-t.html
Sutton, R. E. (1991). Equity and computers in the schools: A decade of research. Review of 
Educational Research, 61, 475-503.
Tamborini, R., Eastin, M. S., Skalski, P., Lachlan, K., Fediuk, T. A., & Brady, R. (2004). Violent vir-
tual video games and hostile thoughts. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 48, 335-357.
Taylor, H., & Mounfield, L. (1994). Exploration of the relationship between prior comput-
ing experience and gender on success in college computer science. Journal of Educational 
Computing, 11, 291-306.
Taylor, N., Jenson, J., & de Castell, S. (2007, September). Gender in play: Mapping a girls’ gam-
ing club. In B. Akira (Ed.), Situated play (pp. 302-308). Tokyo: The University of Tokyo. 
Retrieved March 28, 2009, from the DiGRA Digital Library Web site: http://www.digra.org/
dl/search_results?general_search_index=Gender+in+play%3A+Mapping+a+girls%92+ga
ming+club&SUBMIT=Search
Jenson and de Castell 71
Taylor, T. L. (2006). Play between worlds: Exploring online game culture. Cambridge: MIT 
Press.
Taylor, T. L. (2008). Becoming a player: Networks, structures, and imagined futures. In Y. 
Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: New per-
spectives on gender and gaming (pp. 51-65). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Thornham, H. (2008). “It’s a boy thing”: Gaming, gender and geeks. Feminist Media Studies, 
8, 127-142.
Turkle, S. (1988). Computational reticence: Why women fear the intimate machine. In C. Kramarae 
(Ed.), Technology and women’s voices: Keeping in touch (pp. 41-61). London: Routledge.
Turkle, S. (2005). The second self: Computers and the human spirit. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
(Original work published 1984)
van Zoonen, L. (2002). Gendering the internet: Claims, controversies and cultures, European 
Journal of Communication, 17(1), 5-23.
Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism confronts technology. University Park: Pennsylvania State 
University Press.
Walkerdine, V. (2006). Playing the game: Young girls performing feminity in videogame play. 
Feminist Media Studies, 6, 519-537.
Walkerdine, V. (2007). Children, gender, video games: Towards a relational approach to multi-
media. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Walkerdine, V., Thomas, A., & Studdert, D. (1998). Young children and video games: Danger-
ous pleasures and pleasurable dangers. Retrieved June 30, 2008, from http://creativetech-
nology.salford.ac.uk/fuchs/projects/downloads/young_children_and_videogames.htm
Yates, S., & Littleton, K. (2001). Understanding computer game cultures: A situated approach. 
In E. Green and A. Adam (Eds.), Virtual gender: Technology, consumption and identity 
(pp. 103-23). London: Routledge.
Yee, N. (2008). Maps of digital desires: Exploring the topography of gender and play in online 
games. In Y. Kafai, C. Heeter, J. Denner, & J. Sun (Eds.), Beyond Barbie and Mortal Kombat: 
New perspectives on gender and gaming (pp. 83-96). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Bios
Jennifer Jenson is an associate professor of pedagogy and technology in the Faculty of Educa-
tion, York University, Canada. She is coeditor of Loading: A Journal of the Canadian Game 
Studies Association and has published on gender and technology and gender and video games. 
Contact: jjenson@edu.yorku.ca.
Suzanne de Castell is a professor and interim dean of the Faculty of Education, Simon Fraser 
University. She is editor of Worlds in Play: International Perspectives on Digital Games 
Research (2008) and has recent publications on digital games and education, gender and game-
play, and informal learning environments. Contact: decaste@sfu.ca.

