LETTERS
Behavioural improvements with thalamic stimulation
after severe traumatic brain injury
N. D. Schiff1, J. T. Giacino2,3, K. Kalmar2, J. D. Victor1, K. Baker4, M. Gerber2, B. Fritz2, B. Eisenberg2, J. O’Connor2,
E. J. Kobylarz1, S. Farris4, A. Machado4, C. McCagg2, F. Plum1, J. J. Fins5 & A. R. Rezai4
Widespread loss of cerebral connectivity is assumed to underlie
the failure of brain mechanisms that support communication and
goal-directed behaviour following severe traumatic brain injury.
Disorders of consciousness that persist for longer than 12 months
after severe traumatic brain injury are generally considered to be
immutable; no treatment has been shown to accelerate recovery or
improve functional outcome in such cases1,2. Recent studies have
shown unexpected preservation of large-scale cerebral networks in
patients in the minimally conscious state (MCS)3,4, a condition
that is characterized by intermittent evidence of awareness of self
or the environment5. These findings indicate that there might be
residual functional capacity in some patients that could be sup-
ported by therapeutic interventions. We hypothesize that further
recovery in some patients in the MCS is limited by chronic under-
activation of potentially recruitable large-scale networks. Here, in
a 6-month double-blind alternating crossover study, we show that
bilateral deep brain electrical stimulation (DBS) of the central
thalamus modulates behavioural responsiveness in a patient
who remained in MCS for 6 yr following traumatic brain injury
before the intervention. The frequency of specific cognitively
mediated behaviours (primary outcome measures) and functional
limb control and oral feeding (secondary outcome measures)
increased during periods in which DBS was on as compared with
periods in which it was off. Logistic regression modelling shows a
statistical linkage between the observed functional improvements
and recent stimulation history. We interpret the DBS effects as
compensating for a loss of arousal regulation that is normally
controlled by the frontal lobe in the intact brain. These findings
provide evidence that DBS can promote significant late functional
recovery from severe traumatic brain injury. Our observations,
years after the injury occurred, challenge the existing practice of
early treatment discontinuation for patients with only inconsist-
ent interactive behaviours and motivate further research to
develop therapeutic interventions.
Severe traumatic brain injury typically results in en passant
injuries to thalamic and midbrain structures that are essential parts
of the forebrain arousal regulation system6–11. We sought to deter-
mine whether DBS in the central thalamus could promote be-
havioural responsiveness in a patient in a chronic MCS by
approximating the normal role of mesial frontal cortical and brain-
stem inputs, which adjust firing rates in central thalamic neurons to
regulate cognitive effort and maintain brain metabolic activity dur-
ing normal wakefulness10,11.
As part of a multi-institutional, FDA- and IRB-approved clinical
trial, we implanted DBS electrodes bilaterally within the central thal-
amus of a 38-yr-old male who remained in an MCS following a severe
traumatic brain injury (see Supplementary Information). Over a
two-year course of inpatient rehabilitation and four subsequent
years in a nursing home, he failed to recover consistent command-
following or communication ability and remained non-verbal. Six-
and-a-half years after the injury, the patient was re-admitted to
an inpatient rehabilitation unit for comprehensive re-evaluation
and rehabilitation. Although he remained unable to communicate
reliably, functional MRI showed preservation of a large-scale, bi-
hemispheric cerebral language network, indicating that a substrate
for further recovery might exist4. Additional studies using positron
emission tomography showed that the patient’s resting global cereb-
ral metabolism was markedly reduced. These observations supported
our hypothesis that the patient’s inconsistent behavioural respon-
siveness and communication reflected a global reduction in neuronal
activity resulting from widespread de-afferentation and compression
injuries to the thalamus and midbrain4.
We used a single-subject, multiple baseline design to investigate
the effects of DBS using a priori statistical evaluation of preselected
behavioural metrics. A presurgical baseline established the patient’s
level of responsiveness before surgery. Post-surgical assessments were
conducted within 48 h and during a 2-month period preceding a DBS
titration phase in which the patient was exposed to varying patterns
of stimulation, to allow us to identify optimal behavioural responses.
After the titration phase, a six-month double-blinded crossover
phase began, in which DBS was alternated between being turned
on and turned off every 30 days (Fig. 1). A multidisciplinary neuro-
rehabilitation team performed all evaluations using standardized
assessment procedures.
To assess the effects of DBS, we prospectively chose the JFK Coma
Recovery Scale — Revised (CRS-R), a measure of neurobehavioural
function that has been validated in patients with disorders of con-
sciousness12,13 (Supplementary Fig. 1). We also developed three
secondary outcome measures that assessed object naming, purpose-
ful upper extremity limb movement and oral feeding to characterize
behavioural changes more fully (see Supplementary Information).
A comprehensive inpatient rehabilitation program was initiated
four months before surgery and continued without modification
throughout the study (Figs 1, 2a,b). This program consisted of phys-
ical, occupational, speech and recreational therapies and did not
differ from the patient’s initial course of rehabilitation, which had
been completed four years earlier.
CRS-R evaluations conducted over a three-week presurgical base-
line verified that the patient’s neurobehavioural status was stable.
Three subscales of the CRS-R were subsequently selected as the prim-
ary outcome measures. Scores on the Arousal subscale indicated that
the patient could not consistently respond to basic verbal commands.
1Department of Neurology & Neuroscience, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA. 2JFK Johnson Rehabilitation Institute, Edison, New Jersey 08818, USA.
3New Jersey Neuroscience Institute, Edison, New Jersey 08818, USA. 4Center for Neurologic Restoration, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA. 5Division of
Medical Ethics, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 10021, USA.
Vol 448 | 2 August 2007 | doi:10.1038/nature06041
600
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
Motor and Communication scores demonstrated inability to use
familiar objects in a purposeful manner or to respond reliably to
simple yes/no questions, respectively (Supplementary Table 1).
We then implanted the DBS electrodes, targeting the anterior
intralaminar thalamic nuclei and adjacent paralaminar regions of
thalamic association nuclei bilaterally (see Supplementary Infor-
mation). Both electrodes were positioned with each of the four indi-
vidual contacts within the central lateral nucleus, paralaminar
regions of the median dorsalis, and the posterior-medial aspect of
the centromedian/parafascicularis nucleus complex. This placement
maximized coverage of thalamic regions with strong calbindin pro-
tein staining14. These calbindin-positive neurons project to supra-
granular cortical regions15, consistent with the idea that they have a
parallel role in cerebral activation that is comparable to that of pro-
jections from the brainstem arousal systems16.
We evaluated electrical stimulation at each electrode contact
within 48 h of surgery to identify potential adverse effects and to
determine voltage thresholds for behavioural changes. Stimulation
produced acute changes in arousal including increased heart rate,
well-sustained eye opening and rapid bilateral head-turning to a
voice17. Such effects were observed for all electrode contacts tested,
and each electrode had a preferred contact with the lowest voltage
threshold for eliciting a response. We further determined a specific
configuration of electrode cathode/anode geometries (monopolar
versus bipolar) for each electrode that minimized this voltage thresh-
old. We assessed behaviours over 20–30-min periods of bilateral DBS
that alternated between on and off. During object naming, speech
remained unintelligible and was limited to episodes of incompre-
hensible word-mouthing. The frequency of limb movements that
involved social gesture and object use was significantly higher with
DBS on than with it off (Supplementary Table 2), although we
never observed fully executed movement sequences. On post-
operative day 2, we recorded cortical potentials evoked by electrical
stimuli delivered to the individual contacts of each DBS lead using
time-locked averaging of the scalp EEG (Supplementary Fig. 7). The
total exposure to DBS during this phase was approximately 2 h, and
there was no further exposure to DBS for the next 2 months (Fig. 2b).
The titration phase began 50 days after surgery (Figs 1, 2b) and
continued for 18 weeks. The CRS-R, object naming and limb move-
ment protocols were administered weekly to test a range of different
stimulation frequencies (70–250 Hz) and intensities (0–5 V). The
duration of alternating time on and off stimulation was gradually
increased from three to fourteen days. The frequency range explored
was guided by ongoing empirical observations of the patient and
previous results in primate and rodent experiments that showed
behavioural facilitation by stimulation of the central thalamus using
frequencies of 50–100 Hz18,19.
We noted several qualitative changes in behaviour during DBS
titration that correlated with abrupt changes in CRS-R subscale
scores (Fig. 2a). These changes were observed shortly after the onset
of continuous bilateral stimulation on day –145 (Fig. 2b). Longer
periods of eye opening and increased responsiveness to command
were reflected in increased CRS-R Arousal scores. On day –143,
the patient showed the first instances of functional object use on
the Motor subscale (score 5 6) and intelligible verbalization on the
Oromotor subscale (score 5 3). No previous episodes of intelligible
verbalization had been observed during a series of 33 evaluations
conducted across the first 6 months of observation. These beha-
vioural improvements (and other improvements, see Supplementary
Information) temporally coincided with the onset of DBS (Fig. 2a) and
did not emerge until 160 days after initiation of the rehabilitation
program, indicating that they were primarily attributable to the DBS.
After titration testing, we chose a final set of stimulation parameters
for each electrode (100 Hz, right side–bipolar field, 4 V; left side–
monopolar field, 4 V), reflecting considerations of behavioural obser-
vations and of battery life. The patient then began the crossover phase.
Data were collected daily by the same team that performed the baseline
assessments. Comparison of the DBS on and off conditions showed
that the patient received the maximal score on the Arousal subscale
significantly more often during the DBS-on periods (Fig. 3; P , 0.001,
Pearson Chi-square (two-tail), Systat). There was no significant dif-
ference in performance on the CRS-R Motor and Communication
subscale scores throughout the crossover phase, probably reflecting a
ceiling effect on both subscales. The patient’s ability to execute com-
plete functional limb movement sequences (for example, bringing a
cup to his mouth) also significantly improved with DBS on
(P , 0.001, Pearson Chi-square (two-tail), Systat), as did his ability
independently to chew and swallow a bolus of food placed on his
tongue (Fig. 3; P , 0.001, Pearson Chi-square (two-tail), Systat).
There was no significant difference in object-naming ability.
To distinguish the effects of DBS from those produced by the
rehabilitation program or by repeated exposure to the testing proce-
dures, we performed a logistic regression analysis (see Supplementary
Information). During the crossover phase, traditional rehabilitation
efforts continued, but exposure to DBS alternated on a monthly
basis. Thus, behavioural changes that were temporally linked to
DBS should be modulated in an approximately square-wave fashion,
whereas effects due to rehabilitation or the evaluation process itself
are expected to grow gradually over time. The regression model has
three parameters (A, B and C), each determining the strength of a
potentially contributing influence. The A-term represents the overall
probability of obtaining the higher rating on a given scale. (For this
analysis, rating scales were dichotomized into two classes of approxi-
mately equal size.) The B-term allows this probability to increase or
decrease gradually as a function of elapsed time. The C-term allows
Reinstitution of rehabilitation
Pre-surgical baseline
Surgery/post-
operative testing
Cross-over phaseTitration phase
Day 0Day –145Day –194Day –303 Day 179 Figure 1 | Study timeline. Timeline illustrating
the 483 days of data collection across the different
phases of the study.
0
–303
Days
–253 –203 –153 –103 –53 –3
200
400
600
800
C
um
ul
at
iv
e 
ho
ur
s
of
 e
xp
os
ur
e
Motor function
CRS-R-M
Surgery, day –194
Onset of
titration
testing
Day –143:
stimulation on
for 28 h over 
3 days
Arousal level
CRS-R-A
Oro-motor
CRS-R-O
Titration phase, starts day -145
a
b Stimulation
Rehabilitation
2
3
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 2 | Qualitative changes in behaviour on CRS-R subscales associated
with titration phase and cumulative hours of rehabilitation and brain
stimulation. a, The CRS-R subscale scores are shown from enrolment (Day
–309) to the end of the titration phase (Day –1). Abrupt changes in CRS-R
subscale scores were seen after the onset of the titration phase (Day –145).
b, Cumulative hours of rehabilitation and electrical brain stimulation are
shown across the same time period. Exposure to rehabilitation hours is
constant at 3 h per day, 5 days per week (estimated as 660 h over 44 weeks,
black line). The accumulation of hours of continuous stimulation is shown
in magenta.
NATURE | Vol 448 | 2 August 2007 LETTERS
601
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
this probability to be modulated by the recent stimulation history.
The model was applied, in separate analyses, to the three behavioural
measures that improved significantly during the crossover phase
(CRS-R Arousal, limb control and oral feeding; Fig. 4, Supplemen-
tary Fig. 2a,b and Supplementary Table 3). For all analyses, including
the C-term (reflecting behavioural modulation tracking the stimu-
lation course) in the model leads to a significant improvement
(P , 0.005 or P , 0.001; bootstrap confidence interval on C-term
significant at P , 0.01 for all models). Inclusion of the B-term, which
reflects gradual change, produces only negligible improvement in
the model (not significant for arousal and oral feeding, P , 0.05
for limb control but 95% confidence interval for B-term includes
zero). These analyses indicate that nearly all of the systematic
changes in ratings were temporally linked to DBS stimulation, and
could not be accounted for by a gradual improvement over time. In
addition, logistic regression analyses showed that improvements in
intelligible verbalization and limb control were also directly linked to
the DBS-on condition during the titration phase (Supplementary
Information).
The observed improvements in arousal level, motor control and
behavioural persistence might reflect direct activation of frontal cor-
tical and basal ganglia systems that are innervated by neurons within
the anterior intralaminar regions and adjacent paralaminar regions
of thalamic association nuclei. These neurons act as a key intermedi-
ary system and common final pathway for brainstem arousal systems
and frontal lobe regions that exert executive control of effort regu-
lation, working memory, selective attention and vigilance6–11.
Anatomical studies in nonhuman primates have shown that
the central lateral nucleus and surrounding paralaminar regions
widely innervate the premotor and supplementary motor cortices,
providing several monosynaptic pathways that might have been
stimulated in our study20. We conclude that mesial frontal regions
within the supplementary motor area, anterior cingulate cortex and
other frontal cortical regions were activated by the electrical stimu-
lation. The frontocentral predominance of cortical activations that
were associated with activation of the left DBS lead contacts support
this localization, but we cannot exclude the possibility of contribu-
tions from surrounding thalamic neurons (see Supplementary
Information).
Our focus on patients in a chronic MCS with widely preserved brain
structure and clear evidence of interactive behaviour (command follow-
ing, verbalization and inconsistent communication) is motivated by
two important considerations. First, we propose the use of central tha-
lamic DBS to improve the arousal regulation of functionally connected
but inconsistently active cerebral networks that might be present in
some patients in an MCS but absent in patients in a permanent vegeta-
tive state21. Second, for patients in an MCS who have not yet recovered
reliable communication or functional movements, improvements in
response initiation and persistence might restore these abilities.
The behavioural improvements described in this report are not-
able, given their late emergence and potential functional significance.
However, the generalizability of the results is unknown, and expecta-
tions raised by this report should be tempered. In particular, our
patient followed commands and showed intact language networks
in neuroimaging studies4. These characteristics will not be shared by
all patients in an MCS. Moreover, unknown aspects of this particular
subject’s brain injury might have influenced his response to DBS.
Nonetheless, replication of these findings could have important
implications for clinical practice. Although some patients in MCS
show clear verbal or gestural ‘yes/no’ responses, these do not occur
consistently enough to be considered reliable. Our patient’s recov-
ered ability to interact consistently and meaningfully with others was
cited by members of his family as the most important change
observed. The restoration of communication also allowed the patient
to assume a more active (and interactive) role in his treatment.
These considerations motivate the development of a neuro-
palliative ethic to establish proportionate goals of care to help
20 40 60
–0.5 0 0.5 –1 0 1
–0.5 0 0.5 –1 0 1
80 100 120 140
Bootstrap
resampling
Shuffling
Stim. on
Stim. off
Arousal score = 3
P = 1
P = 0
Arousal score <3
Days
160
C
C
B
B
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.1
0.2
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y
0.2
Figure 4 | Logistic regression model of crossover phase arousal data.
Figure shows stimulation and behavioural time series, and best-fitting
probability model for the behavioural data selected by logistic regression
analyses. Single dots on vertical lines within behavioural time series indicate
multiple observations on the same day, dots on probability model indicate
times of observations. Histograms show bootstrap (blue) and shuffled (red)
estimates (500 each) of the coefficients for a linear trend (B) and the
stimulation history (C ). Data-derived estimates of the coefficients are shown
as black lines. P 5 1 indicates CRS-R arousal score of 3, P 5 0 indicates other
response categories.
CRS-R
Arousal
CRS-R
Comm.
CRS-R
Motor
Limb
control
Oral
feeding**
Object
naming
‡
*
*
*
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Fr
eq
ue
nc
y 
of
 m
ax
im
al
 s
co
re
 r
at
in
g
0
1.0
Pr
e On Of
f
Pr
e On Of
f
Pr
e On Of
f
Pr
e On Of
f
Pr
e On Of
f
Pr
e On Of
f
Figure 3 | Comparison of pre-surgical baselines and DBS on and DBS off
periods during the crossover phase. Pre-surgical baselines (14 consecutive
observations) and crossover phase observations are displayed with 95%
confidence intervals for binomial distributions with n observations for three
CRS-R subscales (Arousal, n 5 185 off, 189 on; Communication (Comm.),
n 5 185 off, 189 on; Motor, n 5 185 off, 189 on) and secondary measures
(limb movement, n 5 336 off, 261 on; oral feeding, n 5 54 off, 53 on; object
naming, n 5 206 off, 235 on). Asterisks indicate significant differences
between on versus off for CRS-R Arousal, limb movement and oral feeding
(P , 0.001 established by Pearson Chi-square (two-tail)). Daggers indicate
that oral feeding data were not available before titration; double asterisk
indicates that scores 1 and 2 are combined for dichotomy. Pre-surgical
baselines for limb control and object naming were converted from CRS-R
Motor and CRS-R Oro-motor scores, which remained below the maximal
rating across the 14 consecutive observations in the pre-surgical baseline.
LETTERS NATURE | Vol 448 | 2 August 2007
602
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
families to balance the potential for improvement against associated
burdens while being guided by the patient’s previously articulated
preferences22. Confirmation of these findings in other patients might
influence the current practice of excluding individuals with incon-
sistent behavioural responsiveness from structured rehabilitation
programs. Our findings should motivate research to elucidate the
mechanisms of recovery and to facilitate the identification of patients
who might benefit from neuromodulatory interventions23.
METHODS SUMMARY
A patient meeting the diagnostic criteria for an MCS proposed by Giacino et al.5
was enrolled as part of a clinical trial of central thalamic DBS. After determina-
tion of eligibility, the patient entered into a four-month phase of behavioural
evaluation with formal behavioural assessments using the JFK CRS-R12 to
identify subscales that failed to show a ceiling effect. Three subscales (Arousal,
Communication and Motor) were prospectively chosen as primary outcome
variables in view of the inconsistency in performance on these measures.
Subsequently, the patient underwent implantation of bilateral DBS electrodes
and post-operative physiological evaluations, including the recording of evoked
potentials generated by the stimulation of individual electrode contacts before
internalization of electrodes and connection to pulse generators. A DBS titration
phase began 50 days after implantation, during which different combinations of
frequency, intensity, electrode contact activation and periods of on and off times
were tested. At the end of the titration phase, a six-month double-blinded
alternating on/off crossover phase began, using optimal parameters that were
selected during the titration phase. Secondary outcome measures were
developed during the titration phase and included object naming, limb control
and oral feeding indices. All primary and secondary outcome measures were
tracked prospectively during the crossover phase. During the entire study (from
enrolment to completion of the crossover phase), the patient continued to
undergo all routine rehabilitation activities. For analysis of DBS data obtained
during the on/off crossover phase, we compared binomial data using the Pearson
Chi-square (two-tail) test, or the Fisher Exact test when the sample size was
insufficient to use the former (Systat). We obtained confidence intervals for
binomials using ‘binofit’ in Matlab 7.0 (Mathworks). Small sample comparisons
were completed using the Wilcoxon ranksum test (Matlab 7.0). Logistic regres-
sion models of the crossover data were fit using the ‘fmincon’ routine in Matlab
7.0.
Full Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of
the paper at www.nature.com/nature.
Received 13 April; accepted 22 June 2007.
1. Lombardi, F., Taricco, M., DeTanti, A., Telaro, E. & Liberati, A. Sensory stimulation
for brain injured individuals in coma or vegetative state. Cochrane Database Syst.
Rev. 2, CD001427 (2002).
2. Giacino, J. & Whyte, J. The vegetative state and minimally conscious state:
current knowledge and remaining questions. J. Head Trauma Rehabil. 20, 30–50
(2005).
3. Boly, M. et al. Auditory processing in severely brain injured patients: differences
between the minimally conscious state and the persistent vegetative state. Arch.
Neurol. 61, 233–238 (2004).
4. Schiff, N. D. et al. fMRI reveals large-scale network activation in minimally
conscious patients. Neurology 64, 514–523 (2005).
5. Giacino, J. T. et al. The minimally conscious state: definition and diagnostic
criteria. Neurology 58, 349–353 (2002).
6. Schiff, N. D. & Purpura, K. P. Towards a neurophysiological basis for cognitive
neuromodulation. Thalamus Relat. Syst. 2, 55–69 (2002).
7. Steriade, M. & Glenn, L. L. Neocortical and caudate projections of intralaminar
thalamic neurons and their synaptic excitation from midbrain reticular core.
J. Neurophysiol. 48, 352–371 (1982).
8. van der Werf, Y. D., Witter, M. P. & Groenewegen, H. J. The intralaminar and
midline nuclei of the thalamus. Anatomical and functional evidence for
participation in processes of arousal and awareness. Brain Res. Brain Res. Rev. 39,
107–140 (2002).
9. Wyder, M. T., Massoglia, D. P. & Stanford, T. R. Contextual modulation of central
thalamic delay-period activity: representation of visual and saccadic goals.
J. Neurophysiol. 91, 2628–2648 (2004).
10. Kinomura, S., Larssen, J., Gulyas, B. & Roland, P. E. Activation by attention of the
human reticular formation and thalamic intralaminar nuclei. Science 271, 512–515
(1996).
11. Paus, T. et al. Time-related changes in neural systems underlying attention and
arousal during the performance of an auditory vigilance task. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9,
392–408 (1997).
12. Giacino, J. T., Kalmar, K. & Whyte, J. The JFK Coma Recovery Scale-Revised:
measurement characteristics and diagnostic utility. Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil. 85,
2020–2029 (2004).
13. Giacino, J. T., Kezmarsky, M. A., DeLuca, J. & Cicerone, K. D. Monitoring rate of
recovery to predict outcome in minimally responsive patients. Arch. Phys. Med.
Rehabil. 72, 897–901 (1991).
14. Munkle, M. C., Waldvogel, H. J. & Faull, R. L. The distribution of calbindin,
calretinin and parvalbumin immunoreactivity in the human thalamus. J. Chem.
Neuroanat. 19, 155–173 (2000).
15. Jones, E. G. The thalamic matrix and thalamocortical synchrony. Trends Neurosci.
24, 595–601 (2001).
16. Llinas, R. R., Leznik, E. & Urbano, F. J. Temporal binding via cortical coincidence
detection of specific and nonspecific thalamocortical inputs: a voltage-dependent
dye-imaging study in mouse brain slices. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 99, 449–454
(2002).
17. Pfaff, D. Brain Arousal and Information Theory (Harvard Univ. Press, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, 2005).
18. Shirvalkar, P., Seth, M., Schiff, N. D. & Herrera, D. G. Cognitive enhancement
through central thalamic deep brain stimulation. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 103,
17007–17012 (2006).
19. Schiff, N. D., Hudson, A. E. & Purpura, K. P. Modeling wakeful unresponsiveness:
characterization and microstimulation of the central thalamus. Soc. Neurosci. 31st
Annual Meeting Abstr. 62.12 (2002).
20. Morel, A., Liu, J., Wannier, T., Jeanmonod, D. & Rouiller, E. M. Divergence and
convergence of thalamocortical projections to premotor and supplementary
motor cortex: a multiple tracing study in the macaque monkey. Eur. J. Neurosci. 21,
1007–1029 (2005).
21. Jennett, B. et al. Neuropathology in vegetative and severely disabled patients after
head injury. Neurology 56, 486–490 (2001).
22. Fins, J. J. Constructing an ethical stereotaxy for severe brain injury: balancing risks,
benefits and access. Nature Rev. Neurosci. 4, 323–327 (2003).
23. Fins, J. J. A proposed ethical framework for interventional cognitive neuroscience:
a consideration of deep brain stimulation in impaired consciousness. Neurol. Res.
22, 273–278 (2000).
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements Funding for this study came from the NINDS, Charles A. Dana
Foundation, Cleveland Clinic Foundation Brain Neuromodulation Center, Ohio
Department of Development BRTT and Third Frontier Program, Jane and Lee
Seidman Neuromodulation Research Fund, Cleveland Clinic Innovations, IntElect
Medical and the NIDDR. We thank L. Turkstra, E. Montgomery, A. Sharan, D. Vegh
and K. Purpura for contributions in planning stages of this work; E. Bagiella for
statistical consultation; and C. Allen, D. Pfaff, J. Whyte, M. Gizzi and R. Grewal for
expert editorial review.
Author Contributions N.D.S., J.T.G. and A.R.R. contributed equally to the design,
implementation and scholarly preparation of this work. N.D.S. and J.T.G. wrote the
manuscript. N.D.S., J.T.G. and A.R.R. acted as principal investigators at their
performance sites and participated in all phases of the study including evaluation of
data and preparation of all parts of the manuscript. A.R.R. and N.D.S. acted as
co-principal investigators for the Investigational Device Exemption (Food and Drug
Administration, IDE) covering the use of the brain stimulation methods. N.D.S.
acted as principal investigator for the initiation of the project and the development
grant that formed the basis of the studies. J.T.G. developed, organized and
supervised the collection and primary analysis of behavioural data along with K.K.
and an independent statistical consultant (E. Bagiella, Columbia University). J.D.V.
assisted with the development of the study design, developed the logistic
regression models and supervised this data analysis, and assisted in the
preparation of manuscript. K.B. analysed the evoked potential response data and
prepared the manuscript presentation of the results; K.B. and N.D.S. collected the
evoked potential data. M.G., B.F., B.E. and J.O. collected behavioural data and
assisted in the development of secondary outcome measures. C.M. served as the
patient’s primary care physician and supervised and administered the deep brain
electrical stimulation of the patient. Owing to role sequestration, she had no role in
data collection or analysis. A.R.R. organized, supervised and carried out the
neurosurgical planning, procedures and follow-up, supervised the programming of
the neurostimulation and assisted in preparation of the manuscript. J.J.F.
developed formal consent procedures and conceptual frameworks with the study
primary investigators to address ethical considerations arising in all aspects of the
study and preparation of the manuscript. E.J.K., A.M. and K.B. participated in the
pre-surgical evaluation, operative and post-operative patient evaluations and
neurophysiological evaluations. S.F. provided expert assistance in the design and
evaluation of the stimulation protocols. F.P. acted as principal investigator for the
planning study for the first year and as a senior advisor throughout the
development of the work.
Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at
www.nature.com/reprints. The authors declare competing financial interests:
details accompany the paper on www.nature.com/nature. Correspondence and
requests for materials should be addressed to N.D.S.
(nds2001@mail.med.cornell.edu).
NATURE | Vol 448 | 2 August 2007 LETTERS
603
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group
METHODS
Overview. Pre-surgical assessments were conducted to enable pre-selection of
the three primary outcome variables. After completion of the pre-surgical base-
line, the patient underwent implantation of bilateral DBS electrodes. The elec-
trodes remained off until initiation of a DBS titration period which began 50 days
after implantation, except for a 2-day period of stimulation testing in the imme-
diate post-operative period. Different combinations of frequency, intensity,
electrode contact activation and periods of on and off times were tested (see
below). At the end of the titration phase, a six-month double-blinded alternating
on/off crossover trial began using optimal parameters selected during the titra-
tion phase. The Arousal, Motor and Communication subscales of the JFK Coma
Recovery Scale — Revised served as the primary outcome measures. The sec-
ondary outcome measures were developed during the titration phase and
included object naming, limb control and oral feeding indices. All measures were
tracked prospectively during the crossover phase.
The subject. A 38-yr-old right-handed man who sustained a closed head injury
after an assault 6 yr before the study was enrolled after fulfilling the entry criteria.
The patient remained in an MCS according to the criteria proposed in ref. 5. The
patient remained medically stable, and structural brain imaging showed no
evidence of significant bilateral frontal lesions or injury to the left inferior frontal
operculum or the left posterior temporal-parietal region. During the entire
study, the patient continued to undergo all routine rehabilitation activities.
Pre-surgical evaluation phase. After selection into the study and determination
of eligibility, the patient entered a four-month phase of behavioural evaluation.
Towards the end of this phase, formal behavioural assessments using the CRS-R
were carried out over a three-week period (twice daily) to identify subscales that
failed to show a ceiling effect. Three subscales (Arousal, Communication and
Motor) were prospectively chosen as primary outcome variables in view of the
patient’s inconsistency in performance on these measures.
Electrode implantation and stimulation. After selection for DBS surgery, the
patient underwent pre-operative physiological evaluations, implantation of DBS
electrodes and post-operative physiological evaluations including recordings
from the implanted DBS electrodes before internalization of electrodes and
connection to pulse generators.
Post-operative testing phase. Over a two-day period following implantation of
the electrode leads, the individual contacts of each electrode were tested to
identify voltage thresholds for behavioural effects. During this time, DBS-evoked
responses were recorded.
Titration phase. During the titration phase, we obtained CRS-R scores and
developed the secondary outcome measures while exploring different stimu-
lation parameters. Observations included comparisons of the frequency of the
highest CRS-R subscale scores obtained before surgery with those obtained
during titration, and weekly assessments of object naming, functional move-
ments and oral feeding performed by physical, speech, occupational and recre-
ational therapists.
Crossover phase. After the pre-treatment titration phase, we chose a specific
parameter set for stimulation for each electrode. The patient then entered into a
double-blinded alternating crossover phase of DBS on and off using only these
stimulation parameters.
Statistics. All small sample comparisons were completed using the Wilcoxon
ranksum test (Matlab 7.0, Mathworks). We compared binomial data using the
Pearson Chi-square (two-tail) test, or the Fisher Exact test when the sample size
was insufficient to use the former (Systat). We obtained confidence intervals for
binomial data using ‘binofit’ in Matlab 7.0. Logistic regression models were fit
using the ‘fmincon’ routine in Matlab 7.0.
doi:10.1038/nature06041
Nature  ©2007 Publishing Group

