AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 1
PATTERN RECOGNITION
The Journal of the Pattern Recognition Society
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
.
XXX
.
•       Description
•       Audience
•       Impact Factor
•       Abstracting and Indexing
•       Editorial Board
•       Guide for Authors
p.1
p.1
p.1
p.2
p.2
p.5
ISSN: 0031-3203
DESCRIPTION
.
Pattern Recognition is a mature but exciting and fast developing field, which underpins developments
in cognate fields such as computer vision, image processing, text and document analysis and neural
networks. It is closely akin to machine learning, and also finds applications in fast emerging areas
such as biometrics, bioinformatics, multimedia data analysis and most recently data science. The
journal  Pattern Recognition was established some 50 years ago, as the field emerged in the early
years of computer science. Over the intervening years it has expanded considerably.
The journal accepts papers making original contributions to the theory, methodology and application
of pattern recognition in any area, provided that the context of the work is both clearly explained
and grounded in the pattern recognition literature. Papers whos primary concern falls outside the
pattern recognition domain and which report routine applications of it using existing or well known
methods, should be directed elsewhre. The publication policy is to publish (1) new original articles
that have been appropriately reviewed by competent scientific people, (2) reviews of developments in
the field, and (3) pedagogical papers covering specific areas of interest in pattern recognition. Various
special issues will be organized from time to time on current topics of interest to Pattern Recognition.
Submitted papers should be single column, double spaced, no less than 20 and no more than 35 (40
for a review) pages long, with numbered pages.
Benefits to authors
We also provide many author benefits, such as free PDFs, a liberal copyright policy, special discounts
on Elsevier publications and much more. Please click here for more information on our author services.
Please see our Guide for Authors for information on article submission. If you require any further
information or help, please visit our Support Center
AUDIENCE
.
Photo-Optical Engineers, Computer Scientists, Space Scientists.
IMPACT FACTOR
.
2016: 4.582 © Thomson Reuters Journal Citation Reports 2017
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 2
ABSTRACTING AND INDEXING
.
ACM Guide to Computing Literature
BIOSIS
Elsevier BIOBASE
Cambridge Scientific Abstracts
Current Literature on Aging
Current Contents/CompuMath
Current Contents/Engineering, Computing & Technology
Current Contents/Social & Behavioral Sciences
Information Science Abstracts
Mathematical Reviews
Engineering Index
GEOBASE
INSPEC
Ocular R
PAIS Bulletin
PASCAL/CNRS
Research Alert
SCISEARCH
SSSA/CISA/ECA/ISMEC
Science Citation Index
Zentralblatt MATH
Scopus
EDITORIAL BOARD
.
Editor-in-Chief
Edwin Hancock, Dept. of Computer Science, University of York, Deramore Lane, Heslington, YO10 5DD, York,
England, UK
Founding Editor
Ledley
Editor Emeritus
Ching Y. Suen, Dept. of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Montréal, Quebec
Deputy Editor
Zoran Duric , George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, USA
Advisory Editors
Roland Chin, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
Josef Kittler, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK
Seong-Whan Lee, Korea University, Seoul, The Republic of Korea
Linda Shapiro, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA
Area Editors
Ana Fred, Universidade de Lisboa, São João De Deus, Lisboa, Portugal
Cheng-Lin Liu, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China
Dacheng Tao, University of Technology, Sydney, Australia
Richard Wilson, University of York, York, England, UK
Associate Editors
Majid Ahmadi, University of Windsor, Windsor, Ontario, Canada
Ethem Alpaydin, Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey
Ognjen Arandjelović, The University of St. Andrews, Scotland, Scotland, UK
Xiang Bai, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
Biggio Battista, Università di Cagliari, Cagliari, Italy
Prabir Bhattacharya, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA
Manuele Bicego, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Horst Bischof, Institute for Computer Graphics & Vision, Graz, Austria
Djamel Bouchaffra, Oakland University, West Monroe, LA, USA
Nizar Bouguila, Concordia University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 3
Toby Breckon, Durham University, Durham, United Kingdom
Luc Brun, ENSICAEN
Hyeran Byun, Yonsei University, Seoul, The Republic of Korea
Umberto Castellani, University of Verona, Verona, Italy
Hong Chan, Digital Media Research Center, Institute of Computing Technology, Beijing
Sotirios Chatzis, Cyprus University of Technology, Nicosia, Cyprus
Chi H. Chen, University of Massachusetts Dartmouth, N. Dartmouth, Massachusetts, USA
Heng-Da Cheng, Utah State University, Logan, Utah, USA
Jian Cheng, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China
Mohamed Cheriet, U. of Quebec’s École de technologie supérieure (ÉTS)
Yiu-ming Cheung, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong
Dima Damen, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
Swagatam Das, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India
Ahmed Elgammal, Rutgers University, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA
Mahmoud El-Sakka, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada
Francisco Escolano, University of Alicante, Alicante, Spain
Richard Everson, The University of Exeter, Exetor, Devon, England, UK
Francesc J. Ferri, Universitat de València, Burjassot, Spain
Roland Goecke, University of Canberra
Minglun Gong, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada
Bilge Gunsel, Istanbul Technical University, Istanbul, Turkey
Laurent Heutte, Université de Rouen, Saint-Etienne-du-Rouvray, France
Atsushi Imiya, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan
Robert Jenssen, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø, Norway
Ian H. Jermyn, Durham University, Durham, UK
Xiaoyi Jiang, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Munster, Germany
Adam Krzyzak, Concordia University, Québec, Quebec, Canada
Mineichi Kudo, Hokkaido University, Japan
Arjan Kuijper, Fraunhofer Institute for Computer Graphics (IGD), Darmstadt, Germany
Louisa Lam, Concordia University, Montréal, Quebec, Canada
Longin Jan Latecki, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Aleš Leonardis, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia
Xuelong Li, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xian, Shaanxi, China
Jessica Lin, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, USA
Haibin Ling, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Wei Liu, Tencent AI Lab,Computer Vision Center, Shenzhen, China
Josep Lladós, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona (UAB), Barcelona, Spain
Marco Loog, Delft University of Technology, Delft, Netherlands
Yue Lu, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
Jiebo Luo, Eastman Kodak Company, Rochester, New York, USA
Takeshi Masuda, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Japan
Julian McAuley, University of California at San Diego, LaJolla, California, USA
Babu Mehtre, Institute for Development and Research in Banking Technology (IDRBT), Hyderabad, Andhra
Pradesh, India
Tao Mei, Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, China
Majid Mirmehdi, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK
Yi Lu Murphey, University of Michigan at Dearborn, Dearborn, Michigan, USA
Umapada Pal, Indian Statistical Institute, Kolkata, India
Ioannis Patras, Queen Mary, University of London (QMUL), London, England, UK
Marcello Pelillo, Università Ca' Foscari Venezia, Venezia Mestre, Italy
Tuan Pham, UNSW Australia, Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia
Petia Radeva, Universitat de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
Huzefa Rangwala, George Mason University, Fairfax, Virginia, USA
A. Ravishankar Rao, School of Computer Sciences and Engineering, Fairleigh Dickinson University, New Jersey,
USA
Kaspar Riesen, FHNW, Olten, Switzerland
Antonio Robles-Kelly, National ICT Australia (NICTA), Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, Australia
Samuel Rota Bulo', Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Trento, Italy
Raimondo Schettini, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy
Dinggang Shen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA
Frank Shih, New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, New Jersey, USA
Ali Shokoufandeh, Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA
Richa Singh, Indraprastha Institute of Information Technology (IIIT) - Delhi, New Delhi, India
Enrique Sucar, Instituto Nacional de Astrofísica, Óptica y Electrónica, Puebla, Mexico
Ponnuthurai Suganthan, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
Kenji Suzuki, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, USA
Andrea Torsello, Università Ca' Foscari Venezia, Venezia Mestre, Italy
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 4
Pavan Turaga, Arizona State University, Arizona, USA
Carole Twining, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Seiichi Uchida, Kyushu University
Mario Vento, Università degli Studi di Salerno, Salerno, Italy
Nicole Vincent, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France
Fei Wang, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut, USA
Liang Wang, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, China
Jianxin Wu, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
Bai Xiao, Beihang University
Herb Yang, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada
Jane Jia You, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong
Jun Yu, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
Pong Chi Yuen, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China
Changshui Zhang, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Kun Zhang, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA
Guoying Zhao, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland
Jie Zhou, Northern Illinois University, DeKalb, Illinois, USA
Barbara Zitova, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czechia
Reyer Zwiggelaar, Aberystwyth University, Aberystwyth, Wales, UK
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 5
GUIDE FOR AUTHORS
.
INTRODUCTION
Submission checklist
You can use this list to carry out a final check of your submission before you send it to the journal for
review. Please check the relevant section in this Guide for Authors for more details.
Ensure that the following items are present:
One author has been designated as the corresponding author with contact details:
• E-mail address
• Full postal address
All necessary files have been uploaded:
Manuscript:
• Include keywords
• All figures (include relevant captions)
• All tables (including titles, description, footnotes)
• Ensure all figure and table citations in the text match the files provided
• Indicate clearly if color should be used for any figures in print
Graphical Abstracts / Highlights files (where applicable)
Supplemental files (where applicable)
Further considerations
• Manuscript has been 'spell checked' and 'grammar checked'
• All references mentioned in the Reference List are cited in the text, and vice versa
• Permission has been obtained for use of copyrighted material from other sources (including the
Internet)
• Relevant declarations of interest have been made
• Journal policies detailed in this guide have been reviewed
• Referee suggestions and contact details provided, based on journal requirements
For further information, visit our Support Center.
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
Ethics in publishing
Please see our information pages on Ethics in publishing and Ethical guidelines for journal publication.
Declaration of interest
All authors must disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations
that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work. Examples of potential conflicts of interest include
employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, paid expert testimony, patent applications/
registrations, and grants or other funding. If there are no conflicts of interest then please state this:
'Conflicts of interest: none'. More information.
Submission declaration and verification
Submission of an article implies that the work described has not been published previously (except
in the form of an abstract or as part of a published lecture or academic thesis or as an electronic
preprint, see 'Multiple, redundant or concurrent publication' section of our ethics policy for more
information), that it is not under consideration for publication elsewhere, that its publication is
approved by all authors and tacitly or explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was
carried out, and that, if accepted, it will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in English or
in any other language, including electronically without the written consent of the copyright-holder. To
verify originality, your article may be checked by the originality detection service CrossCheck.
Changes to authorship
Authors are expected to consider carefully the list and order of authors before submitting their
manuscript and provide the definitive list of authors at the time of the original submission. Any
addition, deletion or rearrangement of author names in the authorship list should be made only
before the manuscript has been accepted and only if approved by the journal Editor. To request such
a change, the Editor must receive the following from the corresponding author: (a) the reason
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 6
for the change in author list and (b) written confirmation (e-mail, letter) from all authors that they
agree with the addition, removal or rearrangement. In the case of addition or removal of authors,
this includes confirmation from the author being added or removed.
Only in exceptional circumstances will the Editor consider the addition, deletion or rearrangement of
authors after the manuscript has been accepted. While the Editor considers the request, publication
of the manuscript will be suspended. If the manuscript has already been published in an online issue,
any requests approved by the Editor will result in a corrigendum.
Copyright
Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' (see
more information on this). An e-mail will be sent to the corresponding author confirming receipt of
the manuscript together with a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' form or a link to the online version
of this agreement.
Subscribers may reproduce tables of contents or prepare lists of articles including abstracts for internal
circulation within their institutions. Permission of the Publisher is required for resale or distribution
outside the institution and for all other derivative works, including compilations and translations. If
excerpts from other copyrighted works are included, the author(s) must obtain written permission
from the copyright owners and credit the source(s) in the article. Elsevier has preprinted forms for
use by authors in these cases.
For open access articles: Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete an
'Exclusive License Agreement' (more information). Permitted third party reuse of open access articles
is determined by the author's choice of user license.
Author rights
As an author you (or your employer or institution) have certain rights to reuse your work. More
information.
Elsevier supports responsible sharing
Find out how you can share your research published in Elsevier journals.
Role of the funding source
You are requested to identify who provided financial support for the conduct of the research and/or
preparation of the article and to briefly describe the role of the sponsor(s), if any, in study design; in
the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; and in the decision to
submit the article for publication. If the funding source(s) had no such involvement then this should
be stated.
Funding body agreements and policies
Elsevier has established a number of agreements with funding bodies which allow authors to comply
with their funder's open access policies. Some funding bodies will reimburse the author for the Open
Access Publication Fee. Details of existing agreements are available online.
Open access
This journal offers authors a choice in publishing their research:
Open access
• Articles are freely available to both subscribers and the wider public with permitted reuse.
• An open access publication fee is payable by authors or on their behalf, e.g. by their research funder
or institution.
Subscription
• Articles are made available to subscribers as well as developing countries and patient groups through
our universal access programs.
• No open access publication fee payable by authors.
Regardless of how you choose to publish your article, the journal will apply the same peer review
criteria and acceptance standards.
For open access articles, permitted third party (re)use is defined by the following Creative Commons
user licenses:
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 7
Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY)
Lets others distribute and copy the article, create extracts, abstracts, and other revised versions,
adaptations or derivative works of or from an article (such as a translation), include in a collective
work (such as an anthology), text or data mine the article, even for commercial purposes, as long
as they credit the author(s), do not represent the author as endorsing their adaptation of the article,
and do not modify the article in such a way as to damage the author's honor or reputation.
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND)
For non-commercial purposes, lets others distribute and copy the article, and to include in a collective
work (such as an anthology), as long as they credit the author(s) and provided they do not alter or
modify the article.
The open access publication fee for this journal is USD 3100, excluding taxes. Learn more about
Elsevier's pricing policy: http://www.elsevier.com/openaccesspricing.
Green open access
Authors can share their research in a variety of different ways and Elsevier has a number of
green open access options available. We recommend authors see our green open access page for
further information. Authors can also self-archive their manuscripts immediately and enable public
access from their institution's repository after an embargo period. This is the version that has been
accepted for publication and which typically includes author-incorporated changes suggested during
submission, peer review and in editor-author communications. Embargo period: For subscription
articles, an appropriate amount of time is needed for journals to deliver value to subscribing customers
before an article becomes freely available to the public. This is the embargo period and it begins from
the date the article is formally published online in its final and fully citable form. Find out more.
This journal has an embargo period of 24 months.
Elsevier Publishing Campus
The Elsevier Publishing Campus (www.publishingcampus.com) is an online platform offering free
lectures, interactive training and professional advice to support you in publishing your research. The
College of Skills training offers modules on how to prepare, write and structure your article and
explains how editors will look at your paper when it is submitted for publication. Use these resources,
and more, to ensure that your submission will be the best that you can make it.
Language (usage and editing services)
Please write your text in good English (American or British usage is accepted, but not a mixture of
these). Authors who feel their English language manuscript may require editing to eliminate possible
grammatical or spelling errors and to conform to correct scientific English may wish to use the English
Language Editing service available from Elsevier's WebShop.
Submission
Our online submission system guides you stepwise through the process of entering your article
details and uploading your files. The system converts your article files to a single PDF file used in
the peer-review process. Editable files (e.g., Word, LaTeX) are required to typeset your article for
final publication. All correspondence, including notification of the Editor's decision and requests for
revision, is sent by e-mail.
Referees
Please submit the names and institutional e-mail addresses of several potential referees. For more
details, visit our Support site. Note that the editor retains the sole right to decide whether or not the
suggested reviewers are used.
PREPARATION
Peer review
This journal operates a single blind review process. All contributions will be initially assessed by the
editor for suitability for the journal. Papers deemed suitable are then typically sent to a minimum of
two independent expert reviewers to assess the scientific quality of the paper. The Editor is responsible
for the final decision regarding acceptance or rejection of articles. The Editor's decision is final. More
information on types of peer review.
Use of word processing software
It is important that the file be saved in the native format of the word processor used. The text
should be in single-column format. Keep the layout of the text as simple as possible. Most formatting
codes will be removed and replaced on processing the article. In particular, do not use the word
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 8
processor's options to justify text or to hyphenate words. However, do use bold face, italics, subscripts,
superscripts etc. When preparing tables, if you are using a table grid, use only one grid for each
individual table and not a grid for each row. If no grid is used, use tabs, not spaces, to align columns.
The electronic text should be prepared in a way very similar to that of conventional manuscripts (see
also the Guide to Publishing with Elsevier). Note that source files of figures, tables and text graphics
will be required whether or not you embed your figures in the text. See also the section on Electronic
artwork.
To avoid unnecessary errors you are strongly advised to use the 'spell-check' and 'grammar-check'
functions of your word processor.
Page limit
Please limit your manuscript to between 20 and 35 pages (figures and tables included, ideally
embedded in the text), double-spaced and in single column with numbered pages. For survey papers,
since there will be a lot of references, your paper can be up to 40 pages. If your paper is less than
10 pages long, we suggest you submit it to our sister journal Pattern Recognition Letters, which
specialises in publishing shorter letters format papers.
LaTeX
You are recommended to use the Elsevier article class elsarticle.cls to prepare your manuscript and
BibTeX to generate your bibliography.
Our LaTeX site has detailed submission instructions, templates and other information.
Article structure
Subdivision - numbered sections
Divide your article into clearly defined and numbered sections. Subsections should be numbered
1.1 (then 1.1.1, 1.1.2, ...), 1.2, etc. (the abstract is not included in section numbering). Use this
numbering also for internal cross-referencing: do not just refer to 'the text'. Any subsection may be
given a brief heading. Each heading should appear on its own separate line.
Author Biographies
Include in the manuscript a short (maximum 50 words) biography of each author.
Essential title page information
• Title. Concise and informative. Titles are often used in information-retrieval systems. Avoid
abbreviations and formulae where possible.
• Author names and affiliations. Please clearly indicate the given name(s) and family name(s)
of each author and check that all names are accurately spelled. Present the authors' affiliation
addresses (where the actual work was done) below the names. Indicate all affiliations with a lower-
case superscript letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the appropriate address.
Provide the full postal address of each affiliation, including the country name and, if available, the
e-mail address of each author.
• Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence at all stages of refereeing
and publication, also post-publication. Ensure that the e-mail address is given and that contact
details are kept up to date by the corresponding author.
• Present/permanent address. If an author has moved since the work described in the article was
done, or was visiting at the time, a 'Present address' (or 'Permanent address') may be indicated as
a footnote to that author's name. The address at which the author actually did the work must be
retained as the main, affiliation address. Superscript Arabic numerals are used for such footnotes.
Abstract
A concise and factual abstract is required (maximum length 150 words). The abstract should state
briefly the purpose of the research, the methods used, the principal results and major conclusions.
An abstract is often presented separate from the article, so it must be able to stand alone.
Graphical abstract
Although a graphical abstract is optional, its use is encouraged as it draws more attention to the online
article. The graphical abstract should summarize the contents of the article in a concise, pictorial form
designed to capture the attention of a wide readership. Graphical abstracts should be submitted as a
separate file in the online submission system. Image size: Please provide an image with a minimum
of 531 × 1328 pixels (h × w) or proportionally more. The image should be readable at a size of 5 ×
13 cm using a regular screen resolution of 96 dpi. Preferred file types: TIFF, EPS, PDF or MS Office
files. You can view Example Graphical Abstracts on our information site.
Authors can make use of Elsevier's Illustration Services to ensure the best presentation of their images
and in accordance with all technical requirements.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 9
Highlights
Highlights are mandatory for this journal. They consist of a short collection of bullet points that
convey the core findings of the article and should be submitted in a separate editable file in the
online submission system. Please use 'Highlights' in the file name and include 3 to 5 bullet points
(maximum 85 characters, including spaces, per bullet point). You can view example Highlights on
our information site.
Keywords
Immediately after the abstract, provide a maximum of five to ten keywords, using American spelling
and avoiding general and plural terms and multiple concepts (avoid, for example, 'and', 'of'). Be
sparing with abbreviations: only abbreviations firmly established in the field may be eligible. These
Keywords will be used for indexing purposes.
Abbreviations
Define abbreviations that are not standard in this field in a footnote to be placed on the first page
of the article. Such abbreviations that are unavoidable in the abstract must be defined at their first
mention there, as well as in the footnote. Ensure consistency of abbreviations throughout the article.
Acknowledgements
Collate acknowledgements in a separate section at the end of the article before the references and do
not, therefore, include them on the title page, as a footnote to the title or otherwise. List here those
individuals who provided help during the research (e.g., providing language help, writing assistance
or proof reading the article, etc.).
Formatting of funding sources
List funding sources in this standard way to facilitate compliance to funder's requirements:
Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers xxxx, yyyy];
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA [grant number zzzz]; and the United States Institutes
of Peace [grant number aaaa].
It is not necessary to include detailed descriptions on the program or type of grants and awards. When
funding is from a block grant or other resources available to a university, college, or other research
institution, submit the name of the institute or organization that provided the funding.
If no funding has been provided for the research, please include the following sentence:
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or
not-for-profit sectors.
Units
Follow internationally accepted rules and conventions: use the international system of units (SI). If
other units are mentioned, please give their equivalent in SI.
Math formulae
Please submit math equations as editable text and not as images. Present simple formulae in
line with normal text where possible and use the solidus (/) instead of a horizontal line for small
fractional terms, e.g., X/Y. In principle, variables are to be presented in italics. Powers of e are often
more conveniently denoted by exp. Number consecutively any equations that have to be displayed
separately from the text (if referred to explicitly in the text).
Footnotes
Footnotes should be used sparingly. Number them consecutively throughout the article. Many word
processors can build footnotes into the text, and this feature may be used. Otherwise, please indicate
the position of footnotes in the text and list the footnotes themselves separately at the end of the
article. Do not include footnotes in the Reference list.
Artwork
Electronic artwork
General points
• Make sure you use uniform lettering and sizing of your original artwork.
• Embed the used fonts if the application provides that option.
• Aim to use the following fonts in your illustrations: Arial, Courier, Times New Roman, Symbol, or
use fonts that look similar.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 10
• Number the illustrations according to their sequence in the text.
• Use a logical naming convention for your artwork files.
• Provide captions to illustrations separately.
• Size the illustrations close to the desired dimensions of the published version.
• Submit each illustration as a separate file.
A detailed guide on electronic artwork is available.
You are urged to visit this site; some excerpts from the detailed information are given here.
Formats
If your electronic artwork is created in a Microsoft Office application (Word, PowerPoint, Excel) then
please supply 'as is' in the native document format.
Regardless of the application used other than Microsoft Office, when your electronic artwork is
finalized, please 'Save as' or convert the images to one of the following formats (note the resolution
requirements for line drawings, halftones, and line/halftone combinations given below):
EPS (or PDF): Vector drawings, embed all used fonts.
TIFF (or JPEG): Color or grayscale photographs (halftones), keep to a minimum of 300 dpi.
TIFF (or JPEG): Bitmapped (pure black & white pixels) line drawings, keep to a minimum of 1000 dpi.
TIFF (or JPEG): Combinations bitmapped line/half-tone (color or grayscale), keep to a minimum of
500 dpi.
Please do not:
• Supply files that are optimized for screen use (e.g., GIF, BMP, PICT, WPG); these typically have a
low number of pixels and limited set of colors;
• Supply files that are too low in resolution;
• Submit graphics that are disproportionately large for the content.
Color artwork
Please make sure that artwork files are in an acceptable format (TIFF (or JPEG), EPS (or PDF), or
MS Office files) and with the correct resolution. If, together with your accepted article, you submit
usable color figures then Elsevier will ensure, at no additional charge, that these figures will appear
in color online (e.g., ScienceDirect and other sites) regardless of whether or not these illustrations
are reproduced in color in the printed version. For color reproduction in print, you will receive
information regarding the costs from Elsevier after receipt of your accepted article. Please
indicate your preference for color: in print or online only. Further information on the preparation of
electronic artwork.
Figure captions
Ensure that each illustration has a caption. Supply captions separately, not attached to the figure. A
caption should comprise a brief title (not on the figure itself) and a description of the illustration. Keep
text in the illustrations themselves to a minimum but explain all symbols and abbreviations used.
Text graphics
Text graphics may be embedded in the text at the appropriate position. If you are working with LaTeX
and have such features embedded in the text, these can be left. See further under Electronic artwork.
Tables
Please submit tables as editable text and not as images. Tables can be placed either next to the
relevant text in the article, or on separate page(s) at the end. Number tables consecutively in
accordance with their appearance in the text and place any table notes below the table body. Be
sparing in the use of tables and ensure that the data presented in them do not duplicate results
described elsewhere in the article. Please avoid using vertical rules and shading in table cells.
References
Citation in text
Please ensure that every reference cited in the text is also present in the reference list (and vice
versa). Any references cited in the abstract must be given in full. Unpublished results and personal
communications are not recommended in the reference list, but may be mentioned in the text. If these
references are included in the reference list they should follow the standard reference style of the
journal and should include a substitution of the publication date with either 'Unpublished results' or
'Personal communication'. Citation of a reference as 'in press' implies that the item has been accepted
for publication.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 11
Web references
As a minimum, the full URL should be given and the date when the reference was last accessed. Any
further information, if known (DOI, author names, dates, reference to a source publication, etc.),
should also be given. Web references can be listed separately (e.g., after the reference list) under a
different heading if desired, or can be included in the reference list.
Data references
This journal encourages you to cite underlying or relevant datasets in your manuscript by citing them
in your text and including a data reference in your Reference List. Data references should include the
following elements: author name(s), dataset title, data repository, version (where available), year,
and global persistent identifier. Add [dataset] immediately before the reference so we can properly
identify it as a data reference. The [dataset] identifier will not appear in your published article.
References in a special issue
Please ensure that the words 'this issue' are added to any references in the list (and any citations in
the text) to other articles in the same Special Issue.
Reference management software
Most Elsevier journals have their reference template available in many of the most popular reference
management software products. These include all products that support Citation Style Language
styles, such as Mendeley and Zotero, as well as EndNote. Using the word processor plug-ins from
these products, authors only need to select the appropriate journal template when preparing their
article, after which citations and bibliographies will be automatically formatted in the journal's style.
If no template is yet available for this journal, please follow the format of the sample references and
citations as shown in this Guide.
Users of Mendeley Desktop can easily install the reference style for this journal by clicking the following
link:
http://open.mendeley.com/use-citation-style/pattern-recognition
When preparing your manuscript, you will then be able to select this style using the Mendeley plug-
ins for Microsoft Word or LibreOffice.
Reference style
Text: Indicate references by number(s) in square brackets in line with the text. The actual authors
can be referred to, but the reference number(s) must always be given.
Example: '..... as demonstrated [3,6]. Barnaby and Jones [8] obtained a different result ....'
List: Number the references (numbers in square brackets) in the list in the order in which they appear
in the text.
Examples:
Reference to a journal publication:
[1] J. van der Geer, J.A.J. Hanraads, R.A. Lupton, The art of writing a scientific article, J. Sci. Commun.
163 (2010) 51–59.
Reference to a book:
[2] W. Strunk Jr., E.B. White, The Elements of Style, fourth ed., Longman, New York, 2000.
Reference to a chapter in an edited book:
[3] G.R. Mettam, L.B. Adams, How to prepare an electronic version of your article, in: B.S. Jones, R.Z.
Smith (Eds.), Introduction to the Electronic Age, E-Publishing Inc., New York, 2009, pp. 281–304.
Reference to a website:
[4] Cancer Research UK, Cancer statistics reports for the UK. http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/
aboutcancer/statistics/cancerstatsreport/, 2003 (accessed 13.03.03).
Reference to a dataset:
[dataset] [5] M. Oguro, S. Imahiro, S. Saito, T. Nakashizuka, Mortality data for Japanese oak wilt
disease and surrounding forest compositions, Mendeley Data, v1, 2015. https://doi.org/10.17632/
xwj98nb39r.1.
Video
Elsevier accepts video material and animation sequences to support and enhance your scientific
research. Authors who have video or animation files that they wish to submit with their article are
strongly encouraged to include links to these within the body of the article. This can be done in the
same way as a figure or table by referring to the video or animation content and noting in the body
text where it should be placed. All submitted files should be properly labeled so that they directly
relate to the video file's content. In order to ensure that your video or animation material is directly
usable, please provide the files in one of our recommended file formats with a preferred maximum size
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 12
of 150 MB. Video and animation files supplied will be published online in the electronic version of your
article in Elsevier Web products, including ScienceDirect. Please supply 'stills' with your files: you can
choose any frame from the video or animation or make a separate image. These will be used instead
of standard icons and will personalize the link to your video data. For more detailed instructions please
visit our video instruction pages. Note: since video and animation cannot be embedded in the print
version of the journal, please provide text for both the electronic and the print version for the portions
of the article that refer to this content.
Supplementary material
Supplementary material such as applications, images and sound clips, can be published with your
article to enhance it. Submitted supplementary items are published exactly as they are received (Excel
or PowerPoint files will appear as such online). Please submit your material together with the article
and supply a concise, descriptive caption for each supplementary file. If you wish to make changes to
supplementary material during any stage of the process, please make sure to provide an updated file.
Do not annotate any corrections on a previous version. Please switch off the 'Track Changes' option
in Microsoft Office files as these will appear in the published version.
ARTICLE ENRICHMENTS
AudioSlides
The journal encourages authors to create an AudioSlides presentation with their published article.
AudioSlides are brief, webinar-style presentations that are shown next to the online article on
ScienceDirect. This gives authors the opportunity to summarize their research in their own words
and to help readers understand what the paper is about. More information and examples are
available. Authors of this journal will automatically receive an invitation e-mail to create an AudioSlides
presentation after acceptance of their paper.
Interactive MATLAB Figure Viewer
This journal features the Interactive MATLAB Figure Viewer, allowing you to display figures created in
MATLAB in the .FIG format in an interactive viewer next to the article. More information and submission
instructions.
Interactive plots
This journal enables you to show an Interactive Plot with your article by simply submitting a data
file. Full instructions.
AFTER ACCEPTANCE
Online proof correction
Corresponding authors will receive an e-mail with a link to our online proofing system, allowing
annotation and correction of proofs online. The environment is similar to MS Word: in addition to
editing text, you can also comment on figures/tables and answer questions from the Copy Editor.
Web-based proofing provides a faster and less error-prone process by allowing you to directly type
your corrections, eliminating the potential introduction of errors.
If preferred, you can still choose to annotate and upload your edits on the PDF version. All instructions
for proofing will be given in the e-mail we send to authors, including alternative methods to the online
version and PDF.
We will do everything possible to get your article published quickly and accurately. Please use this
proof only for checking the typesetting, editing, completeness and correctness of the text, tables and
figures. Significant changes to the article as accepted for publication will only be considered at this
stage with permission from the Editor. It is important to ensure that all corrections are sent back
to us in one communication. Please check carefully before replying, as inclusion of any subsequent
corrections cannot be guaranteed. Proofreading is solely your responsibility.
Offprints
The corresponding author will, at no cost, receive a customized Share Link providing 50 days free
access to the final published version of the article on ScienceDirect. The Share Link can be used
for sharing the article via any communication channel, including email and social media. For an
extra charge, paper offprints can be ordered via the offprint order form which is sent once the
article is accepted for publication. Both corresponding and co-authors may order offprints at any
time via Elsevier's Webshop. Corresponding authors who have published their article open access do
not receive a Share Link as their final published version of the article is available open access on
ScienceDirect and can be shared through the article DOI link.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 30 Jun 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/pr 13
AUTHOR INQUIRIES
Visit the Elsevier Support Center to find the answers you need. Here you will find everything from
Frequently Asked Questions to ways to get in touch.
You can also check the status of your submitted article or find out when your accepted article will
be published.
© Copyright 2014 Elsevier | http://www.elsevier.com

