1 
 
Speaker Identification Investigation and Analysis in Unbiased and Biased 
Emotional Talking Environments 
 
Ismail Shahin
 
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department 
University of Sharjah 
P. O. Box  27272 
Sharjah, United Arab Emirates 
Tel: (971) 6 5050967 
Fax: (971) 6 5050877 
E-mail: ismail@sharjah.ac.ae 
 
 
Abstract 
This work aims at investigating and analyzing speaker identification in each unbiased and 
biased emotional talking environments based on a classifier called Suprasegmental 
Hidden Markov Models (SPHMMs). The first talking environment is unbiased towards 
any emotion, while the second talking environment is biased towards different emotions. 
Each of these talking environments is made up of six distinct emotions. These emotions 
are neutral, angry, sad, happy, disgust and fear. The investigation and analysis of this 
work show that speaker identification performance in the biased talking environment is 
superior to that in the unbiased talking environment. The obtained results in this work are 
close to those achieved in subjective assessment by human judges. 
 
Keywords: emotional talking environment; hidden Markov models; speaker 
identification; suprasegmental hidden Markov models. 
2 
 
1.  Introduction 
Speaker recognition is the process of automatically recognizing who is speaking on the 
basis of individual information embedded in speech signals. Speaker recognition involves 
two applications: speaker identification and speaker verification (authentication). Speaker 
identification is the process of finding the identity of the unknown speaker by comparing 
his/her voice with voices of registered speakers in the database. This type of speaker 
recognition is a one-to-many comparison. Speaker verification is the process of 
determining whether the speaker identity is who the person claims to be. Such type of 
speaker recognition is a one-to-one comparison [1], [2]. 
Speaker recognition is often classified into closed-set recognition and open-set 
recognition. The closed-set recognition refers to the cases that the unknown voice must 
come from a set of known speakers, while the open-set recognition refers to the situations 
that the unknown voice may come from unregistered speakers.  Speaker recognition 
typically operates in one of two cases: text-dependent (fixed-text) case or text-
independent (free-text) case. Text-dependent requires a user to regenerate utterances 
containing the same text, while text-independent does not require knowledge of the text 
to be spoken. 
 
Speaker recognition systems perform poorly in emotional talking environments [3], [4], 
[5], [6], [7]. Speaker recognition by emotion is one of research fields in the human-
computer interaction or affective computing [8]. A major incentive comes from the need 
to develop human machine interface that is more adaptive and responsive to a user’s 
identity. The main task of intelligent human-machine interaction is to enable the machine 
with the affective computing capability so that the machine can identify the user for many 
different applications. The applications of speaker identification in emotional talking 
environments appear in criminal investigations to identify the suspected persons who 
3 
 
produced emotional voice and in Text-To-Speech (TTS) communication-aid that can help 
expressing the emotion of the spoken text [9]. 
 
This work is devoted to studying, investigating and analyzing speaker identification in 
two emotionally unlike and separate speech databases. The first database is unbiased 
towards any emotional state, while the second database is biased towards different 
emotional states. 
 
2.  Motivation and Literature Review 
Some earlier studies in the field of speaker recognition focused on speaker recognition in 
emotional talking environments. Bao et al. shed the light on emotion attribute projection 
for speaker recognition on emotional speech [3]. Wu et al. investigated the rules based 
feature modification for robust speaker recognition with emotional speech [4]. Li et al. 
proposed an approach of speech emotion-state conversion to enhance speaker recognition 
performance in emotional talking environments [5]. In two of his earlier studies, Shahin 
focused on using emotions to identify speakers (emotion-dependent speaker 
identification) [6] and on speaker identification in emotional talking environments [7]. In 
the first study [6], Shahin achieved an average speaker identification performance of 
78.8% (in a closed set with forty speakers and six emotions). In the second study [7], he 
obtained an average speaker identification performance of 61.4%, 66.4% and 69.1% 
based, respectively, on hidden Markov models (HMMs), second-order circular hidden 
Markov models (CHMM2s) and suprasegmental hidden Markov models (SPHMMs) 
using forty speakers and five emotions.  
 
In the last two decades, a new field called emotion recognition has been introduced and 
used in our daily life applications such as telecommunications, media and the 
enhancement of service quality in call centers [10], [11], [12]. In two of his most recent 
4 
 
studies, Shahin studied, analyzed and investigated emotion identification when the 
database is biased towards different emotions based on each of HMMs [13] and 
SPHMMs [14]. The results of these two studies show that emotion identification 
performance in a database biased towards emotional states is much better than that in a 
database unbiased towards any emotion [13], [14].  
 
Our main contribution in this research is focused on studying, investigating and analyzing 
text-independent and emotion-dependent speaker identification in two distinct and 
separate emotional speech databases using SPHMMs as a classifier. The first database is 
unbiased towards any emotion, while the second database is biased towards different 
emotions. Six basic emotions have been used to study speaker identification in each 
emotional talking environment. These emotions are neutral, angry, sad, happy, disgust 
and fear. The current study is different from our two previous studies in [13] and [14]. In 
this work, we focus on studying, investigating and analyzing speaker identification in 
completely two different and separate emotional talking environments, while the two 
studies in [13] and [14] focused on studying, investigating and analyzing emotion 
identification in completely two unlike and separate databases based on HMMs and 
SPHMMs, respectively. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to study 
and investigate speaker identification in an environment biased towards different 
emotional states. 
 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. The next section overviews the 
basics of SPHMMs. Section 4 describes the two emotional speech databases used in this 
work and the adopted features. The algorithm that has been used in identifying speakers 
and the experiments are discussed in Section 5. Section 6 demonstrates the results 
obtained in this work and their discussion. Concluding remarks are given in Section 7. 
 
5 
 
3.  Basics of Suprasegmental Hidden Markov Models 
SPHMMs have been developed, used and evaluated by Shahin in the fields of speaker 
recognition [7], [15] and emotion recognition [16]. SPHMMs proved to be superior 
models over HMMs for speaker recognition in each of emotional [7] and shouted talking 
environments [15]. SPHMMs possess the ability to condense several states of HMMs 
into what is designated suprasegmental state. Suprasegmental state can look at the 
observation sequence through a larger window. Such a state allows observations at rates 
appropriate for the situation of modeling emotional speech signals. For example, 
prosodic information can not be perceived at a rate that is used for acoustic modeling. 
Within HMMs, combining prosodic and acoustic information can be achieved as given 
by the following formula [17], 
  











  O  P.O  P.1O  , P vΨlogαvλlogαvΨvλlog   (1) 
where  is a weighting factor. When 




















model acoustic  ofimpact  no
and model prosodic towards completely biased1α  
modelany   towardsbiasednot 0.5α  
model prosodic ofeffect  no
and model acoustic  towardscompletelybiased0α  
model prosodic  towardsbiased0.5α1  
model acoustic  towardsbiased0α0.5 
 (2) 

v
 is the acoustic model of the v
th
 speaker, 
v
 is the suprasegmental model of the v
th
 
speaker, O is the observation vector or sequence of an utterance, 




O  P
v
λ  and 





 O  P
v
 can be computed using Bayes theorem as given in Eqs. (3) and (4), 
respectively [18], 
  
 OP
λ
0
Pλ O P
O λ P

















vv
v
     (3) 
6 
 
 OP
0
P O P
O  P


















vv
v
    (4) 
where P0(
v
) and P0(
v
) are, respectively, the priori distribution of the acoustic model 
and the suprasegmental model. More information about suprasegmental hidden Markov 
models can be obtained from [7], [15], [16]. 
 
4.  Speech Databases and Extraction of Features 
4.1. Speech Databases 
In this work, speaker identification has been studied, investigated and analyzed in two 
distinct and separate speech databases. The first database is unbiased towards any 
emotional state, while the second one is biased towards different emotional states. 
 
The first database was collected from fifty (twenty five male and twenty five female) 
untrained healthy adult native speakers of American English. In this database, each 
speaker was asked to utter five sentences where each sentence was uttered fifteen times 
(nine times in the training session and the remaining in another separate session called the 
test or identification session) under each of the neutral, angry, sad, happy, disgust and fear 
emotions. In this database, speakers uttered the desired sentences naturally. These 
speakers were allowed to hear some recorded sentences before uttering the required 
database. The speakers were not allowed to practice generating such sentences under any 
emotion. In such a database, the five sentences were unbiased towards any emotion. These 
sentences are: 
1) He works five days a week. 
2) The sun is shining. 
3) The weather is fair. 
4) Assistant professors are looking for promotion. 
5) Electrical and computer engineering department. 
 
7 
 
The above five sentences were unbiased towards any emotion which means that the 
content of these sentences was not biased towards any emotion (i.e. there was no 
correlation between any sentence and any emotion). For example, the content of the last 
sentence "electrical and computer engineering department” can not be biased towards any 
emotion. 
 
The second database was gathered from the same fifty speakers. The fifty speakers were 
asked to generate different five sentences under each of the neutral, angry, sad, happy, 
disgust and fear emotions where each sentence was uttered fifteen times (nine times in the 
training session and the rest in the test session). Each different five sentences were biased 
towards their corresponding emotion (i.e. there was a correlation between each five 
sentences and their corresponding emotion). 
 
The five sentences under neutral state are the same as the previous five sentences. The 
five sentences biased towards angry emotion are: 
1) Do not override my decision. 
2) Stop talking during the lecture. 
3) You broke my laptop. 
4) His behavior made me angry. 
5) Your decision was wrong. 
 
The last five sentences were biased towards angry emotion. The content of every sentence 
is biased towards this emotion. For example, the first sentence “do not override my 
decision” is not expected for someone to hear it from speakers speaking in neutral, sad, 
happy, disgust, or fear emotion. This sentence can only be heard when speakers are in an 
anger mode. 
 
The five sentences biased towards sad emotion are: 
8 
 
1) He passed away few hours ago. 
2) My son failed in the TOEFL exam. 
3) Sorry to hear the bad news. 
4) My friend was fired from his job. 
5) The decision was unfair. 
 
The five sentences biased towards happy emotion are: 
1) I was happy when I went back home. 
2) My son passed the TOEFL exam successfully. 
3) Good to hear the good news. 
4) It is my pleasure to meet you. 
5) The decision was fair. 
 
The five sentences biased towards disgust emotion are: 
1) He vomited in my car. 
2) That was too terrible. 
3) His case shocked me. 
4) The refrigerator smells very bad. 
5) Your talk was disgusting. 
 
The five sentences biased towards fear emotion are: 
1) The story scared me. 
2) I am afraid from failure. 
3) The results are alarming. 
4) I am worry about my promotion. 
5) That was a nightmare for me. 
 
Our speech databases were recorded in a clean environment that was not affected by a 
background noise. The two databases were separately captured by a speech acquisition 
board using a 16-bit linear coding A/D converter and sampled at a sampling rate of 16 
kHz. These databases were 16-bit per sample linear data. The speech signals were applied 
9 
 
every 5 ms to a 30 ms Hamming window. The two speech databases used in this work 
were “closed set”. 
 
4.2. Extraction of Features 
In the present work, the features that have been adopted to represent the phonetic content 
of speech signals are called the short time Log Frequency Power Coefficients (LFPCs). 
LFPCs have proven to be superior features over each of the Linear Prediction Cepstral 
Coefficients (LPCCs) and the Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCCs) in 
emotional talking environments [14], [19]. 
 
The windowed speech signal, after applying the Hamming window, was transformed into 
the frequency domain using the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) algorithm. The spectral 
components were separated into 16 bands. The DFT responses of the 16 filters were 
nothing but shifting and frequency warping versions of a rectangular window Wm(k) 
which is given as [19], 


 

otherwise0 
1,2,...,16m,lkh1 
(k)
mm
mW     (5) 
where k is the DFT domain index, lm and hm are, respectively, the lower and upper edges 
of the mth filter bank which is given by, 
  1,2,...,16m,(k)(k)(m)
2/2)m(bmfk
/2)m(bmfk
mtt WXS 


   (6) 
where Xt(k) is the kth spectral component of the windowed signal, t is the frame number, 
St(m) is the output of the mth filter bank, fm and bm are the center frequency of the mth 
sub-band and the bandwidth of the mth sub-band, respectively. For each frame, 16 LFPCs 
were obtained. 
 
10 
 
In the current work, an ergodic or fully connected SPHMM structure that has been 
obtained from an ergodic HMM structure becomes more appropriate than a left-to-right 
structure because the emotional cues contained in an emotional utterance cannot be 
assumed as specific sequential events in the signal. It is well known that every state in the 
ergodic structure can be reached in a single step from every other state [18]. In this work, 
the number of suprasegmental states was three, while the number of conventional states 
was nine (each suprasegmental state was comprised of three conventional states). The 
number of mixture components, M, was ten per state with a continuous mixture 
observation density was selected for the recognizer. Fig. 1 shows our adopted three-state 
ergodic SPHMM structure that was derived from a nine-state ergodic HMM structure. 
 
5.  Speaker Identification Algorithm Based on SPHMMs and the Experiments 
5.1. Unbiased Emotional Talking Environment 
In this talking environment, the training session based on SPHMMs is similar to the 
training session based on HMMs. In the training session of SPHMMs, suprasegmental 
models were trained on top of acoustic models. In this session, the vth SPHMM speaker 
model was derived using all the five sentences uttered under each emotion with a 
repetition of nine utterances / sentence. The total number of utterances used to construct 
the vth speaker model in such a session was 270 (5 sentences X 6 emotions X 9 utterances 
/ sentence). 
 
In the evaluation (identification) session of such talking environment (completely separate 
from the training session), each one of the fifty speakers used six of the fifteen utterances 
per sentence (text-independent) under each emotion (emotion-dependent). The total 
number of utterances used in this session was 9000 (50 speakers X 6 emotions X 5 
sentences X 6 utterances / sentence). The probability of generating every utterance was 
computed based on SPHMMs (there were 50 probabilities). The model with the highest 
11 
 
probability was chosen as the output of speaker identification as given in the following 
formula, 














 v
v
OP
105
maxarg*V      (7) 
where V
*
 is the index of the identified speaker, O is the observation vector or sequence 
that belongs to the unknown speaker,  vOP  is the probability of the observation 
sequence O given the vth SPHMM speaker model  v. This session can be summarized in 
the block diagram given in Fig. 2. 
 
5.2. Biased Emotional Talking Environment 
In the training session of this talking environment, there are six separate training sessions 
each based on SPHMMs. The first training session belongs to the five sentences under 
neutral state. This training session is the same as that in the unbiased emotional talking 
environment. 
 
The second training session belongs to the five sentences biased towards angry emotion. 
In this session, the vth SPHMM speaker model was built using all the five sentences 
biased towards angry emotion in addition to all the five sentences uttered under each 
unbiased emotion excluding the angry emotion. The training data in this phase was 
composed of 270 utterances ((5 sentences biased towards angry emotion X 9 utterances / 
sentence) + (5 unbiased sentences X 5 emotions X 9 utterances / sentence)). 
 
The third training session corresponds to the five sentences biased towards sad emotion. 
The vth SPHMM speaker model in this session was constructed by exploiting all the five 
sentences biased towards sad emotion plus all the five sentences generated under each 
unbiased emotion except the sad emotion. The training data in such a session was made 
up of 270 utterances. 
12 
 
 
The fourth training session belongs to the five sentences biased towards happy emotion. 
In such a stage, the vth SPHMM speaker model was obtained by employing all the five 
sentences biased towards happy emotion along with all the five sentences generated under 
each unbiased emotion apart from the happy emotion. The training data in this session 
was comprised of 270 utterances. 
 
The fifth training stage is associated with the five sentences biased towards disgust 
emotion. In this stage, the vth SPHMM speaker model was achieved using all the five 
sentences biased towards disgust emotion in conjunction with all the five sentences 
produced under each unbiased emotion aside from the disgust emotion. The training data 
in such a session consisted of 270 utterances. 
 
Finally, the sixth training phase is linked to the five sentences biased towards fear 
emotion. The vth SPHMM speaker model in such a phase was attained using all the five 
sentences biased towards fear emotion in addition to all the five sentences produced under 
each unbiased emotion excluding the fear emotion. The training data in such a phase was 
composed of 270 utterances. 
 
In the evaluation session of the biased talking environment, there are six separate 
evaluation sessions each based on SPHMMs. The first evaluation session belongs to the 
first training session. The second evaluation session belongs to the second training 
session, etc…. In each evaluation session, each one of the fifty speakers used six of the 
fifteen utterances per sentence (text-independent) under each emotion. The total number 
of utterances used in each session was 9000 (50 speakers X 6 emotions X 5 sentences X 6 
utterances / sentence).  In each separate session, the probability of generating every 
13 
 
utterance was computed based on SPHMMs. The model with the highest probability was 
selected as the output of speaker identification. 
 
6.  Results and Discussion 
6.1. Speaker Identification in the Unbiased Emotional Talking Environment 
Speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs in the unbiased talking 
environment is summarized in Table 1. The average speaker identification performance 
of this table is 73.08%. The table shows that the highest speaker identification 
performance happens when speakers speak in a neutral state (86.5%), while the least 
speaker identification performance occurs when speakers speak in an angry emotion 
(64.5%). The results attained in this work are consistent with those obtained by Shahin in 
one of his studies [7]. He achieved, based on the same classifier and using forty speakers 
uttering eight different sentences under five different unbiased emotions, an average 
speaker identification performance of 69.10%. 
 
To make a comparison between HMMs and SPHMMs as classifiers in identifying the 
unknown speaker in the unbiased emotional talking environment, SPHMMs have been 
replaced with HMMs. Table 2 shows speaker identification performance based on HMMs 
in such an environment. This table gives average speaker identification performance of 
66.33%. It is evident from the results obtained in this table and those obtained in Table 1 
that speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs in such emotional talking 
environment is better than that based on HMMs evaluated in the same environment. This 
may be attributed to the following reasons: 
1. HMMs are not convenient enough as a classifier for speaker identification in 
emotional talking environment. 
14 
 
2. SPHMMs have the ability to integrate obsevations from emotional modality 
because such models allow for observations at an appropriate  rate for emotional 
features. 
 
The results achieved in the present work based on HMMs agree with those reported by 
Shahin using the same models. Shahin obtained an average speaker identification 
performance of 61.40% using forty speakers uttering eight distinct sentences under five 
different unbiased emotions [7]. 
 
To investigate whether speaker identification performance differences (speaker 
identification performance based on SPHMMs and that based on HMMs) in the unbiased 
emotional talking environment are real or simply due to statistical fluctuations, a 
statistical significance test has been carried out. The statistical significance test has been 
performed based on the Student t Distribution test as given by the following formula, 
  
pooled
HMMsSPHMMs
HMMs SPHMMs,
SD
xx
t

    (8) 
where SPHMMsx  is the mean of the first sample (based on SPHMMs) of size n, HMMsx  is 
the mean of the second sample (based on HMMs) of the same size, SDpooled is the pooled 
standard deviation of the two samples given as, 
  
n
SDSD
SD
22
HMMsSPHMMs
pooled

    (9) 
where SDSPHMMs is the standard deviation of the first sample (based on SPHMMs) of size 
n, SDHMMs is the standard deviation of the second sample (based on HMMs) of the same 
size. 
 
Based on Table 1 and Table 2, ,36.7SD,%08.73x SPHMMs_unbSPHMMs_unb   
25.8SD  ,%33.66x HMMs_unbHMMs_unb  . Based on these values, the calculated t value is 
15 
 
t SPHMMs_unb, HMMs_unb = 8.191. This calculated t value is much greater than the tabulated 
critical value at 0.05 significant level t0.05 = 1.645. Therefore, it is evident from Table 1 
and Table 2 that SPHMMs are superior to HMMs for speaker identification in the 
unbiased emotional talking environment. 
 
6.2. Speaker Identification in the Biased Emotional Talking Environment 
Table 3 demonstrates speaker identification performance when the talking environment is 
biased towards angry emotion. This table yields an average speaker identification 
performance of 76.75%. It is apparent from Table 1 and Table 3 that angry speaker 
identification performance has been significantly improved by 19.38% when speakers 
speak in an environment biased towards angry emotion compared to that in an unbiased 
environment. The two tables also show that speaker identification performance has been 
improved under all emotions when speakers generate their voices in an environment 
biased towards angry emotion compared to that in the unbiased talking environment. 
 
Table 4 shows speaker identification performance when the talking environment is biased 
towards sad emotion. This table gives an average speaker identification performance of 
75.58%. It is evident from Table 1 and Table 4 that sad speaker identification 
performance has been remarkably enhanced when speakers produce their voices in an 
environment biased towards sad emotion compared to that in an unbiased talking 
environment. The enhancement rate of speaker identification performance is 16.67%. 
 
Speaker identification performance when the talking environment is biased towards 
happy emotion is given in Table 5. Based on this table, the average speaker identification 
performance is 76.08%. Comparing this table with Table 1, happy speaker identification 
performance when the talking environment is biased towards such an emotion has been 
16 
 
appreciably improved by 15.07% compared to that when the talking environment is 
unbiased towards any emotion. 
 
Average speaker identification performance when the talking environment is biased 
towards disgust emotion is 77.00% as calculated from Table 6. This table shows that 
disgust speaker identification performance when the talking environment is biased 
towards such an emotion has been considerably improved by 17.24% compared to that 
when the talking environment is unbiased towards any emotion. 
 
Table 7 yields speaker identification performance when the talking environment is biased 
towards fear emotion. This table gives an average speaker identification performance of 
76.33%. It is evident that fear speaker identification performance has been drastically 
enhanced by 15.75% when the talking environment is biased towards fear emotion 
compared to that when the talking environment is unbiased towards any emotion. 
 
Three more experiments have been separately conducted to evaluate the results obtained 
in this work. The three experiments are: 
1) An informal subjective evaluation of speaker identification performance in each of 
the unbiased and biased emotional talking environments has been carried out by ten 
listeners (human judges) in order to assess speaker identification performance in 
each talking environment. There are one assessment in the unbiased talking 
environment and five separate assessments in the biased talking environment. A 
total of 1500 utterances (fifty speakers X six emotions X five sentences) per 
assessment have been used. During the six separate assessments, each listener was 
asked to identify the unknown speaker. Based on the listening tests, the average 
speaker identification performance when the talking environment is unbiased 
towards any emotion is 75.25%, while the average speaker identification 
17 
 
performances when the talking environment is biased towards angry, sad, happy, 
disgust and fear emotions are 76.44%, 75.21%, 76.09%, 77.78% and 75.89%, 
respectively. 
 
The quality of emotions delivered by subjects has been tested and compared based 
on each of SPHMMs and listening tests by measuring kappa statistic as calculated 
in Fig. 3. Kappa coefficient is a statistical measure of the actual agreement as 
compared to the agreement that may happen just by chance [20]. Large values of 
kappa support the hypothesis that there is a strong relation between two parts (close 
results), while small values indicate that the observed relation is not more than what 
is expected by chance. Based on this figure, it is evident that for speaker 
identification performance based on SPHMMs, there is a moderate agreement for 
each of the six biased talking environments since kappa values range from 0.302 to 
0.408. Therefore, the agreement is due to an actual relation and does not come by 
chance. The same can be fairly said about the listening tests for each of the six 
biased talking environments (kappa values range from 0.348 to 0.400). In addition, 
it can be seen from this figure that the two sets of kappa values per each biased 
talking environment (the one based on SPHMMs and the one based on the listening 
test) are relatively close. 
2) A statistical cross-validation technique has been performed to estimate the standard 
deviation of the recognition rates when the talking environment is biased towards 
each emotion. Cross-validation technique has been implemented per each biased 
talking environment as follows. The entire collected database (22500 utterances) is 
partitioned at random into five subsets. Each subset is composed of 4500 
utterances. Based on these five subsets per each biased emotional talking 
environment and using SPHMMs, the standard deviation per biased talking 
environment is calculated. The standard deviation values are summarized in Fig. 4. 
18 
 
Based on this figure, cross-validation technique shows that the calculated values of 
standard deviation are very low. Therefore, it is apparent that speaker identification 
performance based on SPHMMs when the talking environment is biased towards 
different emotional states (using the five subsets) is very close to that using the 
entire database (very slight fluctuations). 
3) SPHMMs have been replaced as a classifier by HMMs to make a comparison 
between SPHMMs and HMMs in identifying the unknown speaker in each biased 
emotional talking environment. Using HMMs as a classifier, the average speaker 
identification performance when the talking environment is biased towards angry, 
sad, happy, disgust, and fear emotions is 68.02%, 69.51%, 67.95%, 69.89% and 
69.57%, respectively. Table 8 summarizes the calculated tSPHMMs_biased, HMMs_biased 
values when the talking environment is biased towards every emotion. This table 
shows that each calculated t value is much greater than the tabulated critical value 
t0.05 = 1.645. It is clear from this table that SPHMMs are superior to HMMs in the 
biased emotional talking environment. 
 
7.  Concluding Remarks 
In this work, speaker identification has been studied, investigated and analyzed in two 
separate and unlike emotional talking environments. Some concluding remarks can be 
drawn from this work. Firstly, speaker identification performance has been significantly 
improved in the biased emotional talking environment compared to that in the unbiased 
emotional talking environment. This may be attributed to the fact that speakers usually 
use certain words and phrases more frequently in expressing their emotions since they 
have learned the connection between certain words and their corresponding emotions. 
Therefore, it is easier to identify the unknown speaker in the biased emotional talking 
environment than in the unbiased talking environment. Secondly, speaker identification 
performance in the biased emotional talking environment has been enhanced under all 
19 
 
emotions. Thirdly, SPHMMs outperform HMMs for speaker identification systems in 
each unbiased and biased emotional talking environments.  
 
Speaker identification performance in the biased emotional talking environment is 
limited. This limitation is accredited to the choice of the biased database. The choice of 
the biased database is not ideal since some sentences are biased towards more than one 
emotion. Another limitation is that the speech database used in this work is a local one. 
To the best of our knowledge, there is no global and well-known speech database biased 
towards different emotional states. 
 
For future work, we plan to thoroughly study and investigate the factors that affect the 
performance of speaker identification in the biased emotional talking environment. We 
also plan to propose and implement new classifiers to identify speakers in a such talking 
environment. I addition, we intend to determine the features that best model the phonetic 
content of speech signals in the biased talking environment. 
 
References 
[1] S. Furui, “Speaker-dependent-feature-extraction, recognition and processing 
techniques,” Speech Communication, Vol. 10, March 1991, pp. 505-520. 
 
[2] T. F. Quatieri, Discrete-Time Speech Signal Processing: Principles and Practice, 1/e, 
Prentice Hall, Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 2002, Chapter 14. 
 
[3] H. Bao, M. Xu, and T. F. Zheng, "Emotion attribute projection for speaker recognition 
on emotional speech," INTERSPEECH 2007, Antwerp, Belgium, August 2007, pp. 758-
761. 
 
20 
 
[4] Z. Wu, D. Li, and Y Yang, "Rules based feature modification for affective speaker 
recognition," ICASSP 2006, Toulouse, France, May 2006, pp. I-661 – I-664. 
 
[5] D. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Wu and T. Wu, "Emotion-state conversion for speaker 
recognition," Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction 2005, LNCS 3784, Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, pp. 403-410. 
 
[6] I. Shahin, “Using emotions to identify speakers,” The 5
th
 International Workshop on 
Signal Processing and its Applications (WoSPA 2008), Sharjah, United Arab Emirates, 
March 2008. 
 
[7] I. Shahin, “Speaker identification in emotional environments,” Iranian Journal of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Vol. 8, No. 1, Winter-Spring 2009, pp. 41-46. 
 
[8] R. W. Picard, “Affective computing,” MIT Media Lab Perceptual Computing Section 
Tech. Rep., No. 321, 1995. 
 
[9] D. A. Reynolds, "An overview of automatic speaker recognition technology," 
ICASSP 2002, Vol. 4, May 2002, pp. IV-4072- IV-4075. 
 
[10] R. Cowie, E. Douglas-Cowie, N. Tsapatsoulis, G. Votsis S. Collias, W. Fellenz and J. 
Taylor, “Emotion recognition in human-computer interaction,” IEEE Signal Processing 
Magazine, 18 (1), 2001, pp. 32-80. 
 
[11] V.A. Petrushin, “Emotion Recognition in Speech Signal: Experimental Study, 
Development, and Application,” Proceedings of International Conference on Spoken 
Language Processing, ICSLP 2000. 
21 
 
[12] N. Fragopanagos and J. G. Taylor, “Emotion recognition in human-computer 
interaction,” Neural Networks, special issue (18), 2005, pp. 389-405. 
 
[13] I. Shahin, “Emotion identification using specific sentences that are biased towards 
their corresponding emotions,” 9
th
 International Conference on Signal Processing 
(ICSP’08), Beijing, China, October 2008, pp. 553-556. 
 
[14] I. Shahin, “Analysis and investigation of emotion identification in biased emotional 
talking environments”. IET Signal Processing Journal, Vol. 5, No. 5, August 2011, pp. 
461 – 470, DOI: 10.1049/iet-spr.2010.0059. 
[15] I. Shahin, “Speaker identification in the shouted environment using suprasegmental 
hidden Markov models,” Signal Processing Journal, Vol. 88, issue 11, November 2008, 
pp. 2700-2708. 
 
[16] I. Shahin, “Speaking style authentication using suprasegmental hidden Markov 
models,” University of Sharjah Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences, Vol. 5, No. 2, June 
2008, pp. 41-65. 
 
[17] T. S. Polzin and A. H. Waibel, “Detecting emotions in Speech,” Cooperative 
Multimodal Communication, Second International Conference 1998, CMC 1998. 
 
[18] L. R. Rabiner and B. H. Juang, Fundamentals of Speech Recognition, Prentice Hall, 
Eaglewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1983, Chapter 6. 
 
[19] T. L. Nwe, S. W. Foo, L. C. De Silva, "Speech emotion recognition using hidden 
Markov models," Speech Communication, Vol. 41, issue 4, November 2003, pp. 603-623. 
 
22 
 
[20] J. R. Landis G. G. Koch, “The measurement for observer agreement for categorical 
data,” Biometrics, March 1977, 33, (1), pp. 159-174. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Three-state ergodic SPHMM structure derived from a nine-state ergodic HMM 
structure. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
P1 
 
 
P2 
 
 
P3 
 
b33 
b23                                                                                                           
b32 
b22 
b21 
b12 
b11 
b13 
b31 
23 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Block diagram of speaker identification based on SPHMMs. 
 
 
 
 
        Probability 
       computation 
Probability 
computation 
 
Probability 
computation 
 
        Select 
        maximum 
     Feature 
      analysis 
 
 
v 
Digitized speech 
signal of the 
unknown speaker 
Index of recognized speaker 
V* 
 1OP 
 1λOP  
 2OP   
O 
 
 vOP  
 
 
 
24 
 
 
Figure 3.  Kappa statistic based on each of SPHMMs and listening tests in a talking 
environment biased towards each of neutral, angry, sad, happy, disgust and fear 
emotions. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Statistical cross-validation technique based on SPHMMs per each biased 
emotional talking environment. 
 
Table 1 
Speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs in the unbiased emotional talking 
environment 
Emotion Males 
(%) 
Females 
(%) 
Average 
(%) 
Neutral 86 87 86.5 
Angry 64 65 64.5 
Sad 68 70 69 
Happy 72 74 73 
Disgust 73 72 72.5 
Fear 72 74 73 
 
25 
 
Table 2 
Speaker identification performance based on HMMs in the unbiased emotional talking 
environment 
Emotion Males 
(%) 
Females 
(%) 
Average 
(%) 
Neutral 81 82 81.5 
Angry 57 58 57.5 
Sad 61 61 61 
Happy 65 66 65.5 
Disgust 67 68 67.5 
Fear 65 65 65 
 
Table 3 
Speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs when the talking environment is 
biased towards angry emotion 
Emotion Males 
(%) 
Females 
(%) 
Average 
(%) 
Neutral 87 88 87.5 
Angry 76 78 77 
Sad 70 69 69.5 
Happy 75 76 75.5 
Disgust 76 74 75 
Fear 76 76 76 
 
Table 4 
Speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs when the talking environment is 
biased towards sad emotion 
Emotion Males 
(%) 
Females 
(%) 
Average 
(%) 
Neutral 87 89 88 
Angry 64 64 64 
Sad 80 81 80.5 
Happy 73 72 72.5 
Disgust 74 76 75 
Fear 74 73 73.5 
 
Table 5 
Speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs when the talking environment is 
biased towards happy emotion 
Emotion Males 
(%) 
Females 
(%) 
Average 
(%) 
Neutral 88 89 88.5 
Angry 64 65 64.5 
Sad 70 69 69.5 
Happy 84 84 84 
Disgust 75 73 74 
Fear 76 76 76 
 
26 
 
Table 6 
Speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs when the talking environment is 
biased towards disgust emotion 
Emotion Males 
(%) 
Females 
(%) 
Average 
(%) 
Neutral 89 89 89 
Angry 68 68 68 
Sad 70 72 71 
Happy 74 73 73.5 
Disgust 85 85 85 
Fear 75 76 75.5 
 
 
Table 7 
Speaker identification performance based on SPHMMs when the talking environment is 
biased towards fear emotion 
Emotion Males 
(%) 
Females 
(%) 
Average 
(%) 
Neutral 88 88 88 
Angry 66 66 66 
Sad 71 71 71 
Happy 74 74 74 
Disgust 75 74 74.5 
Fear 84 85 84.5 
 
 
Table 8 
Calculated t values when the talking environment is biased towards each emotion 
Talking environment biased towards: Calculated t value 
tSPHMMs, HMMs 
Angry 8.312 
Sad 8.911 
Happy 8.433 
Disgust 8.001 
Fear 8.453 
 

