NATURAL LANGUAGE PARSING
AS
STATISTICAL PATTERN RECOGNITION
a dissertation
submitted to the department of computer science
and the committee on graduate studies
of stanford university
in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of
doctor of philosophy
By
David M. Magerman
February 1994
c Copyright 1994 by David M. Magerman
All Rights Reserved
ii
I certify that I have read this dissertation and that in my
opinion it is fully adequate, in scope and in quality, as a
dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
Vaughan Pratt
(Principal Adviser)
I certify that I have read this dissertation and that in my
opinion it is fully adequate, in scope and in quality, as a
dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
Nils Nilsson
I certify that I have read this dissertation and that in my
opinion it is fully adequate, in scope and in quality, as a
dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
Jerry Hobbs
(Dept. of Linguistics)
Approved for the University Committee on Graduate
Studies:
Dean of Graduate Studies
iii
Preface
The debate between the relative merits of statistical modeling and linguistic theory
in natural language processing has been raging since the days of Zellig Harris and
his irreverent student, Noam Chomsky. I have never been shy about expressing my
views on this issue. I would have liked nothing more than to declare in my dissertation
that linguistics can be completely replaced by statistical analysis of corpora. In fact, I
intended this to be my thesis: given a corpus parsed according to a consistent scheme,
a statistical model can be trained, without the aid of a linguistics expert, to annotate
new sentences with that same scheme.
The most important part of this thesis is that linguists need not participate in
the development of the statistical parser. Using the most obvious representations
of the annotations in the parsed corpus, the parser should automatically acquire
disambiguation rules in the form of probability distributions on parsing decisions. In
other words, natural language parsing would be transformed from the (never-ending)
search for the perfect grammar into the simple task of annotating enough sentences
to train rich statistical models.1
With the guidance and support of the statistical modeling gurus in the IBM Speech
Recognition Group, I formulated and implemented a statistical parser based on this
thesis. In experiments, it parsed a large test set (1473 sentences) with a signicantly
higher accuracy rate than a grammar-based parser developed by a highly-respected
grammarian. The grammarian spent the better part of a decade perfecting his gram-
mar to maximize its score on the crossing-brackets measure.2 The grammarian's score
1This task is not so simple if \enough sentences" turns out to be, say, 10 trillion, but I will deal
with that issue later.
2For the denition of the crossing-brackets measure, see chapter 8.
iv
on this test set was 69%. The statistical parser, trained on the same data to which
the grammarian had access, scored 78%.
While these results represent signicant progress, they do not prove my original
thesis. Despite the 78% crossing-brackets score, only about 35% of the parses exactly
matched the human annotations for those sentences. Ignoring part-of-speech tagging
errors, just under 50% of the parses were exactly correct. All this means, of course,
is that I didn't solve the natural language parsing problem. No big surprise there
(although the naive graduate student in me is a little disappointed.) But, in analyzing
where the parser fails, there is a glimmer of hope for a better solution.
Diagnosing parsing errors, especially in a parser that has hundreds of thousands
of parameters, is a tricky business. But I suspect the main problem with the parser is
the lack of linguistic sophistication in the disambiguation criteria made available to
the statistical models.3 For example, there was no morphological component to the
parser. Distributionally-determined word features provide some morphological clues;
however, these features are only reliable for the higher frequency words. As a result,
conclusions about disambiguation for some singular nouns were not carried over to
their plural forms. Some untensed verbs were not related to their tensed counterparts,
preventing the parser from drawing conclusions about some attachment decisions.
This error analysis leads me to conclude that linguistic input is crucial to natural
language parsing, but in a way much dierent than it is currently being used. Humans,
as language processing experts, are much more capable of identifying disambiguation
criteria than they are at guring out how to apply them. Grammarians can contribute
to statistical parser development not by writing large and unwieldy rule bases, but
instead by identifying the criteria by which a parser might make disambiguation
decisions.
3Actually, with 10,000 times more data, the parser probably could have gotten by with the sim-
plistic representations. But if we could eciently collect a half billion human-annotated sentences,
we probably wouldn't need automatic parsers. We could just use the annotators. The discussion
assumes we are limited to an amount of data that we can reasonably collect for a new domain.
v
Acknowledgements
Although I only began my graduate studies three and a half years ago, the path
to completing my doctoral thesis began much earlier. There are many people who
contributed to this process, both technically and personally.
First, I would like to thank my advisor, Dr. Vaughan Pratt, for supporting me
while I was at Stanford. Dr. Pratt's master's thesis was on a form of probabilistic
natural language parsing, but since completing his master's thesis work in the early
1970's, his research has moved in many dierent directions. I am sure there were many
other Stanford graduate students doing work which contributed more to his current
research projects, but he supported me, both technically and nancially, throughout
my graduate studies. If he had not oered to act as my advisor after my rst-year at
Stanford, I would not have lasted at Stanford very long.
I would also like to thank the other reading committeemembers, Drs. Jerry Hobbs
and Nils Nilsson, and the other friends and colleagues who took the time to read the
many drafts of my dissertation and who gave me much-needed feedback: John Gillett,
Dr. Ezra Black, and Adwait Ratnaparkhi.
None of the work presented in this dissertation could have ever been accomplished
without the technical contributions of the IBM Language Modeling Group. Drs. Fred
Jelinek, Bob Mercer, and Salim Roukos, the managers in the language modeling group
during the time I performed my thesis research, contributed a great number of ideas
to my research. During the summer of 1992, Drs. Jelinek, Mercer, and Roukos,
along with Dr. John Laerty, Adwait Ratnaparkhi, and Barbara Gates met with me
twice weekly to discuss progress in the development of SPATTER and to brainstorm
solutions to problems. I greatly appreciate the contributions of all of the members of
vi
the Language Modeling Group.4
Dr. Ezra Black, an extraordinary linguist and a good friend, did not attend these
meetings even though he was also a member of the IBM Language Modeling Group
during my time at IBM. His parser was used as a benchmark against which my thesis
parser would be evaluated, and it seemed inappropriate for him to contribute directly
to the development of the parser. Nonetheless, he contributed to my thesis in many
ways. The design of my parser was based on that of his feature-based grammar. And
he was always available to me to answer my naive questions about language and the
Lancaster treebank. Even though he didn't believe in my approach to the problem
we were both trying feverishly to solve, he never allowed his reservations to interfere
with his explanations. And, in the end, I discovered that he was right about many of
the points on which we disagreed.
While I may have a degree in mathematics, and I've taken a course or two in
probability and statistics, when I arrived at IBM, I was quite unskilled when it came
to statistical modeling. I would have remained that way were it not for the hours
and hours which the IBM Speech Group members devoted to my education. Drs.
Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent Della Pietra, and John Laerty seemed to be on call
24 hours a day to answer any and all of my questions about statistical modeling. And,
they didn't just answer my questions, but also proved their answers and explained
the proofs until I understood them. I owe nearly all that I know about statistical
modeling to their knowledge and patience.
Although my technical knowledge developed at IBM, my interest in natural lan-
guage parsing began during my undergraduate days at the University of Pennsylvania,
under the tutelage of Dr. Mitch Marcus. I am greatly indebted to Dr. Marcus for
introducing me to the NLP eld, and for teaching me the fundamentals of parsing. I
also thank him for breaking the barriers imposed by my undergraduate status and al-
lowing me the opportunity to meet and discuss my work with the leading researchers
in statistical NLP, like Drs. Kenneth Church, Fernando Pereira, and Don Hindle at
Bell Laboratories, Dr. Stuart Shieber at Harvard University and Dr. Fred Jelinek at
4This work was supported by a grant awarded jointly to the IBM Language Modeling Group and
the University of Pennsylvania Computer Science Department (ONR contract No. N00014-92-C-
0189).
vii
IBM.
All of the researchers mentioned above contributed to my technical knowledge of
the eld, and many of them supported me emotionally as well during my undergrad-
uate and graduate studies. But the man to whom I am most indebted for starting me
down the path which has led to this work is Dr. Max Mintz. I rst met Dr. Mintz as
a student of his in an undergraduate computer class. After a class in the middle of
the semester, he invited me to his oce. For some reason, unknown to me to this day,
he oered me a deal no undergraduate computer science student could turn down. I
needed only to name a research area, any area I desired, and he would make sure I had
an opportunity to become involved with the research group at Penn working in that
area. I am sure he hoped I would express interest in his robotics and vision group.
But, instead of leading me toward this choice, he deliberately biased me against his
own group, so as not to appear to be taking advantage of an impressionable youth
such as I was. In the end, I chose natural language processing, and, true to his word,
he introduced me to the head of the Language and Information Computing lab, Dr.
Mitch Marcus. Even though I was not working directly with him, Dr. Mintz became
my academic advisor, my mentor, and my friend. Any problem I had, no matter how
trivial or how dicult, he would always drop what he was doing and try to solve it
(and he almost always succeeded). I only hope that the work I am reporting in this
dissertation meets with his approval.
I would also like to thank my mother, my father (may he rest in peace), and my
sister for loving me, for supporting me, and for encouraging me to be the best I could
be in whatever endeavor I chose to pursue.
Finally, I would like to thank my roommate for two of the years I was at Stanford,
fellow graduate student, lecturer, and my best friend, Raymond Suke Flournoy. With-
out Ray, I would surely have gone insane long before I completed my dissertation. I
suspect that, without me, he would be much closer to nishing his own dissertation,
but I hope he doesn't hold that against me.
viii
Contents
Preface iv
Acknowledgements vi
1 Introduction 1
1.1 Statement of Thesis : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 3
1.2 Organization of Dissertation : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 4
2 Related Work 6
2.1 Early Natural Language Parsing : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 7
2.2 Computational Grammatical Formalisms : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 8
2.3 Broad-coverage Parsing Systems : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 9
2.4 The Toy Problem Syndrome : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 11
2.4.1 The Speech Recognition Revolution : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 12
2.5 Recent Work in Statistical NL : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 14
2.5.1 Part-of-speech Tagging : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 15
2.5.2 Grammar Induction : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 16
2.5.3 Other Work in Statistical NL : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 17
3 Statistical Decision Tree Modeling 18
3.1 Information Theory : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 19
3.1.1 Entropy : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 20
3.1.2 Perplexity : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 20
3.1.3 Joint Entropy : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 21
ix
3.1.4 Conditional Entropy : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 21
3.1.5 Relative Entropy, or Kullback-Liebler Distance : : : : : : : : : 21
3.1.6 Mutual Information : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 22
3.1.7 Cross Entropy : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 23
3.2 What is a Statistical Decision Tree? : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 23
3.2.1 Histories, Questions, and Futures : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 24
3.2.2 An Example : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 25
3.2.3 Binary Decision Trees : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 26
3.2.4 Recasting N-ary Questions as Binary Questions : : : : : : : : 28
3.3 Growing a Decision Tree : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 30
3.3.1 Notation : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 30
3.3.2 The Growing Algorithm : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 31
3.4 Training a Decision Tree Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 33
3.4.1 The Forward-Backward Algorithm for Decision Trees : : : : : 34
3.4.2 Bucketing 's : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 36
3.5 Problems with M-L Decision Trees : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 37
3.5.1 Greedy Growing Algorithm : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 37
3.5.2 Data Fragmentation and Node Merging : : : : : : : : : : : : : 38
3.5.3 Flaws in Smoothing : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 39
3.5.4 Maximizing the Wrong Function : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 39
3.5.5 Final Comments : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 40
4 Preliminary Experiments 41
4.1 A Context-sensitive Probabilistic Parser : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 42
4.1.1 The PUNDIT String Grammar : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 42
4.1.2 Replacing the Restrictions with Statistics : : : : : : : : : : : : 43
4.1.3 A Context-Sensitive Parsing Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 44
4.1.4 Experimental Results : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 45
4.1.5 Conclusions from the Pearl Experiment : : : : : : : : : : : : : 45
4.2 A Decision Tree Parsing Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 46
4.2.1 The Lancaster Computer Manuals Treebank : : : : : : : : : : 47
x
4.2.2 The History-based Grammar Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 48
4.2.3 The Grammar : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 51
4.2.4 The HBG Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 52
4.2.5 Experimental Results : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 54
4.2.6 Conclusions from the HBG Experiment : : : : : : : : : : : : : 55
5 SPATTER Parsing 57
5.1 The Treebank Recognition Problem : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 59
5.2 Representing Parts of Parse Trees : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 60
5.2.1 Four Elementary Features : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 60
5.2.2 Propagating Lexical Information : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 62
5.2.3 Representing Features as Binary Questions : : : : : : : : : : : 66
5.2.4 A Feature for Conjunction : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 69
5.3 Derivations of Parse Trees : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 70
5.4 SPATTER Parsing: The Algorithm : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 71
5.4.1 An Example : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 73
5.4.2 Managing the Search: Stack Decoding : : : : : : : : : : : : : 74
6 Probabilistic Models in SPATTER 79
6.1 Notation : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 80
6.2 Probabilistic Models for Node Features : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 80
6.2.1 The Tagging Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 80
6.2.2 The Label Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 82
6.2.3 The Extension Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 82
6.2.4 The Conjunction Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 83
6.2.5 The Derivation Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 83
6.2.6 The Parsing Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 84
6.3 Expectation Maximization Training : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 84
6.3.1 Forward-Backward Reestimation : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 85
6.3.2 Forward-Backward in SPATTER : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 86
6.3.3 Decision Trees and the Forward-Backward Algorithm : : : : : 87
6.3.4 Training Algorithm : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 88
xi
7 Evaluation Methodology 89
7.1 Parsing Performance Measures : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 89
7.1.1 Entropy as a Predictor of Performance : : : : : : : : : : : : : 90
7.1.2 The Misguided Crossing-Brackets Measure : : : : : : : : : : : 91
7.1.3 The Exact Match Criterion : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 93
7.1.4 An Argument for the Exact Match Criterion : : : : : : : : : : 94
7.2 Rules of Experimentation : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 95
7.2.1 Test Data : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 96
7.2.2 Training Data : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 97
7.3 Conclusions : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 99
8 Experiment Results 100
8.1 Parser Conguration : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 100
8.2 Signicance of Results : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 101
8.3 Basic Experiment : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 101
8.3.1 Interpreting the Results : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 102
8.4 Variations on the Theme : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 104
8.4.1 Experiment A: No Derivational Model : : : : : : : : : : : : : 105
8.4.2 Experiment B: No Conjunction Feature : : : : : : : : : : : : : 106
8.4.3 Experiments C and D: Pruning the Decision Trees : : : : : : : 107
8.4.4 Experiment E: Training on Half the Data : : : : : : : : : : : : 108
8.4.5 Experiments F and G: Parsing from Tags : : : : : : : : : : : : 109
8.4.6 Experiments H and I: Using a Flexible Tag Dictionary : : : : 110
8.5 Summary of Results : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 111
9 Open Questions 113
9.1 Parse Tree Representation : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 113
9.2 Knowledge Engineering : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 115
9.3 Statistical Decision Tree Modeling : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 116
10 Conclusions 117
A Training and Test Entropies 119
xii
B SPATTER Vocabularies and Binary Encodings 130
B.1 Part-of-Speech Tag Vocabulary : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 130
B.2 Non-terminal Label Vocabulary : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 131
B.3 Extend Feature Vocabulary : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 132
B.4 NumChildren Question Vocabulary : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 132
B.5 NumNodes Question Vocabulary : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 132
B.6 Span Question Vocabulary : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 133
C SPATTER Tree Head Table 134
Bibliography 136
xiii
List of Tables
5.1 Subset of the Tree Head Table. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 64
8.1 Battery of results from the basic experiment. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 103
8.2 Signicance analysis of EXACT results from the basic experiment. : : 103
8.3 Signicance analysis of EXNOTAG results from the basic experiment. 104
8.4 Descriptions of experiments A-H. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 105
8.5 Results of experiment A. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 105
8.6 Signicance analysis of results from experiment A : : : : : : : : : : : 106
8.7 Results of experiment B. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 106
8.8 Signicance analysis of results from experiment B : : : : : : : : : : : 106
8.9 Conjunction error analysis. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 107
8.10 Results of experiments C and D. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 107
8.11 Signicance analysis of results from experiment C and D : : : : : : : 108
8.12 Results of experiment E. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 108
8.13 Signicance analysis of results from experiment E. : : : : : : : : : : : 108
8.14 Results of experiments F and G. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 109
8.15 Signicance analysis of results from experiments F and G. : : : : : : 109
8.16 Results of experiments H and I. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 110
8.17 Signicance analysis of results from experiments H and I. : : : : : : : 110
A.1 Entropies for smoothing models 1.0, 1.9, 2.0, and 2.9. : : : : : : : : : 120
A.2 Entropies for smoothing models from experiments A - G. : : : : : : : 121
A.3 Perplexities for label model from basic experiment. : : : : : : : : : : 122
A.4 Perplexities for tag model from basic experiment. : : : : : : : : : : : 123
xiv
A.5 Perplexities for extension model from basic experiment. : : : : : : : : 124
A.6 Perplexities for conjunction model from basic experiment. : : : : : : : 125
A.7 Perplexities for label model from experiments A - G. : : : : : : : : : 126
A.8 Perplexities for tag model from experiments A - G. : : : : : : : : : : 127
A.9 Perplexities for extension model from experiments A - G. : : : : : : : 128
A.10 Perplexities for conjunction model from experiments A - G. : : : : : : 129
xv
List of Figures
3.1 Decision tree representing the red/not-red distinction. : : : : : : : : : 26
3.2 A decision tree using n-ary questions. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 27
3.3 A decision tree using only binary questions. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 28
3.4 A BCT for the color vocabulary. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 29
3.5 Maximum likelihood decision tree growing algorithm. : : : : : : : : : 32
3.6 Finite-state machine for Forward-Backward algorithm. : : : : : : : : 35
4.1 Sample bracketed sentence from Lancaster Treebank. : : : : : : : : : 49
4.2 Grammar and parse tree for aabb. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 50
4.3 Parsing accuracy: P-CFG vs. HBG : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 55
5.1 Representation of constituent and labeling of extensions in SPATTER. 61
5.2 Treebank analysis encoded using feature values. : : : : : : : : : : : : 63
5.3 BCT for extension feature values with three questions. : : : : : : : : 67
5.4 BCT for extension feature values with two questions. : : : : : : : : : 68
5.5 The SPATTER parsing algorithm. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 72
5.6 Example stack search space for SPATTER stack decoding algorithm. 75
6.1 Partially-constructed SPATTER parse tree. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 81
9.1 SPATTER parse output for a test sentence. : : : : : : : : : : : : : : 114
xvi
Chapter 1
Introduction
Automatic natural language (NL) parsing is a central problem to many natural lan-
guage processing tasks. The task of automatic NL parsing is to design a computer
program which identies the hierarchical constituent structure in a sentence. In the
early years of articial intelligence work, it was believed that this was a relatively sim-
ple problem which would be solved quickly. That was 30 years ago, and the problem
is still a thorn in the NL processing community's collective side.
Why is parsing a natural language so dicult? The short answer is simply: am-
biguity. A natural language sentence takes on dierent meanings, depending on its
context, the speaker, and many other factors. Ambiguity takes on many dierent
forms in NL, such as semantic ambiguity, syntactic ambiguity, ambiguity of pronom-
inal reference, to name just a few.
On closer inspection, the ambiguity resolution problem can be restated as a clas-
sication problem. Consider the prepositional phrase attachment decisions in the
following sentences:
Print the file in the buffer.
Print the file on the printer.
In these cases, the prepositional phrase can be attached to either the nearest noun
phrase, as in the rst example, or to the higher verb phrase, as in the second example:
1
2 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
[V Print [N [N the file N] [P in the buffer P] N] V].
[V Print [N the file N] [P on the printer P] V].
Given the entire sentence and perhaps the entire dialogue as context, the parser's job
is to classify the context as either one which dictates the low N attachment or the
high V attachment.
Traditionally, disambiguation problems in parsing have been solved by enumerat-
ing possibilities and explicitly declaring knowledge which might aid the disambigua-
tion process. This declarative knowledge takes the form of semantic restrictions (e.g.
Hirschman et.al. [32]), free-form logical expressions (e.g. Alshawi et.al. [1]), or a
combination of these methods (e.g. Black, Garside, and Leech [7]). Some have used
probabilistic (e.g. Sene [59]) or non-probabilistic (e.g. Hobbs et.al. [33]) weight-
ing systems to accumulate disambiguation decisions throughout the processing of a
sentence into a single score for each interpretation.
Each of these approaches has resulted in some degree of success in accurately
parsing sentences. However, they all depend on the intelligence and expertise of
their developers to discover and enumerate the specic rules or weights which achieve
their results. Most (if not all) of these systems were developed by a grammarian
or language expert examining sentence after sentence, modifying their rules in some
way to account for parsing errors or new phenomena. This development process can
take years, and there is no reason to believe that the process ever converges. Rule
changes for new sentences might undo xes for old sentences, in eect causing more
recent sentences to take precedence over older ones. And, most important, there
is no systematic way to reproduce this process. A researcher trying to reproduce
these parsing results from scratch would have no algorithm or systematic procedure
to follow to discover the same rules or weights, except for, perhaps, \Look at a lot of
sentences."
1.1. STATEMENT OF THESIS 3
1.1 Statement of Thesis
This work addresses the problem of automatically discovering the disambiguation
criteria for all of the decisions made during the parsing process. These criteria can be
discovered by collecting statistical information from a corpus of parsed text. Given
the set of possible features which can act as disambiguators, an information-theoretic
classication algorithm based on the contexts of each decision made in the process
of constructing a parse tree can learn the criteria by which dierent disambiguation
decisions should be made. Each candidate feature is a question about the context
which has a discrete, nite-valued answer.
The claim of this work is that statistics from a large corpus of parsed sentences
combined with information-theoretic classication and training algorithms can pro-
duce an accurate natural language parser without the aid of a complicated knowledge
base or grammar. This claim is justied by constructing a parser based on very
limited linguistic information, and comparing its performance to a state-of-the-art
grammar-based parser on a common task.
In this work, parsing is not viewed as the recursive application of predetermined
rewrite rules. The parser developed for this work uses a feature-based representation
for the parse tree, decomposing the parse tree into the words in the sentence, the
part-of-speech tags for each word, the constituent labels assigned to each node in
the parse, and the edges which connect the tree nodes. Given the words as input,
statistical models are trained to predict each of the remaining features. A parse tree
is constructed by generating values for each of the features, one at a time, according
to the distributions assigned by the models. Once a feature value is generated, that
value can be taken into account when determining the distributions of future feature
value assignments.
Each feature value assignment decision is modeled by a statistical decision tree,
which estimates the probability of each alternative given the context. Since the
probability distribution of each decision is conditioned on the entire context of the
partial parse, the order in which decisions are made aects the probability of the parse.
Thus, the total probability of a parse tree is the sum over all possible derivations of
4 CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
that parse tree, and the probability of a derivation of a parse tree is the product of the
probabilities of the atomic decisions which resulted in the construction of the parse
tree.
The decision tree models used in this work are constructed using the CART al-
gorithm as discussed in (Breiman et.al.), based on the counts from a training cor-
pus. Then, an expectation-maximization (E-M) algorithm is used to train the hidden
derivation model, assigning weights to the dierent derivations of the parse trees in
the training corpus, in order to maximize the total probability of the corpus. The
resulting model is further improved by smoothing the decision trees using another E-
M algorithm, this time training hidden parameters in the decision trees, maximizing
the probability of the parse trees in a new, held-out corpus.
One of the important points of this work is that statistical models of natural
language do not need to be restricted to simple, context-insensitive n-gram models.
In fact, it should be clear that in a problem like parsing, where long-distance lexical
information is crucial to disambiguate interpretations accurately, local models like P-
CFGs (probabilistic context-free grammars) or n-gram models are insucient. And
while it has been assumed that one could not accurately train statistical models
which consider large amounts of contextual information using the limited amount
of training data currently available, this work illustrates that existing decision tree
technology can generate models which selectively choose elements of the context which
contribute to disambiguation decisions, and which have few enough parameters to be
trained using existing resources.
1.2 Organization of Dissertation
In Chapter 2, I attempt to put this work in the context of previous work on statistical
and non-statistical natural language processing. Then I introduce decision tree mod-
eling in Chapter 3, describing the algorithms used in growing and training decision
trees and discussing some of the open questions involved in decision tree modeling.
In Chapter 4, I report on some preliminary experiments which explored the eective-
ness of using context-sensitive models and decision tree models in statistical parsing.
1.2. ORGANIZATION OF DISSERTATION 5
Chapter 5 introduces my thesis parser, called SPATTER, dening the representations
used in the parser and stepping through the decoding algorithm. Chapter 6 presents
the specic models used in SPATTER and describes the training process. In Chap-
ter 7, I discuss a few methodological issues involved in evaluating the performance of
natural language parsers. Experimental results using SPATTER follow in Chapter 8.
After exploring questions left unanswered by this work in Chapter 9, I oer some
concluding remarks in Chapter 10.
Chapter 2
Related Work
In many respects, the natural language processing task is the holy grail of the articial
intelligence community. It was one of the earliest AI problems attempted, and its
solution is one of the most elusive. The subtleties involved in understanding natural
language, from dealing with anaphora and quantier scope to recognizing sarcasm
and humor, preclude supercial and knowledge-bereft solutions, which characterize
the majority of the early work in natural language processing.
Automatic natural language parsing, as dened earlier, is a critical component of
any solution to the natural language understanding problem. Recent work in infor-
mation extraction and text processing has substituted nite-state pattern matching
machinery for parsing technology with great success. However, these applications do
not require \understanding" as much as the identication and regurgitation of critical
information in a passage. Disambiguation decisions are less important to these tasks,
since a program can make many interpretation errors in a text and still correctly
answer the questions required by the task. However, for a program to detect subtle
language usage and to use all of the information gained from a text in intelligent
activities, the complete disambiguation capabilities of a parser are necessary.
In this chapter, I briey survey early work in natural language parsing, tracing
the progression of the techniques employed. Then I discuss the paradigm shift in the
speech recognition community in the late 1970s from rule-based methods to statistical
modeling, and the impact of this paradigm shift on natural language processing in
6
2.1. EARLY NATURAL LANGUAGE PARSING 7
the late 1980s. Next I survey more recent work on the problem of broad-coverage
natural language parsing. Finally, I discuss the development of decision tree modeling,
from early AI machine learning to current speech recognition and natural language
applications.
2.1 Early Natural Language Parsing
Automatic natural language processing research can be traced back to the early 1950s,
to Weaver's early work on machine translation (MT) [63]. The failure of supercial
\dictionary lookup" solutions to the MT problem suggested the need for a higher
level of knowledge representation.
The work in the 1960s on natural language processing consisted primarily of
keyword analysis or pattern matching. Systems such as Green's BASEBALL[26],
Raphael's SIR[52], and Bobrow's STUDENT[11] search for simple patterns or regular
expressions which indicate useful information. All information in the text which does
not conform to these patterns is ignored. This attribute makes pattern-matching
systems more robust, but it also makes them easy to identify, as they will happily
process gibberish as long as some subset of the input matches a known pattern.
Weizenbaum's ELIZA[65] is a famous example of this \technology," reviled in some
corners of the community for falsely encouraging the already widely-held belief that
natural language processing would be solved within a decade.
Chomsky's work in the late 1950s and early 1960s in transformational grammars
and formal language theory [19] [20] provided much of the machinery for the next
generation of natural language processing research. Context-free grammar parsers,
such as Lindsay's SAD-SAM[56], took advantage of Chomsky's formalization to im-
prove upon the simpler single-state and nite-state models. The SAD component of
this system generates full syntactic analyses for sentences, accepting a vocabulary of
about 1700 words and a subset of English grammar. This approach suered from
some of the same deciencies that exist in systems today, in particular the limited
coverage of the grammar and vocabulary.
In contrast to the decomposition of syntax and semantics in SAD-SAM, Halliday's
8 CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
systemic grammar [28] proposed a formalism that encoded the functional relation-
ships in a sentence. His theory was illustrated in Winograd's blocks-world system,
SHRDLU[67]. SHRDLU demonstrated the eectiveness of functional representations
on a small problem, but it also implicitly revealed one of its weaknesses. Systemic
grammar works when applied to the very constrained blocks-world because the rela-
tionships among objects and the possible actions could be completely and unambigu-
ously specied. A small number of predicates describe all actions and relations in the
blocks-world.1 However, this is far from true in the real world, and it is a daunting
(if not impossible) task to represent even a small subset of this real world knowledge
in a useful way.
The development of Augmented Transition Networks (ATNs) by Woods in the
early 1970s [68] improved upon the power of regular expressions and context-free
grammars by augmenting a nite-state automaton with register variables and func-
tional constraints, allowing an ATN to consider more contextual information when
generating an analysis while maintaining the computational simplicity of a nite-state
machine. However, the use of ATNs also encouraged ad-hoc design methodology,
where each new application required a new ATN, and the solution to one processing
task did not guarantee a solution to any others.
2.2 Computational Grammatical Formalisms
Perhaps in response to the ad-hoc nature of ATNs, in the early 1980s a number of
grammatical formalisms appeared which attempted to account for the power of the
functional augmentations of ATNs in a more formal theoretical framework: Denite-
Clause Grammar (DCG) [49], Functional Unication Grammar (FUG) [38], Lexical-
Functional Grammar (LFG) [37], Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar (GPSG)
[25], and others.
1This is a bit of an oversimplication. SHRDLU implemented a set of predicates which were
dened to be the blocks-world. There were many gaps in the representation of the blocks-world.
While one could claim that predicates could be added to SHRDLU to ll these gaps, this is the same
as claiming that a grammar would work if one only added the correct rules.
2.3. BROAD-COVERAGE PARSING SYSTEMS 9
Although these theories dier in their approach to language processing and rep-
resentation, they all have one attribute in common: they are not really linguistic
theories as much as computational linguistic theories. Chomsky's Transformational
Grammar is a linguistic theory which one can implement, and ATNs are computa-
tional devices which encode some linguistic knowledge; but these new theories unite
linguistic theory and computational elegance.
For the purposes of this dissertation, each of these theories can be viewed as
augmented phrase structure grammars, where the augmentations represent the long-
distance dependencies and the subtleties of language which are required for analysis
and disambiguation of text.2 But does the theoretical formalization of the augmen-
tations solve the natural language parsing problem more eectively than the more
ad-hoc ATNs?
This question has not been conclusively answered. These theories provide supe-
rior representation schemes which allow a grammarian to represent more aspects of
language more eciently and eectively than ATNs do. But they do not appear to
\solve" the problem of natural language parsing. Implementations of these theories
on a grand scale have shown themselves to suer from the same deciencies as the
earlier ATNs, albeit to a lesser extent: language usage is too varied to be represented
completely in a rule base, and each language processing task presents new problems
which the previous \solutions" do not solve.
2.3 Broad-coverage Parsing Systems
After discovering that the \success" of early natural language processing work was
eeting, NL researchers expanded their eorts to solving larger, more general prob-
lems. This work involved building broad-coverage parsers of general language, and
tuning them to focus on a particular domain. These systems consisted of a set of core
language rules which applied to any domain, with rules and restrictions added to aid
disambiguation and analysis for a specic domain.
Some examples of this type of system development are Unisys' PUNDIT system
2Excellent descriptions of these theories can be found in Sells [58] and Shieber[62].
10 CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
[32] and NYU's PROTEUS system [27]. Both of these systems are descendants of the
Linguistic String Project (LSP) [54], an early eort to develop grammar-based parsers
for sublanguages. Both systems use a string grammar, consisting of a context-free
grammar backbone augmented with functional restrictions on the application of the
grammar's productions. Although the grammars in these two systems are similar,
they handle ambiguity resolution in very dierent ways. The PUNDIT system uses a
recursive-descent design strategy with backtracking for its entire processing pipeline.
The rst syntactic analysis which passes through the semantic and pragmatic com-
ponents of the system without error is accepted. Since the system does not generate
parses in an intelligent order, the best analysis will not necessarily be the rst one
generated, and it is possible for the systems to select a suboptimal analysis, as long as
it has an acceptable semantic and pragmatic interpretation. The PROTEUS system,
on the other hand, uses a hand-generated weighting strategy to rank syntactic analy-
ses. Heuristic scoring functions implement various preference mechanisms, including
preferring the closest attachment, disfavoring headless noun phrases, and evaluat-
ing semantic selection. The parser uses a best-rst search strategy to discover the
highest-scoring analysis.
SRI's TACITUS system [34] is another descendant of the Linguistic String Project.
It uses the DIALOGIC parser, which is a union of the LSP grammar and the DIA-
GRAM grammar, a grammar developed for SRI's speech understanding research.
DIALOGIC is similar to the PROTEUS parser in that it uses a sorted agenda pars-
ing algorithm with weighting system for disambiguation. DIALOGIC performs some
pruning as well, advancing only the highest scoring analyses at each point in the
parsing process. For sentences longer than 60 words, DIALOGIC performs \termi-
nal substring parsing," segmenting the sentences into substrings and parsing these
substrings independently and trying to paste together the partial analyses.
The TACITUS and PROTEUS systems were designed for an information extrac-
tion task that only required recognizing and understanding key pieces of information
in a document. Realizing this, the developers of these systems implemented mecha-
nisms to use partial information in the event that a sentence could not be completely
analyzed by their grammar. TACITUS included a relevance lter which allowed the
2.4. THE TOY PROBLEM SYNDROME 11
system to ignore sentences which it deemed statistically \irrelevant" to the informa-
tion extraction task.
These systems gave way to more rened information extraction systems, such as
SRI's FASTUS system [35], which abandons the grammar-based parsing strategy in
favor of a nite-state machine approach, specifying exible templates for identify-
ing the critical information necessary for accomplishing the information extraction
task. Similarly, the grammar-based systems with complete syntactic, semantic and
pragmatic analysis designed for spoken language applications, such as SRI's Core
Language Engine (CLE) [1] and MIT's VOYAGER system [69], have been dominated
by newer nite-state template-based systems. These template-based systems, using
essentially the same technology as exhibited in Schank's SAD analyzer, benets from
a data-driven design methodology to achieve better coverage and accuracy.
These and many other broad-coverage, domain-specic natural language parsing
systems reengineered existing technology, augmenting it with better heuristic strate-
gies, providing better coverage and performance than previous implementations. The
research community recognized that, for some applications, complete understanding
was not as important as robustness in terms of overall performance. This is especially
the case in information extraction and database query tasks. However, while these
systems performed better than earlier ones, they seem to have ignored the original
problem of natural language understanding, where the subtleties of language usage
can not be ignored.
2.4 The Toy Problem Syndrome
Why did the NL community become sidetracked from its goal of NL understanding?
Early NL processing research suered from what I call the Toy Problem Syndrome.
The Toy Problem Syndrome arises from trying to solve a general class of problems
by examining only a single, simple example of the class. The result is a partial
solution to the problem which is limited in scope and extensibility. For instance,
the keyword analysis and pattern matching programs solved a small part of the NL
processing problem, but provided no mechanism to solve the remainder of it. The
12 CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
early ATN-based and grammar-based parsers were developed to handle very con-
strained problems, and while these methods worked on the toy problems they were
designed for, they have not been shown to work on larger ones. Further, the rule
bases for these early systems, especially those using ATNs or systemic grammars, are
so domain-specic that developers of new systems using the same research paradigm
must essentially start from scratch, even though the natural language used, English,
is the same.
The information extraction and database query tasks on which much of the NL
community is currently working are not toy problems, based on the denition above.
They are large and dicult problems which cannot be solved by simple hacks like
ELIZA. However, the technology which has been developed for these tasks is espe-
cially tailored for the specic application being implemented. For instance, the SRI
Template Matcher requires a set of templates for a domain and a mapping from these
templates to a database query language. The system coverage and performance de-
pends on the extent to which these templates can be translated into database queries.
Porting this system to a new domain requires essentially starting from scratch, de-
signing new templates and writing new mappings from templates to query code. For
some domains, this task may be dicult or impossible.
2.4.1 The Speech Recognition Revolution
The speech community confronted the Toy Problem Syndrome in dealing with the
speech recognition (SR) problem in the 1970s. Their solution serves as an excellent
model for the NL parsing community to emulate.
In 1971, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) of the Defense Depart-
ment asked ve speech research groups to build demonstration systems to solve a
simple speech recognition task [46]. The systems were expected to recognize a 1000-
word vocabulary from a constrained domain reasonably quickly with less than a 10%
error rate. No other aspects of the system were constrained. The goal of the project
was to achieve a breakthrough in speech recognition technology.
In fact, what resulted from the ARPA speech eort was an exercise in ad-hoc en-
gineering. The most extreme example of this is the HARPY system [45], developed at
2.4. THE TOY PROBLEM SYNDROME 13
Carnegie-Mellon University. The HARPY system used a precompiled network which
computed all possible sentences which HARPY could expect to recognize. While this
solution satised the letter of their ARPA contract, it certainly violated its spirit.
The speech recognition \technology" in HARPY was a brute force approach which
falls apart if the vocabulary is increased and the domain enlarged. With the HARPY
system, the speech community was no closer to automatic speech recognition than
before the project began. All of the ARPA-sponsored systems suered from the Toy
Problem Syndrome.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the speech community took a giant leap towards
a general solution to the SR problem which avoided the Toy Problem Syndrome. This
revolution in speech technology can be traced back to a seminar given by researchers
at IDA in October, 1980, on Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) [24]. A Markov process
is nite-state process for which the probability of going from one state to another on
a given input depends only on a nite history. Hidden Markov models are statisti-
cal models of a Markov process, where some component of the model is \hidden,"
i.e. not explicitly represented in the data. The hidden component of these models
can be learned in an unsupervised mode using algorithms from information theory.
The speech community, in particular the IBM Speech Recognition group and a com-
pany called Verbex, recognized HMMs as a solution to a critical problem in speech
processing: modeling the intermediate form of speech input.
At the time, the speech recognition problem had been broken down into two steps.
This rst step is called the acoustic modeling problem. Here, spoken language wave-
forms, converted to a sequence of real-valued vectors which mathematically encode
the important characteristics of the input, are translated into a sequence of phonemes,
the linguistic representation for the building blocks of words. This was accomplished
by a variety of rule-based methods. In the second step, the language modeling prob-
lem, these phonemes are combined to form word sequences, again using rule systems.
The critical problem with the early speech systems was the brittleness of their
acoustic and language models. Composed of hand-generated rules, these models might
have be adequate to a handle a single speaker using a limited-vocabulary language
14 CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
with a low perplexity3 grammar, but they never scaled up to larger vocabularies
and general human speech. There is no theoretical reason why a rule-based system
could not be designed to solve the problem; but no system ever approached the level of
coverage needed for general large-vocabulary speaker-independent speech recognition.
If researchers could not adequately encode phonetic representations by hand,
HMMs oered an alternative. The speech input and the sentence output are the
only givens of the problem. The intermediate representation, the phonemes, can
viewed as \hidden," and the whole process can be interpreted as a hidden Markov
process. Using the expectation-maximization algorithm from information theory, the
classes of \phonemes" can be discovered automatically instead of encoded by hand. In
other words, information theory provides techniques which, given written and spoken
versions of the same text, can generate statistical models for recognizing speech. Port-
ing this technology to new domains and new speakers simply requires retraining the
models using text from the domain read by a speaker. Eventually, algorithms were
perfected to combine speech from dierent speakers to allow speaker-independent
recognition.
Certainly HMMs are not a panacea. The key issue in applying Markov models to a
problem is to determine if they are Markov processes. Even if they are not, as long as
the process depends mostly on the most recent history then it is possible to represent
a process approximately using a Markov model. However, for some problems, this is
not the case, as I illustrate later in the case of probabilistic context-free grammars.
But it was found that the speech recognition task could be reformulated as a Markov
process, and this reformulation soon led to a reliable solution to the general problem
of recognizing spoken language.
2.5 Recent Work in Statistical NL
Preliminary experiments in statistical and corpus-based NL parsing have already
begun to follow in the footsteps of the SR community. This work has focused on
3Perplexity is a measure of the average number of words which can appear at any point in a
sentence.
2.5. RECENT WORK IN STATISTICAL NL 15
syntactic analysis, such as part-of-speech tagging and grammar induction, but some
projects have begun involving probabilistic understanding models and statistical ma-
chine translation as well.
2.5.1 Part-of-speech Tagging
Statistical part-of-speech tagging has been a hot topic since the 1988 ACL paper by
Church on HMM tagging [21]. The problem in part-of-speech tagging is to assign to
each word in a sentence a part-of-speech label which indicates the linguistic category
(e.g. noun, verb, adjective, etc.) to which that word belongs in the context of the
sentence. Some part-of-speech tag sets only have a few dozen coarse distinctions, while
others include hundreds of categories, distinguishing temporal, mass, and location
nouns, as well as indicating the tenses and moods of verbs. Actually, HMM tagging
was suggested a few years earlier during a lecture by Mercer at MIT, which Church
attended, and Merialdo published a more obscure paper on the subject in 1986 [23]. At
BBN,Weischedel [44] explored the behavior of HMM tagging algorithms when trained
on limited data, and reports experimental results using various models designed to
account for weaknesses of the simple HMM trigram word-tag model.
Laerty [9] uses decision tree techniques similar to those described in Chapter 3 in
his paper on decision tree part-of-speech tagging. His work was an attempt to extend
the usual three-word window made available to a trigram part-of-speech tagger. By
allowing a decision tree to select from a larger window those features of the context
which are relevant to tagging decisions, he hoped to generate a more accurate model
using the same number of parameters as a trigram model. His results, however, were
not much better than those of existing taggers.
Brill's dissertation work [15] explored using a corpus to acquire a rule-based tagger
automatically. His tagger preprocessed a corpus using a simple HMM tagger and,
based on the correct tagging provided by human taggers, learned a small set of rules
which corrected the output of the HMM tagger. The tagger considered a limited class
of possible rules, and thus could explore the space of rules completely, proposing only
those that improved the overall accuracy of the tagger on a sample corpus.
16 CHAPTER 2. RELATED WORK
2.5.2 Grammar Induction
Much of the work in grammar induction has been a function of the availability of
parsed and unparsed corpora. For instance, in 1990, I published my undergradu-
ate thesis with Marcus [41] on parsing without a grammar using mutual information
statistics from a tagged corpus. I originally intended to do this work on supervised
learning from a pre-parsed corpus, but no such corpus existed in the public domain.
Thus, the earliest work on grammar induction involved either completely unsuper-
vised learning, or, using the Tagged Brown Corpus, learning from a corpus tagged for
parts of speech.
Following the same path of the speech community, a number of parsing researchers
(e.g. Black et.al. [10] [7], Kupiec [39], and Schabes and Pereira [48]), have applied
the inside-outside algorithm, a special case of the expectation-maximization algorithm
for CFGs, to probabilistic context-free grammar (P-CFG) estimation. A P-CFG is a
context-free grammar with probabilities assigned to each production in the grammar,
where the probability assigned to a production, X ! Y1 . . . Yn; represents the
probability that the non-terminal category X is rewritten as Y1 . . . Yn in the parse of
a sentence.
P-CFGs have been around since at least the early 1970s (e.g. Pratt[51]); but
using very large corpora and the inside-outside algorithm, they can now be trained
automatically, instead of assigning the parameters by hand. A P-CFG model can be
trained in a completely unsupervised mode, by considering all possible parses of the
sentences in a training corpus (e.g. Baker[4] and Kupiec [39]), or it can be trained in
a constrained mode, maximizing the probability of the parse trees in a parsed corpus
(e.g. Black et.al. [10] and Schabes and Pereira[48]).
More evidence that the availability of corpora has inuenced the direction of re-
search is in the study of parsing tagged sentences using statistical methods (Magerman
and Marcus[41], Brill [16], and Bod[12]). The motivation behind this work was two-
fold. First, since part-of-speech taggers and tagged corpora were readily available, it
seemed reasonable to attempt to parse a tagged corpus, under the assumption that
part-of-speech taggers would eventually be accurate enough to be used as automatic
2.5. RECENT WORK IN STATISTICAL NL 17
pre-processors for text. Second, statistical parsing based on words required more so-
phisticated training methods than statistical parsing based on tags, since analyzing
words required estimating far more parameters with the same amount of data.
Neither of these motivations is very compelling. In order to use a part-of-speech
tagger as a pre-processor for a parser, the tagger must be able to make disambiguation
decisions which existing parsers cannot make accurately. Also, in the past few years,
the technology for estimating probability distributions in the face of sparse data has
been well-documented. Finally, with greater access to very large parsed corpora,
training parsing models is possible even with more direct estimation methods.
2.5.3 Other Work in Statistical NL
Statistical natural language research extends far beyond tagging and parsing. Work
on language acquisition attempts to discover semantic selection preferences (e.g.
Resnik[53]) and verb subcategorization information (e.g. Brent [14]). Schuetze [57]
has developed a vector-based representation for language which aids in word sense
disambiguation.
A signicant application of statistical modeling technology is the Candide system
[17], developed by the IBM Machine Translation group. Candide translates French to
English using a source-channel model, where it is assumed that the French sentence
was actually originally an English sentence passed through a noisy channel. The job
of the system is to decode the message, i.e. recover the English sentence that was
intended by the French code. While this model may oend the francophile, it has
resulted in a state-of-the-art translation system.
Following this model, researchers at BBN are working on generating semantic
analyses for sentences using statistical models. Their Probabilistic Language Under-
standing Model [64] denes a semantic language and attempts to translate the natural
language sentence into the semantic language. A system developed at CRIN, a Cana-
dian natural language company, takes a similar approach to the problem of database
retrieval, using the SQL database query language as their semantic language.
Chapter 3
Statistical Decision Tree Modeling
Much of the work in this thesis depends on replacing human decision-making skills
with automatic decision-making algorithms. The decisions under consideration in-
volve identifying constituents and constituent labels in natural language sentences.
Grammarians, the human decision-makers in parsing, solve this problem by enumerat-
ing the features of a sentence which aect the disambiguation decisions and indicating
which parse to select based on the feature values. The grammarian is accomplishing
two critical tasks: identifying the features which are relevant to each decision, and
deciding which choice to select based on the values of the relevant features.
Statistical decision tree (SDT) classication algorithms account for both of these
tasks. SDTs can be used to make decisions by asking questions about the situation in
order to determine what the best course of action is to take, and with what probability
it is the correct decision. For example, in the case of medical diagnosis, a decision
tree can ask questions about a patient's vital signs and test results, and can propose
possible diagnoses based on the answers to those questions. And, using a set of patient
records which indicate the correct diagnosis in each case, the SDT can estimate the
probability that its diagnosis is correct. For a particular decision-making problem,
the SDT growing algorithm identies the features about the input which help predict
the correct decision to make. Based on the answers to the questions which it asks,
the decision tree assigns each input to a class indicating the probability distribution
over the possible choices.
18
3.1. INFORMATION THEORY 19
SDTs accomplish a third task which grammarians classically nd dicult. By as-
signing a probability distribution to the possible choices, the SDT provides a ranking
system which not only species the order of preference for the possible choices but
also gives a measure of the relative likelihood that each choice is the one which should
be selected. A large problem composed of a sequence of non-independent decisions,
like the parsing problem, can be modeled by a sequence of applications of a statistical
decision tree model conditioned on the previous choices. Using Bayes' Theorem to
combine the probabilities of each decision, the model assigns a distribution to the
sequence of choices without making any explicit independence assumptions. Inap-
propriate independence assumptions, such as those made in P-CFG models, seriously
handicap statistical methods.
The decision tree algorithms used in this work were developed over the past 15
years by the IBM Speech Recognition group. The growing algorithm is an adapta-
tion of the CART algorithm in Breiman et.al.[13]. The IBM growing and smoothing
algorithm were rst published in Lucassen's 1983 dissertation [40]. Bahl, et.al., [2]
is an excellent discussion of these algorithms applied to the language modeling prob-
lem. For this dissertation, I explored variations of these algorithms to improve the
performance of the decision trees on the parsing task.
In this chapter, I rst introduce some terminology and concepts from information
theory which are used in decision tree modeling. Next, I discuss some representational
issues involved in decision tree parsing. Then I present the basic decision tree algo-
rithms, along with the variations I used in my experiments. Finally, I address some
of the problems associated with maximum-likelihood (M-L) decision tree training.
3.1 Information Theory
The algorithms for growing and smoothing decision trees depend upon the quantica-
tion of information. Information theory, developed by Shannon[60] and Wiener[66], is
concerned with the compression of information when transmitted through a channel.
Information theory formalizes the notion of information in terms of entropy. In this
section, I introduce some basic concepts from information theory which are necessary
20 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
to understand decision trees. A more complete introduction to information theory
can be found in Cover and Thomas[22].
3.1.1 Entropy
Entropy is a measure of uncertainty about a random variable. If a decision, or random
variable,X occurs with a probability distribution p(x); then the entropyH(X) of that
event is dened by
H(X) =  
X
x2X
p(x) log2 p(x): (3:1)
Since x log2 x ! 0 as x ! 0; it is conventional to use the relation 0 log2 0 = 0
when computing entropy.
The units of entropy are bits of information. This is because the entropy of a
random variable corresponds to the average number of bits per event needed to encode
a typical sequence of events sampled from that random variable's distribution.
Consider how entropy behaves in extreme cases. For instance, if a random variable
is uniformly distributed, i.e. p(x) = p = 1
jX j
; then
H(X) =  
X
x2X
p log2 p =   log2 p = log2 jX j: (3:2)
This is the case of maximum uncertainty, and thus maximum entropy. At the other
extreme, when all of the probability mass is on one element of X ; say x; then p(x) = 1
and p(x) = 0 for all x 6= x: Since 1 log2 1 = 0 and 0 log2 0 = 0; then
H(X) =  
X
x2X
p(x) log2 p(x) = 0: (3:3)
This is the case of minimum entropy, since there is no uncertainty about the future;
X takes on the value x every time.
3.1.2 Perplexity
Perplexity is a measure of the average number of possible choices there are for a
random variable. The perplexity of a random variable X with entropy H(X) is
dened to be 2H(X): If X is uniformly distributed, then the perplexity of X is 2
log2
1
jXj ;
which reduces to jXj.
3.1. INFORMATION THEORY 21
3.1.3 Joint Entropy
Joint entropy is the entropy of a joint distribution. Given two random variables X
and Y; a joint probability mass function pX;Y (x; y); the joint entropy of X and Y;
H(X;Y ) is dened as
H(X;Y ) =  
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2 pX;Y (x; y): (3:4)
3.1.4 Conditional Entropy
Conditional entropy is the entropy of a conditional distrition. Given two random
variables X and Y; a conditional probability mass function pY jX(yjx); and a marginal
probability mass function pY (y); the conditional entropy of Y given X; H(Y jX) is
dened as
H(Y jX) =  
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2 pY jX(yjx): (3:5)
From probability theory, we know that
pY (y) =
X
x2X
pX;Y (x; y): (3:6)
Thus, if X and Y are independent, i.e. pY jX(yjx) = pY (y); then the conditional
entropy of Y given X is just the entropy of Y :
H(Y jX) =  
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2 pY jX(yjx) (3.7)
=  
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2 pY (y) (3.8)
=  
X
y2Y
[
X
x2X
pX;Y (x; y)] log2 pY (y) (3.9)
=  
X
y2Y
pY (y) log2 pY (y) (3.10)
= H(Y ): (3.11)
3.1.5 Relative Entropy, or Kullback-Liebler Distance
Relative entropy, or the Kullback-Liebler distance, is a measure of the distance be-
tween two probability distributions. Given a random variable X and two probability
22 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
mass functions p(x) and q(x); the relative entropy of p and q; D(pjjq); is dened as
D(pjjq) =
X
x2X
p(x) log2
p(x)
q(x)
: (3:12)
Note that the Kullback-Liebler \distance" is not really a distance measure since,
for one thing, it is not symmetric with respect to its arguments. The relative entropy
function is generally used to measure how closely a model q correctly matches an
empirical distribution p: If p(x) = q(x) for all x; then D(pjjq) = 0: Statistical training
algorithms are generally structured as a search for a model q which minimizes the
relative entropy function with respect to an empirical distribution p extracted from
a training corpus.
3.1.6 Mutual Information
The mutual information of two random variables I(X;Y ) is dened as the Kullback-
Liebler distance between their joint distribution and the product of their marginal
distributions:
I(X;Y ) = D(pX;Y jjpXpY ) =
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2
pX;Y (x; y)
pX (x)pY (y)
(3:13)
If X and Y are independent, i.e. pX;Y (x; y) = pX(x)pY (y); then
I(X;Y ) =
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2
pX;Y (x; y)
pX(x)pY (y)
(3.14)
=
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2
pX(x)pY (y)
pX(x)pY (y)
(3.15)
=
X
x2X
X
y2Y
pX;Y (x; y) log2 1 (3.16)
= 0 (3.17)
(3.18)
Thus, mutual information quanties the dependence of two random variables, with a
value of 0 indicating independence.
3.2. WHAT IS A STATISTICAL DECISION TREE? 23
3.1.7 Cross Entropy
Cross entropy is an estimate of the entropy of a distribution according to a second
distribution. Given a random variable X and two probability mass functions p(x)
and q(x); the cross entropy of p with respect to q; H(p; q); is dened as
H(p; q) =
X
x2X
p(x) log2 q(x): (3:19)
Note that the relative entropy of two distributions p and q is equal to the cross
entropy of p and q minus the entropy of X with respect to p:
D(pjjq) =
X
x2X
p(x) log2
p(x)
q(x)
(3.20)
=
X
x2X
p(x)(log2 p(x)  log2 q(x)) (3.21)
=
X
x2X
p(x) log2 p(x)  p(x) log2 q(x) (3.22)
=
X
x2X
p(x) log2 p(x) 
X
x2X
p(x) log2 q(x) (3.23)
= [ 
X
x2X
p(x) log2 q(x)]  [ 
X
x2X
p(x) log2 p(x)] (3.24)
= H(p; q) Hp(X): (3.25)
(3.26)
Thus, to minimize the relative entropy of a distribution q with respect to another
distribution p; it is sucient to minimize q's cross entropy with respect to p:
3.2 What is a Statistical Decision Tree?
A decision tree asks questions about an event, where the particular question asked
depends on the answers to previous questions, and where each question helps to
reduce the uncertainty of what the correct choice or action is. More precisely, a
decision tree is an n-ary branching tree in which questions are associated with each
internal node, and a choice, or class, is associated with each leaf node. A statistical
decision tree is distinguished from a decision tree in that it denes a conditional
probability distribution on the set of possible choices.
24 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
3.2.1 Histories, Questions, and Futures
There are three basic objects which describe a decision tree: histories, questions, and
futures.
A history encodes all of the information deemed necessary to make the decision
which the tree is asked to make. The content of a history depends on the application
to which decision trees are being applied. In this work, a history consists of a partial
parse tree, and it is represented as an array of n-ary branching trees with feature
bundles at each node. Thus, the history includes any aspect of the trees in this
array, including the syntactic and lexical information in the trees, the structure of
the trees, the number of nodes in the trees, the co-occurrence of two tree nodes in
some relationship to one another, etc.
While the set of histories represents the state space of the problem, the questions,
and their possible answers, encode the heuristic knowledge about what is important
about a history. Each internal node in a decision tree is associated with a question.
The answers to these questions must be nite-valued, since each answer generates a
new node in the decision tree.
A future refers to one of a set of possible choices which the decision tree can
make. The set of choices is the future vocabulary. For a decision tree part-of-speech
tagger in which the tree selects a part-of-spech tag for each word in a sentence, the
future vocabulary is the tag set. Each leaf node of a decision tree is associated
with an element from the future vocabulary, indicating which choice the decision tree
recommends for events which reach that leaf.
In this parsing work, decision trees are applied to a number of dierent decision-
making problems: assigning part-of-speech tags to words, assigning constituent labels,
determining the constituent boundaries in a sentence, deciding the scope of conjunc-
tions, and even selecting which decision to make next. Each of these decision-making
tasks has its own denition of a history, i.e. its own set of feature questions, and its
own future vocabulary. The algorithms which are described in the rest of this chapter
illustrate how decision trees use distributional information from a corpus of events
to decrease the uncertainty about the appropriate decision to make for each of these
problems.
3.2. WHAT IS A STATISTICAL DECISION TREE? 25
3.2.2 An Example
I will illustrate decision trees using a simple example involving determining the shape
of an object. Consider a world where there are only three possible shapes: square,
circle, and triangle. Objects in this world have only three measureable attributes:
color (red, blue, magenta, or yellow), height (in inches), and weight (in pounds). You
are given 100 objects, each labeled with the values for its three attributes and its
correct shape. From this data, you can create a decision tree which can predict the
shape of future objects based on their attributes.
In this problem, the history consists of the three attribute values of the object.
Examples of decision tree questions include: \what is the color of the object," \is
the object more than 1 pound," and \is the object yellow or is it less than 5 inches
in height?" The future is the shape of the object, and the future vocabulary is
the set fsquare, circle, triangleg: The 100 example objects are the training corpus
which is used to select decision tree questions and to determine empirical probability
distributions.
Assume that the training corpus consists of 80 squares, 10 circles, and 10 triangles.
Without knowing any information about the attributes of the objects, we can already
assign a distribution on the shape of objects based on the empirical distribution of
the training corpus: p(square) = 0:8; p(circle) = 0:1; and p(triangle) = 0:1:
Now, let's say that we know the color of these objects. Specically, there are 70
red squares, 10 yellow circles, 10 blue triangles, and 10 blue squares. If we asked the
question \is the object red?" we would divide the data into two classes, or decision
tree nodes, indicating those objects which are red and those which are not red. Based
on the training data, we know that 70% of the objects are red, and all of the red
objects are squares, i.e. p(squarejred) = 1: However, if the object is not red, which
happens 30% of the time, then it might be a square, circle, or triangle with equal
probability (p = 1
3
): The decision tree consisting of this single question is shown in
Figure 3.1.
Consider how much information we have gained, in terms of entropy reduction,
by asking this single question. Before asking the question, the entropy of the shape
26 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
Red?
No Yes
P(d|not red) P(d|red)
Figure 3.1: Decision tree representing the red/not-red distinction. Here d is the
random variable representing the shape of the object.
decision D; was
H(D) =  
X
d2D
p(d) log2 p(d) =  [0:8 log2 0:8 + 0:1 log2 0:1 + 0:1 log2 0:1] = 0:92;
(3:27)
yielding a perplexity of 1.89. The conditional entropy of the shape decision given the
answer to the redness question R is
H(DjR) =  
X
r2fred, not redg
X
d2D
pR;D(r; d) log2 pDjR(djr) = 0:2; (3:28)
with a perplexity of 1.15. Thus, this decision tree reduces the uncertainty about the
color of the object by 0.72 bits. And instead of there being nearly 2 possible choices
for each event on average, there is now closer to only 1 choice.
3.2.3 Binary Decision Trees
Decision trees are dened above as n-ary branching trees, but the work described
here discusses only binary decision trees, where only yes-no questions are considered.
The main reason for using binary decision trees is that allowing questions to have
dierent numbers of answers complicates the decision tree growing algorithm. The
trees are grown by selecting the question which contributes the most information
to the decision, where information is dened in terms of entropy. It is dicult to
compare the information provided by questions with dierent numbers of answers,
since entropy considerations generally favor questions with more answers.
3.2. WHAT IS A STATISTICAL DECISION TREE? 27
As an example of this, consider the case where histories come in four colors, red,
blue, yellow, and magenta. The question set includes the following questions:
1. What is the color of the history?
2. Is the color either blue or red?
3. Is the color red?
4. Is the color magenta?
Question 1, with four values, provides the most information, and a decision tree
growing algorithm would certainly select it over the other questions (Figure 3.2). The
decision tree could eectively ask this question by asking a combination of binary
questions 2, 3, and 4 (Figure 3.3); but, it would never choose this option over the
single question.
Now, let's consider the situation where the only important feature of the history
is whether the history is red or not. While question 3 achieves the same entropy
reduction as question 1, question 1 divides the histories into four dierent classes
when only two are necessary. This situation is referred to as data fragmentation.
Since magenta histories and blue histories behave similarly, if there are very few (or
no) magenta histories, then a decision tree which asks question 1 (Figure 3.2) will
have more diculty classifying the magenta history than one which asks question 3
(Figure 3.1).
P(d|yellow) P(d|magenta) P(d|blue)
What color?
yellow magenta blue red
P(d|red)
Figure 3.2: A decision tree using n-ary questions.
Another reason for considering only binary questions for decision trees is compu-
tational eciency. During the growing algorithm, the histories at a node are sorted
based on the answers to the question selected for that node. The case where there are
28 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
Red or Blue?
Red?
No Yes
Magenta?
P(d|yellow) P(d|magenta) P(d|blue)
No Yes No Yes
P(d|red)
Figure 3.3: A decision tree using only binary questions.
only two possible answers is simpler to implement eciently than the general case.
Binary questions also speeds up the mathematical calculations, since loops which
range over all possible answers to questions can be unraveled.
3.2.4 Recasting N-ary Questions as Binary Questions
It is very dicult to pose all questions about a decision in binary terms. In the
previous example, it would be counterproductive to expect a person to notice that
blue, yellow, and magenta histories behave one way and red histories behave another
in the training data.
An n-ary question can be recast as a sequence of binary questions by creating a
binary classication tree (BCT) for the answer vocabulary, i.e. the set of answers to a
given question. A BCT for the color questions in section 3.2.3 is shown in Figure 3.4.
BCTs can be acquired using an unsupervised statistical clustering algorithm, as de-
scribed in Brown et.al.[18]; for smaller answer vocabularies, hand-generated BCTs
are a viable alternative.
The binary encoding of n-ary questions generates an implicit binary representation
for the answer vocabularies, as is labeled in Figure 3.4, where each bit corresponds
to a decision tree question. This interpretation oers two possible diculties. First,
since these questions are based on a hierarchical classication tree, the nth bit does
not necessarily have much meaning without knowing the values of the rst n 1 bits.
3.2. WHAT IS A STATISTICAL DECISION TREE? 29
yellow magenta blue red
00 01 10 11
10
10 10
Figure 3.4: A binary classication tree for the color vocabulary, along with its corre-
sponding binary encoding.
Also, if the BCT is unbalanced, the values in the shallower parts of the BCT will
have fewer bits in their representations than those in the deeper parts. One could
pad these shorter bit strings, but should they be padded with 0s or 1s?
Both of these problems are solved using principles of information theory. Since the
children at a given node in the BCT are unordered, one can use a greedy algorithm
to swap the order of the children to maximize the amount of information contained
in each bit. This procedure is called bit-ipping. This makes the padding issue
irrelevant, since regardless of which bit is initially assigned, it will be ipped if more
information is gained by doing so.
Even without bit-ipping, whether or not questions should be asked out of order
is not important. If a question is meaningless without knowing the answers to other
questions rst, the decision tree growing algorithm will detect this situation and ask
only the meaningful questions. The exception to this is when there is very little data
available to evaluate the relative value of questions, which happens in the later stages
of the growing algorithm. Overtraining can occur at this point, where coincidences in
the training data lead the algorithm to select questions which will be uninformative
on new data. This is a general problem in decision trees, as well as in most inductive
algorithms. It is addressed by applying a smoothing algorithm using a second set of
training data.
30 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
3.3 Growing a Decision Tree
In this section, I present the maximum-likelihood (M-L) decision tree growing algo-
rithm from Bahl et.al.[2] and motivate the modications made to the algorithm for
this work.
3.3.1 Notation
Let the random variables X and Y denote the history and future of the events being
modeled by the decision tree. X is the set of possible X values and Y the set of
possible Y values. Let C denote a corpus of examples of the form (x; y); where x 2 X
and y 2 Y:
A decision tree D assigns each history x to a leaf node, denoted by l(x): ND is
the set of nodes in a decision tree D: ND(x) denotes the set of nodes along the path
from the root to l(x); including l(x): The ith ancestor of a node n is denoted by
ai(n); where i is the length of the path from n to ai(n): Thus, the parent of a node is
denoted by a1(n):
A node n can be interpreted as a subcorpus of a corpus C, where the subcorpus
is dened as the set of events in C which visit the node n on the path from the root
to a leaf:
n = f(x; y) 2 C : n 2 ND(x)g: (3:29)
A boolean question qi is denoted by two sets Q
C
i and
QCi ; where
QCi = f(x; y) 2 C : the answer to question qi is yes for xg (3:30)
and
QCi = f(x; y) : (x; y) 62 Q
C
i g: (3:31)
qi(x) is true if the answer to qi is yes for x; and qi(x) is false if the answer to qi is no
for x: The question qi corresponds to the negation of question qi:
The probability pni (yjx) indicates the empirical conditional probability
1 that Y = y
1In general, p is used to refer to an emiprical probability distribution, i.e. a distribution estimated
directly using the relative frequencies from a corpus. On the other hand, ~p refers to a smoothed
distribution.
3.3. GROWING A DECISION TREE 31
given that n 2 N(x) and qi(x) is true:
pni (yjx) =
jf(x0; y0) 2 Qni : y
0 = ygj
jQij
: (3:32)
Likewise,
p
n
i (yjx) =
jf(x0; y0) 2 Qni : y
0 = ygj
j Qij
: (3:33)
3.3.2 The Growing Algorithm
The basic M-L decision tree growing algorithm is shown in Figure 3.5. The al-
gorithm, starting with a set of questions fq1; q2; . . . ; qmg and a training corpus C;
generates a decision tree which minimizes the expected conditional entropy of the
training data.
The main issue in applying a decision tree growing algorithm to a problem is to
decide on an appropriate stopping rule. The stopping rule is the criterion by which
the algorithm stops splitting a node.
Stopping rules are motivated by the fact that as the number of events at a node
gets smaller, the decisions made based on the empirical distribution of these events
become less accurate. This means that not only are the probability distributions
at these nodes called into question, but also, since the conditional entropy values
Hn(Y jqi) are estimated empirically from the events at a node, the entire splitting
process is suspect. Signicant splits might occur using estimates from sparse data,
but there is no way to determine the value of a split without validating the decision
using more data. More likely, splits which occur based on fewer events will result in
overtraining.
In the algorithm in Figure 3.5, the stopping rule dictates that a node should not
be split if the entropy reduction Rn(k) achieved by asking the best question qk; is
less than some minimum value Rmin(n): This minimum value can be a constant, but
it also might be a function of the number of events at the node n: One heuristic to
follow is that the fewer events at a node, the higher the Rmin(n) should be in order
to consider the split statistically signicant. One function used in experiments is the
product of the number of events at a node and the entropy reduction achieved by the
split, jnj  Rn(k): The units of this function are bit-events.
32 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
Figure 3.5: Maximum likelihood decision tree growing algorithm.
Begin with a single root node n and with a training corpus C:
1. If the y value is the same for all events in n; i.e.
9yn 2 Y : 8(x; y) 2 n; y = yn; (3:34)
then n is a pure node. Designate n a leaf node and quit.
2. For each question qi (i = 1; 2; . . . ; m); calculate the average conditional entropy
Hn(Y jqi) :
Hn(Y jqi) = Prf(x; y) 2 Q
n
i gH(Y jqi; n) + Prf(x; y) 2 Q
n
i gH(Y jqi; n)(3.35)
=  
jQni j
jnj
X
y2Y
pn(yjx 2 Qni ) log2 p
n(yjx 2 Qni ) (3.36)
 
j Qni j
jnj
X
y2Y
pn(yjx 2 Qni ) log2 p
n(yjx 2 Qni ) (3.37)
(3.38)
3. Determine the question qk which leads to the lowest entropy:
k = arg min
i
Hn(Y jqi): (3:39)
4. Calculate the reduction in entropy Rn(k) achieved by asking question k at node
n :
Rn(k) = Hn(Y )  Hn(Y jqi): (3:40)
5. If Rn(k)  Rmin(n); then designate n a leaf node and quit.
6. Split node n based on qk:
(a) Assign question qk to node n:
(b) Create left and right children nodes nl and nr:
(c) Assign nodes to nl and nr such that Cnl = Q
n
i and Cnr =
Qni :
(d) Recursively apply this algorithm to nl and nr; removing qk from the list of
candidate questions.
3.4. TRAINING A DECISION TREE MODEL 33
An alternative to a stopping rule is to grow the tree to completion and then
prune nodes based on the signicance of splits. For each node n, consider the node's
children, nl and nr: If either node is not a leaf, apply the pruning algorithm recursively
to the non-leaf child(ren). If both nodes are leaves after the pruning has been applied
recursively, then prune the children of n if the split at n does not satisfy the stopping
rule. Results from experiments involving this type of pruning algorithm are reported
in Chapter 8.
In this work, decision trees are grown using an Rmin(n) value of 0, i.e. decision
trees are grown until none of the questions cause a reduction in entropy at a node.
To avoid overtraining and to compensate for inaccurate probability estimates due
to sparse data, an expectation-maximization smoothing algorithm is applied to the
decision tree using a second training corpus.
3.4 Training a Decision Tree Model
The decision to grow trees to completion was made based on a previously unpublished
result comparing the test entropy of decision tree models using various combinations
of growing algorithms, stopping rules, and training data set sizes.2 The experiments
were performed on the language modeling problem, predicting the class of the next
word given the previous words in the sentence. The variations included: asking
all of the questions in a predened order vs. selecting the question order based on
entropy reduction; growing the tree to completion vs. applying a chi-squared test
with thresholds of 5, 10, and 15; and using dierent size training and smoothing sets.
Regardless of the amount of training and smoothing data used, the best results were
achieved by growing the tree to completion using entropy reduction as a question
selection criterion. Dierent problems may exhibit dierent behaviors with regards
to stopping rules, but in experiments involving applying a stopping rule to the parsing
decision tree models, the trees grown to completion performed better on test data
than those that were pruned.
2These experiments were performed during the summer of 1993 by members of the IBM Speech
Recognition group, Peter F. Brown, Bob Mercer, Stephen Della Pietra, Vincent Della Pietra, Joshua
Koppelman, and myself.
34 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
The main reason the decision trees can be grown to completion without overtrain-
ing is that, after the model is grown, it is smoothed using a second, held-out training
set. The smoothing procedure does not modify the structure of the decision tree or
the questions asked at any of the nodes. Instead, it eectively adjusts the probability
distributions at the leaves of the decision tree to maximize the probability of the
held-out corpus.
If the leaf distributions were completely unconstrained during the smoothing pro-
cedure, then the best model it could nd would simply be the M-L model determined
by mapping each event in the held-out data to a leaf node and computing the relative
frequency of the futures at each node. But this would result in overtraining on the
smoothing data. To avoid this, the smoothing procedure uses the intuition behind
stopping rules to uncover a model which, in a sense, statistically unsplits nodes which
should not have been split.
Stopping rules dictate that, if there is not sucient condence that any question
provides information about the future, then no question should be asked. Smoothing
the model after growing eliminates the need for making such harsh and irreversible
decisions. Each node n in the decision tree is assigned a parameter n which loosely
represents the condence in the distribution at node n: The smoothed probability at
a leaf, ~pn(yjx) is dened recursively as
~pn(yjx) = npn(yjx) + (1   n)~pa1(n)(yjx): (3:41)
The smoothed probability of the root node is dened as:
~proot(yjx) = nproot(yjx) + (1  n)
1
jYj
: (3:42)
If it turns out that a node n should not have been split, then the smoothing algorithm
can assign nl = nr = 0; eectively pruning the children of n:
3.4.1 The Forward-Backward Algorithm for Decision Trees
The Forward-Backward (F-B) algorithm [5] can be used to search for the optimal
parameter settings for  = f1; 2; . . . ; mg: Given a held-out corpus Ch, the F-B
3.4. TRAINING A DECISION TREE MODEL 35
...









p p p p p
n
n
n
a (n)
a (n)
a (n)
a (n)
a (n)
a (n)
1
1
1
2
2
2
root
root
root
unif
unif
1- 1- 1- 1-
Figure 3.6: Finite-state machine indicating the path for computing the forward prob-
ability in the Forward-Backward algorithm.
algorithm computes the probability of Ch using  in the forward pass, and then
computes the updated value vector 0 in the backward pass.3
The algorithm starts by assuming some initial value for : Consider the diagram
in Figure 3.6 of a nite-state machine representing the path from a leaf node to the
root. Imagine that a history x outputs its future y according to some distribution
along the path from l(x) to the root, or possibly it outputs its y according to the
uniform distribution. Let n(x) represent the probability of starting at state l(x) and
visiting state n: Then
n(x) =
8>>>><
>>>>:
Y
d along path from n to l(x)
(1   d) n 2 N(x); n 6= l(x)
1 n = l(x)
0 n 62 N(x)
(3:43)
Let Pr(y; njx) be the probability of generating y from state n on input x: Then
Pr(y; njx) = n(x)npn(yjx): (3:44)
3This smoothing algorithm was rst published in Lucassen's dissertation in 1983 [40]. It was also
mentioned briey in Bahl et.al.[2].
36 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
Now, let n(yjx) be the probability that y was generated on input x from one of the
states in N(n): Then
n(yjx) = npn(yjx) + (1   n)a1(n)(yjx): (3:45)
Let Pr+(y; njx) be the probability of visiting state n but outputting y from a state
other than n. Then
Pr+ (y; njx) = n(x)(1  n)a1(n)(yjx): (3:46)
Notice that l(x)(yjx) is the probability of generating y on the input x:
Let Pr(njx; y) be the probability of having generated y from n given that y was
output. Let Pr+ (njx; y) be the probability that x was generated by some state along
the path from n to the root other than n: These are given by:
Pr(njx; y) =
Pr(y;njx)
Pr(yjx)
=
n(x)npn(yjx)
l(x)(yjx)
(3.47)
Pr+(njx; y) =
Pr+(y;njx)
Pr(yjx)
=
n(x)(1  n)a1(n)(yjx)
l(x)(yjx)
: (3.48)
(3.49)
The F-B updates for the parameters are
0n =
X
(x;y)2Ch
Pr(njx; y)
X
(x;y)2Ch
Pr(njx; y) +
X
(x;y)2Ch
Pr+(njx; y)
: (3:50)
3.4.2 Bucketing 's
Generally, less data is used for smoothing a decision tree than for growing it. This
is best, since the majority of the data should be used for determining the structure
and leaf distributions of the tree. However, as a result, there is usually insucient
held-out data for estimating one parameter for each node in the decision tree.
A good rule of thumb is that at least 10 events are needed to estimate a parameter.
However, since each event is contributing to a parameter at every node it visits on
its path from the root to its leaf, this rule of thumb probably is insucient. I have
required at least 100 events to train each parameter.
3.5. PROBLEMS WITH M-L DECISION TREES 37
Since there will not be 100 events visiting each node, it is necessary to bucket the
's. The nodes are sorted by a primary key, usually the event count at the node, and
any number of secondary keys, e.g. the event count at the node's parent, the entropy
of the node, etc. Node buckets are created so that each bucket contains nodes whose
event counts sum to at least 100. Starting with the node with fewest events, nodes
are added to the rst bucket until it lls up, i.e. until it contains at least 100 events.
Then, a second bucket is lled until it contains 100 events, and so on. Instead of
having a unique parameter for each node, all nodes in the same bucket have their
parameters tied, i.e. they are constrained to have the same value.4
3.5 Problems with M-L Decision Trees
The maximum-likelihood approach to growing and smoothing decision trees described
above is eective, but it has some very signicant aws.
3.5.1 Greedy Growing Algorithm
The algorithm used for growing decision trees is a greedy algorithm. While there
is little doubt that the greediness of the search results in suboptimal decision tree
models, it is not clear how to limit the extent of the damage done by the short-
sighted procedure.
One possible solution is using cross-validation techniques, such as jackkning or
validating against a second training set, to prevent suboptimal splits. Another idea
is to increase the depth of the search, so that at least it is a little less greedy. Exper-
iments involving combinations of both of these ideas failed to yield improvements on
test data.
It is possible that for a given set of questions, there are many decision trees which,
combined with the smoothing algorithm, yield eectively the same models in terms
of test entropy, and the greedy growing algorithm nds one of them. But there is no
way determine this experimentally, since exhaustively searching the space of models
4For historical reasons, this method is referred to as the wall of bricks.
38 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
is computationally prohibitive.
3.5.2 Data Fragmentation and Node Merging
Another problem concerns unnecessary data fragmentation. This problem has more
to do with the structure of decision trees than with the M-L strategy itself. Since
decision trees are restricted to be trees, as opposed to arbitrary directed graphs, there
is no mechanism for merging two or more nodes in the tree growing process.
In some cases, the best model might be found only by implementing some form
of node merging. For instance, consider the case where it is informative to know
when either q1(x) is true or q2(x) is false. While one can create a question q3(x)
which represents this logical combination of q1 and q2; it is not feasible to consider all
possible logical combinations of questions. In this case, the decision tree might elect
to ask q1; and when q1(x) is false, it will then ask q2: This causes data fragmentation.
In this case, the events where q1(x) is false and q2(x) is true behave similarly, and
should be combined into one node. But they are divided among two nodes, and there
is no mechanism for reuniting them.
Node merging is an expensive operation, since any subset of the leaf nodes at any
point in the growing operation is a candidate for merging. It might be feasible to
consider a small class of node merging cases. For instance, when a node has fewer
than k events, the algorithm might try to merge it with a nearby node in the tree.
However, if nodes are allowed to become too small before they are examined for
merging, then the node merging may be ineective, since data fragmentation higher
up in the tree may have already lead to suboptimal node splits.
3.5. PROBLEMS WITH M-L DECISION TREES 39
3.5.3 Flaws in Smoothing
There are numerous aws in the smoothing procedure.5 For instance, the param-
eterization scheme only loosely represents the information it is intended to reect.
Consider a node n which is the parent of one leaf, nl; and another internal node,
nr: Assume nl has very few events, and is not very signicant, while nr has many
events.6 Node n is assigned only one parameter, yet it plays two very dierent roles.
nl will be set very close to 0; so, for events that reach nl; node n plays the role of
a leaf, and its parameter is very important. However, assuming node nr is the root
of large subtree, node n has very little impact on the smoothed distributions at the
leaves beneath nr: Thus, for events that visit nr; n is not very meaningful in the
M-L framework. But the updated value of n will be aected by all held-out events
that visit n; most of which are likely to visit nr:
Another problem with the smoothing is a result of the bucketing scheme. Because
of the way parameters are tied together, it is possible to train and smooth a model
and inadvertently assign an plausible event a probability of 0. This is a horrible
condition in any probabilistic model, since it results in an innite entropy, and thus
causes any training algorithm which depends on entropy calculations to fail. It also
illustrates the weakness of the parameterization scheme. Clearly, the 's are failing
to fulll their role if the probability of an event is so grossly underestimated. It is
likely that other probabilities are inaccurately estimated as well, and it is only the
0's which stand out.
3.5.4 Maximizing the Wrong Function
The most obvious and signicant problem with the decision tree algorithms described
in this chapter is that the decision tree growing algorithm is maximizing the wrong
5While writing up this dissertation, I consulted members of the IBM research group about some
of the ner points of the algorithms I have described in this chapter. Without fail, each person
I asked about the smoothing algorithm remarked, aghast, \Are we still using that old smoothing
algorithm?" It is over a decade old, and the only reason it is still in use is that no one has found
anything that works as well. Of course, I'm not sure how hard they looked.
6While this may seem like an odd occurence, given the growing procedure, it does happen in
the case where each question individually is not very informative, but a combination of questions is
informative.
40 CHAPTER 3. STATISTICAL DECISION TREE MODELING
objective function!
It is always important to construct a model using the same probability function
which will be used when the model is applied to new data. Otherwise, conclusions
drawn about the training data are less likely to be true when the model is applied in
tests.
Notice that the parameterization scheme introduced in the smoothing algorithm
isn't considered in the growing. The decision tree is grown to minimize the expected
entropy according to the empirical distributions at the leaves. But these distributions
are never used on their own to determine the probability of other data.
The correct growing algorithm would calculate the entropy reduction for each
question using the smoothed model instead of the unsmoothed model. However, this
would require performing at least a few iterations of the F-B algorithm for every
question and at every node. This calculation is prohibitive with current hardware.
And with the current bucketing scheme, the smoothing algorithm is not completely
dened until the entire tree is grown. There is no obvious way to correct the decision
tree growing objective function without redesigning the entire process.
3.5.5 Final Comments
Given the negative tone of this section, it is important to remind the reader that
maximum-likelihood decision trees have proven eective at modeling parsing deci-
sions, and they have been successfully applied to problems in speech recognition and
machine translation, as well.
The weaknesses revealed in the discussion above suggest that there are some ba-
sic research issues in the area of decision tree modeling which should be explored.
However, even with these aws, decision tree techniques provide more accurate and
detailed models than the statistical methods generally applied to NLP problems. The
ability to ask arbitrary questions about a history and to smooth by backing o one
question at a time makes decision trees a preferable technology to the simpler n-gram
models with non-iterative smoothing.
Chapter 4
Preliminary Experiments
The development of the SPATTER parsing algorithm was motivated by earlier suc-
cesses in incorporating contextual information into a statistical parsing model. Until
1990, the state-of-the-art statistical parsers used probabilistic context-free grammars,
which assign distributions on parse trees by assuming that context-free rule applica-
tions were completely independent of the context in which they were applied. While
this independence assumption simplies the mathematics of estimating P-CFG mod-
els, it is nonetheless inappropriate for natural language context-free grammars. Rule
applications are not independent of their context, and it seemed likely that statistical
models which considered contextual information would allow more accurate analysis
of language.
To test this hypothesis, I performed two preliminary experiments. In the rst
experiment, context-free rule productions extracted from the Unisys string grammar
were used in the development of a context-sensitive statistical parser, called Pearl.
This experiment illustrates the benets of using limited lexical information and nearby
structural information in a parsing model. In the second experiment, performed in
collaboration with IBM Language Modeling group members Ezra Black, Fred Jelinek,
John Laerty, Robert Mercer, and Salim Roukos, a grammar-based parser developed
by the IBM group is adapted to use a generative statistical parsing model in place of
the simpler P-CFG model. The new model uses statistical decision tree algorithms
to estimate models which incorporate more contextual information than was feasible
41
42 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
in the Pearl work, including multiple words of lexical context.
In this chapter, I describe the relevant details of these two experiments and discuss
the conclusions drawn from them which suggested the development of the SPATTER
parser. In describing the second experiment, I also introduce the task domain which
is used in the experiments described in Chapter 8.
4.1 A Context-sensitive Probabilistic Parser
The Pearl experiment was intended to test the hypothesis that a statistical model
which considered contextual information in assigning a probability distribution over
the space of parse trees could be trained automatically to perform the task of disam-
biguation in the parsing problem. Beginning with a grammar which depended heavily
on rule-based disambiguating criteria, the experiment involved removing the disam-
biguating rules and replacing them with an algorithm which selected the sequence of
rule applications which yielded the highest probability parse according to a statistical
model.
The product of this initial experiment was the Pearl parser, developed at Unisys in
collaboration with Dr. Mitch Marcus of the University of Pennsylvania. Preliminary
experimental results using Pearl were published in Magerman and Marcus[42]. To test
the Pearl model further, and to correct an error in the implementation of the Pearl
model, the Picky parser was developed two years later at Stanford in collaboration
with Dr. Carl Weir of Unisys. This work was published in Magerman and Weir[43].
In this section, I describe the Pearl model including the correction made in the Picky
work.
4.1.1 The PUNDIT String Grammar
The grammar to which this experiment was applied is the PUNDIT string gram-
mar developed at Unisys [32]. The PUNDIT string grammar consists of a set of
context-free rules, referred to as the context-free backbone of the grammar, and a set
of restrictions on the applications of these rules. For instance, one restriction might
4.1. A CONTEXT-SENSITIVE PROBABILISTIC PARSER 43
dictate that the rule VP!V PP could not be applied if the PP (prepositional phrase)
contained the preposition of and if the V (verb) was eat. This type of restriction
is called a selectional restriction. Some selectional restrictions are more general than
this example, referring to word classes instead of specic words. Some also consider
more complex functions of the context.
Restrictions also control the generation of gaps in a parse tree. Gaps, which
originated in transformational grammar, are place holders for words which have been
moved or removed as a result of a transformation, such as question inversion or subject
raising. For instance, given the question
Whom does Mary love? (4:1)
the PUNDIT grammar would generate a gap after the word love, interpreting the
gap as a noun phrase. By inserting the gap, the analysis of the verb phrase in the
sentence
Whom does Mary [VP love [NP NULL NP] VP] ? (4:2)
is consistent with the analysis of the verb phrase in the corresponding sentence with-
out the question inversion:
Mary [VP loves [NP whom NP] VP] ? (4:3)
4.1.2 Replacing the Restrictions with Statistics
One of the problems with the PUNDIT string grammar is that it is tedious and
time-consuming to develop the restriction set. The development of the knowledge
base of selectional and gap restrictions requires a grammarian to identify in example
sentences the lexical and structural co-occurrences that trigger or inhibit each rule.
This task became a full-time job for the Unisys grammarian, since the restrictions
needed to be constantly improved for old domains and modied signicantly for new
domains.
One approach to automating this process is to develop a probabilistic model for
the context-free backbone of the grammar which accomplishes the task of the restric-
tions. The restriction grammar eectively acts like a probabilistic grammar whose
44 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
model assigns a probability of 0 to some rules given certain contexts and assigns a
uniform probability over all other possibilities. The initial problem with this approach
was that the P-CFG, the only existing form of probabilistic grammar at the time,
could not capture the co-occurrences represented by the restrictions, since a P-CFG's
probabilistic model considers only the left-hand side of a rule when determining a
rule's probability.
Solving this problem required developing a more context-sensitive probabilistic
grammar model. The co-occurrences encoded in the restrictions could be represented
using a probabilistic model which conditions the probability of a rule production on
lexical and structural information from the context. Instead of asking a grammar-
ian to recognize the important co-occurrences for each rule, a statistical model could
encode the relative frequencies of the contexts in which a rule occurred in a set of
sentences parsed correctly using the grammar. If the model conditioned its probabil-
ities on the same information that the restrictions used, then it is conceivable that
the model could represent the same information contained in the restriction set, and
the model could be trained automatically using statistical training algorithms.
4.1.3 A Context-Sensitive Parsing Model
The Pearl model, a context-sensitive parsing model, considers lexical and structural
context when assigning a probability to a rule application, in contrast to a P-CFG
model which ignores the context in which a rule is applied when assigning rule prob-
abilities. The Pearl model estimates the probability of each parse T given the words
in the sentence S, P(T jS), by assuming that each non-terminal and its immediate
children are dependent on the non-terminal's siblings and parent and on the part-of-
speech trigram centered at the beginning of that rule:
P(T jS) '
Y
A2T
P(A! jC ! A, a0a1a2) (4:4)
where C is the non-terminal node which immediately dominates A; a1 is the part-
of-speech associated with the leftmost word of constituent A; and a0 and a2 are the
parts-of-speech of the words to the left and to the right of a1; respectively. See
Magerman and Marcus[42] for a more detailed description of this model.
4.1. A CONTEXT-SENSITIVE PROBABILISTIC PARSER 45
4.1.4 Experimental Results
Experiments were performed which tested whether or not the Pearl parsing model
could represent the same information encoded in the restriction set. In these ex-
periments, the context-free backbone of the PUNDIT grammar was used to parse
sentences. This unrestricted grammar generates thousands of analyses for each sen-
tence. To avoid generating all of the parses, the parser searches the space of possible
parses guided by the probability function, using an agenda-based parsing algorithm
that expands only the most probable partial analyses. These experiments evaluated
for what percentage of the test sentences the parser would be able to select a correct
parse from the space of grammatical parses.
In the original experiment, the Pearl parser was trained on 1,100 sentences from
the Voyager direction-nding domain [69] and tested on 40 test sentences from the
same domain. Of these 40 sentences, Pearl produced parse trees for 38 of them, and
35 of these parse trees were equivalent to the correct parse produced by Pundit, for
an overall accuracy rate of 88%.
After the development of the Picky parser, a more rigorous evaluation of the
Pearl parsing model was performed. The Picky parser was trained on almost 1,000
sentences and was tested on 3 sets of 100 sentences which were held out from the rest
of the corpus during training. The training corpus consisted of 982 correctly-parsed
sentences. The average accuracy of the Picky parser on these 3 data sets was 89.3%.
4.1.5 Conclusions from the Pearl Experiment
The Pearl parsing model illustrated the ability of a context-sensitive probability
model to represent the knowledge contained in a restriction set generated over the
course of many years by a grammarian. The results were surprising, since the gram-
marians at Unisys considered it unlikely that the statistical models would be able to
predict the locations of the gaps, since it was presumed that the generation of gaps
was a semantic phenomenon and not a syntactic one. Nonetheless, the Pearl model
proved itself capable of identifying the gaps in the limited tests of its abilities.
There were two main limitations of the Pearl experiments. The most critical
46 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
weakness of the work was the unreliability of the experimental results. The Pearl
model was applied to a very simple problem, and was tested on very little data.
Further, the test data was viewed repeatedly during the experiments, and the same
test data was tested on over and over again. It was possible that the development
process tuned the parser to the specic training set. In short, these experiments
violated many of the rules of evaluations discussed in Chapter 7.
The Pearl experiment also suered from the oversimplicity of its statistical model.
While the model considered far more contextual information than a P-CFG, it ignored
lexical information and considered very little structural context.
Pearl was a reasonable rst step in the direction of context-sensitivity in parsing
models. And given the amount of training data used, it probably would not have been
possible to estimate a more complex model using the resources available. But, if a
parser using a context-sensitive probabilistic model were applied to a more challenging
domain, or to a corpus of general English, its model would need to consider signicant
amounts of lexical and structural information.
4.2 A Decision Tree Parsing Model
The comparison of the Pearl model with the P-CFG model suggested that increasing
the context-sensitivity of a parsing model led to a higher degree of parsing accuracy.
However, two questions remained. First, how much contextual information could
eectively be incorporated into a statistical model, given state-of-the-art statistical
estimation techniques? And second, how would this form of statistical disambiguation
perform on a domain which was more dicult to parse.
Soon after the Pearl experiment, members of the IBM Language Modeling group
were developing the theoretical underpinnings of a class of parsing models called
history-based grammar (HBG) models. HBG models are based on the principle that
the probability of any action in the parsing process is potentially aected by any or
all of the actions which preceded it.
In order to answer the questions raised by the Pearl experiment, and to explore
the eectiveness of HBG models applied to parsing, an experiment was devised to
4.2. A DECISION TREE PARSING MODEL 47
compare a Pearl-like HBG model with an existing P-CFG model.
In this experiment, both the P-CFG and HBG models are applied to the parses
output by a broad-coverage, feature-based unication grammar. The question which
this experiment explores is: how much improvement in parsing accuracy can be
achieved by replacing a P-CFG model with a lexically-sensitive HBG model?
This experiment diers from the Pearl experiment in three signicant ways. First,
the task domain, parsing computer manuals, is more challenging than the Voyager
domain, including longer sentences, more complex structures, and more lexical and
syntactic ambiguity. Second, the grammar to which the context-sensitive model has
already been probabilized. Thus, there is a P-CFG to test the new model against
directly. Finally, using the statistical decision tree algorithms developed by the IBM
group, it would be possible to accurately estimate a probabilistic model using much
more contextual information than was previously attempted.
In this section, I dene the history-based grammar model, briey discuss the
grammar to which this experiment is applied, describe the parsing model used in
this experiment, report the test results, and discuss the conclusions drawn from this
experiment.
However, before beginning the discussion of history-based grammars, I introduce
the Lancaster Computer Manuals Treebank, which is the treebank used in both the
history-based grammar experiments as well as in the experiments in Chapter 8.
4.2.1 The Lancaster Computer Manuals Treebank
Training a context-sensitive decision tree parsing models requires a very large tree-
bank. It is important that the treebank be annotated accurately and consistently. In
evaluating a new parsing model, it is also useful to use a data set to which an existing
state-of-the-art probabilistic parser has already been applied, so that previous results
can be used to gauge the progress made by using the new methods introduced by the
new work.
Using these guidelines, the domain I selected to use for the history-based pars-
ing experiments, as well as my dissertation experiments, is the Computer Manuals
domain, and the training and test data I used is the Lancaster Computer Manuals
48 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
Treebank. Black, Garside, and Leech [7] provides detailed reports on experiments
performed using his P-CFG, some of which is described in this section. And since I
have access to both the training and test data used in these previous experiments, I
have the opportunity to perform a direct comparison between the two parsing models,
training and testing on exactly the same sentences.
The treebank sentences were selected from 40 million words of IBM computer
manuals. The sentences from the computer manuals which were used in the treebank
were selected in the following way. First, the 3,000 most frequent tokens1 were iden-
tied in a corpus of 600,000 words from 10 manuals. A sentence from a computer
manual is used in the treebank only if all of the tokens in the sentence are among
these 3,000 most frequent. The treebank consists of a few million words of sentences
selected in this manner from the 40 million words of manuals.
The following sentence is a randomly selected example from the computer manuals
domain:
It indicates whether a call completed successfully or if some error was
detected that caused the call to fail.
Figure 4.1 shows the Lancaster treebank bracketing of this sentence.
The Lancaster treebank uses 195 part-of-speech tags and 19 non-terminal labels.
A complete list of the tags and labels is included in Appendix B. The denitions of
these tags and labels are given in [7].
4.2.2 The History-based Grammar Model
A generative probabilistic grammar model estimates the joint probability of a deriva-
tion tree T and the observed sentence, S; denoted by p(T; S): The P-CFG model
estimates this probability by assuming all derivational steps in T are independent.
The history-based grammar model makes the opposite assumption, namely that the
probability of each derivational step depends on all previous steps.
1The notion of a token is not clearly dened in [7]. However, since there are over 7,000 unique
words in the treebank training set, a token is not the same as a word. I believe that each word
is made up of one or more tokens, and the extra 4,000 words in the training data are multi-token
words.
4.2. A DECISION TREE PARSING MODEL 49
[N It PPH1 N]
[V indicates VVZ
[Fn [Fn&whether CSW
[N a AT1 call NN1 N]
[V completed VVD successfully RR V]Fn&]
or CC
[Fn+ if CSW
[N some DD error NN1 N]@
[V was VBDZ detected VVN V]
@[Fr that CST
[V caused VVD
[N the AT call NN1 N]
[Ti to TO fail VVI Ti]V]Fr]Fn+]
Fn]V]. .
Figure 4.1: Sample bracketed sentence from Lancaster Treebank.
The history-based grammar model denes the context of a parse tree in terms of
the leftmost derivation of the tree. Consider the context-free grammar for anbn and
the parse tree for the sentence aabb shown in Figure 4.2. The leftmost derivation of
the tree T in Figure 4.2 is:
S
r1! ASB
r2! aSB
r3! aABB
r4! aaBB
r5! aabB
r6! aabb (4:5)
where the rule used to expand the i-th node of the tree is denoted by ri. Note that
we have indexed the non-terminal nodes of the tree with this leftmost order. We
denote by t i the sentential form obtained just before we expand node i. Hence,
t 3 corresponds to the sentential form aSB or equivalently to the string r1r2. In a
leftmost derivation we produce the words in left-to-right order.
Using the one-to-one correspondence between leftmost derivations and parse trees,
we can rewrite the joint probability p(T; S) as:
p(T; S) =
mY
i=1
p(rijt
 
i ): (4:6)
In a P-CFG, the probability of an expansion at node i depends only on the identity
50 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
of the non-terminal Ni, i.e., p(rijt
 
i ) = p(ri). Thus
p(T; S) =
mY
i=1
p(ri): (4:7)
So, in a P-CFG, the derivation order does not aect the probabilistic model2.
S ! ASBjAB
A ! a
B ! b
S
SA
a
B
A
a
B
b b
2
1
3 6
54
Figure 4.2: Grammar and parse tree for aabb.
A less crude approximation than the usual P-CFG is to use a decision tree to
determine which aspects of the leftmost derivation have a bearing on the probability
of how node i will be expanded. In other words, the probability distribution p(rijt
 
i )
will be modeled by p(rijE[t
 
i ]) where E[t] is the equivalence class of the history t
as determined by the decision tree. This allows our probabilistic model to use any
information anywhere in the partial derivation tree to determine the probability of
dierent expansions of the i-th non-terminal. The use of decision trees and a large
bracketed corpus may shift some of the burden of identifying the intended parse from
the grammarian to the statistical estimation methods.
In this experiment, only a restricted implementation of this model is explored, one
in which only the path from the current node to the root of the derivation along with
2Note the abuse of notation since we denote by p(ri) the conditional probability of rewriting the
non-terminal Ni.
4.2. A DECISION TREE PARSING MODEL 51
the index of a branch (index of the child of a parent) is examined to build equivalence
classes of histories.
4.2.3 The Grammar
The grammar used in this experiment is a broad-coverage, feature-based unication
grammar. The grammar is context-free but uses unication to express rule templates
for the the context-free productions. For example, the rule template:
2
4 pos = NP
number = x
3
5!
2
4 pos = Det
number = unspec
3
5
2
4 pos = N
number = x
3
5 (4:8)
where the second feature, number; can take on three possible values: singular, plural,
or unspecied (unspec): This rule template corresponds to 3 dierent context-free
productions. The rule template might also include a restriction on the values of x
based on values of other features in the production.
The grammar has 21 features whose range of values maybe from 2 to about 100
with a median of 8. There are 672 rule templates of which 400 are actually exercised
when we parse a corpus of 15,000 sentences. The number of productions that are
realized in this training corpus is several hundred thousand.
For a complete description of this grammar, see Black, Garside, and Leech[7].
P-CFG
A non-terminal in the above grammar is a feature vector. For the purposes of param-
eterizing a P-CFG model of this grammar, several non-terminals are grouped into a
single class called a mnemonic. A mnemonic is represented by the one non-terminal
that is the least specied in its class. For example, the mnemonic VB0PASTSG*
corresponds to all non-terminals that unify with:
2
6664
pos = v
verb  type = be
tense  aspect = past
3
7775 (4:9)
52 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
These mnemonics are used to label a parse tree and also to estimate a P-CFG,
where the probability of rewriting a non-terminal is given by the probability of rewrit-
ing the mnemonic. From a training set, a CFG is induced from the actual mnemonic
productions that are elicited in parsing the training corpus. Using the inside-outside
algorithm, a P-CFG can be estimated from a large corpus of text. Using the bracketed
sentences from the Lancaster treebank, the inside-outside algorithm can be adapted
to reestimate the probability parameters subject to the constraint that only correct
parses, i.e. parses whose constituent structure matches the bracketing in the tree-
bank, contribute to the reestimation. From a training run of 15,000 sentences, 87,704
mnemonic productions were observed, with 23,341 mnemonics of which 10,302 were
lexical. Running on a test set of 760 sentences, 32% of the rule templates were used,
7% of the lexical mnemonics, 10% of the constituent mnemonics, and 5% of the
mnemonic productions actually contributed to parses of test sentences.
4.2.4 The HBG Model
Unlike the P-CFG model which assigns a probability to a mnemonic production, the
HBG model assigns a probability to a rule template.
For the HBG model, in place of the mnemonics, there are 50 syntactic categories
and 50 semantic categories. Each non-terminal of the grammar has been assigned a
syntactic (Syn) and a semantic (Sem) category. Also, each rule production associates
a primary lexical head, denoted by H1, and a secondary lexical head, denoted by
H2, with each constituent.
3 When a rule is applied to a non-terminal, it indicates
which child will generate the primary lexical head and which child will generate the
secondary lexical head.
The HBG model estimates the probability of a parse tree and a sentence, p(T; S)
as the product of the probabilities of every constituent node in the sentence, where
a constituent node contains a unique value for Syn and Sem; a rule R which is used
3The primary lexical head H1 corresponds (roughly) to the linguistic notion of a lexical head. The
secondary lexical head H2 has no linguistic parallel. It merely represents a word in the constituent
besides the head which contains predictive information about the constituent.
4.2. A DECISION TREE PARSING MODEL 53
to expand the node, and a primary and secondary lexical head:
p(T; S) =
Y
[Syn;Sem;R;H1 ;H2]2T
p([Syn; Sem;R;H1;H2] j [Syn; Sem;R;H1;H2]p; Ipc);
(4:10)
where []p refers to the information at the parent of the current node and Ipc refers to
the index of the node in its parent's list of children (e.g. in VP! V NP, the Ipc of
the V node is 0 and the Ipc of the NP node is 1).
In this experiment, the probability of a node is approximated by the following ve
factors:
1. p(Syn j Rp; Ipc;H1p; Synp; Semp)
2. p(Sem j Syn;Rp; Ipc;H1p;H2p; Synp; Semp)
3. p(R j Syn; Sem;Rp; Ipc;H1p;H2p; Synp; Semp)
4. p(H1 j R;Syn; Sem;Rp; Ipc;H1p;H2p)
5. p(H2 j H1; R; Syn; Sem;Rp; Ipc; Synp)
While a dierent order for these predictions is possible, the experiment used only this
one.
The rule probability component of this model is the only model estimated using
decision trees. The other four components are n-gram models with the usual deleted
interpolation for smoothing.
Following the techniques described in Chapter 3, binary classication trees are
generated by hand for the syntactic categories, the semantic categories, and the rule
templates. The binary classication tree for the lexical head values are automati-
cally clustered using the bigram mutual information clustering algorithm in Brown
et.al.[18]. Given the bitstring of a history, a decision tree is grown to model the
probability that a rule will be used for rewriting a node in the parse tree.
Since the grammar produces parses which may be more detailed than the treebank,
the decision tree is built using a training set constructed in the following manner.
Using the grammar with the P-CFG model, the most likely parse that is consistent
54 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
with the treebank is determined, and the resulting sentence-tree pair is identied as
an event. Note that the grammar parse will also provide the lexical head structure of
the parse. Using the resulting data set a decision tree is grown by classifying histories
to locally minimize the entropy of the rule template.
4.2.5 Experimental Results
To evaluate the performance of a grammar and an accompanying model, two types
of measurements are used:
 the any-consistent rate, dened as the percentage of sentences for which the
correct parse is proposed among the many parses that the grammar provides
for a sentence.
 the Viterbi rate dened as the percentage of sentences for which the most likely
parse is consistent.
The any-consistent rate is a measure of the grammar's coverage of linguistic phenom-
ena. The Viterbi rate evaluates the grammar's coverage with the statistical model
imposed on the grammar. The goal of probabilistic modeling is to produce a Viterbi
rate close to the any-consistent rate.
The any-consistent rate of the grammar is 90% when evaluating consistency based
on both structure and labels and 96% when only unlabeled brackets are considered.
These results are obtained on 760 sentences from 7 to 17 words in length. The parse
base of the grammar is 1.35 parses/word. The parse base of a grammar is dened
as the geometric mean of the number of proposed parses on a per word basis, to
quantify the ambiguity of the grammar. This translates to about 23 parses for a
12-word sentence. The unlabeled Viterbi rate of the P-CFG model stands at 64%
and the labeled Viterbi rate is 60%.
While the Viterbi rate is believed to be close if not the state-of-the-art perfor-
mance, there is room for improvement by using a more rened statistical model to
achieve the labeled any-consistent rate of 90% with this grammar. There is a signi-
cant gap between the labeled Viterbi and any-consistent rates: 30 percentage points.
4.2. A DECISION TREE PARSING MODEL 55
Using the HBG model as described above, the Viterbi rate is increased to 75%.
This is a reduction of 37% in error rate.
Accuracy
P-CFG 59.8%
HBG 74.6%
Error Reduction 36.8%
Figure 4.3: Parsing accuracy: P-CFG vs. HBG
In developing the HBG model, the experiments also explored similar models of
varying complexity. One discovery made during this experimentation is that models
which incorporated more context than HBG performed slightly worse than HBG.
This suggests that the current training corpus may not contain enough sentences
to estimate richer models. Based on the results of these experiments, it appears
likely that signicantly increasing the size of the training corpus should result in a
corresponding improvement in the accuracy of HBG and richer HBG-like models.
4.2.6 Conclusions from the HBG Experiment
The HBG experiment provided further evidence that statistical models could be used
to deal with ambiguity resolution in natural language parsing. Further, it showed that
signicant amounts of lexical information could be incorporated into these models,
although it also suggested that more data would be necessary to realize the full
disambiguating potential of the lexical information.
This experiment also tested the application of decision tree technology to the
parsing modeling problem. These algorithms had previously been applied to language
modeling and speech recognition problems, but they had never been attempted on
a problem as varied and complex as the parsing problem. The HBG experiment
conrmed the hypothesis that decision tree models could provide eective estimates
of a probabilistic parsing model.
Given the encouraging results of the Pearl model and HBG model, the stage was
set to try a far more ambitious experiment. Both of these experiments attempted to
56 CHAPTER 4. PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENTS
nd models which could select a correct parse from the limited set of parses generated
by an elaborate context-free grammar. But, if there were no grammar at all, could a
statistical model select a correct parse from the space of all possible parse trees? That
is, could a statistical model be trained to select a correct parse tree for a sentence
from the space of all n-ary labeled trees with the same number of leaves as words in
the sentence? This is the question addressed by remainder of this dissertation.
Chapter 5
SPATTER Parsing
The previous chapter recounted an experiment in which combining an elaborate rule-
based grammar with decision tree models succeeded in improving the accuracy of a
statistical parser. In that experiment, the grammar serves as a lter for unreasonable
parses, based on the grammarian's knowledge about the language. The decision tree
models combine to rank the remaining analyses.
But why use the grammar to lter out parse trees in the rst place? If the sta-
tistical models are accurate enough to distinguish correct grammatical parses from
incorrect grammatical parses, certainly they should be able to discern correct gram-
matical parses from ludicrous ungrammatical ones.
There are good reasons to question the necessity of highly restrictive grammars
for parsing when statistical information is available, some of which were explored in
the experiments discussed in Chapter 4.
Another strong motivation for eliminating complicated rule systems from parsing
is the enormous investment of time and resources in grammar development without
any guarantee of success. To illustrate this point, let us examine the grammar writing
process:
A grammarian examines sentences, skillfully extracts the linguistic
generalizations evident in the data, and writes grammar rules which cover
the language. The grammarian then evaluates the performance of the
grammar, and upon analysis of the errors made by the grammar-based
57
58 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
parser, carefully renes the rules, repeating this process on and o for
about a decade.
For the best and most accurate robust rule-based grammars, a decade is not an
exaggeration of the time necessary to complete a grammar. The grammar rene-
ment process is extremely time-consuming and dicult, and has not yet resulted in a
grammar which can be used by a parser to analyze accurately a large corpus of unre-
stricted text. Instead of writing grammars, one can develop corpora of hand-analyzed
sentences (treebanks) with signicantly less eort. With the availability of treebanks
of annotated sentences, one can view NL parsing as simply treebank recognition.
In this chapter, I introduce an approach to parsing natural language which restates
the parsing problem as pattern recognition, where the pattern to be recognized is a
linguistic analysis of a sentence. This approach divides the parsing problem into two
separate tasks: treebanking, dening the annotation scheme which encodes the lin-
guistic content of the sentences and applying it to a corpus, and treebank recognition,
generating these annotations automatically for new sentences.
The annotation scheme used to represent the linguistic content of the sentence
is now the primary contribution of the grammarian (although as we will see much
later, the grammarian has another important role to play). The treebank can contain
whatever information is deemed valuable by the grammarian, as long as it can be
applied consistently and eciently to a large number of sentences. If one views the
treebank as a black box which, given a sentence, assigns a unique analysis to that
sentence, then the goal of treebank recognition is to produce the same analysis of a
sentence that the treebank would generate.
The solution to the treebank recognition problem described in the remainder of
this dissertation is called SPATTER (Statistical PATTErn Recognizer). The SPAT-
TER parser uses probabilistic models to predict the part-of-speech labels, parse tree
edges, and constituent labels for a given sentence. The parsing process is divided into
a sequence of actions which add structure to the sentence in a bottom-up fashion.
The probabilistic models used to predict each action condition their distributions
on the information made available by the sequence of actions preceding the current
action. Thus the derivational order of the actions leading to an analysis aects the
5.1. THE TREEBANK RECOGNITION PROBLEM 59
probability assigned to the parse. In Chapter 4, this type of model is referred to as a
history-based grammar model. A derivational model, which assigns a distribution to
the possible derivations of a parse tree, is self-organized in the process of training the
other models. The probabilistic models in SPATTER are estimated using statistical
decision trees, and these distributions are rened using two dierent applications of
the expectation-maximization (E-M) algorithm.
In this chapter, I dene and motivate the treebank recognition problem (TRP),
discuss the knowledge representation issues involved in SPATTER parsing, and de-
scribe in detail the statistical models used in this work.
5.1 The Treebank Recognition Problem
The purpose of introducing the treebank recognition problem (TRP) is to remove a
signicant obstacle impeding progress in the area of natural language (NL) parsing.
One of the most dicult aspects of NL parsing is that, to the casual observer, or to a
dedicated parsing specialist for that matter, it is not clear exactly what the parsing
problem is. To wit, parsing has something to with assigning syntactic constituent
structure to sentences. But this simplistic denition does little more than replace one
unknown term (parsing) with another (syntactic constituent structure). Disregarding
the issue of what \syntactic constituent structure" means, many would argue that a
parse is muchmore than syntactic structure alone. To some, parsing involves assigning
semantic labels to constituents as well. Still others expect parse trees to indicate
predicate-argument relations, and to resolve anaphoric and elliptical references. To
make the task even more dicult, linguists have divergent views on the denitions
of semantics and predicate-argument relations. It is dicult to pin down precise
denitions to many of the features of a sentence that parsers are expected to identify.
In summary, the natural language parsing problem is an ill-dened task.
In contrast, the TRP is posed as a well-dened task. The annotation scheme used
to analyze the treebank sentences denes the expected output of the parser. For
instance, if a linguist can consistently annotate sentences with predicate-argument
structure, then it is the goal of the treebank recognition problem to identify that
60 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
structure in new sentences accurately.
The most signicant advantage the TRP has over the parsing problem is in evalu-
ation of dierent approaches and implementations. For a given treebank, divided into
training data and unseen test data, the best solution to the TRP is the one which
assigns THE correct analysis to the most test sentences. Comparative evaluation of
solutions to the parsing problem has been hindered by the claim that there is no one
correct parse, i.e. any reasonable analysis of a sentence is correct, where a \reason-
able" analysis is one supported by any one of the diverse and numerous linguistic
theories available on a given day. The TRP explicitly rules out this argument. For
better or for worse, the one and only correct parse of sentence is the one which the
treebank assigns to that sentence. Of course, the treebank may have internal incon-
sistencies. While statistical training methods can overcome some inconsistencies in
the training data, annotation schemes which border on the random will be dicult
to reproduce accurately. And errors in the test data are unavoidable. But, assuming
the description task, as discussed in the introduction, results in a labeling scheme
which can be consistently assigned to text by humans, the inconsistencies in both the
training and testing sentences should be negligible.
5.2 Representing Parts of Parse Trees
The initial development of SPATTER was guided by the principle that the best
representation to start with is the most straightforward. The rationale behind this
principle is that, if experiments based on a straightforward representation failed, error
analysis might reveal obvious aws in the representation which could be corrected.
But, if solving the TRP is reduced to a search for the best representation of a parse
tree, then there is little hope for success.
5.2.1 Four Elementary Features
The treebank can be viewed as a collection of n-ary branching trees, with each node in
a tree labeled by either a non-terminal label, a part-of-speech label, or a word token.
5.2. REPRESENTING PARTS OF PARSE TREES 61
For the purposes of pattern recognition, these trees must be described precisely, in
terms of elementary components.
Grammarians elevate constituents to the status of elementary units in a parse,
especially in the case of rewrite-rule grammars where each rewrite rule denes a
legal constituent. If a parse tree is interpreted as a geometric pattern, however, a
constituent is no more than a set of edges which meet at the same tree node. For
instance, the noun phrase, \a brown cow," consists of an edge extending to the right
from \a," an edge extending to the left from \cow," and an edge extending straight
up from \brown" (see gure 5.1).
a
rig
ht
cow
left
brown
up
Figure 5.1: Representation of constituent and labeling of extensions in SPATTER.
The parse tree is encoded in terms of into four elementary components, or features:
words, tags, labels, and extensions.1 Each feature has a xed vocabulary, with each
element of a given feature vocabulary having a unique representation.
The input to the treebank recognizer is a sentence, which is a sequence of tokens.
The rst feature, the word feature, denes the mapping from these tokens onto a
xed vocabulary of words, including an \unknown" word for all tokens which do
not map onto a word in the vocabulary. The mapping is almost trivial, with most
tokens mapping to the vocabulary item with the same spelling. However, because
the capitalization in a sentence sometimes contains useful information, e.g. in titles,
and sometimes doesn't, e.g. at the beginning of a sentence, the capitalization of the
tokens is altered according to a deterministic algorithm before the tokens are mapped
onto the word vocabulary.
1The idea of decomposing the components of a parse tree into words, tags, labels, and extensions
was originally proposed by Fred Jelinek, Bob Mercer, and Salim Roukos.
62 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
The next feature assigned, the tag feature, represents the part-of-speech informa-
tion for each word in the sentence. The tag vocabulary is dened to be the set of all
part-of-speech labels which are assigned to words in the treebank training data.
Once a leaf node has been assigned a tag feature value, it is extended in some
direction towards a parent node. The direction of this extension is represented by the
extension feature. This feature takes on one of 4 possible values, left, right, up, or
unary. A left extension value corresponds to the initial node of a constituent, and a
right value corresponds to the nal node of a constituent. The up value is assigned to
the nodes which are between the initial and nal nodes of a constituent. The unary
value means that the parent of the node has only one child. So, in the noun phrase,
\a brown brown brown brown cow," the nodes corresponding to all of the brown's
in the sentence are assigned the extension value up.2
A constituent is dened in terms of the extension feature values of consecutive
nodes. A node with extension value right followed by any number of nodes with
extension value up followed by a node with extension value left is a constituent. Any
node which is assigned the unary extension value is also a constituent. Whenever the
parser detects a sequence of nodes which corresponds to a constituent, it generates
a new parent node and begins the process of assigning feature values to that node.
The rst feature value assigned to an internal node in a parse tree is a label feature
value, which encodes information about the constituent beneath that node.
5.2.2 Propagating Lexical Information
The constituent labels in a treebank are not very descriptive. It would be dicult
for human treebankers to assign constituent labels to text consistently, accurately,
and eciently if the labels conveyed subtle nuances of meaning. For example, the
Lancaster Treebank uses only 17 constituent labels, whereas the grammar described
in Black, Garside, and Leech[7] covering the same domain assigns over 13,000 unique
2Since each node of the parse tree must be assigned an extension value, there must be a fth
extension value for the root node. I call this value root. However, since the root node of each parse
tree is assigned the same label (GOD) and the label value is assigned before the extension value,
the root feature value is actually redundant. It is assigned to a node with the GOD label with
probability 1. Therefore, discussions of the extension feature omit mention of the root value.
5.2. REPRESENTING PARTS OF PARSE TREES 63
each
DD1
right
character
NN1
up
used
VVN
right
by
II
right
the
AT
right
computer
NN1
left
N
computer
NN1
left
P
by
II
left
Tn
used
VVN
left
N
character
NN1
right
is
VBZ
right
listed
VVN
left
V
listed
VVN
left
S
listed
VVN
root
Each character used by the computer is listed
Figure 5.2: Treebank analysis encoded using feature values. Each internal node
contains, from top to bottom, a label, word, tag, and extension value, and each leaf
node contains a word, tag, and extension value.
64 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
non-terminal categories.
Given the dearth of information in the label set, it would be dicult to model
the assignment of feature values by asking questions primarily of the label values.
Questions about the words and part-of-speech tags are more informative, but it is
infeasible, and not necessarily even useful, to ask questions about all word and tag
values from a constituent.
To augment the information available at constituent nodes, a word, along with its
corresponding part-of-speech tag, is selected from each constituent to act as a lexical
representative. Thus, at each internal node in the parse tree, there are word and
tag feature values which are deterministically assigned, as well as label and extension
values which are predicted by models.
The lexical representative from a constituent loosely (very loosely) corresponds
to the linguistic notion of a head word. For example, the lexical representative of a
noun phrase is the rightmost noun, and the lexical representative of a verb phrase
is the leftmost non-auxiliary verb. However, the correlation to linguistic theory ends
there. The set of deterministic rules which select the representative word from each
constituent, called the Tree Head Table, was developed in the better part of an hour, in
keeping with the philosophy of avoiding excessive dependence on rule-based methods.
If the performance of these methods depend on the precise word selection rule set,
there is little hope of success.
Nr right-to-left Nr NNT1 NNT2 RR ...
V left-to-right V VV0 VVC VVD VVG ...
N right-to-left N NN NNJ NNU NP NN2 ... J ... Nn
S right-to-left S V Ti Tn Tg N J Fa ...
Tg right-to-left Tg VVG VBG VDG VHG V
Ti right-to-left Ti VVI VDI VVN VDN VHI VHD VBI V TO
Tn right-to-left Tn VVN VDN VHD V
...
Table 5.1: Subset of the Tree Head Table, which determines the lexical representative
from each constituent, based on the label of the constituent and the tags and labels
of the elements of the constituent.
5.2. REPRESENTING PARTS OF PARSE TREES 65
Table 5.1 presents a subset of the mapping rules in the Tree Head Table used
in SPATTER. The rst column is the label of the constituent whose word and tag
features are being assigned. The second column indicates whether the children of this
node are processed left-to-right or right-to-left. The remainder of each line consists
of an ordered list of tag and label values which might occur as the children of the
constituent label in the rst column. The elements in this list are assigned priorities,
with the rst element getting priority 1, the second element priority 2, and so on. The
Tree Head assignment algorithm identies the lexical representative of a constituent
as the lexical representative of the child whose label (or tag if the child is not a
constituent) has the lowest priority value. In the case of two children having the
same priority value, if the parent label is marked as left-to-right, then the leftmost
child is selected, otherwise the rightmost child is selected.
As an example, let's step through the Tree Head assignment algorithm for the
sentence:
[S [N I_PN N] [V really_RR [V like_VBZ [N ice_NN cream_NN N] V] V] S]
Initially, each node is assigned its corresponding word value, e.g. node 1 is assigned
\I," node 2 is assigned \really," etc. Working bottom-up, the rst tree head assign-
ment is for the noun phrase, \I." Since the noun phrase has only one child, and it's
tag, PN, occurs in the priority list for N, \I" is selected as the lexical head. Note
that if PN did not occur in the priority list, then there would be no lexical head for
the constituent. Now, consider the noun phrase \ice cream." Both \ice" and \cream"
are potential head's of this noun phrase, and both have the same priority value. Ac-
cording to the Tree Head Table, N's are processed right-to-left, so the rightmost NN
is selected as the lexical head, in this case \cream." The algorithm selects \like" as
the head of \like ice cream," and also selects \like" as the head of \really like ice
cream." Finally, it selects \like" as the head of the sentences, since V has a lower
priority value than N for constituents labeled with S.
To illustrate the mapping between a treebank parse and the feature value repre-
sentation scheme, consider the following sentence from the IBM computer manuals
domain, as annotated in the Lancaster Treebank:
66 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
[N Each_DD1 character_NN1
[Tn used_VVN [P by_II [N the_AT computer_NN1 N] P] Tn] N]
[V is_VBZ listed_VVN V] ._.
The node feature value representation of this treebank analysis is shown in Fig-
ure 5.2.
5.2.3 Representing Features as Binary Questions
In SPATTER, a combination of binary statistical decision tree (SDT) models assign
a probability distribution on the space of possible parse trees. The exact form of
these models is discussed in a later section, but the use of binary SDTs brings up
an interested representation problem. Binary SDTs require that the contexts, or
histories, be represented in terms of answers to binary questions. Questions like
\Are the words and or or in the sentence?" have convenient binary answers. But
questions like \What is the word at the current node?" or \How many children does
the current node's constituent have?" have more than 2 answers. This problem is
solved by creating a binary classication tree for the answers to each question.3
Binary Classication Tree Feature Representations
SDTs ask questions about the contextual history which help them predict the future
more accurately, i.e. which reduce the entropy (uncertainty) of the future. In the
context of SPATTER, these questions are about the feature values of nearby nodes
in the parse tree. To simplify the mathematical algorithms used in training SDTs, it
is very useful to enforce a binary structure on the decision trees. In a binary decision
tree, only binary questions can be asked of the history. Of course a question which
has four possible answers can be encoded as a sequence of binary questions.
3This work contains references to three dierent types of trees: parse trees, decision trees, and
classication trees. It is important to keep in mind which type of tree is being discussed. The parse
trees are constructed using decision tree models. The answers to the questions asked by the decision
tree models are encoded using classication trees. Now, if you were a tree, which kind would you
be?
5.2. REPRESENTING PARTS OF PARSE TREES 67
upleft
extension = unary?
extension = left?
extension = right?
0
right
10
110
unary
111
Figure 5.3: Classication tree for extension feature values with three binary questions.
The hyphen (-) in the binary encoding indicates that the value of that bit can be either
0 or 1. The value of the bit in those cases can be selected to maximize the information
content of that bit with respect to the value being predicted.
Consider a 4-valued question which asks about the an extension feature value.
Without the binary question constraint, one can ask a question like \What is the
extension feature value of the parse node to the left of the current node?" With this
constraint, one can ask the same question using the sequence of questions shown in
gure 5.3. However, other sequences of questions might be more predictive of the
future. For instance, one might want to ask if the feature value is left or right rst,
indicating a constituent boundary, as shown in gure 5.4.
Each of these sequences of questions corresponds to a binary classication tree
on the extension vocabulary, with each extension feature value assigned a binary
representation. The word, tag, and label feature vocabularies are also assigned binary
representations using the same scheme.
Ideally, the classication trees used to represent the features should be constructed
so that the set of values beneath each node in the classication tree provide infor-
mation about the future. For instance, if one were trying to predict the label of
a constituent by asking about the extension value of the node to the right of that
constituent, then the representation for extensions suggested by gure 5.3 would be
68 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
extension = left | right?
extension = up?extension = left?
up
00
right
01
left
00
unary
11
Figure 5.4: Classication tree for extension feature values with two binary questions.
particularly useful if, in general, the distribution of the labels of constituents next
to unary constituents are signicantly dierent from those next to nodes extended in
any other direction | either to the left, to the right, or up.
While bit representations based on distributional behavior are ideal, it is compu-
tationally expensive to create representations which produce this attractive predic-
tive behavior. Previous work on n-gram class models (Brown et.al.[18]) illustrates
a method for distributionally clustering words based on bigram mutual information.
However, this clustering method generates classes which reduce uncertainty about the
next word, but do not necessarily reduce uncertainty about syntactic structure in a
sentence. It is not clear how to extrapolate these methods to clustering constituent
labels and extensions, since these feature values cannot easily be ordered, from left to
right, as bigrams in the same way as words or part-of-speech tags in a sentence. Also,
since a given node feature value is used to predict all four feature values elsewhere in
the parse tree, it would be best to produce dierent binary representations for each
type of decision made by the models.
In the interests of expediency, the classication trees for the word and tag features
are generated using the mutual information clustering algorithm, and the remaining
feature value classication trees are generated by hand. For the hand-generated
classes, some redundancy is encoded in the bit representations, with the hope that
each statistical decision tree will nd some sequence of questions to ask which will
predict the future well.
5.2. REPRESENTING PARTS OF PARSE TREES 69
More Questions?
The previous section discusses predicting node feature values by asking binary ques-
tions about feature values of nearby nodes. However, this information does not easily
capture generalizations about the local context. For instance, the number of children
nodes in a constituent is useful when assigning a constituent label, but this informa-
tion isn't readily accessible from the node feature values without asking a number of
questions about the specic extension values of the node's children. Also, the span
of a constituent, i.e. the number of words contained within the constituent, also
might alter the distributions of label and extension feature value assignments. This
information is extremely dicult to extract by asking only about feature values.
There are many such questions about the structure of the parse tree which might
provide predictive information for the decision tree to ask about. However, using the
principle that the best representation to start with is the most straightforward, only
the most obvious aspects of a parse tree are encoded as questions: the number of
children of a node, the span of a node, and the number of constituent nodes in the
sentence.4
5.2.4 A Feature for Conjunction
After analyzing preliminary parsing results, it was clear that the SPATTER was not
able to predict the scope of conjunctions very accurately. The precise reason is not
clear, but a contributing factor is that there is no single feature which represents the
fact that two or more constituents will be conjoined. And while there are tell-tale
signs that a conjunction is going to occur in a sentence, e.g. the words and or or, or
a comma (,) or semi-colon (;), the cues for the boundaries of the conjuncts are not
obviously encoded in the four feature values or the other questions described above.5
Coincidentally, the Lancaster Treebank annotation scheme encodes information
about conjunction which was not used in the initial experiments. The treebank
indicates which constituents are conjoined by appending a symbol to the end of the
4Note that the answer to this nal question, about the number of constituent nodes, changes as
the parser adds structure to the sentence.
5Now try to parse that sentence automatically!
70 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
constituent label. This information can be viewed as one bit of information attached
to each constituent, in other words, a fth feature of the parse tree. This binary-
valued node feature, the conjunction feature, takes on a true value only when the
constituent node is going to be a part of a conjoined phrase.
5.3 Derivations of Parse Trees
Since the statistical models in SPATTER are sensitive to the order in which feature
values are assigned, it would be ideal to consider all possible orderings of feature value
assignments.6 However, with ve feature values assigned at each internal node and
four feature values assigned at each leaf, there are far too many dierent derivations of
a single parse tree to consider. If derivations were completely unconstrained, a parse
tree with 20 nodes would have over 10150 (over 100 factorial) possible derivations.
To constrain this space, the only derivations which will be considered are bottom-
up derivations. In a bottom-up derivation, a node is not constructed until all of the
node feature values beneath it are assigned. One simple derivation is the bottom-
up leftmost derivation, in which the parsing process begins with the leaf nodes, and
feature values are lled out in order from left to right. But there are many other
derivations which might allow more predictive information to be available at crucial
points in the parsing process. For instance, the extension feature value of a noun
phrase node which is sandwiched between a verb and a prepositional phrase deter-
mines the prepositional phrase attachment. In the bottom-up leftmost derivation, the
noun phrase extension would be predicted before any information was known about
the prepositional phrase and its argument noun phrase. In other derivations both
constituent nodes would be within the extension model's ve node window. On the
other hand, not all derivations provide information by deviating from the bottom-up
leftmost derivation. Predicting the part-of-speech tag of the last word in a long sen-
tence is unlikely to aect the distribution of the part-of-speech tag of the rst word
in the sentence.
6The idea of using derivations of a parse tree was originally proposed by Fred Jelinek, Bob Mercer,
and Salim Roukos.
5.4. SPATTER PARSING: THE ALGORITHM 71
To further constrain the number of derivations while still allowing informative
derivations to be considered, a derivational window constraint (DWC) is used.7 Under
a DWC of size n; the rst n possible feature value assignments, from left to right, are
considered. The nodes at which these candidate feature value are to be assigned are
called active nodes.
As an example, at the start of the parsing process, when only the word feature
values are assigned, a window constraint of 3 would allow any one of the rst three
part-of-speech tags to be assigned, and thus the rst three nodes in the sentence are
active. Let's say the second word is tagged. Then, the window constraint permits
either the rst or third word to be tagged or the second word to be extended, and
again the rst three nodes are active. The fourth node in the sentence does not
become active until one of the rst three nodes is completed (i.e. all of its feature
values are assigned). When a sequence of completed nodes are combined to form a
new constituent node, the new node is then active again.
Even with a DWC of 2 applied to all of the features, there are too many possible
derivations to consider. To make the number of derivations manageable, the DWC
is set to 1 for all but the extension and tag feature assignments. This means that
initially the tag feature value can be assigned for the rst 2 words. However, as soon
as an internal node is created (i.e. a constituent is recognized), the label and con-
junction feature values for that node are assigned immediately, without considering
other derivational possibilties.
It is dicult to explain how the window constraint works in any more detail
without stepping through an example. The DWC will be made more clear in the next
section, when the SPATTER parsing algorithm is applied to an example sentence.
5.4 SPATTER Parsing: The Algorithm
In SPATTER parsing, a parse tree is represented as a connected, single-rooted
graph with feature values at each node, one of which indicates the geometry of the
7The idea of a derivational window constraint was rst suggested by Fred Jelinek, and the idea
was developed by myself, Jelinek, Bob Mercer, Salim Roukos, Adwait Ratnaparkhi, and Barbara
Gates.
72 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
create parse node array INITNODE
let Word feature value for INITNODE[i] = ith word in sentence
create sets of node arrays STATES, PARSES
add INITNODE to STATES
while (STATES is non-empty)
remove a node array NODE from STATES
if (NODE array has only one node and NODE[0] is completed)
add NODE to PARSES
else
let FEATURE[i] = the next unassigned feature for NODE[i]
let ACTIVE[i] = number of active nodes to left of ith node
if for some X, ((ACTIVE[X] < DWC) and
((FEATURE[X] == Label, Word, or Conj) or
(NODE[X] is an internal node and
FEATURE[X] == Tag)))
AssignFeature(FEATURE[X], NODE, X)
else
for X from 0 to DWC-1
AssignFeature(FEATURE[X], NODE, X)
Procedure AssignFeature(FEATURENAME, NODE, X):
for each value V for feature FEATURENAME
let NEWNODE = copy of NODE
set value of FEATURENAME to V for NEWNODE[X]
if ((NEWNODE[X] is completed) and
(<NEWNODE[X-A], ..., NEWNODE[X+B]> forms a constituent))
replace <NEWNODE[X-A], ..., NEWNODE[X+B]>
with an empty node whose children are
NEWNODE[X-A], ..., NEWNODE[X+B]
add NEWNODE to STATES
Figure 5.5: The SPATTER parsing algorithm. When the algorithm terminates, the
set of complete parse trees for the input sentence is in PARSES.
5.4. SPATTER PARSING: THE ALGORITHM 73
parse (the extension feature). Since the probability of a feature value assignment at
a particular node is conditioned on the information available at other nodes in the
partially-constructed tree, the probability of a parse tree derived in a certain order is
dierent from the probability of the same parse tree derived in a dierent order.
5.4.1 An Example
In this section, I step through the parsing algorithm in Figure 5.5 using the sentence
from Figure 5.2:
each character used by the computer is listed
First, the initial parse node array INITNODE is allocated with eight nodes, one
for each word in the sentence. The node feature value of the ith node of INITNODE
is set to the ith word in the sentence, with the word each assigned to INITNODE[0],
character assigned to INITNODE[1], etc. This initial state is added to the STATES
set.
The algorithm's main loop begins by trying to advance this initial state, now called
NODE. Since NODE is not completed, the algorithm tries to advance the rst two
active nodes of NODE. The FEATURE array is set to the value fTag, Tag, Tag, Tag,
Tag, Tag, Tag, Tagg and the ACTIVE array is set to the value f0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7g:
Using DWC = 2; the tag feature for NODE[0] and NODE[1] are assigned. This
means that for all possible tags t, a new state is generated with the tag feature value
of NODE[0] set to t, and another new state is generated with the tag feature value of
NODE[1] set to t: Since there are 196 part-of-speech tags, a total of 392 new states
are generated in this step. All of these states are added to the STATES set.
The main loop continues with one of these states. The order in which states are
expanded are determined by the stack decoder algorithm, described in section 5.4.2.
For the sake of the example, assume that the next state extended is the state which
has the tag feature value for NODE[1] set to the correct tag, NN1. For this state,
the FEATURE array is set to the value fTag, Extend, Tag, Tag, Tag, Tag, Tag, Tagg
and the ACTIVE array is set to the value f0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7g: For this state, the
74 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
tag feature value of NODE[0] and the extend feature value of NODE[1] are assigned.
Since there are 4 possible extension values, 200 new states are generated in this step.
Consider the four states added in this step which had their NODE[1] extend
feature value assigned. Using the terminology of the AssignFeature procedure in
Figure 5.5, the NEWNODE[1] for these four states is completed. However, only one
of these states contains a sequence of completed nodes which forms a constituent.
The state for which the NEWNODE[1] extend feature was assigned the value unary
contains a constituent consisting of the word character. For this state, a new parse
node is created with unassigned feature values, and this new empty node replaces
NEWNODE[1], with the old completed node becoming this node's child.
Consider what happens when the state being advanced is the one where the tag
feature value of NODE[1] is set toNN1 and the extension feature value of NODE[1] is
set to up. In this case, the FEATURE array is set to the value fTag, NONE, Tag, Tag,
Tag, Tag, Tag, Tagg and the ACTIVE array is set to the value f0; 0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6g:
Since NODE[1] is completed, the active nodes which are advanced in this step are
NODE[0] and NODE[2].
5.4.2 Managing the Search: Stack Decoding
In SPATTER parsing, a state is dened as a sequence of n-ary labeled trees which
together span the sentence. Since all possible feature values are generated at each
node with some probability, the search space for this parser is immense. Even with
the heuristic constraints, such as the DWC and the Tree Head Table, the search space
is still far too large to search exhaustively. To complicate matters further, because
the parser pursues dierent derivations of the same parse, the state space is a graph
instead of a tree.
The search algorithm which SPATTER uses to explore the search graph and prune
intelligently is the stack decoding algorithm. The stack decoding algorithm was in-
troduced by Jelinek in 1969 [36] for solving the graph search problem in speech recog-
nition. Other discussions of stack decoding in speech recognition are found in Bahl
et.al.[3] and Paul[47].
Like other AI search procedures, the stack decoding algorithm uses a scoring
5.4. SPATTER PARSING: THE ALGORITHM 75
stack 000
GOAL
STACKS
stack 100
stack 110
stack 200
stack 210
stack 111
stack 300
Figure 5.6: Example stack search space for SPATTER stack decoding algorithm.
76 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
function to evaluate a state based on the path from the initial state. In SPATTER,
the state evaluation function is the product of the probability of each decision along
the path to that state, according to the decision tree models. Since the stack decoding
algorithm is a graph search algorithm, the state evaluation function must provide a
mechanism for evaluating states with multiple paths from the initial state. In some
problems, it makes sense to assign such a state the value of the maximumor minimum
value path. However, since SPATTER includes a derivational model, the probability,
and thus the score, of a state with multiple derivations is the sum of the probabilities
of all of the derivations of the state.
Unlike standard tree search algorithms, the stack decoding algorithm's scoring
function does not attempt to provide a total order on the state space. Since dierent
states result from dierent numbers of decisions, the probability of a state with very
little structure would generally be higher than that of a nearly completed parse tree.
Thus, a probability-based search procedure would nearly exhaustively explore the
state space nearest to the initial state before expanding states near the goals.
The stack decoding algorithm avoids this problem by using a stack index function
to assign each state to a stack. State probabilities are only compared to one another
if states are assigned to the same stack. The stack index function used in SPATTER
reects the number of tagging, labeling, and extension decisions made in that state.
Thus, states will only be compared to one another if they have been constructed by
the same number of tagging, labeling, and extension decisions.
The stack search space in SPATTER parsing is illustrated in Figure 5.6. The
initial state, as described in section 5.4.1, is assigned to stack 000, reecting the fact
that no decisions have been made in that state. Since the only action permitted in
the initial state is a tagging decision, every state generated by the initial state is
assigned to stack 100. States in stack 100 can be continued with either a tagging
action or a labeling action, so states extended from stack 100 states can be assigned
to either stack 200 or stack 110, etc. Note in the gure that a state in stack 210 has
been generated by a state in stack 110 and from another state in stack 200.
The most important aspect of the stack decoding algorithm is its method of prun-
ing. It prunes states by assigning each state a threshold based on the scores of the
5.4. SPATTER PARSING: THE ALGORITHM 77
states which are alive in each stack. The health of a state is determined by the sta-
tus of its progeny, and a stack thresholding parameter, : Each stack is assigned a
parameter  between 0 and 1. Frequently, the  for each stack is the same.
The pruning process begins with the stacks which are on the frontier, i.e. stacks
which have only states with no descendents. All of the states in a frontier stack are
marked as alive. The score pmax of the highest scoring state in the stack is determined,
and only states which have a score greater than or equal to  pmax are advanced. The
remainder of the states in a stack are pruned for this iteration. Next, the parent states
of all of the unpruned states states are marked as \alive." This pruning procedure
is applied recursively to a stack S once all of the stacks containing states generated
by states in S are pruned. Figure 5.6 indicates the pruning threshold with a dashed
line separating unpruned states above from pruned states below. Once the pruning
algorithm reaches the initial stack (000) and all of the unpruned states have been
advanced, the algorithm begins again at the new frontier.
A major dierence between the stack decoding algorithm and standard tree search
algorithms is that, while tree pruning algorithms generally eliminate states perma-
nently, the stack decoding algorithm only prunes states temporarily. If a state gen-
erates unfruitful progeny, it will not remain alive. Once a high probability state dies
due to low probability descendents, the pruning threshold for that state's stack is
lowered, re-animating previously pruned states.
While stack decoders work best when there is no permanent pruning, it may be
necessary to implement an upper limit on the number of states allowed in each stack,
especially if the state space is very large and memory is a limited resource. It is
unlikely, however, that pruning the least probable state in a large stack will aect
the search results. Consider the situation where this permanent pruning leads to
a search error. In this case, if the lowest probability state were not pruned, the
search procedure would likely take a very long time expanding the more probable
states rst. Assuming there is some limit on the search processing time, the search
procedure would likely run out of time before getting around to processing the lowest
probability state.
Note in Figure 5.6 that there are multiple goal stacks. Goal states in SPATTER
78 CHAPTER 5. SPATTER PARSING
consist of a single-rooted labeled parse trees spanning the entire sentence. Since dif-
ferent parses of the same sentence can have dierent numbers of constituents, goal
states will not all be assigned to the same stack. Thus, there will be multiple goal
stacks when the SPATTER search procedure is terminated. According to the stack
decoding procedure, there is no justication for comparing the scores of states from
dierent goal stacks. However, the SPATTER parsing algorithm selects the highest
probability completed parse tree, regardless of the amount of structure. This does
favor simpler analyses over parses with more constituent structure. This favoritism
biases the parser against adding unnecessary structure, but it does not prevent the
construction of complex analyses if simpler ones are not likely according to the mod-
els.
Chapter 6
Probabilistic Models in SPATTER
The SPATTER parser assigns probability to a parse tree T given the sentence S;
P(T j S): This is referred to as a parsing model, which is distinguished from a gen-
erative model, i.e. one which assigns probability to a parse tree and a sentence,
P(T; S):
The most common type of probabilistic parsing model is the P-CFG model (e.g.
Sharman, Jelinek and Mercer [61], Black, Garside, and Leech [10]), which assigns a
probability to each rule in a context-free grammar and computes the probability of the
parse tree by assuming that each grammar rule application is independent of all other
rule applications in the sentence. As illustrated in Magerman and Marcus [42], Black
et.al. [8], and Magerman and Weir[43], probabilistic parsers are much more accurate
when their models incorporate lexical information from the context, and when the
applications of the models are not assumed to be independent. The development of
history-based grammar models is based on the premise that each decision potentially
aects future decisions in the parsing process.
The statistical models in SPATTER can ask questions about all feature value
assignments made prior to the current parse action. Due to constraints on resources,
both computational and physical, the models are limited to asking questions about
two constituent nodes to the left of the current node, two constituent nodes to the
right of the current node, and up to four children of the current node.
79
80 CHAPTER 6. PROBABILISTIC MODELS IN SPATTER
6.1 Notation
In the remainder of this section, the following notational scheme is used. wi and ti
refer to the word corresponding to the ith token in the sentence and its part-of-speech
tag, respectively. Nk refers to the 4-tuple of feature values at the kth node in the
current parse state, where the nodes are numbered from left to right. Nkl ; N
k
w; N
k
t ;
Nkc ; and N
k
e refer, respectively, to the label, word, tag, conjunction, and extension
feature values at node k: N cj refers to the jth child of the current node where the
leftmost child is child 1. N c j refers to the jth child of the current node where the
rightmost child is child 1. The symbol Qetc refers to miscellaneous questions about
the current state of the parser, such as the number of nodes in the sentence and the
number of children of a particular node.
6.2 Probabilistic Models for Node Features
The probability distribution for each feature value is estimated using conditional mod-
els in the form of statistical decision trees. The decision tree models are conditioned
on information from a ve node window, including the node processed and its chil-
dren. Since the ordering of feature value assignments is not xed, some feature value
slots in the nodes within this window will be empty, i.e. they may not have been
assigned yet. If a node feature value being queried by the decision tree is unassigned,
the decision tree is licensed to ask about that same feature value from the nearest
child of that node. If the node has no children, a canonical NULL feature value is
returned, indicating that there is no information available.
In this section, each of the conditional decision tree models used in SPATTER
is dened. Using the partially-constructed parse tree in Figure 6.1, examples are
provided of the specic information made available to the parsing models.
6.2.1 The Tagging Model
The tag feature value prediction is conditioned on the two words to the left, the two
words to the right, and all information at two nodes to the left and two nodes to the
6.2. PROBABILISTIC MODELS FOR NODE FEATURES 81
each
DD1
right
character
NN1
up
used
VVN
right
by
II
right
the
AT
right
computer
NN1
left
N
computer
NN1
left
is listed
Each character used by the computer is listed
Figure 6.1: Partially-constructed SPATTER parse tree.
right.
P(ti j context)  P(ti j wiwi 1wi 2wi+1wi+2ti 1ti 2ti+1ti+2N
k 1Nk 2Nk+1Nk+2)
(6:1)
In Figure 6.1, consider the tag feature value assignment decision for the word is.
In this case, the decision tree model can ask questions about the word being tagged,
wi = is; the two words to the left, wi 2 = the and wi 1 = computer; and the two
words to the right, wi+1 = listed and wi+2 = NULL: It also can ask about the tags
which have been previously assigned in this ve word window, namely ti 2 = AT and
ti 1 = NN1: It can ask about any feature value information contained in the two
parse nodes to the left, in this case the leaf node containing the word used (Nk 2)
and the node containing the phrase by the computer (Nk 1) for which none of the
feature values have yet been assigned. Since none of the feature values are known for
node Nk 1; the decision tree can instead ask questions about its rightmost child, the
N node corresponding to the noun phrase the computer. It can also ask about the
information in the two parse nodes to the right (Nk+1 and Nk+2), but in this case,
82 CHAPTER 6. PROBABILISTIC MODELS IN SPATTER
there is only one parse node to the right of the current node, the leaf node containing
the word listed. Finally, the decision tree can ask miscellaneous questions about
any of the nodes in this ve node window, including about the number of children
each of these nodes has, and about the presence or absence of certain key words or
punctuation marks.
6.2.2 The Label Model
The label feature value prediction is conditioned on all information from two nodes to
the left and two nodes to the right, on all information from the two leftmost and two
rightmost children of the current node, and on miscellaneous questions about any of
these nodes or about words in the sentence.
P(Nkl j context)  P(N
k
l j N
k 1Nk 2Nk+1Nk+2N c1N c2N c 1N c 2Qetc) (6:2)
In Figure 6.1, consider the label feature value assignment decision for the node
containing the phrase by the computer. In this case, the decision tree model can
ask questions about any feature value information contained in the two parse nodes
to the left and to the right, in this case the leaf nodes containing the words character
(Nk 2), used (Nk 1), is (Nk+1), and listed (Nk+2). It can also ask about the two
children of this node, the node containing the word by (N c1 and N c 2) and the node
containing the noun phrase the computer (N c 1 and N c2). Finally, the decision
tree can ask miscellaneous questions about any of these nodes, including about the
number of children each of these nodes has, and about the presence or absence of
certain key words or punctuation marks.
6.2.3 The Extension Model
The extension feature value prediction is conditioned on the node information at the
node being extended, all information from two nodes to the left and two nodes to the
right, and the two leftmost and two rightmost children of the current node (these will
be redundant if there are less than 4 children at a node).
6.2. PROBABILISTIC MODELS FOR NODE FEATURES 83
P(Nke j context)  P(N
k
e j N
k
wN
k
t N
k
l N
k
cN
k 1Nk 2Nk+1Nk+2N c1N c2N c 1N c 2)
(6:3)
6.2.4 The Conjunction Model
The conjunction feature value prediction is conditioned on the node information at
the node being extended, all information from two nodes to the left and two nodes to
the right, and the two leftmost and two rightmost children of the current node (these
will be redundant if there are less than 4 children at a node). However, questions
about the conjunction bit of adjacent nodes are omitted from the set of candidate
questions.
P(Nkc j context)  P(N
k
c j N
k
wN
k
t N
k
l N
 1N 2N1N2N c1N c2N c 1N c 2) (6:4)
6.2.5 The Derivation Model
In initial experiments, the active node selection process was modeled by a uniform
(P(active) = 1=n) model. However, dierent derivations are considered in the parser,
at great computational expense, in order to allow better derivations to supersede the
leftmost bottom-up derivation when appropriate. When a uniform distribution on
the active node selection is assumed, all derivations, better or worse, contribute to
the probability of a parse. In experiments this characteristic was preventing good
derivations, in which the information available suggested the correct parse, from dis-
tinguishing themselves from less good derivations, in which the information available
was either inconclusive or misleading. The solution to this problem is to model the
active node selection, conditioning the prediction on the current node information
and the node information available within the ve node window.
P(active j context)  P(active j QetcN
kNk 1Nk 2Nk+1Nk+2) (6:5)
84 CHAPTER 6. PROBABILISTIC MODELS IN SPATTER
6.2.6 The Parsing Model
The overall model used in SPATTER is dened in terms of the previous approxima-
tions.
First, the probability of a parse tree given the sentence is the sum over all deriva-
tions of that parse tree:
P(T j S) =
X
d
P(T; d j S) (6:6)
The probability of a derivation of a parse tree is the product of the each of the
feature value assignments in that derivation and the probability of each active node
selection made in that derivation:
P(T; d j S) =
Y
N2T;j<jdj
P(active= N j context(dj))P(Nx j context(dj)) (6:7)
where x ranges over all feature values predicted at a node.
6.3 Expectation Maximization Training
The most obvious way to estimate a probability distribution from a corpus of exam-
ples is to count the occurrences of the phenomena of interest and to estimate the
probability of an event to be the frequency of the event divided by the total number
of events. However, this is not a very good way to train a model which considers as
much contextual information as the models in SPATTER.
One reason why this is true is that there is a strong tendency to overtrain models
when using empirical estimates directly. The SPATTER parsing models consider so
much contextual information that almost every new sequence of words would intro-
duce new parameters into the model, and the models would be doing no more than
memorizing the parse for each sentence. A model trained in this way would perform
very poorly on new sentences. The overtraining problem is treated by smoothing the
decision trees with a separate held-out training set using an expectation-maximization
(E-M) algorithm.
6.3. EXPECTATION MAXIMIZATION TRAINING 85
However, smoothing issues aside, the SPATTER parsing model certainly cannot be
estimated by direct frequency counts because the model contains a hidden component:
the derivation model. The order in which the treebank parse trees were constructed is
not encoded in the treebank, but the SPATTER parser assigns probabilities to specic
derivations of a parse tree. The training process must discover which derivations
assign higher probability to the treebank parses, and favor those derivations over
others. The decision tree which assigns a distribution to the possible active nodes
directly assigns weights to dierent derivations. The reestimation procedure which
tries to maximize the probability of the parse trees of a corpus is called the forward-
backward algorithm.
6.3.1 Forward-Backward Reestimation
The forward-backward (F-B) algorithm, which is a special case of the expectation-
maximization algorithm, reestimates the parameters of a model Pi to generate a
new model Pi+1 which is guaranteed to assign a higher probability to the training
corpus than the original model, Pi+1(C)  Pi(C); when certain assumptions about
the model hold. For proofs concerning this and other properties of the forward-
backward algorithm, see Poritz[50].
The intuition behind the F-B algorithm is that when there are multiple paths
from an initial state to a goal state, the dierent paths should contribute to the
model according to their relative probabilities. For example, let's say there are two
dierent derivations, d1 and d2; of a parse tree of a sentence, T; where P (T ) =
P (d2; T )+P (d1; T ): If the goal is to maximize the probability of the parse tree P (T );
then it would make sense to try to increase the probabilities assigned to the actions in
d1 and d2: However, the reestimation procedure is complicated by the constraint that
the probabilities of all actions at a given state must sum to 1. It may be impossible
to increase the probabilities of all of the actions in both derivations. Consider the
rst step in each derivation. If the probability of the rst step of d1 is set to 1, then
the probability of the rst step of d2 must be zero, since both derivations begin with
the same initial state. The F-B algorithm manages the constraints of probabilistic
models while improving the probability of the corpus from one iteration to the next.
86 CHAPTER 6. PROBABILISTIC MODELS IN SPATTER
6.3.2 Forward-Backward in SPATTER
To train the SPATTER parser, all legal derivations of a parse tree (according to the
derivational window constraint) are computed. Each derivation can be viewed as a
path from a common initial state, the words in the sentence, to a common nal state,
the completed parse tree. These derivations form a lattice of states, since dierent
derivations of the same parse tree inevitably merge. For instance, the state created by
tagging the rst word in the sentence and then the second is the same state created by
tagging the second word and then the rst. These two derivations of this state have
dierent probability estimates, but the state can be viewed as one state for future
actions, since it represents a single history.
Adjacent states in this lattice dier by only a single feature value assignment. For
a state s; let sh represent a state which precedes s in the state lattice, and let f(sh; s)
be the feature value assignment which was made to get from state sh to state s: The
probability of a state s is computed by
P (s) =
X
sh
P (sh)P (f(sh; s)jsh): (6:8)
The construction of the state lattice and assignment of transition probabilities
according to the current model is called the forward pass. The probability of a given
state, P (s); is referred to as (s): The backward probability of a state, referred to as
(s); is calculated according to the following recursive formula:
(sh) =
X
s
(s)P (f(sh; s)jsh) (6:9)
where the backward probability of the goal state is set equal to the forward proba-
bility of the goal state, (sgoal) = (sgoal): The count associated with a feature value
assignment, f(sh; s); is
count(f(sh; s)) =
(s)(sh)P (f(sh; s)jsh)
(sgoal)
: (6:10)
This value, count(f(sh; s)); is the contribution of the event f(sh; s) to the distribution
which predicts the feature value f given the history h: The reestimate of the prob-
ability of a feature value assignment given a history is the ratio of the total count
6.3. EXPECTATION MAXIMIZATION TRAINING 87
for that feature value assignment and the total count of all feature value assignments
given that history:
Pnew(f jh) 
count(f(sh; s))P
s0 count(f(sh; s0))
: (6:11)
6.3.3 Decision Trees and the Forward-Backward Algorithm
Each leaf of decision tree represents the distribution of a class of histories. The
parameters of these distributions can be updated using the F-B algorithm as described
in chapter 6.3.2.
In addition to increasing the probability of a corpus, the algorithm assigns weights
to the events in a corpus, where the weights represent the relative contribution of the
event to the probability of the corpus. This attribute of the F-B algorithm is useful
for growing the decision tree models used in SPATTER.
Initially, the models in SPATTER are assumed to be uniform. Accordingly, each
event in each derivation contributes equally to the process which selects questions to
ask about the history in order to predict each feature value. However, the uniform
model is certainly not a very good model of feature value assignments. Additionally,
since some derivations of a parse tree are better than others, the events generated by
the better derivations should contribute more to the decision tree-growing process.
The decision trees grown using the uniform assumption collectively form a parsing
model,M1: The F-B count for each event in the training corpus usingM1 can be used
to grow a new set of decision trees,M2: The decision trees inM2 are constructed in a
way which gives more weight to the events which contributed most to the probability
of the corpus. However, there is no guarantee that M2 is a better model than M1: It
isn't even guaranteed that the probability of the training corpus according to M2 is
higher than the probability according toM1: However, based on experimental results,
the use of F-B counts in the construction of new decision trees is eective in acquiring
a better model of the data.
88 CHAPTER 6. PROBABILISTIC MODELS IN SPATTER
6.3.4 Training Algorithm
There is no way of knowing a priori which combination of the previously mentioned
applications of the forward-backward algorithm will produce the best model. It might
be best to grow an initial set of decision trees, perform F-B training on these trees
for a few iterations, and then grow new trees. It might be best to grow more than
two sets of trees, generating model M3 from the F-B counts of M2; and M4 from the
F-B counts of M3:
Growing the decision tree models takes almost 2 days on one machine, and so the
number of variations which can be attempted is limited. After initial experimentation,
the following sequence of training steps proved eective:
1. Grow initial decision trees (M1) based on uniform models.
2. Create M2 by pruning trees in M1 to a maximum depth of 10.
3. Grow decision trees (M3) from F-B counts from M2:
4. Perform F-B reestimation for leaves of decision trees in M3:
There is no obvious justication for the decision to prune the trees in step two to
a depth of 10, as opposed to a depth of 5 or a depth of 20. If computational resources
permit it, the F-B reestimation may also be applied to M1; with the resulting model
compared to the fully trained M3 model. Also, steps two and three may be applied
to M3 to generate a new model M5; which may then be trained using F-B.
Chapter 7
Evaluation Methodology
Natural language parsing is a means to an end. As such, the output of a natural
language parser is dicult to evaluate outside of the context of a natural language
processing system. Natural langauge researchers nd themselves in a Catch-22: to
solve the NL problem, they need a good parser, but in order to identify a good parser,
they need an NL system.
7.1 Parsing Performance Measures
One of the diculties of evaluating parsers is that dierent approaches to the pars-
ing problem have dierent strengths and weaknesses which can not be represented
completely in a single scalar value. Some parsers identify more information than is
encoded in a treebank, such as word senses, the semantic roles of constituents, or the
referents of pronouns. While this information may be useful if not crucial to an NL
parsing system, it is dicult to evaluate the accuracy of these features, much less the
impact of these capabilities on the parsing task.
The treebank recognition problem was dened in Chapter 5 to limit the scope of
the parsing problem in order to more easily evaluate alternative solutions. However,
proponents of other parsing methods argue that their approaches don't lend them-
selves to the strict evaluation criterion of the TRP, exact match. I argue this point
later in this section.
89
90 CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
Here I consider the relative merits of a number of evaluation criteria. First, I
comment on the use of test entropy as a measure of performance in a statistical
parser. Then I discuss the various applications of the crossing-brackets measure,
along with the constituent-based measures of precision and recall. Finally, I consider
the strictest measure of accuracy, the exact-match criterion.
7.1.1 Entropy as a Predictor of Performance
Entropy provides the second best measure of the expected relative performance of
dierent models, second only to applying the model to a real recognition task. In
speech recognition, it would be ideal to evaluate every experimental language model
by plugging it into a speech recognizer and judging the improvements made in the
recognition accuracy. However, this is infeasible. Instead, language models distinguish
themselves by assigning a higher probability to a given test corpus than existing
models. Only if a model achieves a signicant reduction in entropy over the state-of-
the-art will it be tried out in a recognizer.
Statistical training algorithms use entropy as their objective function, trying to im-
prove a model in a way which increases the expected likelihood of a training corpus.
Expectation-Maximization algorithms are frequently used in training precisely be-
cause they guarantee improvements in training entropy. The hypothesis upon which
these procedures depend is that improvements in training entropy will lead to im-
provements in test entropy.
While this hypothesis is frequently true, it is not guaranteed. Overtraining can
lead to the construction of a model which essentially memorizes the training data,
resulting in a training entropy close to 0. However, an overtrained model will yield
high entropy on a test corpus, especially if the training corpus is small compared to
the size of the domain.
Test entropy is not a perfect measure of performance. It is possible to decrease
the entropy of a data set without increasing the recognition accuracy rate of the
model on that data. Consider two models which assign probability to a sequence
of independent binary random variables. For each event, both models select the
choice which has a probability greater than 0.5. The rst model is a perfect model
7.1. PARSING PERFORMANCE MEASURES 91
which assigns probability 0.51 to the correct choice every time. The second model
\improves" this model by assigning probability 1 to the correct choice for half of the
events and probability 0.49 to the correct choice for the other half. The second model
has a lower test entropy than the rst, since it has 0 entropy for half of the events and
only a negligibly smaller entropy for the other half. However, the rst model has a
100% recognition rate, whereas the second model's recognition rate is only 50%. This
is an extreme example, but training algorithms will frequently sharpen the probability
of high probability events, increasing the probability of an event from 0.9 to 0.999,
resulting in a decrease in entropy which is unlikely to change recognition performance
at all.
Test entropy has other weaknesses as well. Since a test corpus generally contains
only a small sample of events from the domain, a small decrease in test entropy may
not be signicant. Also, test data is frequently generated in a way makes it articially
similar to the training data. Thus, an overtrained model will report lower entropy
on the test corpus than it would achieve in a true test of the model on a recognition
task.
Despite these problems, test entropy is useful for gauging incremental progress
on a statistical modeling problem. Signicant test entropy reduction from a new
model typically leads to recognition improvements. But it is important to verify
these improvements by decoding with the new model.
7.1.2 The Misguided Crossing-Brackets Measure
The crossing-brackets measure was introduced during the PARSEVAL workshop on
parser evaluation at the University of Pennsylvania in 1990 (Black et.al.[6]). This
measure was never intended to be used in isolation; it was one of three measures which
together evaluate the performance of a parser. The workshop participants reached
a consensus that the constituent-based measures of crossing-brackets rate, precision,
and recall, suciently represented the performance of their parsers in comparison to
a skeletal treebank.
A single crossing-bracket error is a constituent in a parse tree which contains parts
92 CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
of two dierent constituents from a treebank analysis without completely contain-
ing either. For instance, consider the following treebank analysis and corresponding
parser analysis:
Treebank: [ [ A B ] [ C D ] [ E F ] G ]
Parse Tree: [ [ A B C ] D [ E F G ]
The parse constituent \[ A B C ]" is an instance of crossing-brackets violation, since
B and C are not in the same constituent in the treebank analysis, and neither of
the treebank constituents containing B or C are completely contained in the parse
constituent. On the other hand, \[ E F G ]" is not a crossing-brackets violation, even
though it is not represented in the treebank analysis.
The three constituent-based measures are calculated by the following formulas:
Crossing-Brackets | total number of crossing-brackets violations in the sentence,
Precision | # of parse constituents which exactly match treebank constituents
total # of parse constituents
;
Recall |
# of treebank constituents which exactly match parse constituents
total # of treebank constituents :
Without precision and recall, the constituent-based crossing-brackets measure is
a very weak measure of parsing accuracy. First, a trivial analysis with no con-
stituent structure yields a perfect score on this measure. And assigning extra struc-
ture which does not violate constituent boundaries results in an articially higher
crossing-brackets score. But even if a parser assigns the same number of constituents
as the treebank, or more, the crossing-brackets measure does not identify classes
of errors including incorrect prepositional-phrase attachment, inappropriate internal
noun-phrase structure, and omitting important constituents such as the main verb
phrase.
Another criticism of the workshop evaluation measures is that they have com-
pletely side-stepped the issue of constituent labeling and part-of-speech tagging. It
undoubtedly would have been dicult to reach a consensus about a constituent label
set or part-of-speech tag set at the workshop, considering the dierence between the
level of detail supplied by some grammars compared to a skeletal treebank. However,
7.1. PARSING PERFORMANCE MEASURES 93
by ignoring tagging and labeling errors, inaccurate parses which misidentify the main
verb and its arguments might still get low crossing-bracket error scores. And a natu-
ral language processing system will not be able to use a parser eectively unless it is
identifying the categories of constituents along with the constituent structure.
The PARSEVAL measures provide very crude evaluations of parsing performance.
It was the estimation of the PARSEVAL workshop participants that the state-of-the-
art in parsing was at such a low level that these crude measures were sucient to
dierentiate good parsers from bad. While that was probably true 3 years ago,
the level of parsing performance, particularly for those using statistical modeling
techniques, has improved to the point that these measures are no longer informative
in isolation. They may provide an upper bound on performance, since a parse cannot
be correct if it has crossing-brackets errors, but a high score on these measures does
not necessarily indicate a solution to the parsing problem.
7.1.3 The Exact Match Criterion
The exact match criterion is a much stricter evaluation of a parser's performance than
the PARSEVAL statistics. This measure considers a parse tree correct if and only
if every constituent, label, and tag in the parse tree matches those in the treebank
analysis. This, of course, requires that the parser generate parses using the same
constituent label and part-of-speech tag sets that were used to annotate the corpus.
In some ways, the exact match criterion appears too stringent. The measure
doesn't take into account the fact that treebanks are internally inconsistent. The
internal consistency of the Lancaster treebank, used as training data for the experi-
ments reported in this chapter, has been measured at a little higher than 50%. This
means that if the same sentence is analyzed twice by treebankers, there is only a 50%
chance that both analyses will be identical. The internal consistency of the UPenn
treebank has been measured at 23%.
These consistency measures certainly appear to be damning for the exact match
criterion, but they really are not. It is most important that the test data be internally
consistent; training algorithms should be robust enough to tolerate some inconsistency
in the training data. Since test sets are considerably smaller than training sets, it
94 CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
is feasible to have multiple treebankers annotate the test sentences, and select the
consensus analysis as the correct one. Using this method, the Lancaster treebankers
achieved over 90% consistency on test data. Certainly, it would improve matters
to have a higher level of quality control in the treebanking process. But perfect
treebanking should not be expected, nor could it be achieved. Humans can not be
expected to be completely consistent when there are perhaps dozens of treebankers
analyzing hundreds of thousands of sentences over the course of a weeks, months, or
years. However, as long as test data has a consistency rate much higher than the
accuracy rate of state-of-the-art parsers, then exact match measures can be useful for
evaluating parsing performance.
Aside from the internal consistency of a treebank, there is still a strong argument
against the exact match criterion. Adding or omitting constituent structure in a way
which does not signicantly alter the meaning of the analysis should not be considered
as much of an error as completely misanalyzing a sentence. However, the exact match
criterion does not dierentiate between these two types of errors.
There are many dierent levels at which the structure of a sentence can be ana-
lyzed. The Lancaster treebank attempts to indicate some internal noun-phrase struc-
ture inconsistently, and it leaves other detailed structure out completely. The UPenn
treebank omits all internal noun-phrase structure, including the internal structure of
multiple conjoined noun phrases. However, statistical learning algorithms, including
the decision tree methods discussed here, can overcome the inconsistencies in the tree-
bank and accurately predict internal noun-phrase structure as well as other details
which are not annotated in the treebank. They also can make blatant mistakes by
adding extra structure which completely change the meaning of the analysis.
7.1.4 An Argument for the Exact Match Criterion
Most of the drawbacks of the exact match criterion are actually aws in the treebank-
ing process, not in the evaluation measure itself. No treebank will ever be perfect;
there is an upper bound on the consistency and accuracy with which humans can an-
notate data. However, as discussed above, the consistency of test data can be brought
up to acceptable levels.
7.2. RULES OF EXPERIMENTATION 95
The exact match criterion measures something concrete: the parser's ability to
make generalizations about the syntactic structures in the training data and apply
this knowledge to new data consistently. If a parser can do this, by whatever means,
it can achieve a high score on this measure. This may require renaming constituent
labels and part-of-speech tags in a grammar to match those of the treebank. But,
after all, these are only symbols to the parser. They could be renamed A1 through
A100 and still represent the same information.
The alternative to using exact match is to continue to accept human judgment of
parsing performance as a scientic measure. A grammarian or one of his colleagues
scanning a few hundred parses and reporting the percentage which the evaluator feels
are correct is not a very reliable measure. The human evaluator is performing a task
even more dicult than the treebanker's task, and we have already seen measures of
the reliability of individual annotators. But, even if the evaluator is internally con-
sistent in his judgments, dierent evaluators are used in every experiment, and these
evaluators' standards and judgments are not available for review. These standards
and judgments are available for the exact match criterion, in a treebanker's style
manual, and to a certain extent in the treebank itself.
Restating the parsing problem as treebank recognition does not really change the
problem; it merely levels the playing eld. The only dierence between the traditional
parsing problem and treebank recognition is that the minimal label and tag sets are
predetermined. A grammar can assign more precise labels and indicate semantic, but
it will only be evaluated on what is contained in the treebank. Only when parsers
are speaking the same language, generating parse trees using the same labels at some
level, will we be able to compare the performance of dierent parsing systems.
7.2 Rules of Experimentation
Not only do statistics represent a possible solution to natural language processing
problems, but they also oer insight into experimentation procedures. There are a
number of rules which must be observed in order for experiments to have statistical
validity.
96 CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
7.2.1 Test Data
Violations of test data etiquette are prevalent in the natural language community.
The single most important rule of test data is that under no circumstance whatsoever
should one ever, ever, ever look at one's test data. This precludes not only physically
eyeing the data, but also extracting vocabularies from it, collecting distributional
information from its annotations, modifying grammar rules based on it, or gaining any
information at all from the test data that would not be available in a real test of the
system. Any violations of these rules put into question any results from experiments
on the test data.
Another violation of test data etiquette is more subtle: separating training and
test data from a corpus by random sampling. It goes without saying that one should
not test on data which was used in training. Recently, a number of parsing papers,
including two of my own [42] [43], have reported results using test sets were ran-
domly sampled from a corpus, using the remainder of the corpus as training material.
While this technique seems benign, it actually ensures that the test data will be as
statistically similar to the training data as possible. This improves the perceived test
performance of any training algorithm which is susceptible to overtraining, as most
statistical methods are.
Unless a program can automatically adapt its models in real time based on recent
test data to improve its performance on new test data, it is also inappropriate to use
test data which is known to be contiguous with the training data. For example, the
experiments described in this chapter are based on a large training set and a non-
contiguous test set. When the same experiments were repeated by training on the
rst 90% of the training data and testing on the nal 10%, the accuracy results were
signicantly higher. While, according to the standard denition this new experiment
is a fair test, it is clear that the results are biased by the proximity of the test data
to the training data. And since the training algorithms used in this work are not
incremental, the better results are not reective of the actual performance of the
parser.
Finally, it is important not to test too many times on the same test data. It is pos-
sible to t solutions to a particular test set, even if the only result from an experiment
7.2. RULES OF EXPERIMENTATION 97
is a single accuracy rate. This is a danger particularly when dierent experiments
involve changes to a rule base. If a grammarian keeps changing a grammar's rule base
until the grammar performs better on a particular test set, it is not necessarily true
that the rules changed in the \improved" grammar are any more of an improvement
than the rule changes made in previous experiments. It only means that the changed
rules which led to the increased accuracy rate are rules which are used in a correct
parse in that particular test set.
7.2.2 Training Data
Training data is the critical source of information which will drive any acquisition
process, be it automatic or manual. It is important that this data set be an unbiased
random sample of the typical events in the domain being modeled.
Data Collection
An example of biased data collection comes from the ARPA ATIS project [31]. This
project involves building a spoken language interface to an airline reservation system.
Data was collected at a number of ARPA research sites using a standard Wizard of
Oz setup, where speakers interact with a what they believe is a computer program
but which is actually a human being responding electronically. At one of the sites, the
participants were given an instruction sheet with information about the tasks they
were to perform, along with example queries. When the data was accumulated from
all of the sites, it became clear that the aforementioned site had collected biased data.
Unlike the data collected at other sites, which contained a great deal of variability
between speakers, this site's data was largely uniform. Nearly all of the speakers had
asked about the few things mentioned in the example queries, and had even asked
about them using the same sentence structure.
Another area in which data collection methodology is critical is in treebanking.
Treebanking and corpus annotation is a subtle task which can yield strikingly dif-
ferent results depending on the method used. The Lancaster and UPenn treebanks
are supposed to contain generally the same information, skeletal syntactic analyses.
98 CHAPTER 7. EVALUATION METHODOLOGY
However, they were constructed using dierent philosophies, and the annotators for
the treebanks did their work using very dierent software environments.
The Lancaster researchers stressed consistency over eciency. The Lancaster
treebankers started with completely unannotated sentences and lled in all of the
structure using a simple editor. Working with the IBM parsing researchers, they
iteratively improved the consistency of the data, reannotating data sets over and over
until the data was of sucient quality to train and evaluate a statistical parser.
The UPenn researchers put a premium on getting data to the research community
as soon as possible. They used automatic parsing and tagging programs as prepro-
cessors and had annotators correct the automatically annotated data. There was
also a high turnover rate in the early years of the treebanking project. These factors
resulted in a treebank which had low internal consistency. The early versions of the
treebank released to the research community included segments of data done by very
poor annotators, data which has since been reannotated because of its low quality.
The data also contained unmatched brackets; and since sentence boundaries were
not clearly indicated, there was no systematic way to determine where the missing
brackets should be. There were also sentences which included markers and symbols
output by the automatic parsing preprocessor. Based on the number and types of
errors, these sentences clearly had not been corrected by treebankers.
Using Data Representative of the Problem
Recently, there have been a number of papers, such as Schabes and Pereira[48], Brill
[16], and Bod[12], citing work based on parsing using sentences tagged for part of
speech. While it is true that part-of-speech taggers have very low error rates, some
below 3%, parsing from manually assigned tags is not the same as parsing from
automatically assigned tags. Automatic taggers make systematic errors that might
seriously aect the performance of a parser trained on only correct tag assignments.
Since a parser will be tested on data which is completely automatically processed
(a human tagger will not be a component of an NL system), the parser should be
trained on automatically tagged data. State-of-the-art automatic tagging programs
are available throughout the research community, so accessibility to automatically
7.3. CONCLUSIONS 99
tagged data should not be an issue. Certainly, training and testing on correct tag
sequences will lead to higher accuracy results. But such experiments are articial and
do not reect the performance of the parser on a real test.
Hand-modifying Training Data
In order to ensure reproduceability of experiments, one should not to hand-modify
training data. This issue was discussed with regards to test data, but it is nearly as
important with regards to training data. Training data should be generated in a way
which is documentable and reproduceable. If humans are generating data, it must be
clear how to generate similar data. Otherwise, the results cannot be reproduced by
other members of community.
Altering training data can also cause confusion. As was mentioned earlier, the
UPenn treebank has a very low internal consistency rate. In his recent paper [12],
Bod reports achieving a 96% exact match accuracy rate parsing UPenn treebank data
from the ATIS domain. Yet, a statistical analysis of this data reveals that, due to
the internal inconsistency of the training data, there was an upper bound of 70%
accuracy on a fair test using that data.1 Bod later revealed that he had in fact hand-
corrected his training (and test) data. Thus, all of the experiments we had planned
to reproduce his results and to compare them directly to other parsers on the same
data were useless.
7.3 Conclusions
The bottom line in experiment methodology is that a system should be trained in an
environment that is comparable to the environment in which a working version of the
system would be trained, and it should be tested in a way which is identical to the
way the system will be used.
1These consistency experiments were performed by Salim Roukos, Adwait Ratnaparkhi, and
Todd Ward at IBM.
Chapter 8
Experiment Results
In the absence of an NL system, I have performed parsing experiments which attempt
to evaluate the output of the parser directly. These experiments explore the parser's
performance and how this performance is aected by variations in the training process
and in the conguration of the parser.
The parser output in these experiments are evaluated by the following criteria:
exact match of structure, labels, and tags ; exact match of structure and labels; exact
match in the top 5 ranked parses; and exact match in the top 20 ranked parses.
Training and test entropies for all of these experiments are listed in Appendix A.
The domain of these experiments, IBM Computer Manuals domain, is described
in section 4.2.1.
8.1 Parser Conguration
The SPATTER parser uses the tag and label vocabularies dictated by the Lancaster
treebank annotations. The word vocabulary is also determined by the Lancaster
training data.1 SPATTER also uses vocabularies which contain the possible answers
to the questions which the decision trees can ask. Each of the items in these vocabu-
laries has a corresponding binary representation. These vocabularies and their binary
1Words are selected from the training data by frequency so that approximately 5% of the words
in the data will be outside of this xed vocabulary. This is to allow the training algorithms to
acquire a model for unknown words.
100
8.2. SIGNIFICANCE OF RESULTS 101
encodings are listed in Appendix B.
The Tree Head Table used in these experiments is included in Appendix C.
The parser also uses a dictionary to constrain the set of part-of-speech tags which
a word can be assigned. This dictionary is automatically generated by listing all of
the tags which a word is assigned in the training data.
8.2 Signicance of Results
The statistical signicance of the dierences between the performances of two models
X and Y can be determined by counting how many sentences X gets right and Y
gets wrong (c12) and how many sentences Y gets right and X gets wrong (c21). If the
hypothesis is that X and Y have the same accuracy rate, then c12 and c21 should be
equal. Further, c12 and c21 should be distributed according to a binomial distribution
with p = 1
2
: Thus, the probability that the two models are equivalent is the same as
the probability of getting c12 heads when tossing a fair coin c12 + c21 times. When
c12 + c21 is large, the binomial distribution can be estimated using the DeMoivre-
Laplace approximation, which is much easier to compute than the binomial.
8.3 Basic Experiment
The idea behind the basic experiment is to construct the best parser possible and to
perform experiments using the same training and test data as the experiment reported
in Black, Garside, and Leech[7], which I refer to as the P-CFG experiment. The basic
experiment consists of constructing SPATTER's decision tree models as described in
Chapter 6 using the treebank data, and training these models nearly to convergence.2
The training procedure for the basic experiment is described in section 6.3.4. The
rst set of decision trees were grown, pruned to a depth of 0, and new trees were
grown based on the pruned trees. This is eectively the same as growing the second
2I don't allow the training algorithms to converge largely because of the computational constraints
of current hardware. However, further training is more likely to result in overtraining than in
performance improvements.
102 CHAPTER 8. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
set of trees based on a unigram model extracted from the training data. Since the
active node decision tree model is self-organized, it is pruned to a depth of 20 before
smoothing, since the nodes nearer to the leaves are likely to be overtrained on the
training sentences. Nine iterations of the forward-backward algorithm were applied
to the second set of trees, and the nal model was smoothed for 20 iterations using
held out data.
Not all of the sentences in the Lancaster treebank training set were used in the
training and smoothing processes. Only sentences between 3 and 30 words in length
were considered. Also, any sentence which contained a constituent with more than
8 children was deemed too supercially annotated to be trained on. When applying
the models, the parser is also constrained not to generate a constituent with more
than 8 children.3
The parser was trained on the rst 28,000 sentences of the Lancaster treebank
training set and smoothed using the next 2,800 sentences. The next 100 sentences
were used to generate experimental test entropies during the smoothing process.
The test set included 1,473 sentences, whose lengths range from 3 to 30 words,
with a mean length of 13.7 words. These sentences are the same test sentences used
in the experiments reported for the P-CFG parser in Black, Garside, and Leech[7].
Since [7] only reports results using the sentence-based crossing-brackets measure, I am
reporting the same measure for the sake of comparison. On sentences of 25 words or
less, SPATTER Model 1.9 has a 78% accuracy rate, as compared to the 69% accuracy
rate of the P-CFG.
8.3.1 Interpreting the Results
Table 8.1 contains the results of the basic experiment. It includes the results obtained
by performing 0 and 9 iterations of the F-B algorithm on both sets of trees.
The columns correspond to the percentage of sentences in the test data for which
the SPATTER output satises the following criteria: exact match of structure, labels,
and tags (EXACT); exact match of structure and labels (EXNOTAG); exact match
3Treebankers are instructed to skip sentences which are incomplete or make no sense to them.
Sentences with constituents made of more than 8 children likely fall into this category.
8.3. BASIC EXPERIMENT 103
Experiment EXACT EXNOTAG EXTOP5 EXTOP20 Perp.
Model 1.0 37.5% 45.6% 50.2% 59.4% 1270
Model 1.9 37.7% 45.2% 49.7% 59.8% 1425
Model 2.0 36.6% 44.2% 50.8% 60.7% 1049
Model 2.9 37.2% 44.7% 50.4% 60.5% 1241
Table 8.1: Battery of results from basic experiment. The designation \Model x.y"
corresponds to the results from decision tree set x trained using y iterations of the
F-B algorithm.
in the top 5 ranked parses (EXTOP5); and exact match in the top 20 ranked parses
(EXTOP20). The last column reports the test perplexity of the grammar, which
represents the average number of parses for each test sentence according to the model.
Model X Model Y #X= T
Y 6= T
# Y= T
X 6= T
p(X = Y )
1.0 1.9 11 16 0.22
1.0 2.0 80 75 0.37
1.0 2.9 78 80 0.47
1.9 2.0 81 71 0.23
1.9 2.9 80 77 0.44
2.0 2.9 23 30 0.21
Table 8.2: Signicance analysis of EXACT results from the basic experiment. Column
3 indicates the number of sentences for which model X achieved an exact match and
model Y did not. Column 4 indicates the number of sentences for which model Y
achieved an exact match and model X did not.
Table 8.2 shows the signicance analysis of the EXACT results. The rst two
columns show the models being compared. Column three contains the number of
sentences for which model X achieved an exact match with the treebank but model
Y did not. Column four contains the number of sentences for which model Y achieved
an exact match bin model X did not. As discussed earlier, these counts should be
distributed according to a binomial distribution with p = 1
2
and N equal to the sum
of columns three and four. Column ve indicates the probability that the two models
have the same accuracy rate according to the experiment. Based on Table 8.2, none of
104 CHAPTER 8. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Model X Model Y #X' T
Y 6' T
# Y' T
X 6' T
p(X ' Y )
1.0 1.9 15 13 0.42
1.0 2.0 97 87 0.25
1.0 2.9 97 93 0.41
1.9 2.0 94 86 0.30
1.9 2.9 99 97 0.47
2.0 2.9 30 36 0.27
Table 8.3: Signicance analysis of EXNOTAG results from the basic experiment.
Column 3 indicates the number of sentences for which model X achieved an exact
match except for tags and model Y did not. Column 4 indicates the number of
sentences for which model Y achieved an exact match except for tags and model X
did not.
the experiments reveals a signicant dierence between the models. Table 8.3 shows
the same signicance analysis for the EXNOTAG results.
Based on both of these tables, any two models have a non-negligible probability
of having the same accuracy rate. Thus, none of the dierences in the performances
of the models are statistically signicant.
However, there is a signicant trend in test perplexity. The Model 2 trees have
a lower test entropy than the Model 1 trees. The perplexity steadily increases as
the trees are trained more. This increase is evidence of overtraining. Note that the
performance appears to degrade as perplexity decreases, the exact opposite of what
one might expect. Of course no conclusions can be drawn, since the performance
dierences are not signicant enough.
8.4 Variations on the Theme
I also performed a number of experiments to explore the dierent parameter settings
and design decisions in the basic conguration of SPATTER. Table 8.4 describes the
conditions of each of the experiments.
Due to computational constraints, the decision trees in experiments B, E, F, G,
H, and I were not trained. Thus it makes sense to compare the results of these
8.4. VARIATIONS ON THE THEME 105
A Parse with no derivational model, using only the bottom-up leftmost derivation.
B Parse with no conjunction feature.
C Use a stopping rule, pruning decision trees to 1 bit-event of signicance.
D Prune decision trees to 5 bit-events of signicance.
E Train using only half of the training data (14,000 sentences).
F Parse assuming the correct tag for each word is known.
G Parse from tags, assuming the correct tag sequence for the sentence is known but
the words are not.
H Use a exible tagging dictionary, allowing the highest probability tag each time a
tag is assigned, regardless of whether the tagging dictionary allows it.
I Use a exible tagging dictionary, allowing the 5 highest probability tags.
Table 8.4: Descriptions of experiments A-H.
experiments to the results of the Model 1.0 experiment. Experiments C and D were
trained for 9 iterations. Since there is no hidden component to experiment A's models,
it makes no sense to train them. Thus experiments A, C, and D should be compared
to the most completely trained models, Model 1.9 and Model 2.9.
8.4.1 Experiment A: No Derivational Model
Experiment EXACT EXNOTAG EXTOP5 EXTOP20 Perp.
A 35.8% 43.0% 52.8% 64.2% 536
Table 8.5: Results of experiment A (no derivation model).
Experiment A illustrates the value of the derivational model. Based on Table 8.6,
there is statistically signicant improvement in performance with the derivational
model. I suspect the improvement would be more signicant with better questions.
106 CHAPTER 8. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Model X Model Y p(X = Y ) p(X ' Y )
A 1.9 0.03 0.06
A 2.9 0.03 0.07
Table 8.6: Signicance analysis of EXACT and EXNOTAG results from experiment
A.
Since the questions asked are supercial, they are not able to take full advantage of
the added information provided by the dierent derivations.
The EXTOP5 and EXTOP20 results point out one drawback of the derivation
model. Because the space of all possible parses is so many orders of magnitude smaller
than the space of all possible derivations of all possible parses, the stack decoding
search algorithm prunes away the correct parse more often with the derivation model
than without it.
8.4.2 Experiment B: No Conjunction Feature
Experiment EXACT EXNOTAG EXTOP5 EXTOP20 Perp.
B 34.2% 41.6% 48.5% 59.2% 1555
Table 8.7: Results of experiment B (no conjunction feature).
Model X Model Y p(X = Y ) p(X ' Y )
B 1.0 0.005 0.001
Table 8.8: Signicance analysis of EXACT and EXNOTAG results from experiment
B.
Experiment B illustrates the improvements achieved by implementing the con-
junction feature. The conjunction feature was a response to the poor performance of
a previous version of SPATTER on sentences with conjunctions.
8.4. VARIATIONS ON THE THEME 107
While the parser's performance on sentences with conjunctions improves with the
conjunction feature, a signicant percentage of sentences with conjoined phrases are
still misanalyzed. Table 8.9 shows the percentage of conjoined phrases which are
correctly identied by SPATTER using the conjunction feature. These results are
from a hand analysis of 250 test sentences.
Conjoined Phrase Noun Verb Sentence Other Total
Correct/Total 22/39 17/24 7/17 2/4 48/84
% Correct 56 71 41 50 57
Table 8.9: Percentage of conjoined phrases correctly identied by SPATTER using
the conjunction feature.
Most of the conjunction successes were in sentences where there was very little
or no local ambiguity. When the conjoined phrases are long and there are nearby
phrases that seem reasonable to conjoin, then SPATTER usually strongly favors the
wrong attachment decision. This behavior is symptomatic of the failure of SPATTER
to capture some classes of long distance dependencies. This is probably due to the
simplicity and local nature of the decision tree questions asked.
8.4.3 Experiments C and D: Pruning the Decision Trees
Experiment EXACT EXNOTAG EXTOP5 EXTOP20 Perp.
C 36.8% 44.5% 50.5% 59.9% 1085
D 37.0% 45.8% 49.3% 60.0% 1023
Table 8.10: Results of experiments C and D (pruning decision trees to 1 and 5 bit-
events of signicance).
Experiments C and D explore the eect of pruning the decision trees on perfor-
mance. In experiment C, the decision trees are pruned to 1 bit-event of signicance,
and in experiment D, to 5 bit-events. The results show slight but not statistically
108 CHAPTER 8. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Model X Model Y p(X = Y ) p(X ' Y )
C 1.9 0.14 0.19
C 2.9 0.21 0.25
D 1.9 0.22 0.35
D 2.9 0.29 0.31
Table 8.11: Signicance analysis of EXACT and EXNOTAG results from experiment
C and D.
signicant degradations in performance with the pruned models. However, the per-
plexities of these models are much higher, indicating that the fully grown trees provide
better models than the pruned trees.
This result is somewhat surprising, since nodes which are pruned in C and D
are based on splits which are not statistically signicant. The smoothing appears be
accomplishing its goal of statistically pruning the children of those low-count nodes
which should not have been split, and giving weight to the children of those which
were correctly split.
8.4.4 Experiment E: Training on Half the Data
Experiment EXACT EXNOTAG EXTOP5 EXTOP20 Perp.
E 32.5% 39.9% 48.4% 60.2% 122
Table 8.12: Results of experiment E (trained with 1/2 training data).
Model X Model Y p(X = Y ) p(X ' Y )
E 1.0 10 8 10 9
Table 8.13: Signicance analysis of EXACT and EXNOTAG results from experiment
E.
Experiment E measures the impact of cutting the training data size in half. The
performance of the parser degrades signicantly, lending credence to the hypothesis
8.4. VARIATIONS ON THE THEME 109
that there is not enough training data to train the SPATTER models with the current
questions. It would be informative to see the results of training on twice as much
data, but there is not yet a large enough treebank to try this experiment.
8.4.5 Experiments F and G: Parsing from Tags
Experiment EXACT EXNOTAG EXTOP5 EXTOP20 Perp.
F 46.2% 46.2% 64.8% 74.2% 81
G 50.8% 50.8% 68.2% 78.3% 54
Table 8.14: Results of experiments F (parsing from words and correct tags) and G
(parsing from correct tags only).
Model X Model Y p(X = Y ) p(X ' Y )
F 1.0 10 14 0.12
G 1.0 10 22 10 5
Table 8.15: Signicance analysis of EXACT and EXNOTAG results from experiments
F and G.
Experiments F and G mimic the experiments performed by Brill [16] and by Bod
[12], respectively. Experiment F parses assuming the words in the sentence and their
correct tags are known. Experiment G parses assuming the correct tags are known,
but the decision trees are not permitted to ask about the words in the sentence.
The very surprising result here is that the parser performs signicantly better
when it is not allowed to ask about the words in the sentence! This seems to go
against intuition.
But this result is not saying that lexical information is unimportant in parsing.
Parsing from correct tags is an articial problem. Determining the correct tag for
each word is a signicant part of the disambiguation problem. Once the part-of-
speech tags are determined, the statistical algorithms train better when the input is
tags, since the space of inputs is much smaller. But the words would certainly be
needed to determine the correct part-of-speech tags.
110 CHAPTER 8. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
Another possible explanation for these results is that the binary representations
for words, which are determined by word bigram mutual information, do not provide
suciently informative questions for the decision tree growing algorithms. Thus, by
giving the decision trees access to the word bits, the models are overtrained.
It is also surprising that the EXNOTAG performance does not improve signi-
cantly when the correct tag is known. This suggests that if the parser does not get a
sentence correct, it would not have gotten the sentence correct even if it had known
the correct tag for each word.
8.4.6 Experiments H and I: Using a Flexible Tag Dictionary
Experiment EXACT EXNOTAG EXTOP5 EXTOP20 Tag Error
1.0 37.5% 45.6% 50.2% 59.4% 3.1%
H 36.5% 45.5% 49.6% 59.1% 3.5%
I 36.5% 45.7% 49.5% 58.3% 3.6%
Table 8.16: Results of experiments H and I (allowing top 1 and top 5 highest proba-
bility tags), including part-of-speech tagging error rate.
Model X Model Y p(X = Y ) p(X ' Y )
H 1.0 0.0005 0.31
I 1.0 0.001 0.5
Table 8.17: Signicance analysis of EXACT and EXNOTAG results from experiments
H and I.
Experiments H and I examines the trade-o created by using the tag dictionary.
If the tag dictionary were complete, it would be appropriate to allow only tags listed
as legal for a word. However, since the tag dictionary is very crude, automatically
generated by the word-tag pairs in the training data, it could prevent the correct
analysis from being generated, regardless of the probability assigned that analysis.
The point of this experiment is to determine if this phenomenon is occurring.
8.5. SUMMARY OF RESULTS 111
Using the exible tag dictionary, there is a signicant dierence in the EXACT
score, but a much less signicant dierence in the EXNOTAG score. Also, the tagging
error rate increases when the exible tag dictionary is used (see Table 8.16). These
results suggest that the exible tag dictionary is allowing the incorrect tag more often
than it is compensating for a gap in the tag dictionary. Based on this result, it is
best to use the tag dictionary. Nonetheless, it would be a simple task to improve
the tag dictionary, either using more tagged data or using an on-line dictionary as a
knowledge source.
8.5 Summary of Results
It is dicult to draw conclusions from these experiments. The dierences in per-
formance among most of the parsing models were not statistically signicant. Small
but measurable improvements were achieved by adding the conjunction feature model
and the derivation model, but variations in the decision tree stopping rule and the
conguration of the tag dictionary did not aect the parsing results. This suggests
that the arbitrary decisions made in conguring the parser are less important than
improvements in the modeling decisions. However, some of the results might have
been dierent if the models had been trained to convergence.
While experiments show that the derivational model improves performance, it
seems that its power is not fully exploited by the questions being asked. But there
are no methods yet for quantifying the overall value of a question in a decision tree,
so it would be dicult to evaluate the dierent types of questions objectively. It also
seems likely that the derivational model cannot be completely self-organized. Since
it is started using a uniform distribution, it has complete freedom to move in any
direction in the space of models which will increase the probability of the corpus.
Self-organized models rarely approach global optima without an informed starting
point, and this is probably true of the hidden derivational model.
Other conclusions one can draw from these experiments are that more training
data and more linguistically motivated questions might improve the results. Of course
112 CHAPTER 8. EXPERIMENT RESULTS
these observations are no more than rules of thumb when using these statistical meth-
ods and decision trees.
In trying to compare SPATTER's performance to the state-of-the-art, it is hard
to identify the best results in parsing. Some of the best parsers are incorporated
into good natural language processing systems, where the boundary between parsing
and understanding is blurred. It is a serious weakness of this work that the parser is
not applied to a natural language processing task. But based on accuracy measures
reported at the PARSEVALmeetings in 1990 and 1992, which included many of these
parsers, this work is a signicant improvement over the 30% - 60% sentence accuracy
results using the already-maligned crossing-brackets measure. However, it remains
to be seen whether the skeletal treebank annotations generated by SPATTER are as
useful as the more elaborate markings of rule-based grammars.
Chapter 9
Open Questions
This work oers far more questions than it answers. For instance, what can be
done to improve the parse tree representations to facilitate the statistical modeling
process? How can one eliminate or automate the acquisition of the knowledge used in
SPATTER? And how does one evaluate the eectiveness of the decision tree modeling
techniques employed here?
The answers to these questions elude me, but in this chapter I at least present the
issues involved and speculate on ways to pursue them.
9.1 Parse Tree Representation
One of the early design decisions made in SPATTER was to represent the parse
tree only at a sub-constituent level. Combinations of decision tree questions can be
used to discover information about constituents. But since the decision tree growing
algorithm is greedy, it fails to nd informative combinations of questions unless each
question individually is very informative.
SPATTER occasionally generates nonsensical constituents in order to make a
context look like a familiar history. Figure 9.1 gives an example of this. SPATTER
correctly identies the innitival phrase in the sentence, but it misidenties the word
\restore" as a verb. In order to accommodate this interpretation, it labels the noun
phrase \key" followed by the innitival phrase as a relative clause! Although the
113
114 CHAPTER 9. OPEN QUESTIONS
Treebank:
[V press [N the [Nn carriage restore Nn] key N]
[Ti to advance [N the paper N]
[P to [N the next form N] P] Ti] V]
Probability = 0.023
Parse:
press
[N the carriage N]
[V restore [Fn [N key N]
[Ti to advance
[N the paper N]
[P to [N the next form N] P] Ti] Fn] V]
Probability = 0.029
Figure 9.1: The treebank analysis and SPATTER parse output for a sentence from
the computer manuals domain.
decisions which construct this phrase have low probability, their combined probability
is not low enough to overcome the low probability of the correct part-of-speech tag
assignment. As indicated in the gure, SPATTER nds both analyses but assigns
the incorrect one a higher probability.
SPATTER might be improved by representing constituents, but how should this
be implemented?
One solution might be to model multiple levels of constituent structure, as Bod
does in [12]. The main problem with this approach is that, given the limited amount
of training data, it is likely that this approach would overtrain on the constituents
in the treebank, and closely mimic a P-CFG. This proposals is dicult to pursue
because there is too little training data to model the space of subtrees accurately.
Another possibility is to try to discover automatically the classes of subtrees which
are not modeled well by the decision trees, and to model them using other statistical
methods. These subtrees could be identied by generalizing those contexts in the
treebank which have high entropy according to the decision tree models.
9.2. KNOWLEDGE ENGINEERING 115
9.2 Knowledge Engineering
One of the principles of this work is that manual knowledge engineering should be
kept at a minimum. The majority of the knowledge for parsing should be encoded in
the treebank. The pattern recognition training algorithms should extract whatever
knowledge is needed from the data.
In general, this principle was adhered to in the implementation of SPATTER;
however, there were a few exceptions. The Tree Head Table is a blatant violation
of this principle. The development of this knowledge base was automated as much
as possible, using the treebank constituents to propose candidates and to verify the
completeness of this table so that every constituent is assigned a head. However,
it would be preferable to acquire this knowledge completely automatically from the
treebank.
It might be possible to acquire the information in this table by implementing it
as another hidden component of the model. In other words, instead of using a table
to select the head word from the children of a constituent, each possible head word
could be selected according to some probability distribution, and all paths could be
pursued.
There are two problems with this approach. Allowing the parser to select a con-
stituent's head word from any of its children signicantly increases the size of the
search space. It also increases the number of parameters in SPATTER's models.
Since there is too little training data to train the model as it stands, increasing the
size of the model without increasing the size of the training set is unlikely to improve
matters.
The hand-coded binary classication trees used as decision tree questions are
more examples of manual knowledge engineering in SPATTER. This information
could probably be acquired using statistical methods similar to the bigram mutual
information clustering used to discover the word classes. However, it is not clear what
measures to use to eectively cluster the objects, such as extensions and constituent
labels, in a parse tree.
116 CHAPTER 9. OPEN QUESTIONS
9.3 Statistical Decision Tree Modeling
There are a number of open questions in the area of statistical decision tree modeling.
The need for improvement in the decision tree algorithms, especially the smoothing,
has already been discussed in detail in section 3.5. A problem which has not yet been
discussed is that of quantifying the value of decision tree questions.
At a given node in the decision tree, a question can be evaluated by the entropy re-
duction achieved by asking that question. But what is the overall value of a question?
SPATTER allows questions about any node in the parse tree, even any combination
of nodes. But only a tiny fraction of the possible questions are actually considered
because of computational constraints of current machines. It would be useful to be
able to rank candidate questions in order to eliminate worthless questions and replace
them with more useful ones.
One measure of the usefulness of a question is the total entropy reduction achieved
by the question, combining the incremental reductions from all of the nodes at which
the question was selected. It would be more useful, however, to nd a measure which
does not depend on a fully grown decision tree.
Chapter 10
Conclusions
In this dissertation, I have presented a rst attempt at statistical decision tree parsing.
By some measures, in terms of both technology and performance, it is an improvement
over the state-of-the-art in parsing.
The state-of-the-art in statistical parsing technology includes P-CFGs trained us-
ing the Inside-Outside algorithm (Schabes and Pereira [48], Kupiec [39], and Black,
Garside, and Leech[7], parsers which generate unlabeled bracketing using correct tag
sequences as input (Brill [16], Schabes and Pereira [48], and grammar induction strate-
gies which attempt to acquire grammars by extracting context-free productions from
treebanks. None of these parsing techniques considers lexical information in its mod-
els, with the exception of probabilistic lexicalized tree-adjoining grammar (Schabes
and Waters[55]), which has yet to be implemented and tested on a large scale. In
contrast, the SPATTER parser incorporates into its models as much lexical infor-
mation as the decision tree algorithms deem useful, and uses a hidden derivational
model to maximize the amount of information available to make the more dicult
disambiguation decisions. The parser considers an immense space of possible parses,
and uses the stack decoding algorithm from speech recognition to search this space.
It must be stressed that this work is only a rst attempt at applying speech recog-
nition technology to the natural language parsing problem. The natural language
processing community must distance itself from the toy problems it has addressed in
the past. Parsing technology has improved to the point that it can and should be
117
118 CHAPTER 10. CONCLUSIONS
evaluated on stricter measures. Evaluating unlabeled structure or structure generated
from tagged data should no longer be considered acceptable. Parsers are capable of
analyzing and labeling syntactic structure at a reasonable accuracy rate. Reporting
results on toy experiments only serves to mislead the community.
The speech recognition community has demonstrated that solutions to dicult
problems can be found by addressing a real problem, and not by creating an articial
task and solving it instead. Only by formalizing the parsing problem and agreeing to
use objective measures of progress will the parsing community make progress on the
parsing problem. The treebank recognition problem and the exact match criterion
represent rst steps in this direction.
Appendix A
Training and Test Entropies
Appendix A contains training and test entropies for all of the models described in
Chapter 8. The training entropies reported here are the experimental entropies after
each iteration of the forward-backward algorithm. The experimental entropies are
estimated based on 2,800 sentences. These sentences were not among those sentences
used in growing the decision tree models. The test entropies are estimated based on
100 sentences which were not used in growing or smoothing the models.
Following the tables of training and test entropies, there are tables reporting the
perplexity estimates for each component model (label, tag, extension, and conjunc-
tion). These perplexity estimates are based on the same 2,800 sentences from which
the entropy results were generated.
119
120 APPENDIX A. TRAINING AND TEST ENTROPIES
Iter. 1.0 1.9 2.0 2.9
1 2692.4 2957.5 2540.3 2901.2
2 362.1 384.4 354.4 375.7
3 233.8 247.1 230.1 242.2
4 195.1 205.5 192.7 202.3
5 177.1 186.1 175.2 183.8
6 166.8 174.9 165.3 173.2
7 160.1 167.6 158.9 166.4
8 155.4 162.4 154.4 161.5
9 151.9 158.5 151.0 158.0
10 149.1 155.5 148.5 155.2
11 147.0 153.1 146.4 153.0
12 145.3 151.2 144.8 151.3
13 143.9 149.6 143.5 149.8
14 142.8 148.3 142.4 148.6
15 141.8 147.2 141.4 147.6
16 141.1 146.3 140.6 146.7
17 140.4 145.5 140.0 145.9
18 139.8 144.8 139.3 145.2
19 139.2 144.2 138.8 144.6
20 138.8 143.7 138.3 144.1
Test 1259.1 1204.7 917.2 1046.9
Table A.1: Training entropies after each iteration of smoothing algorithm for basic
conguration models 1.0, 1.9, 2.0, and 2.9. Smoothing entropies are based on 2,800
sentences. Last row contains test entropies, based on 100 sentences.
121
Iter. A B C D E F G
1 2699.6 1267.3 1723.7 1400.9 32592.7 65.1 50.4
2 648.0 262.3 392.6 392.9 3008.3 36.6 26.5
3 420.5 167.5 255.1 267.8 1590.4 30.2 22.6
4 340.6 136.0 209.0 222.9 1192.3 27.4 21.2
5 300.3 120.6 186.6 200.2 1012.2 25.9 20.6
6 276.1 111.6 173.6 186.5 911.1 25.0 20.2
7 259.9 105.7 165.0 177.4 847.2 24.4 19.9
8 248.5 101.5 159.0 171.0 803.5 24.0 19.8
9 240.0 98.4 154.6 166.1 771.9 23.8 19.6
10 233.5 95.9 151.1 162.4 748.2 23.5 19.5
11 228.4 94.0 148.4 159.4 730.0 23.4 19.4
12 224.3 92.5 146.2 157.0 715.9 23.2 19.4
13 221.0 91.2 144.4 155.0 704.6 23.1 19.3
14 218.3 90.3 142.8 153.3 695.4 23.0 19.2
15 216.1 89.5 141.5 151.9 687.7 22.9 19.2
16 214.2 88.8 140.4 150.6 681.1 22.9 19.2
17 212.6 88.2 139.5 149.5 675.4 22.8 19.1
18 211.3 87.7 138.7 148.6 670.4 22.7 19.1
19 210.1 87.3 138.0 147.8 666.0 22.7 19.1
20 209.1 86.9 137.4 147.1 662.1 22.7 19.1
Test 1430.9 829.0 781.2 891.1 5986.4 87.6 79.1
Table A.2: Training entropies after each iteration of smoothing algorithm for models
A - G. Smoothing entropies are based on 2,800 sentences. Last row contains test
entropies, based on 100 sentences.
122 APPENDIX A. TRAINING AND TEST ENTROPIES
Iter. 1.0 1.9 2.0 2.9
1 1.07741 1.07603 1.07745 1.07654
2 1.05061 1.04988 1.05111 1.05051
3 1.04592 1.04510 1.04642 1.04584
4 1.04420 1.04334 1.04468 1.04412
5 1.04324 1.04238 1.04370 1.04318
6 1.04260 1.04175 1.04304 1.04255
7 1.04215 1.04130 1.04257 1.04210
8 1.04181 1.04097 1.04222 1.04176
9 1.04155 1.04072 1.04195 1.04150
10 1.04134 1.04052 1.04173 1.04129
11 1.04117 1.04035 1.04156 1.04112
12 1.04104 1.04022 1.04141 1.04098
13 1.04092 1.04011 1.04129 1.04086
14 1.04082 1.04001 1.04119 1.04076
15 1.04074 1.03992 1.04110 1.04068
16 1.04066 1.03985 1.04102 1.04060
17 1.04060 1.03979 1.04096 1.04054
18 1.04054 1.03973 1.04090 1.04048
19 1.04049 1.03968 1.04085 1.04043
20 1.04044 1.03964 1.04080 1.04038
Table A.3: Perplexities for label model after each iteration of smoothing basic con-
guration models 1.0, 1.9, 2.0, and 2.9.
123
Iter. 1.0 1.9 2.0 2.9
1 1.23947 1.24896 1.23740 1.24695
2 1.14769 1.15204 1.14651 1.15089
3 1.12747 1.13140 1.12651 1.13048
4 1.11891 1.12265 1.11806 1.12186
5 1.11425 1.11790 1.11347 1.11719
6 1.11130 1.11489 1.11059 1.11425
7 1.10922 1.11277 1.10858 1.11219
8 1.10766 1.11118 1.10708 1.11065
9 1.10644 1.10995 1.10592 1.10945
10 1.10546 1.10897 1.10500 1.10850
11 1.10467 1.10818 1.10425 1.10773
12 1.10403 1.10754 1.10364 1.10710
13 1.10351 1.10703 1.10314 1.10659
14 1.10309 1.10662 1.10273 1.10616
15 1.10275 1.10629 1.10238 1.10581
16 1.10246 1.10603 1.10208 1.10551
17 1.10221 1.10580 1.10182 1.10525
18 1.10199 1.10561 1.10159 1.10502
19 1.10181 1.10545 1.10138 1.10481
20 1.10164 1.10531 1.10120 1.10464
Table A.4: Perplexities for tag model after each iteration of smoothing basic cong-
uration models 1.0, 1.9, 2.0, and 2.9.
124 APPENDIX A. TRAINING AND TEST ENTROPIES
Iter. 1.0 1.9 2.0 2.9
1 1.19404 1.19691 1.18946 1.19575
2 1.15802 1.16035 1.15489 1.15847
3 1.15085 1.15290 1.14803 1.15094
4 1.14807 1.14995 1.14543 1.14805
5 1.14669 1.14842 1.14416 1.14661
6 1.14592 1.14751 1.14345 1.14579
7 1.14544 1.14690 1.14301 1.14529
8 1.14512 1.14648 1.14273 1.14495
9 1.14489 1.14616 1.14254 1.14472
10 1.14472 1.14591 1.14240 1.14454
11 1.14459 1.14572 1.14229 1.14440
12 1.14449 1.14556 1.14220 1.14428
13 1.14441 1.14542 1.14213 1.14418
14 1.14434 1.14530 1.14208 1.14409
15 1.14428 1.14520 1.14203 1.14402
16 1.14423 1.14511 1.14199 1.14395
17 1.14419 1.14503 1.14195 1.14389
18 1.14415 1.14496 1.14192 1.14384
19 1.14411 1.14489 1.14189 1.14379
20 1.14408 1.14484 1.14187 1.14375
Table A.5: Perplexities for extension model after each iteration of smoothing basic
conguration models 1.0, 1.9, 2.0, and 2.9.
125
Iter. 1.0 1.9 2.0 2.9
1 1.03001 1.02985 1.03111 1.03140
2 1.02469 1.02489 1.02617 1.02699
3 1.02316 1.02333 1.02465 1.02548
4 1.02247 1.02264 1.02394 1.02478
5 1.02209 1.02226 1.02356 1.02441
6 1.02185 1.02203 1.02332 1.02419
7 1.02168 1.02187 1.02317 1.02405
8 1.02155 1.02175 1.02306 1.02395
9 1.02145 1.02166 1.02298 1.02388
10 1.02138 1.02157 1.02292 1.02383
11 1.02131 1.02150 1.02288 1.02379
12 1.02126 1.02142 1.02285 1.02376
13 1.02121 1.02135 1.02282 1.02373
14 1.02118 1.02128 1.02280 1.02371
15 1.02114 1.02123 1.02279 1.02369
16 1.02111 1.02118 1.02278 1.02367
17 1.02109 1.02115 1.02277 1.02365
18 1.02107 1.02112 1.02277 1.02364
19 1.02105 1.02109 1.02277 1.02362
20 1.02103 1.02107 1.02276 1.02361
Table A.6: Perplexities for conjunction model after each iteration of smoothing basic
conguration models 1.0, 1.9, 2.0, and 2.9.
126 APPENDIX A. TRAINING AND TEST ENTROPIES
Iter. A B C D E F G
1 1.08095 1.07683 1.07939 1.07889 1.11101 1.07883 1.06071
2 1.05842 1.05658 1.06033 1.06027 1.07719 1.05938 1.04427
3 1.05344 1.05158 1.05548 1.05557 1.06843 1.05427 1.04069
4 1.05139 1.04948 1.05334 1.05350 1.06495 1.05194 1.03926
5 1.05016 1.04837 1.05208 1.05228 1.06316 1.05060 1.03848
6 1.04931 1.04767 1.05125 1.05147 1.06208 1.04973 1.03798
7 1.04866 1.04719 1.05067 1.05088 1.06137 1.04913 1.03763
8 1.04817 1.04684 1.05025 1.05045 1.06086 1.04869 1.03736
9 1.04778 1.04659 1.04993 1.05013 1.06048 1.04836 1.03716
10 1.04747 1.04639 1.04969 1.04988 1.06018 1.04811 1.03701
11 1.04721 1.04623 1.04949 1.04967 1.05995 1.04791 1.03688
12 1.04700 1.04610 1.04933 1.04951 1.05975 1.04774 1.03677
13 1.04682 1.04599 1.04920 1.04937 1.05959 1.04760 1.03668
14 1.04667 1.04589 1.04909 1.04925 1.05944 1.04748 1.03660
15 1.04654 1.04581 1.04899 1.04915 1.05932 1.04738 1.03654
16 1.04642 1.04574 1.04890 1.04906 1.05921 1.04729 1.03648
17 1.04632 1.04568 1.04882 1.04899 1.05910 1.04721 1.03642
18 1.04623 1.04562 1.04876 1.04892 1.05901 1.04715 1.03638
19 1.04615 1.04557 1.04870 1.04885 1.05893 1.04708 1.03634
20 1.04608 1.04552 1.04864 1.04880 1.05885 1.04703 1.03630
Table A.7: Perplexities for label model after each iteration of smoothing models from
experiments A - G.
127
Iter. A B C D E F G
1 1.25801 1.24207 1.24796 1.24717 1.38945 1 1
2 1.18214 1.16090 1.16551 1.16730 1.26025 1 1
3 1.16208 1.14017 1.14443 1.14642 1.22876 1 1
4 1.15296 1.13089 1.13505 1.13703 1.21452 1 1
5 1.14772 1.12564 1.12976 1.13169 1.20629 1 1
6 1.14430 1.12222 1.12632 1.12822 1.20094 1 1
7 1.14186 1.11979 1.12389 1.12576 1.19722 1 1
8 1.14003 1.11796 1.12206 1.12391 1.19447 1 1
9 1.13861 1.11651 1.12063 1.12247 1.19235 1 1
10 1.13748 1.11534 1.11949 1.12133 1.19068 1 1
11 1.13657 1.11438 1.11856 1.12040 1.18937 1 1
12 1.13584 1.11360 1.11779 1.11963 1.18835 1 1
13 1.13523 1.11297 1.11713 1.11898 1.18753 1 1
14 1.13474 1.11245 1.11657 1.11842 1.18686 1 1
15 1.13433 1.11203 1.11610 1.11794 1.18630 1 1
16 1.13398 1.11167 1.11570 1.11753 1.18582 1 1
17 1.13369 1.11137 1.11537 1.11718 1.18540 1 1
18 1.13343 1.11112 1.11509 1.11688 1.18503 1 1
19 1.13321 1.11090 1.11485 1.11662 1.18471 1 1
20 1.13301 1.11070 1.11464 1.11639 1.18442 1 1
Table A.8: Perplexities for tag model after each iteration of smoothing models from
experiments A - G.
128 APPENDIX A. TRAINING AND TEST ENTROPIES
Iter. A B C D E F G
1 1.20265 1.18199 1.19157 1.18310 1.26553 1.17672 1.15695
2 1.18077 1.15187 1.16780 1.16854 1.21722 1.15388 1.13153
3 1.17225 1.14230 1.15961 1.16253 1.20420 1.14582 1.12520
4 1.16766 1.13767 1.15568 1.15931 1.19838 1.14177 1.12277
5 1.16482 1.13503 1.15349 1.15736 1.19515 1.13934 1.12160
6 1.16292 1.13337 1.15213 1.15607 1.19312 1.13779 1.12093
7 1.16157 1.13225 1.15123 1.15517 1.19173 1.13678 1.12051
8 1.16057 1.13143 1.15059 1.15452 1.19074 1.13607 1.12021
9 1.15981 1.13079 1.15012 1.15403 1.19002 1.13555 1.11998
10 1.15922 1.13029 1.14976 1.15364 1.18947 1.13516 1.11980
11 1.15874 1.12988 1.14947 1.15333 1.18904 1.13486 1.11965
12 1.15836 1.12956 1.14923 1.15307 1.18869 1.13461 1.11953
13 1.15805 1.12931 1.14903 1.15286 1.18841 1.13441 1.11942
14 1.15780 1.12911 1.14887 1.15267 1.18817 1.13424 1.11934
15 1.15758 1.12895 1.14872 1.15252 1.18796 1.13409 1.11926
16 1.15741 1.12882 1.14859 1.15238 1.18779 1.13397 1.11920
17 1.15726 1.12871 1.14848 1.15225 1.18764 1.13386 1.11914
18 1.15713 1.12862 1.14838 1.15215 1.18751 1.13377 1.11909
19 1.15702 1.12853 1.14829 1.15205 1.18739 1.13369 1.11905
20 1.15693 1.12846 1.14821 1.15196 1.18729 1.13361 1.11902
Table A.9: Perplexities for extension model after each iteration of smoothing models
from experiments A - G.
129
Iter. A B C D E F G
1 1.03453 N/A 1.04217 1.04221 1.04287 1.02959 1.02460
2 1.03255 N/A 1.03888 1.03927 1.03743 1.02590 1.02069
3 1.03158 N/A 1.03720 1.03777 1.03540 1.02474 1.01930
4 1.03099 N/A 1.03620 1.03689 1.03433 1.02410 1.01860
5 1.03059 N/A 1.03556 1.03633 1.03368 1.02370 1.01819
6 1.03031 N/A 1.03511 1.03593 1.03323 1.02343 1.01791
7 1.03010 N/A 1.03478 1.03563 1.03290 1.02324 1.01771
8 1.02993 N/A 1.03452 1.03539 1.03265 1.02309 1.01755
9 1.02980 N/A 1.03431 1.03520 1.03244 1.02296 1.01742
10 1.02969 N/A 1.03415 1.03504 1.03227 1.02286 1.01732
11 1.02960 N/A 1.03400 1.03490 1.03213 1.02278 1.01723
12 1.02952 N/A 1.03388 1.03478 1.03201 1.02271 1.01716
13 1.02945 N/A 1.03377 1.03467 1.03190 1.02265 1.01709
14 1.02939 N/A 1.03368 1.03458 1.03181 1.02259 1.01704
15 1.02934 N/A 1.03360 1.03449 1.03172 1.02254 1.01699
16 1.02930 N/A 1.03352 1.03441 1.03165 1.02250 1.01694
17 1.02925 N/A 1.03345 1.03434 1.03158 1.02246 1.01691
18 1.02922 N/A 1.03339 1.03428 1.03152 1.02242 1.01688
19 1.02918 N/A 1.03334 1.03422 1.03146 1.02239 1.01685
20 1.02915 N/A 1.03329 1.03416 1.03140 1.02236 1.01683
Table A.10: Perplexities for conjunction model after each iteration of smoothing
models from experiments A - G.
Appendix B
SPATTER Vocabularies and
Binary Encodings
The 7,655 word vocabulary and their bitstrings, and the bitstrings for the part-
of-speech tag set are available from the author upon request. To request elec-
tronic verisions of any of the SPATTER vocabularies, send electronic mail to mager-
man@cs.stanford.edu.
The descriptions of the non-terminal label set and part-of-speech tag set can be
found in Black, Garside, and Leech[7].
B.1 Part-of-Speech Tag Vocabulary
Here is the part-of-speech tag vocabulary, sorted by frequency of occurrence in the
Lancaster Computer Manuals Treebank:
NN1 AT . II NN2 VVC VVN JJ , VVI AT1 CC NP1 VBZ PPY TO VM CS IO IF MC
VVZ DD1 VVG RR JB : ) ( VV0 VBI XX VBR NN CST APP$ IW &FO MC1 RP PPH1
DB NNT1 DD RT MD ZZ1 VVD " DAR DDQ DA VH0 DD2 VBDZ VHZ CSA II22 II21
RRQ VHI VDZ VD0 REX22 REX21 NNJ ; NNU EX VBN CSN NNT2 UH CF VDC CCB $
JJR RR21 RL RR22 PPHS2 ? LE DA2 VBG CSW VBDR MC-MC RG PPHO2 VDI -
CS22 CS21 PNQS RG22 RG21 ZZ2 VDN DB2 II33 II32 II31 RRR VDD PN NNS1 JK
130
B.2. NON-TERMINAL LABEL VOCABULARY 131
PN1 DAT VHG PPX1 ... PPHS1 NNL1 JJT RR33 RR32 RR31 DDQ$ RGR NP VBC
NNU1 NNU2 VDG VHD CSW33 CSW32 CSW31 JA DD222 DD221 CS33 CS32 CS31 VBS
BTO22 BTO21 NNJ2 MF RGQ NNL2 CC33 CC32 CC31 RRQV VHC VVGK DA1 CC22
CC21 ! RGT RGA MC2 PPHO1 PPX222 PPX221 RPK PN122 PN121 VVS RRT NNO2
BCS22 BCS21 RA VVO VVC22 VVC21 VHS VBDS VB0 PPX122 PPX121 NPM1 NP2
NNSB2 NNSA1 NNJ1 NN122 NN121 MC222 MC221 JJ33 JJ32 JJ31 JJ22 JJ21 JBT
CC23 BDT
B.2 Non-terminal Label Vocabulary
Non-terminal Bitstring
BDL 10000000
GOD 11000000
11000001
P 11000011
Fc 11000110
J 11001011
G 11010011
V 11100000
S 11100010
Si 11100011
Fa 11100100
Fr 11100110
Fn 11100111
Ti 11110001
Tn 11110101
Tg 11110110
Nn 11111000
N 11111010
Nv 11111100
Nr 11111110
132 APPENDIX B. SPATTER VOCABULARIES AND BINARY ENCODINGS
B.3 Extend Feature Vocabulary
Extend Type Bitstring
up 10011
left 10110
right 11000
unary 11101
root 01000
BDE 00100
B.4 NumChildren Question Vocabulary
# of Children Bitstring
0 11001
1 11101
2 11111
3 10111
4 10110
5 10100
>5 10000
B.5 NumNodes Question Vocabulary
# of Nodes Bitstring
1 1000
2 0101
3 0100
4 0110
5 0111
6-10 0010
11-20 0000
>20 1100
B.6. SPAN QUESTION VOCABULARY 133
B.6 Span Question Vocabulary
Constituent Span Bitstring
1 1110
2 1100
3 1101
4 1001
5 1011
6-10 0111
11-20 0010
>20 0000
Appendix C
SPATTER Tree Head Table
Nr right-to-left Nr NNT1 NNT2 RR RRR DAR RT DAT DA1 NN1 NN2 MC
Nv right-to-left Nv NNU1 NNU2 NNU NN1 NN2 MC MC1 MC-MC DA DAR JJR
N P
V left-to-right V VV0 VVC VVC21 VVC22 VVD VVG VVGK VVI VVN VVO
VVS VVZ VB0 VBC VBDR VBDS VBDZ VBG VBI VBN VBR VBS VBZ
VD0 VDC VDD VDG VDI VDN VDZ VH0 VHC VHD VHG VHI VHS VHZ
VM Tg Nn
N right-to-left N NN NNJ NNU NP NN2 NNJ2 NNL2 NNO2 NNSB2 NNT2 NNU2
NP2 NN1 NN121 NNJ1 NNL1 NNS1 NNSA1 NNT1 NNU1 NP1 NPM1 ZZ1
ZZ2 &FO UH PPY PN PN1 PN122 PNQS PPH1 PPHO1 PPHO2 PPHS1
PPHS2 PPX1 PPX122 PPX222 PPY JA JB JBT JJ JJ21 JJ32 JJR JJT JK
J DA DA1 DA2 DAR DAT DB DB2 DD DD1 DD2 DD222 DDQ DDQ$ MC
MC-MC MC1 MC2 MC222 MD MF EX Nn
S right-to-left S V Ti Tn Tg N J Fa REX22 P UH
Tg right-to-left Tg VVG VBG VDG VHG V
Ti right-to-left Ti VVI VDI VVN VDN VHI VHD VBI V TO
Tn right-to-left Tn VVN VDN VHD V
134
135
Fa right-to-left Fa CS CS21 CS31 CSA CSN CST CSW CSW31 CF CCB LE RRQV
Fc right-to-left Fc Fa
Fn right-to-left Fn S Ti N
Fr right-to-left Fr S
G left-to-right G N
J right-to-left J JJ JB JA JJ21 JJ31 JJR JJT JK VVN
P left-to-right P II II21 II32 IO IW IF
Si right-to-left Si S
Nn right-to-left Nn VVC N II RR RRQ RP UH RL CC : "
Bibliography
[1] A. Alshawi and et. al. Interim report on the sri core language engine. Technical
Report CCSRC-5, 1988.
[2] L. R. Bahl, P. F. Brown, P. V. deSouza, and R. L. Mercer. A tree-based statistical
language model for natural language speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Vol. 36, No. 7, pages 1001{1008, 1989.
[3] L. R. Bahl, F. Jelinek, and R. L. Mercer. A maximum likelihood approach
to continuous speech recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, Vol. PAMI-5, No. 2, pages 179{190, 1983.
[4] J. K. Baker. Stochastic modeling for automatic speech understanding. Speech
Recognition, pages 521{542, 1975.
[5] L. E. Baum. An inequality and associated maximization technique in statistical
estimation of probabilistic functions of markov processes. Inequalities, Vol. 3,
pages 1{8, 1972.
[6] E. Black and et. al. A procedure for quantitatively comparing the syntactic
coverage of english grammars. Proceedings of the February 1991 DARPA Speech
and Natural Language Workshop, pages 306{311, 1991.
[7] E. Black, R. Garside, and G. Leech. Statistically-driven Computer Grammars of
English: The IBM/Lancaster Approach. Rodopi, Atlanta, Georgia, 1993.
[8] E. Black, F. Jelinek, J. Laerty, D. M. Magerman, R. Mercer, and S. Roukos.
Towards history-based grammars: Using richer models for probabilistic parsing.
136
BIBLIOGRAPHY 137
Proceedings of the February 1992 DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work-
shop, 1992.
[9] E. Black, F. Jelinek, J. Laerty, R. Mercer, and S. Roukos. Development and
evaluation of a broad-coverage probabilistic grammar of english-language com-
puter manuals. Proceedings of the February 1992 DARPA Speech and Natural
Language Workshop, pages 117{121, 1992.
[10] E. Black, J. Laerty, and S. Roukos. Development and evaluation of a broad-
coverage probabilistic grammar of english-language computer manuals. Proceed-
ings of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 1992, 1992.
[11] D. G. Bobrow. Natural language input for a computer problem-solving system.
Semantic Information Processing, pages 146{226, 1968.
[12] R. Bod. Monte carlo parsing. Proceedings of the August 1993 International
Workshop on Parsing Technologies, 1993.
[13] L. Breiman, J. H. Friedman, R. A. Olshen, and C. J. Stone. Classication and
Regression Trees. Wadsworth and Brooks, Pacic Grove, California, 1984.
[14] M. R. Brent. Automatic acquisition of subcategorization frames from untagged
free-text corpora. Proceedings of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, 1991.
[15] E. Brill. Doctoral dissertation. University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Penn-
sylvania, 1993.
[16] E. Brill. Transformation-based error-driven parsing. Proceedings of the August
1993 International Workshop on Parsing Technologies, 1993.
[17] P. Brown and et. al. A statistical approach to machine translation. Computa-
tional Linguistics, Vol. 16, No. 2, pages 79{85, 1990.
[18] P. F. Brown, V. J. Della Pietra, P. V. deSouza, J. C. Lai, and R. L. Mercer.
Class-based n-gram models of natural language. Proceedings of the IBM Natural
Language ITL, March 1990, 1990.
138 BIBLIOGRAPHY
[19] N. Chomsky. Syntactic Structures. Mouton, The Hague, 1957.
[20] N. Chomsky. Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. MIT Press, Cambridge, Mas-
sachusetts, 1965.
[21] K. Church. A stochastic parts program and noun phrase parser for unrestricted
text. Proceedings of the Second Conference on Applied Natural Language Pro-
cessing, 1988.
[22] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory. John Wiley
and Sons, Inc., New York, New York, 1991.
[23] A. Derouault and B. Merialdo. Probabilistic grammar for phonetic to french
transcription. ICASSP 85 Proceedings, pages 1577{1580, 1985.
[24] Jack Ferguson. Hidden Markov Models for Speech. IDA-CRD, Princeton, New
Jersey, 1980.
[25] G. Gazdar, E. Klein, G. K. Pullum, and I. A. Sag. Generalized Phrase Structure
Grammar. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1982.
[26] B. F. Green, A. K. Wolf, C. Chomsky, and Laughery. K. Baseball: An automatic
question answerer. Computers and Thought, pages 207{216, 1963.
[27] R. Grishman. PROTEUS Project Memorandum No. 4-C. New York University,
New York, New York, 1990.
[28] M. A. K. Halliday. Language structure and language function. New Horizons in
Linguistics, pages 140{165, 1970.
[29] M. A. Harrison. Introduction to Formal Language Theory. Addison-Wesley Pub-
lishing Company, 1978.
[30] D. Hindle and M. Rooth. Structural ambiguity and lexical relations. Proceedings
of the June 1990 DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, 1990.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 139
[31] L. Hirschman. Multi-site data collection for a spoken language corpus. Pro-
ceedings of the February 1992 DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop,
pages 7{14, 1992.
[32] L. Hirschman and et. al. The pundit natural-language processing system. Pro-
ceedings of the AI Systems in Government Conference, 1989.
[33] J. Hobbs. The dialogic parser. 1982.
[34] J. Hobbs. Sri international: Description of the tacitus system as used for muc-3.
Proceedings of the Third Message Understanding Conference (MUC-3), 1991.
[35] J. R. Hobbs, D. E. Appelt, J. S. Bear, D. J. Israel, and W. M. Tyson. Fastus:
A system for extracting information from natural-language text. Technical Note
No. 519, 1993.
[36] F. Jelinek. A fast sequential decoding algorithm using a stack. IBM Journal of
Research and Development, Vol. 13, pages 675{685, 1969.
[37] R. Kaplan and J. Bresnan. Lexical-functional grammar: A formal system for
grammatical representation. The Mental Representation of Grammatical Rela-
tions, 1983.
[38] M. Kay. Parsing in functional unication grammar. Natural Language Parsing:
Psychological, Computational and Theoretical Perspectives, 1985.
[39] J. Kupiec. A trellis-based algorithm for estimating the parameters of a hid-
den stochastic context-free grammar. Proceedings of the February 1991 DARPA
Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 241{246, 1991.
[40] J. Lucassen. Doctoral dissertation. ??? University, ???, ???, 1983.
[41] D. M. Magerman and M. P. Marcus. Parsing a natural language using mutual
information statistics. Proceedings of AAAI-90, 1990.
[42] D. M. Magerman and M. P. Marcus. Pearl: A probabilistic chart parser. Pro-
ceedings of the European ACL Conference, March 1991, 1991.
140 BIBLIOGRAPHY
[43] D. M. Magerman and C. Weir. Eciency, robustness, and accuracy in picky
chart parsing. Proceedings of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
1992, 1992.
[44] M. Meteer, R. Schwartz, and R. Weischedel. Studies in part of speech labelling.
Proceedings of the February 1991 DARPA Speech and Natural Language Work-
shop, pages 331{336, 1991.
[45] A. Newell. Harpy: Production systems and human cognition. CMU-CS-78-140,
1978.
[46] A. Newell and et. al. Speech Understanding Systems: Final Report of a Study
Group. North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 1973.
[47] D. B. Paul. Algorithms for an optimal a search and linearizing the search in
the stack decoder. Proceedings of the June 1990 DARPA Speech and Natural
Language Workshop, pages 200{204, 1990.
[48] F. Pereira and Y. Schabes. Inside-outside reestimation from partially bracketed
corpora. Proceedings of the February 1992 DARPA Speech and Natural Language
Workshop, pages 122{127, 1992.
[49] F. C. N. Pereira and D. H. D. Warren. Denite clause grammars for language
analysis { a survey of the formalism and a comparison with augmented transition
networks. Articial Intelligence, Vol. 13, pages 231{278, 1980.
[50] A. B. Poritz. Hidden markov models: A guided tour. Proceedings of the Inter-
national Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, 1988, 1988.
[51] V. Pratt. A linguistics oriented programming language. Proceedings of the Third
International Joint Conference on Articial Intelligence, 1973.
[52] B. Raphael. Sir: A computer program for semantic information retrieval. Se-
mantic Information Processing, pages 33{145, 1968.
BIBLIOGRAPHY 141
[53] P. Resnik. Wordnet and distributional analysis: A class-based approach to lexical
discovery. Statistically-Based NLP Techniques, AAAI-92, 1992.
[54] N. Sager. Natural Language Information Processing. Addison-Wesley Publishing
Company, Inc., Reading, Massachusetts, 1981.
[55] Y. Schabes and R. Waters. Stochastic lexicalized context-free grammar. Pro-
ceedings of the August 1993 International Workshop on Parsing Technologies,
1993.
[56] R. C. Schank. Sam { a story understander. Research Report 43, 1975.
[57] Hinrich Schutze. Distributed syntactic representations with an application to
part-of-speech tagging. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Neural Networks, 1993.
[58] P. Sells. Lectures on Contemporary Syntactic Theories. CSLI, Stanford, Califor-
nia, 1985.
[59] Stephanie Sene. Tina: A probabilistic parser for speech understanding systems.
Proceedings of the August 1989 International Workshop on Parsing Technologies,
1989.
[60] C. E. Shannon. Prediction and entropy of printed english. Bell Systems Technical
Journal, Vol. 30, pages 50{64, 1951.
[61] R. A. Sharman, F. Jelinek, and R. Mercer. Generating a grammar for statistical
training. Proceedings of the June 1990 DARPA Speech and Natural Language
Workshop, 1990.
[62] S. Shieber. An Introduction to Unication-based Approaches to Grammar. CSLI,
Stanford, California, 1986.
[63] W. Weaver. Translation. Machine Translation of Languages, pages 15{23, 1955.
142 BIBLIOGRAPHY
[64] R. Weischedel, S. Ayuso, D. amd Boisen, H. Fox, and R. Ingria. A new approach
to text understanding. Proceedings of the February 1992 DARPA Speech and
Natural Language Workshop, pages 316{322, 1992.
[65] J. Weizenbaum. Eliza { a computer program for the study of natural language
communication between man and machine. CACM, Vol. 9, pages 36{45, 1966.
[66] N. Wiener. The Extracpolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of Stationary Time
Series. John WIley and Sons, New York, New York, 1949.
[67] T. Winograd. Understanding Natural Language. Academic Press, New York,
New York, 1972.
[68] W. A. Woods. Transition network grammars for natural language analysis.
CACM, Vol. 13, pages 457{471, 1970.
[69] V. Zue, J. Glass, D. Goodine, H. Leung, M. Phillips, J. Polifroni, and S. Sene.
The voyager speech understanding system: A progress report. Proceedings of
the October 1989 DARPA Speech and Natural Language Workshop, pages 51{59,
1989.

