Pattern Recognition in Histopathological Images:        
An  ICPR 2010 Contest 
Metin N. Gurcan1, Anant Madabhushi2, Nasir Rajpoot3 
 
1 Department of Biomedical Informatics, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210, 
USA 
2 Department of Biomedical Engineering,  Rutgers The State University of New Jersey, 
Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA 
3 Department of Computer Science, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK 
 
metin.gurcan@osumc.edu, anantm@rci.rutgers.edu, nasir@dcs.warwick.ac.uk 
http://bmi.osu.edu/cialab/ICPR_contest/ 
Abstract. The advent of digital whole-slide scanners in recent years has spurred 
a revolution in imaging technology for histopathology. In order to encourage 
further interest in histopathological image analysis, we have organized a contest 
called “Pattern Recognition in Histopathological Image Analysis.” This contest 
aims to bring some of the pressing issues facing the advance of the rapidly 
emerging field of digital histology image analysis to the attention of the wider 
pattern recognition and medical image analysis communities. Two sample 
histopathological problems are explored: counting lymphocytes and 
centroblasts. The background to these problems and the evaluation 
methodology are discussed. 
Keywords: histopathology, computerized image analysis, pattern recognition, 
follicular lymphoma 
1   Introduction 
The advent of digital whole-slide scanners in recent years has spurred a revolution in 
imaging technology for histopathology. The large multi-Giga-pixel images produced 
by these scanners contain a wealth of information potentially useful for computer-
assisted disease diagnosis, grading, and prognosis. Processing and analysis of such 
high-resolution images, however, remain non-trivial tasks, not just because of the 
sheer size of the images but also due to complexities of the underlying factors, 
                                                           
1 The authors are the organizers of this contest and have contributed equally to this article as 
well as to the design, preparation and evaluation of the contest. 
 
including variable staining procedures and practices, illumination variations, diversity 
in imaging devices, and last but not the least the ultimate goal of the analysis. In order 
to encourage further interest in histopathological image analysis, we have organized a 
contest called “Pattern Recognition in Histopathological Image Analysis,” as part of 
the ICPR 2010. This contest aims to bring some of the pressing issues facing the 
advance of the rapidly emerging field of digital histology image analysis to the 
attention of the wider pattern recognition and medical image analysis communities.  
 
We proposed two problems and provided the training dataset for each problem to the 
contestants. The problems are described in the following sections and Table 1 
summarizes the data information: 
 
Dataset Name Number of training images Number of test images 
Problem 1 10 10 
Problem 2 5 5 
 
Table 1: Summary of Datasets. 
 
1.1 Problem 1: Counting Lymphocytes on Histopathology Images 
Breast cancer (BC) is the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in women, 
with more than 182 000 new cases of invasive BC predicted in the United States for 
2008 alone [1]. Although it is a common cancer diagnosis in women, the fact that BC 
exhibits an exceptionally heterogeneous phenotype in histopathology [2] leads to a 
variety of prognoses and therapies. One such phenotype is the presence of 
lymphocytic infiltration (LI) in invasive BC that exhibits amplification of the HER2 
gene (HER2+ BC). Most HER2+ BC is currently treated with agents that specifically 
target the HER2 protein. Researchers have shown that the presence of LI in 
histopathology is a viable prognostic indicator for various cancers, including HER2+ 
BC [3]–[5]. The function of LI as a potential antitumor mechanism in BC was first 
shown by Aaltomaa et al. [4]. More recently, Alexe et al. [5] demonstrated a 
correlation between the presence of high levels of LI and tumor recurrence in early 
stage HER2+ BC.The ability to automatically detect and quantify extent of LI on 
histopathology imagery could potentially result in the development of an image based 
prognostic tool for Her2+ and ovarian cancer patients.  
However, lymphocyte segmentation in Haemotoxylin (H) and Eosin (E)-stained 
histopathology images is complicated by the similarity in appearance between 
lymphocyte nuclei and other structures (e.g. cancer nuclei) in the image. Additional 
challenges include biological variability, histological artifacts, and high prevalence of 
overlapping objects. Although active contours are widely employed in image 
segmentation, they are limited in their ability to segment overlapping objects and are 
sensitive to initialization [6]. 
 
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained BC biopsy cores were scanned into a 
computer using a high resolution whole slide scanner (Aperio Systems) at 40x optical 
magnification at The Cancer Institute of New Jersey (CINJ). A total of 20 HER2+ BC 
images (from nine patients) exhibiting various levels of LI were used for this 
competition. The images were downsampled by a factor of 2 and saved as 200 × 200 
pixels digital images. The ground truth for spatial presence of LI was obtained via 
manual detection and segmentation performed by a breast cancer oncologist from 
CINJ. The ground truth for LI detection evaluation was obtained in the form of 
highlighted pixels representing the approximate centers of each of the lymphocytes in 
all 100 images. Note that, since the 20 images comprised over 2000 individual 
lymphocytes, and on account of the effort involved in manual segmentation, only a 
few dozen lymphocytes randomly chosen from the set of 20 images were delineated 
by the expert to allow the evaluation of the segmentation performance of the model. 
The detection performance of the model, however, was evaluated on all lymphocytes 
across all 20 images. The H&E-stained histopathology images comprise of four main 
structures or entities, namely: 1) BC nuclei; 2) lymphocyte nuclei; 3) stroma; and 4) 
background, as illustrated in Figure 1. Note the extent of overlap between objects and 
the similarity between lymphocyte nuclei and BC nuclei. Lymphocyte nuclei tend to 
be stained deeper than BC nuclei and are often smaller in size.  
Lymphocytic centers were indicated on all the images. A distinct set of testing 
images will be provided to the contestants on the day of the competition. These 
images may have been digitized on the same scanner and stained in a different lab 
compared to the training images. 
 
1.2 Problem 2: Counting Centroblasts from Histology Images of Follicular 
Lymphoma 
Follicular Lymphoma (FL), a common type of non-Hodgkins lymphoma, is a cancer 
of lymph system. According to World Health Organization's recommendations, FL 
has three histological grades indicating the degree of the malignancy of the tumor [7]. 
Histological grading of FL is based on the number of centroblasts, large malignant 
cells, in ten representative neoplastic follicle regions in a high power field (HPF) of 
0.159 mm2. Based on this method FL is stratified into three histological grades: FL 
grade I (0-5 centroblasts/HPF), FL grade II (6-15 centroblasts/HPF) and FL grade III 
(>15 centroblasts/HPF) ordered from the least to the most malignant subtypes, 
respectively. Further information about this problem and some previous work in this 
area can be found in the References [8-17]. 
There were a total of five images containing centroblasts which were H&E stained 
and digitized at 40 x resolution to serve as the training set. Centroblast centers were 
indicated on all the images, as marked by at least two expert pathologists. Figure 2 
shows an example image. A distinct set of testing images will be provided to the 
contestants on the day of the competition. Characteristics of these images will be 
similar to those of the training images in terms of slide preparation and digitization. 
 
2   Competition 
Twenty three groups showed interest in the competition and were provided with the 
training dataset as well as the ground truth for Problems 1 and 2 as described in 
Sections 1.1 and 1.2. Five of these groups developed algorithms to solve these 
problems and submitted their results; three groups turned their efforts into papers, 
which are published in this volume. 
 
3   Evaluation Methodology 
All the submitted results were evaluated using a standard criteria and automatically. 
The following sections describe the evaluation methodologies. 
3.1 Evaluation Methodology for Problem 1: 
3.1.1 Region-based measures 
The region-based performance measures were defined as follow 
• Dice Coefficient (DICE) = ; 
• Overlap (OL) = ; 
• Sensitivity (SN) = ; 
• Specificity (SP) = ; 
• Positive Predictive Value (PPV) = , 
where   is the total number of pixels in the image and  represents the cardinality 
of any set . | | and | | are the areas of the closed boundary of segmentation 
results and manual delineation, respectively. The values shown in Table 1 are the 
values obtained by averaging across ten images. Note that higher values for each of 
the region-based measures indicates superior performance with a maximum value of 
1.0 reflecting the best possible segmentation performance, while 0.0 reflecting the 
worst possible performance. 
 
3.1.2 Boundary-based measures 
The boundary-based performance measures are defined as follow 
• Hausdorff distance (HD) = ; 
• Mean absolute distance (MAD) = , 
where  and  are closed boundaries of segmentation results and manual 
delineations, respectively. Each of S and G are represented as set of image pixels  
and  respectively, where any pixel c is represented by its two dimensional Cartesian 
coordinates.  is the number of pixels on the closed boundaries of segmentation 
results. Note that lower values for each of the boundary-based measures indicates 
superior performance with a value of 0 reflecting perfect concordance between the 
boundary obtained via the segmentation algorithm and the expert delineated ground 
truth. 
3.2 Evaluation Methodology for Problem 2: 
The ground-truth information regarding the centroblasts are the locations marked by a 
consensus of pathologists. Therefore the evaluation is based on counting the number 
of true/false detection by comparing the centroid locations of the cells detected by the 
proposed computerized systems. If the distance between the centroid of a detected cell 
and the ground-truth marking is less than a threshold (30 pixels, equivalent of ~7.5 
microns), then it is considered as a true positive, otherwise it is counted as false 
positive. The threshold value is determined empirically by measuring the average size 
of a cell on the training set of images. 
 
Figure 1: 
Example of a 
HER2+ BC 
histopathology 
image showing 
lymphocyte 
nuclei, BC 
nuclei, stroma 
and the 
background. 
Note the overlap 
between 
adjacent 
nuclei and the 
similarity in 
appearance 
between cancer 
and lymphocyte 
nuclei [6]. 
 
Figure 2: An example of part of an H&E-stained follicular lymphoma image with centroblasts.  
4   Evaluation Results 
Five groups participated in this competition and only four of these submitted papers. 
These groups are shown in Table 2. Below we summarize the results of evaluation for 
both off-line and on-line results for the training and testing data, respectively. 
 
4.1 Evaluation of Off-line Results for the Training Data 
 
Submitted results of the five groups participating in this competition are summarized 
in Tables 3 and 4 below. As seen in these results, for Problem 1, Group 4’s algorithm 
outperformed all the other methods in terms of both region-based and boundary-based 
measures of performance. For Problem 2, only two groups submitted their results, 
again Group 4’s method producing impressive results. However, Group 4 chose not to 
submit details of their methods for publication in these proceedings. It is worth noting 
that these results were obtained using training data provided to these groups before 
the actual contest, where previously unseen test data was given to the contestants for 
on-site evaluation (please see Section 4.2).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Group People Institute Paper 
1 Cheng, J, Veronika, M, Rajapakse, J Singapore-MIT Alliance, 
Singapore 
[18] 
2 Gupta, S, Kuse, M, Sharma, T The LNM Institute of 
Information Technology, 
Jaipur, India 
[19] 
3  Graf, F, Grzegorzek, M, Paulus, D Institute for 
Computational 
Visualistics, University of 
Koblenz-Landau, 
Germany 
[21] 
4 Bruynooghe, M Alkmaar, The Netherlands - 
5 Panagiotakis, C, Ramasso, E, 
Tziritas, G 
Department of Computer 
Science, University of 
Crete, Greece 
[20] 
 
 Table 2: Groups participating in the competition. 
 
 
 
  
Region-based Measures Boundary-based Measures Group# DICE OL SN SP PPV HD MAD 
Group 1 [18] 0.73 0.57 0.57 1 1 4.58 0.77 
Group 2 [19] 0.74 0.58 0.58 1 1 3.63 0.65 
Group 3 0.37 0.23 0.23 1 1 21.95 9.14 
Group 4 0.83 0.71 0.71 1 1 3.73 0.41 
Group 5 [20] 0.74 0.59 0.59 1 1 3.51 0.62 
 
Table 3: Evaluation results for Problem 1 (Detecting Lymphocytes in Breast 
Histopathology Images); Best performance is shown in bold. 
 
 
Group# TP
R 
FPR 
Group 1  0.38 0.83 
Group 4 1 0 
 
Table 4: Evaluation results for Problem 2 (Detecting Centroblasts in Follicular 
Lymphoma Histopathology Images); Best performance is shown in bold. Centroblast 
coordinates or contours were not submitted to evaluate more detailed region-based or 
boundary-based measures. 
4.2 On-site Evaluation: 
 
All the five groups participated at an on-site evaluation. The groups were given test 
images which were different from the training images and were asked to run their 
programs on these images and provide the organizers with results. The participating 
groups only attempted the first problem. 
All groups were evaluated on (a) ability to identify lymphocytic centers and (b) the 
total number of lymphocytes identified. All groups were asked to provide 
segmentation results in the form of binary masks with just the centers of the 
lymphocytes identified. They were also asked to provide the contours of the 
individual cells, though these were not used for the evaluation (since ground truth 
evaluation for contours could not be obtained from a second independent expert). 
 
 For criterion (a) and (b) above, the mean and standard deviation errors were 
tabulated. For all 4 numbers reported, a smaller number represented a better result. In 
case of criterion (a) the Euclidean distance d between the ground truth and the result 
provided by the participants was calculated. In case of criterion (b) the absolute 
difference between the true number of cells and the number of cells N found by the 
participating group was identified. Table 5 shows the on-site evaluation results with 
the ranking of performance, where µ and σ denote the mean and standard deviation, 
respectively. 
 
 
Ranking Group Number µd σd µN σN 
1 2 3.04 3.40 14.01 4.4 
2 5 2.87 3.80 14.23 6.3 
3 3 7.60 6.30 24.50 16.2 
4 1 8.10 6.98 26.67 12.5 
Table 5: Evaluation results for Problem 1 for on-site evaluation. 
 
 
 No results were obtained for the Group 4 since they required feeding in the centers of 
the cells to their segmentation program and since contour evaluation was not 
performed during the on-site evaluation. 
 
5   Conclusions  
The main purpose of this contest was to encourage pattern recognition and 
computer vision researchers in getting involved in the rapidly emerging area of 
histopathology image analysis. Twenty three groups registered their interest in 
participating in this contest, while five of these groups actually submitted their results 
on training data released before the actual contest. Two of the groups submitted 
results for both the problems, detection of lymphocytes in breast histopathology 
images and detection of centroblasts in follicular lymphoma histophathology images. 
Of these, one group has produced quite promising results in terms of both types of 
performance measures, region-based and boundary-based. Given this was the first 
contest of its kind, we are encouraged by the level of enthusiasm and interest shown 
in this contest so far and look forward to the results of these groups’ algorithms in the 
actual contest at the conference. Given that digital pathology is a nascent field and 
that application of pattern recognition and image analysis methods to digitized 
histopathology even more recent, there is not yet consensus on what level of 
performance would be acceptable in the clinic. While it is clear that most algorithms 
in this domain should produce an output which either directly (or via some 
transformation) correlates highly with clinical and patient outcome, it is not yet clear 
what level of algorithm performance would suffice towards this goal. Further versions 
of this competition will thus seek to explore, in a more quantitative fashion, the 
correlation between algorithmic performance and disease outcome. 
 
 
Acknowledgments. This work was supported in part by Award Number 
R01CA134451 from the National Cancer Institute (MG), the Wallace H. Coulter 
Foundation, the National Cancer Institute under Grants R01CA136535‐01, R01 
CA140772-01, Grant ARRA‐NCI‐3 R21 CA127186‐02S1, R21CA127186‐01, 
R03CA128081‐01, and R03CA143991‐01, and the Cancer Institute of New Jersey. 
The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily 
represent the official views of the National Cancer Institute, or the National Institutes 
of Health. The authors would like to thank Olcay Sertel, Jun Xu, Dr. Shridar Ganesan, 
and Ajay Basavanhally for their help in the preparation of the datasets and evaluation 
of the results.  
References 
1. A. Jemal, R. Siegel, E. Ward, Y. Hao, J. Xu, T. Murray, and M. J. Thun, “Cancer 
statistics, 2008,” CA Cancer J. Clin., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 71–96, 2008. 
2. F. Bertucci and D. Birnbaum, “Reasons for breast cancer heterogeneity,” J. Biol., vol. 7, 
no. 6, 2008. 
3. J. R. van Nagell, E. S. Donaldson, E. G. Wood, and J. C. Parker, “The significance of 
vascular invasion and lymphocytic infiltration in invasive cervical cancer,” Cancer, vol. 
41, no. 1, pp. 228–234, Jan. 1978. 
4. S. Aaltomaa, P. Lipponen, M. Eskelinen, V. M. Kosma, S. Marin, E. Alhava, and K. 
Syrjanen, “Lymphocyte infiltrates as a prognostic variable in female breast cancer,” Eur. J. 
Cancer, vol. 28A, no. 4/5, pp. 859–864, 1992. 
5. G. Alexe, G. S. Dalgin, D. Scanfeld, P. Tamayo, J. P. Mesirov, C. DeLisi, L. Harris, N. 
Barnard, M. Martel, A. J. Levine, S. Ganesan, and G. Bhanot, “High expression of 
lymphocyte-associated genes in node negative her2+ breast cancers correlates with lower 
recurrence rates,” Cancer Res., vol. 67, no. 22, pp. 10 669–10 676, Nov. 2007. 
6. Fatakdawala, H, Basavanhally, A, Xu, J, Bhanot, G, Ganesan, S, Feldman, M, 
Tomaszewski, J, Madabhushi, A, Expectation Maximization Driven Geodesic Active 
Contour with Overlap Resolution: Lymphocyte Segmentation on Breast Cancer 
Histopathology, IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 57[7], pp. 1676-89, 
2010. (PMID: 20172780) 
7. E. S. Jaffe, N. L. Harris, H. Stein, and J. W. Vardiman, World Health Organization 
Classification of Tumours - Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissues. Lyon: 
IARC Press, 2001. 
8. Gurcan MN, Boucheron L, Can A, Madabhushi A, Rajpoot N, Yener B, 
“Histopathological Image Analysis: A review,” IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, 
vol. 2, pp 147-171, (2009) 
9. Sertel O, Kong J, Catalyurek UV, Lozanski G, Saltz J, Gurcan MN, “Histopathological 
image analysis using model-based intermediate representations and color texture: 
Follicular lymphoma grading,” The Journal of Signal Processing Systems, vol. 55, pp. 
169-183, (2009) 
10. Cooper L, Sertel O, Kong J, Lozanski G, Huang K, Gurcan MN, “Feature-Based 
Registration of Histopathology Images with Different Stains: An Application for 
Computerized Follicular Lymphoma Prognosis,” Computer Methods and Programs in 
Biomedicine, 96(3), pp. 182-192, (2009) 
11. Sertel O, Kong J, Lozanski G, Catalyurek U, Saltz J, Gurcan MN, “Computerized 
microscopic image analysis of follicular lymphoma,” SPIE Medical Imaging 2008, 16 -
 21 February 2008, San Diego, California 
12. Sertel O, Kong J, Catalyurek U, Lozanski G, Shanaah A, Saltz J, Gurcan MN, “Texture 
classification using nonlinear color quantization: Application to histopathological image 
analysis,” IEEE ICASSP 2008,  March 30-April 4, 2008, Las Vegas, NV 
13. Belkacem-Boussaid K, Sertel O, Lozanski G, Shana’aah A, Gurcan MN, "Extraction of 
color features in the spectral domain to recognize centroblasts in histopathology," IEEE 
EMBC 2009, September 2-6, 2009, Minneapolis, MN 
14. Samsi S, Krishnamurthy AK, Groseclose M, Caprioli RM, Lozanski G, Gurcan MN, 
"Imaging Mass Spectrometry Analysis for Follicular Lymphoma Grading," IEEE EMBC 
2009, September 2-6, 2009, Minneapolis, MN 
15. Teodoro G, Sachetto R, Sertel O, Gurcan MN, Meira W, Catalyurek U, Ferreira R, 
“Coordinating the use of GPU and CPU for improving performance of compute intensive 
applications,” IEEE Cluster 2009, August 31 – September 4, 2009, New Orleans, LA 
16. Belkacem-Boussaid K, Prescott J, Lozanski G, Gurcan MN, “Segmentation of follicular 
regions on H&E slides using matching filter and active contour models,” SPIE Medical 
Imaging 2010, 13-18 February 2010, San Diego, California 
17. Belkacem-Boussaid K, Pennell M, Lozanski G, Shana’ah A, Gurcan MN, “Effect of 
pathologist agreement on evaluating a computer-assisted system: Recognizing centroblasts 
in follicular lymphoma cases,” IEEE ISBI 2010, 14-17 April 2010, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands 
18. Cheng, J, Veronika, M, Rajapakse, J, “Identifying Cells in Histopathological Images,” 
Proceedings of the ICPR 2010 Contests, Springer, 2010 
19. Gupta, S, Kuse, M, Sharma, T, “A Classification Scheme for Lymphocyte Segmentation 
in H&E Stained Histology Images,” Proceedings of the ICPR 2010 Contests, Springer, 
2010 
20. Panagiotakis, C, Ramasso, E, Tziritas, G, “Lymphocyte Segmentation using the 
Transferable Belief Model,” Proceedings of the ICPR 2010 Contests, Springer, 2010 
21. Graf, F, Grzegorzek, M, Paulus, D, “Counting Lymphocytes in Histopathology Images 
Using Connected Components,” Proceedings of the ICPR 2010 Contests, Springer, 2010 
 
 
 
 

