Comparative Analysis of Pattern 
Recognition Methods: An Overview 
  
M.Subba Rao 
Head, Department   of IT, AITS, 
Rajampet, Andhra Pradesh, India 
E-mail: msraoswap@yahoo.co.in 
 
Dr.B.Eswara Reddy 
Head, Dept of CSE, JNTUniversity, 
Anantapur, Andhra Pradesh, India 
E-mail:eswarcsejntu@gmail.com 
 
Abstract- The identification or interpretation of the pattern in an image can be described effectively with the 
help of Pattern Recognition (PR). It aims to extract information about the image to classify its contents. Inputs 
are in the form of digitized binary valued 2D images or textures containing the pattern to be classified. The 
analysis and recognition of the patterns such as images and textures are becoming more and more complex and 
multiform. This  is because in general the patterns to be analyzed are shifting from simple to complex, and 
because the patterns of heavy variations and with heavy noise have to be treated. Therefore it is proposed to 
develop sophisticated strategies of pattern analysis to cope with these difficulties. 
Pattern recognition is the research area that studies the operation and design of systems that recognize 
patterns in data.In this work three basic approaches of pattern recognition are analyzed: statistical pattern 
recognition, structural pattern recognition and neural pattern recognition. In the statistical approach the 
recognition is based on the decision boundaries that are established in the feature space by statistical distribution 
of the patterns. In the structural (syntactic) approach each pattern class is defined by a structural description or 
representation. The recognition is performed according to the similarity of structures. This is based on the fact 
that the significant information is not only the features but also the relationships consisting among the features. 
In the neural network based approach the artificial neural networks are able to form complex decision regions 
for pattern recognition. The present work involves in the study of Pattern recognition methods on Texture 
Classifications. 
Keywords- Pattern Recognition, Texture, Neural Networks, Classification. 
1. Introduction 
In machine learning, pattern recognition is the assignment of some sort of output value (or label) to a 
given input value (or instance), according to some specific algorithmPattern recognition (PR) as a field of study 
developed significantly in the 1960s. It was very much an interdisciplinary subject, covering developments in 
the areas of statistics, engineering, artificial intelligence, computer science, psychology and physiology, among 
others. Pattern recognition is generally categorized according to the type of learning procedure used to generate 
the output value. Supervised learning assumes that a set of training data (the training set) has been provided, 
consisting of a set of instances that have been properly labeled by hand with the correct output[10]. A learning 
procedure then generates a model that attempts to meet two sometimes conflicting objectives: perform as well as 
possible on the training data, and generalize as well as possible to new data (usually, this means being as simple 
as possible, for some technical definition of "simple", in accordance with occam's razor). Unsupervised learning, 
on the other hand, assumes training data that has not been hand-labeled, and attempts to find inherent patterns in 
the data that can then be used to determine the correct output value for new data instances. A combination of the 
two that has recently been explored is semi-supervised learning, which uses a combination of labeled and 
unlabeled data (typically a small set of labeled data combined with a large amount of unlabeled data). Note that 
in cases of unsupervised learning, there may be no training data at all to speak of; in other words, the data to be 
labeled is the training data [10]. 
Pattern recognition is generally categorized according to the type of learning procedure used to 
generate the output value. Supervised learning assumes that a set of training data (the training set) has been 
provided, consisting of a set of instances that have been properly labeled by hand with the correct output. A 
learning procedure then generates a model that attempts to meet two sometimes conflicting objectives: perform 
as well as possible on the training data, and generalize as well as possible to new data (usually, this means being 
as simple as possible, for some technical definition of "simple", in accordance with occam's razor). 
M.Subba Rao et al./ Indian Journal of Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0976-5166 Vol. 2 No. 3 Jun-Jul 2011 385
Unsupervised learning, on the other hand, assumes training data that has not been hand-labeled, and attempts to 
find inherent patterns in the data that can then be used to determine the correct output value for new data 
instances. A combination of the two that has recently been explored is semi-supervised learning, which uses a 
combination of labeled and unlabeled data (typically a small set of labeled data combined with a large amount 
of unlabeled data). Note that in cases of unsupervised learning, there may be no training data at all to speak of; 
in other words, the data to be labeled is the training data [11]. 
Texture analysis is important in many applications of computer image analysis for classification or 
segmentation of images based on local spatial variations of intensity or color. A successful classification or 
segmentation requires an efficient description of image texture. Important applications include industrial and 
biomedical surface inspection, for example for defects and disease, ground classification and segmentation of 
satellite or aerial imagery, segmentation of textured regions in document analysis, and content-based access to 
image databases. However, despite many potential areas of application for texture analysis in industry there is 
only a limited number of successful examples. A major problem is that textures in the real world are often not 
uniform, due to changes in orientation, scale or other visual appearance. In addition, the degree of computational 
complexity of many of the proposed texture measures is very high.  
Texture classification process involves two phases: the learning phase and the recognition phase. In the 
learning phase, the target is to build a model for the texture content of each texture class present in the training 
data, which generally comprises of images with known class labels. The texture content of the training images is 
captured with the chosen texture analysis method, which yields a set of textural features for each image. These 
features, which can be scalar numbers or discrete histograms or empirical distributions, characterize given 
textural properties of the images, such as spatial structure, contrast, roughness, orientation, etc. In the 
recognition phase the texture content of the unknown sample is first described with the same texture analysis 
method. Then the textural features of the sample are compared to those of the training images with a 
classification algorithm, and the sample is assigned to the category with the best match. Optionally, if the best 
match is not sufficiently good according to some predefined criteria, the unknown sample can be rejected 
instead[11]. 
 
2. Pattern recognition methods 
Pattern recognition is a computational algorithm used to classify raw data (sometimes appropriate 
action choice is included in the definition). The term is from machine learning, but has been adapted by 
cognitive psychologists to describe various theories for how the brain goes from incoming sensory information 
to action selection.Pattern recognition undergoes an important developing for many years. Pattern recognition 
include a lot of methods which impelling the development of numerous applications in different filed. The 
practicability of these methods is intelligent emulation.  
 
Statistical pattern recognition  
Statistical decision and estimation theories have been commonly used in PR for a long time. It is a 
classical method of PR which was found out during a long developing process, it based on the feature vector 
distributing which getting from probability and statistical model. The statistical model is defined by a family of 
class-conditional probability density functions Pr(x|ci)(Probability of feature vector x given class ci) In detail, in 
SPR, we put the features in some optional order, and then we can regard the set of features as a feature vector. 
Also statistical pattern recognition deals with features only without consider the relations between features.  
 
Data clustering  
Its aim is to find out a few similar clusters in a mass of data which not need any information of the 
known clusters. It is an unsupervised method. In general, the method of data clustering can be partitioned two 
classes, one is hierarchical clustering, and the other is partition clustering. 
 
The application of fuzzy sets 
The thinking process of human being is often fuzzy and uncertain, and the languages of human are 
often fuzzy also. And in reality, we can’t always give complete answers or classification, so theory of fuzzy sets 
come into being. Fuzzy sets can describe the extension and intension of a concept effectively. The application of 
fuzzy sets in pattern recognition started in 1966, where the two basic operations –abstraction and generalization 
were quite much aimed at by Bellan et al.Two principles proposed by Marr (1982) and (Keller, 1995) which can 
be think as the general role of fuzzy sets in PR. The PR system based on fuzzy sets theory can imitate thinking 
process of human being widely and deeply.  
 
Neural networks 
Neural networks is developing very fast since the first neural networks model MP was proposed since 
1943, especially the Hopfield neural networks and famous BP arithmetic came into being after. It is a data 
M.Subba Rao et al./ Indian Journal of Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0976-5166 Vol. 2 No. 3 Jun-Jul 2011 386
clustering method based on distance measurement; also this method is model-irrespective. The neural approach 
applies biological concepts to machines to recognize patterns. The outcome of this effort is the invention of 
artificial neural networks which is set up by the elicitation of the physiology knowledge of human brain. Neural 
networks are composed of a series of different ，associate unit. In addition, genetic algorithms applied in neural 
networks is a statistical optimized algorithms proposed by Holland (1975) NeurPR is a very attractive since it 
requires minimum a priori knowledge, and with enough layers and neurons, an ANN can create any complex 
decision region.  
 
Structural pattern recognition  
The concept of structural pattern recognition was put for the fourth time (Pavilidis, 1977).And 
structural pattern recognition is not based on a firm theory which relies on segmentation and features extraction. 
Structural pattern recognition emphases on the description of the structure, namely explain how some simple 
sub-patterns compose one pattern. 
There are two main methods in structural pattern recognition, syntax analysis and structure matching. 
The basis of syntax analysis is the theory of formal language, the basis of structure matching is some special 
technique of mathematics based on sub-patterns. When consider the relation among each part of the object, the 
structural pattern recognition is best. Different from other methods, structural pattern recognition handle with 
symbol information, and this method can be used in applications with higher level, such as image interpretation. 
Structural pattern recognition always associates with statistic classification or neural networks through which we 
can deal with more complex problem of pattern recognition, such as recognition of multidimensional objects. 
 
Syntactic pattern recognition 
This method major emphasizes on the rules of composition. And the attractive aspect of syntactic 
methods is its suitability for dealing with recursion. When finish customizing a series of rules which can 
describe the relation among the parts of the object, syntactic pattern recognition which is a special kind of 
structural pattern recognition can be used.( in the middle of 1960’s,1978) . 
 
Approximate reasoning approach to pattern recognition 
This method which uses two concepts: fuzzy applications and compositional rule of inference can cope 
with the problem for rule based pattern recognition. (Kumar S.Ray, J.Ghoshal,1996)  
 
A logical combinatorial approach to pattern recognition  
This method is presented, and works mainly in Spanish and Russian, which works with the descriptions 
of the objects. This approach can apply for both supervised pattern recognition and unsupervised pattern 
recognition.  
 
Applications of Support Vector Machine (SVM) for pattern recognition 
SVM is a relative new thing with simple structure; it has been researched widely since it was proposed 
in the 1990’s. SVM base on the statistical theory ,and the method of SVM is an effective tool that can solve the 
problems of pattern recognition and function estimation, especially can solve classification and regression 
problem, has been applied to a wide range for pattern recognition such as face detection, verification and 
recognition, object detection and recognition ,speech recognition etc.  
Using higher-order local autocorrelation coefficients to pattern recognition 
In 2004, Vlad Popovici, present an efficient method using higher order autocorrelation functions for 
pattern recognition. The autocorrelation feature vectors reside in a high dimensional space, which one can avoid 
their computing easily. 
 
A novel method and system of pattern recognition using data encoded as Fourier series and Fourier space 
It was put forward by (Randell. L Mills) in 2006. This novel method anticipate the signal processing of 
an ensemble of neurons as a unit and intends to simulate aspects of brain which bring capabilities like pattern 
recognition and reasoning that have not been produced with past approaches as neural networks .  
 
3.  Statistical pattern recognition Method 
 
Statistical pattern recognition has been used successfully to design a number of commercial recognition 
systems. In statistical pattern recognition, a pattern is represented by a set of d features, or attributes, viewed as a 
d-  dimensional feature vector. Well-known concepts from statistical decision theory are utilized to establish 
decision boundaries between pattern classes. The recognition system is operated in two modes: training 
(learning) and classification (testing) (see Fig. 1). The role of the preprocessing module is to segment the pattern 
of interest from the background, remove noise, normalize the pattern, and any other operation which will 
M.Subba Rao et al./ Indian Journal of Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0976-5166 Vol. 2 No. 3 Jun-Jul 2011 387
contribute in defining a compact representation of the pattern. In the training mode, the feature 
extraction/selection module finds the appropriate features for representing the input patterns and the classifier is 
trained to partition the feature space. The feedback path allows a designer to optimize the preprocessing and 
feature   extraction/selection strategies. In the classification mode, the trained classifier assigns the input pattern 
to one of the pattern classes under consideration based on the measured features. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 1 Model for Statistical Pattern Recognition 
 
4.  Structural pattern recognition Method 
 
Structural pattern recognition [1][2][3], sometimes referred to as syntactic pattern recognition due to its 
origins in formal language theory, relies on syntactic grammars to discriminate among data from different 
groups based upon the morphological interrelationships (or interconnections) present within the data. Structural 
pattern recognition systems have proven to be effective for data which contain an inherent, identifiable 
organization such as image data (which is organized by location within a visual rendering) and time series data 
(which is organized by time). The usefulness of structural pattern recognition systems, however, is limited as a 
consequence of fundamental complications associated with the implementation of the description and 
classification tasks. 
The description task of a structural pattern recognition system is difficult to implement because there is 
no general solution for extracting structural features, commonly called primitives, from data.The lack of a 
general approach for extracting primitives puts designers of structural pattern recognition systems in an 
awkward position: feature extractors are necessary to identify primitives in the data, and yet there is no 
established methodology for deciding which primitives to extract. The result is that feature extractors for 
structural pattern recognition systems are developed to extract either the simplest and most generic primitives 
possible, or the domain and application specific primitives that best support the subsequent classification task. 
Some structural pattern recognition systems justify the use of a particular set of feature extractors by claiming 
that the same set had been used successfully by a previous system developed for a similar application within the 
same domain; such claims simply shift the burden of feature extractor development onto previously 
implemented systems. 
Simplistic primitives are domain independent, but capture a minimum of structural information and 
postpone deeper interpretation until the classification step. At the other extreme, domain and application specific 
primitives can be developed with the assistance of a domain expert, but obtaining and formalizing knowledge 
from a domain expert, called knowledge acquisition, can be problematic. 
 
M.Subba Rao et al./ Indian Journal of Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0976-5166 Vol. 2 No. 3 Jun-Jul 2011 388
 
 
Fig  2 The process of knowledge acquisition for developing domain and  Application specific feature extractors for structural pattern 
recognition. 
  
5.  Neural pattern recognition Method 
 
In most networks, the principle of learning a network is based on minimizing the gradient of error [4,5]. 
Therefore it is assumed that a network has a minimum error at the end of  learning process [6] but it is not 
always happened like this. Sometimes because of the largeness of the domain of changes of the input network 
signal, the activity function of some neurons will be saturated and at last the output of these categories of 
neurons will be fixed in their border amount. It can make a same situation for the next layers of neurons. With 
continuing this situation, the network will be in a stable mode. In this case the output of neurons will be fixed 
and continuing learning is not useful because the network is trapped at a minimum position as a cure we can 
teach the neurons activity function gradient like links weight. Among neurons activity functions sigmoid 
function (one directed & two directed) has the most application, therefore for studying the mathematical form of 
the network 
Designing a neural network which is used error back propagation algorithm is not only a science but 
also an 
experimental work. The reason is that many factors are engaged in designing a network which are the results of 
researcher's experiences however with considering some matters we can lead the back propagation algorithm to 
better 
Performance [7][8][9]. 
The model of a network comprises analog cells like neuron. Fig. 3 shows an instance of these cells 
which are used in a network. This multi layer hierarchal network is made of lots of cell layers. In this network 
there are forward and backward links between cells. If this network is used for recognizing the pattern in this 
hierarchy, forward signals handle the process of recognizing pattern whereas backward signals handle the 
process of separating patterns and reminding. We can teach this network to recognize each set of patterns. Even 
being extra instigators or lack in patterns, this model can recognize it. It is not necessary that the complete 
reminding recognize manipulated shapes or the shapes that are changed in size or convert the imperfect parts to 
the main mode. 
M.Subba Rao et al./ Indian Journal of Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0976-5166 Vol. 2 No. 3 Jun-Jul 2011 389
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      Fig 3 Neuron Model of Pattern Recognition 
 
Conclusion 
 
Pattern recognition is generally categorized according to the type of learning procedure used to 
generate the output value. In simple sense pattern recognition is the heart of all scientific inquiry, including 
understanding ourselves and the real-world around us. Now a day the development of pattern recognition is 
increasing very fast. In this paper we navigate pattern recognition in the round, include the definition of PR, the 
methods of PR, the composition of PR system and figures related to PR. In addition, it is an important trend to 
use pattern recognition on engineering applications; one should make efforts on PR. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The work was supported by JNTUA, Anantapur, and Annamacharya Institute of Technology & Sciences, 
Rajampet, India. 
 
References 
  
[1] K. S. Fu. Syntactic Pattern Recognition and Applications. PrenticeHall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1982. 
[2] Rafael C. Gonzalez and Michael G. Thomason. Syntactic Pattern Recognition: An Introduction. AddisonWesley, Reading, 
Massachusetts, 1978. 
[3] T. Pavlidis. Structural Pattern Recognition. Springer Verlag 
[4] K. Economou and D. Lymberopoulos, "A new perspective in learning pattern generation for teaching neural networks", Neural 
Networks, Volume 12, Issue 4-5, June 1999, Pages 767-775. 
[5] Eiji Mizutani and James W. Demmel, "On structure-exploiting trust region regularized nonlinear least squares algorithms for neural-
network learning", Neural Networks, Volume 16, Issue 5-6, June-July 2003. 
[6] Kamarthi S.V., Pittner S. , Accelerating neural network traning using weight extrapolation, Neural networks, 9, 1999, pp. 1285-1299. 
[7] Mirzaaghazadeh, H. Motameni, "Using Neural Network in Pattern Recognition", Proceeding of Iran Computer Conference, 2002. 
[8] Burak Goktepe, "Role of Learning Algorithm in Neural Network- Based Back calculation of Flexible Pavements", Journal of 
Computingin Civil Engineering, Volume 20, Issue 5, pp. 370-373(September/October 2006). 
[9] V. Maiorov, "Approximation by neural networks and learning theory", Journal of Complexity, Volume 22, Issue 1, Februery 2006, 
Pages 102- 117. 
[10] http://www.diesel- ebooks.com/item/9780470845134/Webb-Andrew-R.-Statistical-Pattern-Recognition/1.html  
[11] ]http://media.wiley.com/product_data/excerpt/39/04708451/0470845139.pdf  
 
 
 
M.Subba Rao et al./ Indian Journal of Computer Science and Engineering (IJCSE)
ISSN : 0976-5166 Vol. 2 No. 3 Jun-Jul 2011 390

