Statistical Analysis of Dice CAPTCHA Usability
Darko Brodić1∗, Alessia Amelio2, Ivo R. Draganov3
1 Technical Faculty in Bor, University of Belgrade, Vojske Jugoslavije 12, 19210 Bor, Serbia,
dbrodic@tfbor.bg.ac.rs
2Department of Computer Engineering, Modeling, Electronics and Systems, University of Calabria,
Via P. Bucci Cube 44, 87036 Rende (CS), Italy,
aamelio@dimes.unical.it
3Faculty of Telecommunications, Technical University of Sofia,
8 Kl. Ohridski Blvd, Sofia 1000, Bulgaria
idraganov@tu-sofia.bg
Abstract. In this paper the elements of the CAPTCHA usability are analyzed. CAPTCHA,
as a time progressive element in computer science, has been under constant interest of ordinary,
professional as well as the scientific users of the Internet. The analysis is given based on the us-
ability elements of CAPTCHA which are abbreviated as user-centric approach to the CAPTCHA.
To demonstrate it, the specific type of Dice CAPTCHA is used in the experiment. The experiment
is conducted on 190 Internet users with different demographic characteristics on laptop and tablet
computers. The obtained results are statistically processed. At the end, the results are compared
and conclusion of their use is drawn.
Keywords: Artificial intelligence, CAPTCHA, Demographic characteristics, Internet, Response
time, Statistical analysis.
1 Introduction
CAPTCHA (Completely Automated Public Turing test to tell Computers and Humans Apart) is a
program representing a challenge-answer to the given test, which is used to realize if the solver is an
Internet user (human) or a computer program (computer robot). This process includes the following
elements: (i) The computer as a server, which generates the CAPTCHA test, (ii) Internet users or
computer program which try to correctly solve the given task, (iii) The computer which evaluates
the answer to the CAPTCHA in the format Yes/No (correctly/incorrectly solved). Typically, the
CAPTCHA task is accustomed to the humans. Hence, there is a greater possibility that humans will
solve this task compared to computer robots abbreviated as bots. Hence, the aim of the CAPTCHA
program is to differentiate Internet users from bots [1].
∗(Corresponding author)
1
ar
X
iv
:1
70
6.
10
17
7v
1 
 [
cs
.A
I]
  3
0 
Ju
n 
20
17
The application of CAPTCHA program is useful in the following areas: (i) Online systems, (ii)
The creation of free e-mail accounts, (iii) Online pooling, and (iv) Online system for buying tickets,
etc. [2].
Still, the CAPTCHA should fulfill certain elements, such as: (i) The solving of CAPTCHA
should not rely on the user’s knowledge of certain language, (ii) The solving of CAPTCHA should
not depend on the user’s age, (iii) CAPTCHA should make an automatic evaluation of the correct-
ness, (iv) The user’s privacy should not be violated, and (v) It should be easy for Internet users to
be solved unlike bots [3].
The related works on CAPTCHA often employ statistical approaches treating their various
aspects. They can be partitioned taking into account their properties in the following areas: (i)
Security, (ii) Practicality, and (iii) Usability [4].
Security represents the main concern to the CAPTCHA programmers. It represents a central
problem of CAPTCHA, but it is not the only one that is of a great importance.
Practicality is connected to the way of creating certain types of CAPTCHA. Again, it has greater
concerns of programmers than CAPTCHA users.
The usability represents the main problem related to the use of the CAPTCHA. Accordingly,
it especially concerns the CAPTCHA users. Hence, this study is used to uncover the elements
of CAPTCHA usability, which represents the main concern of the Internet users. In this way,
an objective analysis of a certain type of CAPTCHA can facilitate better understanding the user-
centric relation between computer and man, i.e. CAPTCHA and Internet user which will contribute
to innovate and improve CAPTCHA elements to be more accustomed to the Internet users unlike
bots.
This paper is organized in the following manner. Section II presents the CAPTCHA types.
Section III describes the experiment. Section IV gives the results of the experiment and discusses
them. Section V draws conclusions and points out the direction of future works.
2 CAPTCHA Types
All CAPTCHA types can be divided into five typical groups: (i) Text-based CAPTCHA, (ii) Image-
based CAPTCHA, (iii) Audio-based CAPTCHA, (iv) Video-based CAPTCHA and (v) Other types
of CAPTCHA [5].
Text-based CAPTCHA asks the Internet users to input exact combination of the given charac-
ters. This type of CAPTCHA is the most widespread one. In order to reduce its vulnerability to bot
attacks, many distorted elements are incorporated. Unfortunately, the text-based CAPTCHA can
be successfully attacked by bot due to the solid OCR (Optical Character Recognition) programs.
Fig. 1 shows an example of the text-based CAPTCHA.
Image-based CAPTCHA is considered as one of the most advanced and safest types of CAPTCHA.
It requires from the users to find out a certain image from a list of images and point to it. Due
to that, its elements include the image details. It represents a relatively easy task to be solved by
Internet users unlike bots. Fig. 2 illustrates an example of the image-based CAPTCHA.
Audio-based CAPTCHA includes an audio element whose purpose is an audio reproduction
of characters that the user should have to input in order to solve the CAPTCHA. This type of
CAPTCHA is especially designed for the people with disabilities. Unfortunately, the audio-based
CAPTCHA is mostly attacked by speech and recognition algorithms in approximately 70% of cases.
Fig. 3 illustrates an example of the audio-based CAPTCHA with audio element in the top right
corner.
2
Video-based CAPTCHA contains text information embedded into the video. Hence, it is a
video which includes a passing text given in specific color compared to video background. The
user should recognize the given passing text and type it. The modern OCR programs challenge
this task, making this CAPTCHA vulnerable to bot attacks. Fig. 4 illustrates an example of the
video-based CAPTCHA.
Other types of CAPTCHA represent those CAPTCHAs that cannot be part of the previous
standardization. Fig. 5 illustrates the examples of such types of CAPTCHA.
3 Experiment
The CAPTCHA experiment is conducted on 190 Internet users. It is divided in two different
experiments solving two different Dice CAPTCHAs (Dice 1 and 2). The first experiment is based
	 Figure 1: An example of the text-based CAPTCHA
	Figure 2: An example of image-based CAPTCHA
3
Figure 3: An example of the audio-based CAPTCHA
	 Figure 4: An example of the video-based CAPTCHA
on Dice CAPTCHAs tested on a community of 90 laptop users aged from 29 to 62 years. The laptop
used for the experiment is Lenovo B51 with the following characteristics: (i) 15.6” wide screen, (ii)
CPU Quad-core 2.4 GHz Celeron, (iii) 4 GB of RAM, (iv) 500 GB of internal memory, and (v)
Operating system Microsoft Windows 7. The second experiment is based on Dice CAPTCHAs
tested on a community of 100 tablet users aged from 28 to 55 years. The tablet used for the
experiment is Lenovo IdeaTab A3000 with the following characteristics: (i) 7” wide screen, (ii)
CPU Quad-core 1.2 GHz Cortex-A7, (iii) 1 GB of RAM, (iv) 16 GB of internal memory, and (v)
Operating system Android.
4 Results and Discussion
4.1 Hypotheses
It is worth noting that the solution time for “ideal” CAPTCHA should not depend on the age,
education and gender differentiation. However, if any CAPTCHA can satisfy these elements, then
it doesn’t mean that it can be solved quickly and easily. According to previous facts, the following
four hypotheses are proposed according to the given demographic characteristics:
Hypothesis 1 (H1) - There exists a statistically significant difference between users’ groups
(laptop vs. tablet) in average response time to solve the CAPTCHA.
Hypothesis 2 (H2) - There exists a statistically significant difference between age groups in
solving the CAPTCHA,
4
	Figure 5: An example of other type of CAPTCHA on the Dice CAPTCHA samples (Dice 1 at the
top, and Dice 2 at the bottom)
Hypothesis 3 (H3) - The group of Internet users with higher education will have a faster response
time in solving the CAPTCHA,
Hypothesis 4 (H4) - There exists a statistically significant difference between gender groups in
solving the CAPTCHA.
4.2 Experimental Results
The first results of the experiment are given in Tables I-II. These tables give a descriptive analysis
of the obtained results for 90 laptops’ and 100 tablets’ Internet users concerning CAPTCHA Dice 1
and 2. They are obtained by Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which tests the unknown distribution and
checks the normality assumption in the analysis of variance [6].
The most important information represents the measure Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed). It defines the
statistical significance of the analyzed data. Because it is smaller than 0.05, then obtained results
5
are statistically significant. Also, it is worth noting that the average time to solve CAPTCHA Dice
1 is 7.6444, while CAPTCHA Dice 2 is solved in 6.514 seconds by laptop users.
From Table II, the measure Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed) is again lower than reference of 0.05, which
determines the statistical significance of the analyzed data. Furthermore, it is worth noting that
the average time to solve CAPTCHA Dice 1 is 12.090, while CAPTCHA Dice 2 is solved in 8.590
seconds by tablet users.
From Tables I-II, it is quite clear that exists a statistically significant difference in the response
time to solve CAPTCHA Dice1 and Dice 2 between laptop and tablet users’ groups. Obviously,
Dice CAPTCHA is more convenient to be solved on a laptop than on a tablet computer. It is
proved by statistical significant population. Hence, H1 is proved.
4.3 Statistical Test
The Mann-Whitney U test is a non-parametric test which can be used to (dis)prove a null-hypothesis
H0 and a research hypothesis H1. Essentially, this test is used to compare differences between two
independent groups N1 and N2. To be used, some pre-assumptions should be valid: (i) Input should
be composed of two categorical independent groups N1 and N2, (ii) Output should be ordinal or
continuous, (iii) There should be no correlation between groups N1 and N2, and (iv) The input
variables should not be normally distributed. The Mann-Whitney U test considers 3 important
measures: (i) p-value, (ii) U value, and (iii) Z value.
The p-value is the first crucial measure of this statistical test. Its value can be interpreted as
follows: (i) p < 0.05 shows a strong evidence against the null-hypothesis. As a consequence, the
null-hypothesis of the test is disproved, while research hypothesis H1 is proved, (ii) p ≥ 0.05 shows
a weak evidence against the null-hypothesis of the test. As a consequence, the null-hypothesis of
the test is proved, while research hypothesis H1 is disproved. U value is calculated as:
U = n1n2 +
n1(n1 + 1)
2
−R1, (1)
where U represents the result of the Mann-Whitney U test. Accordingly, n1 is the size of the
independent group N1, n2 is the size of the independent group N2, and R1 represents the sum of
ranks of group N1. If U value is higher than the critical U value, then the two groups N1 and N2
will have the same score distributions, otherwise the two distributions N1 and N2 will be different
in some aspect. Critical value U is important only for small size distributions, where the number
of their elements is up to 20. If the group is larger than 20, then U value approaches to normal
distribution. In that case, the Z value has importance. It is calculated as:
6
Z =
U − n1n2/2√
n1n2(n1 + n2 + 1)/12
. (2)
If the absolute value of Z is lower than 1.96, then the two groups N1 and N2 will have the same
score distributions, otherwise the two distributions of N1 and N2 will be dissimilar in some way.
Accordingly, if Z is lower than 1.96 research hypothesis is disproved, otherwise it is proved.
4.4 Analysis of the Results and Discussion
The results obtained by statistically processing (Mann-Whitney U test) of experimental data for
the age characteristic of the laptop/tablet users are given in Table III.
The first relevant measure, which has to be evaluated is Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed). For laptop users
as well as for tablet users concerning CAPTCHA Dice 1 and 2 it is higher than 0.05. Accordingly,
this analysis is not statistically significant. Hence, H2 is not proved.
The results obtained by statistically processing (Mann-Whitney U test) experimental data for
the education demographic characteristic of the laptop and tablet users are given in Table IV.
Again, the measure Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed) is evaluated the first. For laptop users as well as for
tablet users concerning CAPTCHA Dice 1 and 2 it is higher than 0.05. Hence, this analysis is not
statistically significant. This leads that H3 is not proved.
The results obtained by statistically processing (Mann-Whitney U test) experimental data for
the gender demographic characteristic of the laptop and tablet users are given in Table V.
From Table V the measure Asymp. Sig. (2-tailed) is again higher than reference value 0.05.
Hence, for laptop users as well as for tablet users concerning CAPTCHA Dice 1 and 2 the given
analysis is not statistically significant. Accordingly, H4 is not proved.
From the aforementioned, the H1 is only proved, while H2, H3 and H4 are not proved. Because,
the postulate of “ideal” CAPTCHA is to be solved in reasonable time (less than 30 sec. [5]),
and the solution time should not depend on the age, education and gender differentiation, the
Dice CAPTCHA represents a good direction toward creating an “ideal” CAPTCHA. However, it
is worth noting that using CAPTCHA on different computer types should also diminish differences
between solution time of certain CAPTCHA. In our case, solution time of Dice CAPTCHA between
laptop and tablet users is almost 50% less in favor of laptop users. Taking into account this
7
information, Dice CAPTCHA is more accustomed to the laptop than tablet Internet users. Hence,
Dice CAPTHA can be considered only as the first step in right direction toward creating an “ideal”
CAPTCHA.
5 Conclusion
The paper analyzed the response time of Internet laptop and tablet users in solving the Dice
CAPTCHA version 1 and 2. To research the given topic, an experiment was conducted on 190
users. It was divided into two parts: (i) testing of 90 laptop users in solving Dice CAPTCHA 1
and 2, and (ii) testing of 100 tablet users in solving Dice CAPTHA 1 and 2. Then, the obtained
results were statistically processed. According to the results, four hypotheses were established,
which should be proved or disproved. All hypotheses were closely related to the elements of an
“ideal” CAPTCHA. Using statistical tools, a descriptive statistical analysis and the results of
Mann-Whitney U test were used for proving and disproving the given hypotheses. At the end,
the H1 hypothesis was only proved, while the other ones were rejected. In spite of the obtained
result, which represents the main elements of an “ideal” CAPTCHA, due to rather different time in
solving Dice CAPTCHA between laptop and tablet users, this type of CAPTCHA cannot be used
8
as an example of “ideal” CAPTCHA. But, because of some overlapping with the characteristics of
an “ideal” CAPTCHA, the Dice CAPTCHA is a good start and a right direction toward creating
the real “ideal” CAPTCHA.
Acknowledgement. This study was partially funded by the Grant of the Ministry of Educa-
tion, Science and Technological Development of the Republic of Serbia, as a part of the project
TR33037.
References
[1] L. Von Ahn, M. Blum, J. Langford, “Telling humans and computers apart automatically”,
Communication of ACM, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 47-60, 2004.
[2] The CAPTCHA test. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CAPTCHA.
[3] L. von Ahn, M. Blum, N. Hopper, and J. Langford, “CAPTCHA: Using hard AI problems for
security”, Proceedings of Eurocrypt, Warsaw, Poland, 2003, pp. 294-311.
[4] P. Baecher, M. Fischlin, L. Gordon, R. Langenberg, M. Lutzow, D. Schroder, “CAPTCHAs:
the good, the bad and the ugly”, Sicherheit, pp.353-365, 2010.
[5] D. Brodić, S. Petrovska, M. Jevtić, Z. N. Milivojević, “The influence of the CAPTCHA types
to its solving times”, Proceeding of 39th MIPRO, Opatija, Croatia, 2016, pp. 1274-1277.
[6] W. J. Conover, “Practical Nonparametric Statistical”, pp. 428-433, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
New York, 1999.
9

