 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
1 
Computer Networks and Internet working 
 
Computer networking is the connectivity among computers to allow communication 
between computer systems or devices. A computer network is any set of computers or 
devices connected to each other with the ability to exchange data. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Network Services 
 Email service  
 File service - Allows users to use and share file space on a computer with a lot of file 
space.  
 Print service - Allows printing to printers connected on the network.  
By completing this module you will be able to understand and learn the 
following:  
 Computer Networking, Types of Networks and network Services 
 Different Cables used in networking and Internet  
 Working of Internet and it’s services 
 Domain naming system 
 Advantages & disadvantages of Internet 
 What is a Website, Web portal ,Web browsers 
 Important Internet service providers in India 
 Types of Internet connections 
 Search engines 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
2 
 Web surfing - Allowing someone to open web pages and see web sites on the 
internet.  
 Filtering out undesired sites on the internet.  
 Allowing someone to access the network from the outside (from home).  
 Updating virus definitions on workstations.  
 Allowing someone to log onto the network.  
 Even giving a workstation an address on the network is a service. If your computer 
does not have an address, it cannot access the internet or any other resource on the 
network 
 
Examples of important networks are: 
 
Local Area Network (LAN), which is usually a 
small network constrained to a small geographic 
area like a home, office, or group of buildings e.g. 
a school. 
 
 
 
Wide Area Network (WAN) is usually a 
larger network that covers a large geographic 
area. WANs are used to connect LANs and 
other types of networks together, so that users 
and computers in one location can 
communicate with users and computers in 
other locations. 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
3 
Metropolitan Area Network: A Metropolitan Area Network is a network that 
connects two or more Local Area Networks or Campus Area Networks together but does 
not extend beyond the boundaries of the immediate town, city, or metropolitan area. 
Multiple routers, switches & hubs are connected to create a MAN. 
 
Wireless LANs and WANs (WLAN & 
WWAN) is the wireless equivalent of the LAN 
and WAN. Wireless telecommunications 
networks are generally implemented with some 
type of remote information transmission 
system that uses electromagnetic waves, such 
as radio waves, for the carrier and this 
implementation usually takes place at the 
physical level or "layer" of the network. 
 
Different kinds of cables: 
All networks are interconnected to allow communication with a variety of different kinds 
of media. This includes, twisted-pair copper wire cable, coaxial cable, optical fiber, and 
various wireless technologies. The devices can be separated by a few meters (e.g. via 
Bluetooth) or nearly unlimited distances (e.g. via the interconnections of the Internet. 
 
A: outer plastic sheath 
B: copper screen 
C: inner dielectric insulator 
D: copper core 
 
     Copper wire cable                Flexible coaxial cable 
 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Fiber Optic Cable 
Internetwork 
Two or more networks or network segments connected using devices as a router. Any 
interconnection among or between public, private, commercial, industrial, or 
governmental networks may also be defined as an internetwork. 
In modern practice, the interconnected networks use the Internet Protocol. There are at 
least three variants of internetwork, depending on who administers and who 
participates in them:   
• Intranet 
• Extranet 
• Internet 
Intranets and extranets may or may not have connections to the Internet. If connected 
to the Internet, the intranet or extranet is normally protected from being accessed from 
the Internet without proper authorization.  
An intranet is a set of interconnected networks, using the Internet Protocol and uses 
IP-based tools such as web browsers, that is under the control of a single administrative 
entity. That administrative entity closes the intranet to the rest of the world, and allows 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
5 
only specific users. Most commonly, an intranet is the internal network of a company or 
other enterprise. 
An extranet is a network or internetwork that is limited in scope to a single 
organization or entity but which also has limited connections to the networks of one or 
more other usually, but not necessarily, trusted organizations or entities.  
Internet : A specific internetwork, consisting of a worldwide interconnection of 
governmental, academic, public, and private networks. It is based upon the Advanced 
Research Projects Agency Network (ARPANET) developed by ARPA of the U.S. 
Department of Defense. Its also responsible for the World Wide Web (WWW).  
World Wide Web:  
The World Wide Web (commonly shortened to the Web) is a system of interlinked 
hypertext documents accessed via the Internet. With a Web browser, a user views Web 
pages that may contain text, images, videos, and other multimedia and navigates 
between them using hyperlinks. The World Wide Web was created in 1989 by Sir Tim 
Berners-Lee, working at CERN in Geneva, Switzerland. 
Internet working: 
The Internet is a group of computers connected to share the information they hold. The 
connected computers belong to various agencies - government, universities, companies, 
individuals etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
6 
Interne
t 
Internet- working Diagram: 
 
 
 
Internet Services 
Most of the Internet Services 
operate on the client/server 
model or concept. A computer 
is a client if it is receiving files, 
and is a server if it is sending 
files.  
To gain access to the Internet 
most people open an account 
with an Internet Service 
Provider (ISP) in their area. To 
connect they "dial-up" to their ISP's server and "log-in" with their account name and 
password. Some of the services accessed through the internet are as follows 
Electronic Mail (E-mail) 
E-mail, is the most popular service of the Internet. It is preferred s the messages get 
transmitted in seconds. A person also has the option to read and respond to the 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
7 
messages at one's convenience. People can send and receive e-mail wherever they go, 
when they travel as long as they have access to a connected computer. People can 
send forms, documents, colored pictures, etc. through email as attachments  
Mailing List 
An electronic mailing list is used when somebody wants to send a message or 
newsletter, for example, to many people at once.   
Newsgroups 
This is the Internet equivalent of a discussion group or an electronic bulletin board. It’s 
a feature using which people discuss on specific areas of interest via the internet. Some 
newsgroups are moderated, others are not. If it is moderated a human moderator 
screens all messages and decides if these are worth posting. Discussions can be 
"threaded." For example, in a newsgroup for agriculture, one member might ask about 
suitable crops that can be grown in his land. But another member may start discussing 
how to storage methods for grains.  More than one threaded discussion can occur at 
the same time with different members posting their opinions and reactions to either one 
or more threads.   
Chat 
This is another popular form of communication over the Internet. Unlike e-mail, mailing 
list and newsgroups, chat allows people to converse in "real time." People may actually 
see you type your questions and responses.  
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) 
File Transfer Protocol is the standard method for transferring files, whether 
downloading or uploading, to and from your computer with another computer on the 
Internet. It is simple to use and is the most popular way to download software and 
other files from the Internet.  
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
8 
Telnet 
Telnet is short for "Terminal Emulation." It is a feature of the Internet that lets you use 
the resources of another computer in another part of the world. This is done by 
remotely logging to the distant computer which is called the host. Once you are 
connected, it is possible to operate a remote computer using one's keyboard. The telnet 
is most useful to access the databases of public services like government directories.  
 
An Internet Address: Messages are transmitted from one computer to another; 
every computer in the Internet must have a unique and specific address. An Internet or 
IP address, as it is sometimes called, consists of four numbers separated by periods. 
The smallest address would be 0.0.0.0 while the biggest would be 
1234.5678.9101.1121. Only computers are expected to remember all these numbers 
without getting confused.  
Domain Name System 
The Domain Name System (DNS) helps users to find their way around the Internet. 
Every computer on the Internet has a unique address, called the "IP address". But it is 
hard to remember everyone's IP address. The DNS makes it easier by allowing a 
familiar string of letters (the "domain name") to be used instead of the IP address. So 
instead of typing 192.0.34.65, you can type www.indg.in, which is easier to 
remember. 
Domain names have the format: hostname.subdomain.top-level-domain. Eg. 
www.indg.gov.in. The third set of letters of an address are intended to indicate the 
type of organization hosting the computer.   
Domain name   Meaning 
COM   Commercial organizations 
GOV   Government institutions 
NET   Major Network support centers 
ORG   Organizations other than those above 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
9 
• Two letter codes - The final two letter codes indicate the country of origin.  
Eg:.'in' is used for India  
Advantages and disadvantages of Internet 
Advantages 
There are many advantages of using the internet such as:  
Communication:  
The foremost target of internet has always been the communication By the advent of 
computer’s Internet, our earth has reduced and has attained the form of a global village.  
Now we can communicate in a fraction of second with a person who is sitting in the 
other part of the world. Today, for better communication, we can avail the facilities of 
e-mail; we can chat for hours with our loved ones.  
Information  
Information is probably the biggest advantage that internet offers. The Internet is a 
virtual treasure trove of information. Any kind of information on any topic under the sun 
is available on the Internet. The search engines like Google, yahoo is at your service on 
the Internet.   
Entertainment  
Entertainment is another popular area why many people prefer to surf the Internet. 
Downloading games, songs, movies are certain examples.  
Services  
Many services are now provided on the internet such as online banking, job seeking, 
booking railway tickets, etc.   
E-Commerce  
Ecommerce is the concept used for any type of business deals that involves the transfer 
of information across the globe via Internet. Eg. Shopping online for books, household 
goods etc. 
  
 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
10 
Address Bar  
Ex: www.indg.in 
Disadvantages  
Theft of Personal information  
While using the internet, there is the danger of personal information such as name, 
address, and credit card number etc. being accessed and misused by culprits.   
Spamming 
Spamming refers to sending unwanted e-mails in bulk, which are useless and obstruct 
the entire system.  
Virus threat  
Virus is nothing but a program which disrupts the normal functioning of the computer 
systems. Computers attached to internet are more prone to virus attacks and they can 
end up into crashing the whole hard disk.  
Pornography 
This is a serious issue concerning the Internet. There are thousands of sites on the 
Internet that provide bad/obscene images/content that affect the users' mental health. 
 
 
Web site / Web Page 
A web page is an area of text and other visual effects that can be seen when we get 
on the internet.  
A web site is a group of web 
pages that belong to one 
section of the internet, such 
as one person, one company, 
one school, or one 
government agency, etc. 
Web Portal  
Web portals provide a single 
point of access to a variety of content and core services. Eg. www.indg.in 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
11 
Web browser 
A web browser is a software application that enables a user to display and interact 
with text, images, videos, music and other information typically located on a Web page 
at a website on the World Wide Web or a local area network.  
Important web browsers: 
• Mosaic, April 22,1993 
• Netscape Navigator and Netscape Communicators, October 13, 1994 
• Internet Explorer, August 1995 
• Opera,1996 
• Mozilla Firefox, 2004 
 
The most popular browser is Internet Explorer and is published by Microsoft and the 
second most popular browser is Netscape (or Netscape Navigator). It is also freely 
available. 
Under the title bar, a browser displays its main menu. 
 
 
 
 
 
The Toolbar: Under the main menu, a browser is equipped with small pictures called 
buttons. Microsoft Internet Explorer usually displays these buttons on their own range 
(called a toolbar). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
12 
The Address bar : the space where the address of a particular website is to be typed 
to view the site 
 
 
 
Internet Service Providers in India 
An Internet service provider (abbr. ISP, also called Internet access provider or 
IAP) is a business or organization that provides consumers or businesses access to 
the Internet and related services. 
Main ISP’s in India:  
• BSNL Broadband 
• Bharti Airtel 
• Iqara 
• Mahanagar Telephone Nigam Limited 
• Reliance Communications 
• Sancharnet 
• Spice Telecom 
• Tata Teleservices 
• Railtel 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
13 
Types of Internet Connections 
I.  Home user connection 
i.  Dial-up 
Dial-up access is a form of Internet access via telephone line. The client uses a 
modem connected to a computer and a telephone line, to dial an Internet service 
provider's (ISP) node to establish a modem-to-modem link, which is then routed to 
the Internet. 
Modem : Modem (from modulator-
demodulator) is a device that modulates an 
analog carrier signal to encode digital 
information, and also demodulates such a 
carrier signal to decode the transmitted 
information. The goal is to produce a signal 
that can be transmitted easily and decoded to 
reproduce the original digital data. Modems 
can be used over any means of transmitting analog signals, from driven diodes to 
radio. 
ii.  DSL (Digital subscriber line): DSL or xDSL, is a 
technology that provides digital data transmission over the 
wires of a local telephone network.  
iii.  Broadband wireless access: Wireless Broadband is a 
technology that provides high-speed wireless internet and data network access over a 
wide area. 
iv. Cable modem: A cable modem is a type of modem that 
provides access to a data signal sent over the cable television 
infrastructure. Cable modems are primarily used to deliver 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
14 
broadband Internet access in the form of cable internet.  
v. ISDN: Integrated Services refers to ISDN's ability to deliver at minimum two 
simultaneous connections, in any combination of data, voice, video, and fax, over a 
single line. Multiple devices can be attached to the line, and used as needed. That 
means an ISDN line can take care of most people's complete communications needs 
at a much higher transmission rate, without forcing the purchase of multiple analog 
phone lines. 
In a videoconference, ISDN provides simultaneous voice, video, and text transmission 
between individual desktop videoconferencing systems and group (room) 
videoconferencing system. 
II.  Business connections 
i. DSL 
ii. SHDSL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fundamentals of IT                          India Development Gateway www.indg.in 
15 
Search Engines 
Although the internet is highly rich with information, the information is not always 
organized in a way that a person expects. When "browsing", it is hard to get to the 
particular information one is looking for. To provide an alternative, there are some 
specialized sites that can perform the search for users, with more or less same 
accuracy. These sites are referred to as search engines. Some of the most popular of 
them are:  
Examples : Google, Yahoo, MSN, Netscape, Alta Vista Search 
 
Steps to do a search 
• To do a search, first access a search engine site. 
Eg. www.search.com 
• Each one of them provides you with a 
convenient box in which you can type the word 
or sentence to search and press Enter. Eg. 
Types of roses 
• The results are displayed in a list.  
• You can then click each link and check it. If a 
link doesn't provide the type of information 
you are looking for, you can click Back (the 
shortcut to go back on most browsers is Alt + 
left arrow key) and click the next link in the list. 
If you still don't find what you are looking for, 
you can change the word or sentence that you 
typed and start searching again. You can also try another search engine site. 
 
Most of the search engine sites provide more services than searching the web. For 
example, both Yahoo and MSN provide free email services. 

