IEEE Communications Magazine • September 2008 590163-6804/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE
INTRODUCTION
The demand for higher data rates in wireless net-
works is unrelenting, and has triggered the design
and development of new data-minded cellular
standards such as WiMAX (802.16e), the Third
Generation Partnership Project’s (3GPP’s) High
Speed Packet Access (HSPA) and LTE stan-
dards, and 3GPP2’s EVDO and UMB standards.
In parallel, Wi-Fi mesh networks are also being
developed to provide nomadic high-rate data ser-
vices in a more distributed fashion [1]. Although
the Wi-Fi networks will not be able to support
the same level of mobility and coverage as the
cellular standards, to be competitive for home
and office use, cellular data systems will need to
provide service roughly comparable to that
offered by Wi-Fi networks.
The growth in wireless capacity is exemplified
by this observation from Martin Cooper of
Arraycomm: “The wireless capacity has doubled
every 30 months over the last 104 years.” This
translates into an approximately millionfold
capacity increase since 1957. Breaking down
these gains shows a 25× improvement from wider
spectrum, a 5× improvement by dividing the
spectrum into smaller slices, a 5× improvement
by designing better modulation schemes, and a
whopping 1600× gain through reduced cell sizes
and transmit distance. The enormous gains
reaped from smaller cell sizes arise from effi-
cient spatial reuse of spectrum or, alternatively,
higher area spectral efficiency [2].
The main problem in this continued micro-
ization of cellular networks is that the network
infrastructure for doing so is expensive. A recent
development is femtocells, also called home base
stations (BSs), which are short-range low-cost
low-power BSs installed by the consumer for
better indoor voice and data reception. The
user-installed device communicates with the cel-
lular network over a broadband connection such
as digital subscriber line (DSL), cable modem,
or a separate radio frequency (RF) backhaul
channel. While conventional approaches require
dual-mode handsets to deliver both in-home and
mobile services, an in-home femtocell deploy-
ment promises fixed mobile convergence with
existing handsets. Compared to other techniques
for increasing system capacity, such as distribut-
ed antenna systems [3] and microcells [4], the
key advantage of femtocells is that there is very
little upfront cost to the service provider. Table
1 provides a detailed comparison of the key
traits of these three approaches.
Studies on wireless usage show that more
than 50 percent of all voice calls [Airvana, 5]
and more than 70 percent of data traffic origi-
nate indoors [PicoChip, 5]. Voice networks are
engineered to tolerate low signal quality, since
the required data rate for voice signals is very
low, on the order of 10 kb/s or less. Data net-
works, on the other hand, require much higher
signal quality in order to provide the multi-
megabit per second data rates users have come
to expect. For indoor devices, particularly at the
higher carrier frequencies likely to be deployed
in many wireless broadband systems, attenuation
losses will make high signal quality and hence
high data rates very difficult to achieve. This
raises the obvious question: why not encourage
the end user to install a short-range low-power
link in these locations? This is the essence of the
win-win of the femtocell approach. The sub-
scriber is happy with the higher data rates and
reliability; the operator reduces the amount of
traffic on their expensive macrocell network, and
can focus its resources on truly mobile users. To
summarize, the key arguments in favor of femto-
cells are the following.
Better coverage and capacity. Due to their
short transmit-receive distance, femtocells can
greatly lower transmit power, prolong handset
battery life, and achieve a higher signal-to-inter-
ference-plus-noise ratio (SINR). These translate
into improved reception — so-called five-bar
coverage — and higher capacity. Because of the
ABSTRACT
The surest way to increase the system capaci-
ty of a wireless link is by getting the transmitter
and receiver closer to each other, which creates
the dual benefits of higher-quality links and
more spatial reuse. In a network with nomadic
users, this inevitably involves deploying more
infrastructure, typically in the form of microcells,
hot spots, distributed antennas, or relays. A less
expensive alternative is the recent concept of
femtocells — also called home base stations —
which are data access points installed by home
users to get better indoor voice and data cover-
age. In this article we overview the technical and
business arguments for femtocells and describe
the state of the art on each front. We also
describe the technical challenges facing femto-
cell networks and give some preliminary ideas
for how to overcome them.
TOPICS IN RADIO COMMUNICATIONS
Vikram Chandrasekhar and Jeffrey G. Andrews, The University of Texas at Austin
Alan Gatherer, Texas Instruments
Femtocell Networks: A Survey
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 59
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 200860
reduced interference, more users can be packed
into a given area in the same region of spectrum,
thus increasing the area spectral efficiency [2] or,
equivalently, the total number of active users per
Hertz per unit area.
Improved macrocell reliability. If the traffic
originating indoors can be absorbed into the
femtocell networks over the IP backbone, the
macrocell BS can redirect its resources toward
providing better reception for mobile users.
n Table 1. Femtocells, distributed antennas, and microcells.
Infrastructure Expenses Features
Femtocell: Consumer installed wireless data access
point inside homes, which backhauls data through
a broadband gateway (DSL/cable/Ethernet/WiMAX)
over the Internet to the cellular operator network.
Capital expenditure. Subsidized fem-
tocell hardware.
Operating expenditure. a) Providing a
scalable architecture to transport data
over IP; b) upgrading femtocells to
newer standards.
Benefits. a) Lower cost, better cover-
age and prolonged handset battery
life from shrinking cell-size; b) capaci-
ty gain from higher SINR and dedicat-
ed BS to home subscribers ; c)
reduced subscriber churn
Shortcomings. a) Interference from
nearby macrocell and femtocell trans-
missions limits capacity; b) increased
strain on backhaul from data traffic
may affect throughput.
Distributed antennas: Operator installed spatially
separated antenna elements (AEs) connected to a
macro BS via a dedicated fiber/microwave backhaul
link.
Backhaul
Capital expenditure. AE and backhaul
installation.
Operating expenditure. AE mainte-
nance and backhaul connection.
Benefits. a) Better coverage since
user talks to nearby AE; b) capacity
gain by exploiting both macro- and
micro-diversity (using multiple AEs
per macrocell user). 
Shortcomings. a) Does not solve the
indoor coverage problem; b) RF inter-
ference in the same bandwidth from
nearby AEs will diminish capacity; c)
backhaul deployment costs may be
considerable.
Microcells: Operator installed cell towers, which
improve coverage in urban areas with poor
reception.
Capital expenditure. Installing new
cell towers.
Operating expenditure. Electricity,
site lease, and backhaul.
Benefits. a) System capacity gain
from smaller cell size; b) complete
operator control.
Shortcomings. a) Installation and
maintenance of cell towers is pro-
hibitively expensive; b) does not com-
pletely solve indoor coverage
problem.
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 60
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 2008 61
Cost benefits. Femtocell deployments will
reduce the operating and capital expenditure
costs for operators. A typical urban macrocell
costs upwards of $1000/month in site lease, and
additional costs for electricity and backhaul. The
macrocell network will be stressed by the operat-
ing expenses, especially when subscriber growth
does not match the increased demand for data
traffic [Airvana, 5]. The deployment of femto-
cells will reduce the need for adding macro-BS
towers. A recent study [6] shows that the operat-
ing expenses scale from $60,000/year/macrocell
to just $200/year/femtocell.
Reduced subscriber turnover. Poor in-build-
ing coverage causes customer dissatisfaction,
encouraging them to either switch operators or
maintain a separate wired line whenever indoors.
The enhanced home coverage provided by fem-
tocells will reduce motivation for home users to
switch carriers.
The goal of this article is to provide an
overview for these end-user-deployed infra-
structure enhancements and describe in more
detail how the above improvements come about.
We also describe the business and technical
challenges that femtocells present, and provide
some ideas about how to address them.
TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF
FEMTOCELLS
The capacity potential of femtocells can be veri-
fied rapidly from Shannon’s law, which relates
the wireless link capacity (in bits per second) in
a bandwidth to the SINR. The SINR is a func-
tion of the transmission powers of the desired
and interfering transmitters, path losses, and
shadowing during terrestrial propagation. Path
losses cause the transmitted signal to decay as
Ad–α, where A is a fixed loss, d is the distance
between the transmitter and receiver, and α is
the path loss exponent. The key to increasing
capacity is to enhance reception between intend-
ed transmitter-receiver pairs by minimizing d
and α. Simultaneously, additional benefits in
network-wide spatial reuse can be obtained by,
but not restricted to, exploiting diversity, and
employing interference cancellation, interference
suppression, and interference avoidance tech-
niques.
Femtocells enable reduced transmit power
while maintaining good indoor coverage. Pene-
tration losses insulate the femtocell from sur-
rounding femtocell transmissions. Assuming a
fixed receive power target with a path loss prop-
agation model (no fading), and denoting α (β)
as the outdoor (indoor) path loss exponent,
overlaying an area L2 with N femtocells results
in a transmit power reduction on the order of
[10(α–β) log10 L + 5 β log10 N] dB. For exam-
ple, choosing a cell dimension of L = 1000 m
and N = 50 femtocells, with equal path loss
exponents α = β = 4, femtocells give a transmit
power saving of nearly 34 dB. When the indoor
path loss exponent is smaller, say β = 2, the
transmit power savings increase to nearly 77 dB.
To summarize, the capacity benefits of femto-
cells are attributed to:
• Reduced distance between the femtocell
and the user, which leads to higher received
signal strength.
• Lowered transmit power, and mitigation of
interference from neighboring macrocell
and femtocell users due to outdoor propa-
gation and penetration losses.
• As femtocells serve only around one to four
users, they can devote a larger portion of
their resources (transmit power and band-
width) to each subscriber. A macrocell, on
the other hand, has a larger coverage area
(500 m–1 km radius) and a larger number
of users; providing quality of service (QoS)
for data users is more difficult.
The first two points illustrate the dual
improvements in capacity through increased sig-
nal strength and reduced interference. The third
point shows that deploying femtocells will enable
more efficient usage of precious power and fre-
quency resources. The assumption here is that
the wired broadband operator provides sufficient
QoS over the backhaul. Otherwise, backhaul
n Figure 1. Femtocell vs. macrocell throughput.
Normalized throughput per user (b/s/Hz)
10
0
0.1
C
um
ul
at
iv
e 
di
st
ri
bu
ti
on
 f
un
ct
io
n
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
2 3 4
Select 20
strongest users
All femtocells transmit
simultaneously
Number of femtocells: 50
Users per femtocell: 2
Median throughput gain: 1.8 b/s/Hz/user
5 6 7 8 9 10
Femtocell (voice)
Macrocell (voice)
Femtocell (data)
Macrocell (data)
Normalized sum throughput (b/s/Hz)
500
0
0.1
C
um
ul
at
iv
e 
di
st
ri
bu
ti
on
 f
un
ct
io
n
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
100 150 200
Number of femtocells: 50
Users per femtocell: 2
Median sum throughput gain: 250 b/s/Hz
Simultaneous low-power femtocell
transmissions enable enormous gains
in sum throughput for a femtocell network
relative to a macrocell network.
250 300 350
Femtocell (data)
Macrocell (data)
Macrocell radius: 400 m 
Femtocell radius: 40 m
Transmit/receive antennas: 1
Lognormal std. dev. (macro): 8 dB
Macrocell path loss (dB): 34 + 40log(d)
Transmit power (femto): 23 dBm
Lognormal std. dev. (neighboring femto): 12 dB
Lognormal std. dev. (indoor): 4 dB
Indoor path loss (dB): 37 + 30log(d)
Penetration loss: 10 dB
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 61
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 200862
capacity limitations could reduce the indoor
capacity gains provided by femtocells.
Example. Consider a cellular orthogonal fre-
quency-division multiple access (OFDMA) sys-
tem with 100 active users. One scenario consists
of a single macrocell serving all 100 users simul-
taneously; another scenario consists of 50 femto-
cells, with two active users in each femtocell.
Figure 1 illustrates the cumulative distribution
function of the normalized per user and sum
throughput (normalized by the overall band-
width), considering voice and data traffic. Simu-
lations show a nearly 0.6 b/s/Hz gain in
normalized median user throughput in femtocell
deployments for voice only networks.
With data traffic, it is infeasible for a macro-
cell to provide data services to all 100 users
simultaneously because of the limited transmis-
sion power and spectrum availability per user.
We therefore consider a somewhat pathological
case, in which the macrocell always schedules
the 20 strongest users for transmission. On the
other hand, femtocells can transmit simultane-
ously over the entire bandwidth. Compared to a
macrocell, a femtocell deployment shows a nor-
malized user throughput gain equaling 1.8 b/s/Hz
and a huge system-wide median sum throughput
gain of nearly 250 b/s/Hz. This shows that the
biggest benefits of femtocells are massive
improvement in the system spatial spectral effi-
ciency.
BUSINESS ASPECTS OF FEMTOCELLS
Even though femtocells offer savings in site
lease, backhaul, and electricity costs for the
operator, they incur strategic investments. Oper-
ators will need to aggressively price femtocells,
despite tight budgets and high manufacturing
costs, to compete with ubiquitous Wi-Fi. For
example, the North American operator Sprint
charges a subsidized price of $99.99 per Airave
femtocell for subscribing to a $20/month family
plan. At the same time, the features femtocells
have to provide are in many ways more sophisti-
cated than what is in a consumer grade Wi-Fi
access point. The nascent femto vendors are fac-
ing cost targets set by the mature high-volume
Wi-Fi market and the demands of operators for
minimal subsidy to reduce return-on-investment
(ROI) time. Consequently, cost issues are in most
cases the central factor driving the selection of
solutions to each technical challenge.
Table 2 shows a predictive cost breakdown in
a femtocell network deployment, conducted by
n Table 2. Predictive return on investment from femtocell deployments 
Gartner
Airvana
New core network infrastructure
Capital expenditure = $35 per consumer
Subscriber addition
a) Femtocell price = $200
b) Price to consumer = $50
c) Marketing expense = $50
Net expense per additional subscriber = $200
Monthly revenues
a) Customer revenue = $25
b) Network operating expenditure = $8
c) Customer support = $3
Monthly revenue
1) Electricity savings
from reduced macro BS power
consumption = $0.50 per consumer
2) Monthly savings from reduction
in number of macrocells
= $1.50 per consumer
3) Monthly revenue from indoor data
downloads = $5 per consumer
4) Bundled voice services, broadband
services over LTE/WiMAX/UMB
= $2.50 per consumer
Monthly expenses
1) Free voice calls inside
femtocell = $2.50 per consumer
2) Operating expenditure
for core network upgrades
= $2 per consumer
Expense
per consumer
= $4.50 per month
Revenue
per consumer
= $9.50 per month
Implied ROI with
$100 subsidy per
consumer equals
20 months
Fixed expense 
per consumer
= $235
Revenue 
per consumer
= $14 per month
Implied 
ROI equals 
16 months
Even though 
femtocells offer 
savings in site lease,
backhaul, and 
electricity costs for
the operator, they
incur strategic 
investments. 
Operators will need
to aggressively price
femtocells, despite
tight budgets and
high manufacturing
costs, to compete
with ubiquitous 
Wi-Fi.
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 62
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 2008 63
Airvana and Gartner [5]. On balance, it can be
assumed that after 1.5 years operator investment
will be recovered, allowing future profits.
CURRENT STANDARDIZATION AND
DEPLOYMENTS
Given the aggressive cost challenges, standard-
ization of requirements across customers is
important to accomplish a low-cost femtocell
solution. Toward this end, a collaborative orga-
nization called the Femto-Forum comprising
operators and femtocell vendors was formed in
2007 with the objective of developing open stan-
dards for product interoperability.
Table 3 shows the current state of femtocell
deployments. The operator Sprint currently pro-
vides code-division multiple access (CDMA) 1x
EVDO femtocell services in the United States;
concurrently, a number of operators — Verizon
and AT&T (United States), O2 Telefonica and
Motorola (Europe), and Softbank (Japan) — are
conducting femtocell trials prior to market. ABI
Research [5] predicts 102 million users world-
wide on more than 32 million femtocells by 2012.
TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
This section overviews the key technical chal-
lenges facing femtocell networks:
• Broadband femtocells: Resource allocation,
timing/synchronization, and backhaul
• Voice femtocells: Interference management
in femtocells, allowing access to femtocells,
handoffs, mobility, and providing Emergen-
cy-911 services
• Network infrastructure: Securely bridging
the femtocell with the operator network
over IP
PHYSICAL AND MEDIUM ACCESS LAYERS:
BROADBAND FEMTOCELLS
Confronting operators will be the dual problems
of mitigating RF interference and efficiently
allocating spectrum in femtocell networks. Inter-
ference mitigation will require innovative solu-
tions since the low-cost target potentially
necessitates scaled down signal processing capa-
bilities inside femtocells. The RF interference
will arise from:
a Macrocell-to-femtocell interference
b Femtocell-to-femtocell interference
c Femtocell-to-macrocell interference
The near-far effect due to uneven distribution of
receive power is the main contributor for a and
c, while femtocell-to-femtocell interference is
relatively smaller due to low transmit power and
penetration losses.
Challenge 1: How Will a Femtocell Adapt
to Its Surrounding Environment and Allo-
cate Spectrum in the Presence of Intra-
and Cross-Tier Interference? — The 3GPP
LTE and WiMAX standards ensure intracell
orthogonality among macrocellular users and
mitigate intercell interference through fractional
frequency reuse. Since femtocells will be placed
by end consumers, the ad hoc locations of fem-
tocells will render centralized frequency plan-
ning difficult.
Due to the absence of coordination between
the macrocell and femtocells, and between fem-
tocells, decentralized spectrum allocation
between macrocell and femtocell users is an
open research problem that can provide answers
to the following questions:
• Should macrocell and femtocell users be
orthogonal through bandwidth splitting? Is
there an “optimal” splitting policy? How
does this vary with the femtocell density?
• Alternatively, with shared bandwidth (i.e.,
universal frequency reuse), what fraction of
the spectrum should the macrocell and
femtocells assign their users?
• Which of these two schemes is “better” in
various configurations?
Challenge 2: How Will Femtocells Provide
Timing and Synchronization? — Femtocells
n Table 3. Existing femtocell offerings.
Manufacturer Partner/operator Region Technology
Samsung (Ubicell) Sprint (Airave) North America a) IS-95, CDMA2000 1xEV-DOb) WCDMA
AirWalk Communications Tatara Systems andTango Networks North America CDMA 1x RTT & 1x-EVDO
Ericsson Europe GSM/3GPP UMTS
Airvana Nokia-Siemens 3GPP UMTS
Alcatel-Lucent North America 3GPP UMTS
Axiom Wireless PicoChip United Kingdom a) 3GPP UMTSb) WiMAX
IP Access (Oyster) PicoChip United Kingdom 3GPP UMTS
Ubiquisys (Zonegate) Kineto Wireless, Google United Kingdom 3GPP UMTS/HSPA
Given the aggressive
cost challenges, 
standardization of
requirements across
customers is 
important to 
accomplish a 
low-cost femtocell
solution. Toward this
end, a collaborative
organization called
the Femto-Forum
comprising operators
and femtocell 
vendors was 
formed in 2007.
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 63
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 200864
will require synchronization to align received sig-
nals to minimize multi-access interference and
ensure a tolerable carrier offset. Synchronization
is also required so that macrocell users can hand
off to a femtocell or vice versa, which is made
more difficult due to absence of centralized
coordination between them. With an IP back-
haul, femtocells will experience difficulty in
obtaining a time base that is immune to packet
jitter. For fourth-generation (4G) OFDMA air
interfaces, ranging procedures to achieve timing
(~ 1 µs) and frequency accuracy (~250 ppb) [7,
8] are needed for two reasons:
• The intercarrier interference arising from a
carrier offset causes loss of subcarrier
orthogonality. Additionally, femtocells will
have to compensate for frequency errors
arising from the handsets, which typically
have poor oscillators.
• In time-division duplex (TDD) systems,
femtocells will require an accurate refer-
ence for coordinating the absolute phases
for forward and reverse link transmissions,
and bounding the timing drift.
Although both points apply to the macrocell
BS as well, the low cost burden and difficulty of
synchronizing over backhaul will make efficient
synchronization especially important for femto-
cells. Network solutions such as the IEEE-1588
Precision Timing Protocol over IP, with poten-
tial timing accuracy of 100 ns, and self-adaptive
timing recovery protocols (e.g., the G.8261 stan-
dard) are promising. Another possibility is equip-
ping femtocells with GPS for synchronizing with
the macrocell, which relies on maintaining stable
indoor satellite reception and keeping low costs
in a price-sensitive unit. Finally, high-precision
oven-controlled crystal oscillators may be used
inside femtocells, incurring additional cost and
periodic calibration.
Challenge 3: How Will Backhaul Provide
Acceptable QoS? — IP backhaul needs QoS
for delay-sensitive traffic and providing service
parity with macrocells. Additionally, it should
provide sufficient capacity to avoid creating a
traffic bottleneck. While existing macrocell net-
works provide latency guarantees within 15 ms,
current backhaul networks are not equipped to
provide delay resiliency. Lack of net neutrality
poses a serious concern, except in cases where
the wireline backhaul provider is the same com-
pany or in a tight strategic relationship with the
cellular operator.
Another issue arises when femtocell usage
occurs when the backhaul is already being used
to deliver Wi-Fi traffic. Trials by Telefonica [5]
reveal that when users employed Wi-Fi, femto-
cells experienced difficulty transferring data and
even low-bandwidth services like voice. This is
especially important considering that improved
voice coverage is expected to be a main driver
for femtocells.
PHYSICAL AND MEDIUM ACCESS LAYERS:
VOICE FEMTOCELLS
For voice users, an operator faces two choices:
either allocate different frequency bands to
macrocell and femtocell users to eliminate cross-
tier interference, or serve both macrocell and
femtocell users in the same region of bandwidth
to maximize area spectral efficiency. Considering
the scarce availability of radio resources and
ease of deployment, using the same region of
bandwidth is preferable, if at all possible.
Challenge 4: How Will Femtocells Handle
Cross-Tier Interference? — CDMA networks
(without femtocells) employ fast power control to
compensate for path loss, shadowing, and fading,
and to provide uniform coverage. When femto-
cells are added, power control creates dead zones
(Fig. 2), leading to nonuniform coverage. On the
reverse link, a cell edge macrocell user transmit-
ting at maximum power causes unacceptable
interference to nearby femtocells. Consequently,
cell edge femtocells experience significantly high-
er interference than interior femtocells. On the
forward link, at the cell edge — where femtocells
are most needed — macrocell users are disrupt-
ed by nearby femtocell transmissions since they
suffer higher path loss than cell interior users.
Challenge 5: Should Femtocells Provide
Open or Closed Access? — A closed access
femtocell has a fixed set of subscribed home
users that, for privacy and security, are licensed
to use the femtocell. Open access femtocells, on
the other hand, provide service to macrocell
users if they pass nearby. Radio interference is
managed by allowing strong macrocell interfer-
ers to communicate with nearby femtocells.
Although open access reduces the macrocell
load, the higher numbers of users communicat-
ing with each femtocell will strain the backhaul
to provide sufficient capacity (related to Chal-
lenge 3) and raise privacy concerns for home
users. Open access will need to avoid “starving”
the paying home user so that they never see “all
circuits busy.” Since femtocells are typically mar-
keted as offering flat rate calling, open access
will need to differentiate the zero tariff home
users from the pay-per-minute visitor. For both
reasons, operators are looking at hybrid models
n Figure 2. Dead zones in CDMA femtocell networks.
Scenario A: forward link
(BS to mobile)
Scenario A: reverse link
(mobile to BS)
Nearby macrocell user
transmits with high power to macro BS and
creates dead zone for femtocell user
Femtocell transmits to
home user and creates
dead zone for macro user
Macrocell transmits to cell edge
user in femtocell dead zone
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 64
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 2008 65
where some of the femto’s resources are reserved
for registered family members while others are
open for roamers.
Challenge 6: How Will Handoff Be Per-
formed in Open Access? — In general, hand-
off from a femtocell to the macrocell network is
significantly easier (as there is only one macro
BS) than handoffs from the macrocell to the
femtocell. Current second-generation (2G) and
3G systems broadcast a neighbor list used by a
mobile attached to the current cell to learn where
to search for potential handover cells. Such a
handoff protocol does not scale to the large num-
bers of femtocells that “neighbor” (actually
underlay) the macrocell, and the underlying net-
work equipment is not designed to rapidly change
the lists as femtocells come and go. This moti-
vates 4G handover procedures to take the pres-
ence of femtocells into consideration.
In open access, channel fluctuations may
cause a passing macrocell user to perform multi-
ple handovers. In co-channel deployments
Claussen et al. [10] have proposed auto configu-
ration that periodically reduces the pilot power
inside a femtocell when no active calls are in
progress, thereby minimizing handoffs from
passing macrocell users. An open research area
is developing low-complexity algorithms to pre-
dict the dwell time before handing off a macro-
cell user to a nearby femtocell. Yeung and
Nanda [11] proposed controlling handoff events
by choosing velocity thresholds based on user
mobility and sojourn times when a macrocell
user travels in the vicinity of a femtocell.
Challenge 7: Can Subscribers Carry Their
Femtocells for Use Outside the Home Area?
— The portability of the femtocell presents a
conundrum. Unlike Wi-Fi networks that operate
in unlicensed spectrum in which radio interfer-
ence is not actively managed, femtocell networks
will operate in licensed spectrum. Femtocell
mobility can cause problems when a subscriber
with operator A carries their femtocell to anoth-
er location where the only service provider is
rival operator B. In such a scenario, should the
femtocell be allowed to transmit on operator B’s
spectrum? Viable options are providing GPS
inside femtocells for location tracking and lock-
ing the femtocell within a geographical area.
Alternatively, interoperator agreements facilitate
charging the home subscriber on roaming.
Challenge 8: How Will Femtocells Provide
Location Tracking for Emergency-911, and
Should They Service Nearby Macrocell
Users with Poor Coverage? — Government
mandated Emergency-911 services require oper-
ators to provision femtocells for transmitting
location information during emergency calls.
Femtocell location may be obtained by either
using GPS inside femtocells (added cost with
possibly poor indoor coverage), querying the ser-
vice provider for location over the backhaul,
gathering information from the macrocell pro-
viding the femtocell falls within the macrocell
radio range, or even inferring the location from
the mobile position (estimated by the macro net-
work) at handoff to the femtocell.
Ethical/legal dilemmas can arise on whether a
femtocell should service macrocell users with
poor outdoor coverage for making emergency
calls if they are located within its radio range. In
open access networks this problem can be solved
by handoff. Closed access femtocells should be
provisioned to allow communication with unsub-
scribed users in the event of emergencies.
NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
In a femtocell environment the operator will
need to provide a secure and scalable interface
over the Internet at a reasonable cost. Tradition-
al radio network controllers (RNCs) are
equipped to handle tens to hundreds of macro-
cells. How will they provide equal parity service to
femtocells over the Internet?
Three network interfaces have been pro-
posed, of which the IP multimedia subsystem
(IMS)/Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) and unli-
censed mobile access (UMA)-based interfaces
appear to be the architectures of choice.
Iu-b over IP: Existing RNCs connect to fem-
tocells through standard Iu-CS (circuit-switched)
and Iu-PS (packet-switched) interfaces present
in macrocell networks. The advantage is that the
capital expenditure is comparatively low insofar
as the operator can leverage existing RNCs. The
shortcomings are the lack of scalability and that
the interface is not yet standardized.
IMS/SIP: The IMS/SIP interface provides a
core network residing between the femtocell and
the operator. The IMS interface converts sub-
scriber traffic into IP packets and employs voice
over IP (VoIP) using SIP, and coexists with the
macrocell network. The main advantages are
scalability and rapid standardization. Disadvan-
tages include the capital expenditure for
upgrade, and the operating expenditure in main-
taining two separate core networks for the
macrocell and femtocell respectively.
RAN-gateway-based UMA: A radio access
network (RAN) gateway exists between the IP
and operator networks, aggregating traffic from
femtocells. This gateway is connected to the
operator network using a standard Iu-PS/CS
interface. Between the femtocell and the RAN
gateway, the UMA protocol makes use of secure
IP tunneling for transporting the femtocell sig-
nals over the Internet. Current UMA-enabled
services such as T-Mobile’s Hotspot@Home
require dual-mode handsets for switching
between in-home Wi-Fi and outdoor cellular
access. Integrating the UMA client inside femto-
cells rather than the mobile would enable future
deployments support use of legacy handsets.
RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
We now consider the key areas and tools for
conducting further femtocell research, with the
goal of designing efficient femtocell architec-
tures.
INTERFERENCE MANAGEMENT
Due to the ad hoc topology of femtocell loca-
tions, interference suppression techniques alone
will prove ineffective in femtocell networks. Suc-
cessive interference cancellation, in which each
user subtracts out the strongest neighboring
In a femtocell 
environment the
operator will need to
provide a secure and
scalable interface
over the Internet at a
reasonable cost. 
Traditional radio 
network controllers
(RNCs) are equipped
to handle tens to
hundreds of macro-
cells. How will they
provide equal parity
service to femtocells
over the Internet?
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 65
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 200866
interferers from their received signal, appears
promising initially, but cancellation errors quick-
ly degrade its usefulness [12]. Consequently, an
interference avoidance approach wherein users
avoid rather than suppress mutual interference is
more likely to work well in geography-dependent
femtocell networks. The low cost requirement is
likely to influence the design of low-complexity
femtocell BS receivers (e.g., simple matched fil-
ter processing) and low-complexity transmission
schemes for sensing nearby available frequency
channels to avoid collisions.
In CDMA femtocell networks with universal
frequency reuse, for example, interference avoid-
ance through time hopping and directional
antennas provides a 7× improvement in system
capacity [9] when macrocell and femtocell users
share a common bandwidth.
Frequency and time hopping. In Global Sys-
tem for Mobile Communications (GSM) net-
works, the interference avoidance offered
through slow frequency hopping enables femto-
cell users and nearby transmitting macrocell
users to avoid consistent mutual interference.
Similarly, frequency-hopped OFDMA networks
can use random subchannel assignments in order
to decrease the probability of persistent collision
with neighboring femtocells.
In time-hopped CDMA, the CDMA duration
G Tc (G is the processing gain and Tc is the chip
period) is divided into Nhop hopping slots, where
each user randomly selects a hopping slot for
transmission and remains silent during the
remaining slots. Random time hopping reduces
the average number of interfering users by a fac-
tor of Nhop while trading off the processing gain.
The trade-off is that femtocells are accommodat-
ed by changing the way an existing CDMA
macrocell network operates.
Directional antennas inside femtocells offer
interference avoidance, with zero protocol over-
head, by restricting radio interference within an
antenna sector. Providing a reasonable unit cost
and easy end-user deployment are the key chal-
lenges confronting this approach.
Adaptive power control strategies vary the
femtocell receive power target depending on its
location. Commercial femtocells such as Sprint’s
Airave femtocell tackle cross-tier interference
using an “automatic adaptation” protocol that
adjusts the femtocell transmit power. Over the
forward link in closed access, Ericsson [13] has
proposed reducing interference to macrocell
users by reducing the femtocell transmit power
with increasing distance from the macro BS. The
trade-off is decreased home coverage at far-off
femtocells. Over the reverse link in closed access,
we suggest providing a higher receive power tar-
get to femtocell users relative to macrocell users
[9], which will vary based on femtocell location.
Figure 3 shows the reductions in the outage
probability for a femtocell user (the femto-
macro receive power ratios are 1 and 10), in
conjunction with interference avoidance using
CDMA time hopping and antenna sectoring. For
open access, Kishore et al. [14] propose over-
coming the near-far effect by extending femto-
cell coverage-allow a user to communicate to a
macrocell only if their channel gain is apprecia-
bly higher — at the expense of increased inter-
ference between neighboring femtocells.
Multimode phones [7] switch protocols in closed-
access systems for mitigating interference, for
example, transmit in WCDMA mode inside a
femtocell, and revert to GSM mode otherwise.
MIMO FEMTOCELLS
Multiple antennas at the transmitter and/or the
receiver (multiple input multiple output, MIMO)
exploit the spatial diversity of the wireless chan-
nel. Femtocells can perform temporal link adap-
tation through adaptive modulation and coding;
additionally, MIMO spatial link adaptation will
enable a femtocell to switch between providing
high data rates and robust transmission. High
data rates are obtainable by transmitting multi-
ple spatial streams (spatial multiplexing) over
high SINR links. Over low SINR links, MIMO
provides robustness through open and closed
loop diversity schemes such as space-time codes
and beamforming. Interesting areas for future
research are:
• Link adaptive mode switching for femtocells
between diversity and spatial multiplexing
[15]
• Analyzing the effect of channel state infor-
mation errors induced by co-channel inter-
ference on MIMO femtocell performance
• The complexity limitations of MIMO femto-
cell receivers, which may be significant vs.
macrocell receivers due to cost considera-
tions
• Channel models for MIMO femtocells, since
the diversity characteristics may be very dif-
ferent from macrocells
CONCLUSIONS
Femtocells have the potential to provide high-
quality network access to indoor users at low
cost, while simultaneously reducing the burden
n Figure 3. Outage probability in a closed-access femtocell.
Mean macrocellular users
50
10-3
10-4
Fe
m
to
ce
ll 
ou
ta
ge
 p
ro
ba
bi
lit
y
10-2
10-1
100
10 15 20 25
Time hopping slots = 128
Femtocell-macro power ratio = 1
Femto antenna sectors = 1
Time hopping slots = 4
Femto-macro power ratio = 10
Femto antenna sectors = 1
No interference
avoidance and equal
femto/macro
receive
powers
CDMA hopping slots = 4
Femto-macro power ratio = 10
Femto antenna sectors = 3
Maximum allowable outage
30 35 40 45 50
Macrocell radius = 500 m
Femtocell radius = 20 m
Distance from femtocell to 
macrocell = 250 m
CDMA processing gain = 128
Outdoor lognormal std. dev. = 8 dB
Indoor path loss (dB) = 37+20log(d)
Outdoor to indoor 
  path loss (dB) = 44.24+40log(d)
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 66
IEEE Communications Magazine • September 2008 67
on the whole system. This article has identified
the key benefits of femtocells, the technological
and business challenges, and research opportuni-
ties. From a technical standpoint, operators face
challenges in providing a low-cost solution while
mitigating RF interference, providing QoS over
the IP backhaul, and maintaining scalability.
From a business perspective, generating long-
term revenue growth and overcoming initial end-
user subsidies are key challenges.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the reviewers
for providing excellent feedback, which greatly
improved the quality and readability of this arti-
cle. The authors also thank Andrew Hunter
(University of Texas) and Shalinee Kishore
(Lehigh University) for their comments and sug-
gestions on the article, and Vijay Sundararajan
(Texas Instruments) for ongoing feedback on
our work.
REFERENCES
[1] Tropos Networks, “Picocell Mesh: Bringing Low-Cost
Coverage, Capacity and Symmetry to Mobile WiMAX,”
White Paper.
[2] M.-S Alouini and A. J. Goldsmith, “Area Spectral Effi-
ciency of Cellular Mobile Radio Systems,” IEEE Trans.
Vehic. Tech., vol. 48, no. 4, July 1999, pp. 1047–66.
[3] A. Saleh, A. Rustako, and R. Roman, “Distributed Antennas
for Indoor Radio Communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 35, no. 12, Dec. 1987, pp. 1245–51.
[4] C.-L. I, L. J. Greenstein, and R. D. Gitlin, “A Microcell/
Macrocell Cellular Architecture for Low- and High-
Mobility Wireless Users,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 11, no. 6, Aug.
1993, pp. 885–91.
[5] Presentations by ABI Research, Picochip, Airvana, IP.access,
Gartner, Telefonica Espana, 2nd Int’l. Conf. Home Access
Points and Femtocells; http://www.avrenevents.com/dallas-
femto2007/purchase_presentations.htm
[6] Analysys, “Picocells and Femtocells: Will Indoor Base-
Stations Transform the Telecoms Industry?” http://
research.analysys.com
[7] Picochip, “The Case For Home Base Stations,” White
Paper, Apr. 2007.
[8] J. G. Andrews, A. Ghosh, and R. Muhamed, Fundamen-
tals of WiMAX, Prentice Hall, 2007.
[9] V. Chandrasekhar and J. Andrews, “Uplink Capacity and
Interference Avoidance in Two-Tier Femtocell Net-
works,” to appear, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.NI/0702132
[10] L. T. W. Ho and H. Claussen, “Effects of User-Deployed,
Co-Channel Femtocells on the Call Drop Probability in a
Residential Scenario,” 18th Annual IEEE Int’l. Symp. Person-
al, Indoor and Mobile Commun., Sept. 2007, pp. 1–5.
[11] K. L. Yeung and S. Nanda, “Channel Management in
Microcell/Macrocell Cellular Radio Systems,” IEEE Trans.
Vehic. Tech., vol. 45, no. 4, Nov 2006, pp. 601–12.
[12] S. Weber et al., “Transmission Capacity of Ad Hoc Networks
with Successive Interference Cancellation,” IEEE Trans. Info.
Theory, vol. 53, no. 8, Aug. 2007, pp. 2799–2814.
[13] Ericsson, “Home NodeB Output Power,” 3GPP TSG
Working Group 4 meeting; http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/
tsg_ran/WG4_Radio/TSGR4_43bis/Docs/
[14] S. Kishore et al, “Uplink User Capacity in a Multicell CDMA
System with Hotspot Microcells,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Com-
mun., vol. 5, no. 6, June 2006, pp. 1333–42.
[15] A. Forenza et al, “Adaptive MIMO Transmission for
Exploiting the Capacity of Spatially Correlated Chan-
nels,” IEEE Trans. Vehic. Tech., vol. 56, no. 2, Mar.
2007, pp. 619–30.
BIOGRAPHIES
VIKRAM CHANDRASEKHAR (cvikram@mail.utexas.edu) is a Ph.D.
candidate at the University of Texas (UT) Austin. He com-
pleted his B.S. at IIT Kharagpur and his M.S. at Rice Univer-
sity. His current research focuses on fundamental limits
and algorithms for microcellular and hotspot-aided broad-
band cellular networks. He has held industry positions at
National Instruments, Freescale, and Texas Instruments.
JEFFREY G. ANDREWS (jandrews@ece.utexas.edu) received a
B.S. from Harvey Mudd College, and M.S. and Ph.D.
degrees in electrical engineering from Stanford University.
He is an associate professor in the Electrical and Computer
Engineering Department at UT Austin, where he is director
of the Wireless Networking and Communications Group.
He is author of Fundamentals of WiMAX (Prentice Hall,
2007) and recipient of the 2007 NSF CAREER award. He
has held industry positions at Intel and Qualcomm.
ALAN GATHERER received a B.Eng. from Strathclyde Universi-
ty, and M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering
from Stanford University. He is the CTO for the Communi-
cations Infrastructure and Voice Business and a Fellow at
Texas Instruments. He is responsible for the strategic devel-
opment of TI’s digital baseband modems for 3G and 4G
wireless infrastructure as well as high-performance medical
products..
From a technical
standpoint, operators
face challenges in
providing a low-cost
solution while 
mitigating RF 
interference, provid-
ing QoS over the IP
backhaul, and 
maintaining 
scalability. From a
business perspective,
generating long-term
revenue growth and
overcoming initial
end-user subsidies
are key challenges.
CHANDRASEKHAR LAYOUT  8/20/08  5:09 PM  Page 67

