0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
Mobility Increases the Capacity of Ad-hoc Wireless Networks
Matthias Grossglauser David Tse
AT&T Labs- Research Department of EECS
180 Park Avenue University of California
Florham Park NJ 07932 Berkeley CA 94720
mgross@research.att.com dtse@eecs.berkeley.edu
Abstract
The capacity of ad-hoc wireless networks is constrained
by the mutual interference of concurrent transmissions be-
tween nodes. We study a model of an ad-hoc network
where n nodes communicate in random source-destination
pairs. These nodes are assumed to be mobile. We exam-
ine the per-session throughput for applications with loose
delay constraints, such that the topology changes over the
time-scale of packet delivery. Under this assumption, the
per-user throughput can increase dramatically when nodes
are mobile rather than fixed. This improvement can be
achieved by exploiting node mobility as a type of mul-
tiuser diversity.
1 Introduction
A fundamental characteristic of mobile wireless networks
is the time variation of the channel strength of the under-
lying communication links. Such time variation can be
due to multipath fading, path loss via distance attenuation,
shadowing by obstacles and interference from other users.
The impact of such time variation on the design of wireless
networks permeates throughout the layers, ranging from
coding and power control at the physical layer to cellular
handoff and coverage planning at the networking layer.
An important means to cope with the time-variation of the
channel is the use of diversity. Diversity can be obtained
over time (interleaving of coded bits), frequency (combin-
ing of multipaths in CDMA systems) and space (multiple
antennas). The basic idea is to improve performance by
having several independent signal paths between the trans-
mitter and the receiver.
These diversity modes pertain to a point-to-point link. Re-
cent results point to another form of diversity, inherent in
a wireless network with multiple users. This multiuser di-
versity is best motivated by an information theoretic result
of Knopp and Humblet [6]. They focused on the uplink
in the single cell, with multiple users communicating to
the basestation via time-varying channels. To maximize
the total information theoretic capacity, they showed that
the optimal strategy is to schedule at any one time only
the user with the best channel to transmit to the basesta-
tion. Diversity gain arises from the fact that in a system
with many users, there is likely to be a user with a very
good channel at any one time. Overall system through-
put is maximized by allocating at any time the common
channel resource to the user that can best exploit it.
Strategies of this type incur additional delay, because
packets have to be buffered until the channel becomes
strong relative to other users. Therefore, the time-scale
of channel fluctuations that can be exploited through mul-
tiuser diversity is limited by the delay tolerance of the user
or application. For example, for applications that can tol-
erate delays on the order of fractions of seconds to several
seconds, short time-scale multipath fading can be taken
advantage of. In this paper, the focus is on applications
that are so asynchronous in nature that they can tolerate
end-to-end delays of minutes or even hours. On such a
long time-scale, even more diversity gain can be obtained
because the network topology changes significantly over
time due to user mobility. Examples of such applications
include electronic mail, database synchronization between
a mobile terminal and a central database, and certain types
of event notification.
We demonstrate in this paper that these ideas have rami-
fications to the design of wireless networks beyond clas-
sical cellular architectures. We will focus on mobile ad-
hoc networks which have no fixed basestations and with
multiple pairs of users wanting to communicate with each
other. Gupta and Kumar [4] proposed a model for study-
ing the capacity of fixed ad-hoc networks, where nodes
are randomly located but are immobile. Each source node
has a random destination to which it wants to commu-
nicate. Their main result shows that as the number of
nodes per unit area n increases, the throughput per source-
destination (S-D) pair decreases approximately like 1=
p
n.
1360 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
This is the best performance achievable even allowing for
optimal scheduling, routing and relaying of packets in the
networks, and is a somewhat pessimistic result on the scal-
ability of such networks, as the traffic rate per S-D pair
actually goes to zero.
In this paper, we introduce mobility into the model and
consider the situation when users move independently
around the network. Our main result shows that the av-
erage long-term throughput per S-D pair can be kept con-
stant even as the number of nodes per unit area n in-
creases. This is in sharp contrast to the fixed network sce-
nario, and the dramatic performance improvement is ob-
tained through the exploitation of the time-variation of the
users’ channels due to mobility. We observe that our result
implies that, at least in terms of growth rate as a function
of n, there is no significant loss in throughput per S-D pair
when there are many nodes in the network as compared
to having just a single S-D pair. A caveat of this result is
that the attained long-term throughput is averaged over the
time-scale of node mobility, and hence delays of that order
will be incurred.
In the fixed ad-hoc network model, the fundamental per-
formance limitation comes from the fact that long-range
direct communication between many user pairs is infeasi-
ble, due to the excessive interference caused. As a result,
most communication has to occur between nearest neigh-
bors, at distances of order 1=
p
n, with each packet going
through many other nodes (serving as relays) before reach-
ing the destination. The number of hops in a typical route
is of order
p
n. Because much of the traffic carried by the
nodes are relayed traffic, the actual useful throughput per
user pair has to be small.
With mobility, a seemingly natural strategy to overcome
the above performance limitation is to transmit only when
the source and destination nodes are close together, at dis-
tances of order 1=
p
n. This is reminiscent of the Infosta-
tion architecture [3], where users connect to the infosta-
tions only when they are close by. However, this strategy
turns out to be too naive in the present situation. The prob-
lem is that the fraction of time two nodes are nearest neigh-
bors is too small, of the order of 1=n. Instead, our strategy
is for each source node to distribute its packets to as many
different nodes as possible. These then serve as mobile
relay nodes and whenever they get close to the final des-
tination, they hand the packets off to the final destination.
The basic idea is that since there are many different relay
nodes, the probability that at least one is close to the desti-
nation is significant. On the other hand, each packet goes
through at most one relay node, and hence the throughput
can be kept high. Although the basic communication prob-
lem is point-to-point, this strategy effectively creates mul-
tiuser diversity by distributing packets to many different
intermediate nodes which have independent time-varying
channels to the final destination.
2 Model
The ad-hoc network consists of n nodes all lying in the
open disk of unit area (of radius 1=
p
). The location of
the ith user at time t is given by Xi(t). Nodes are mobile,
and we assume that the process fXi()g is stationary and
ergodic with stationary distribution uniform on the open
disk; moreover the trajectories of different users are inde-
pendent and identically distributed.
We first describe the session model. We assume that each
of the n nodes is a source node for one session, and a
destination node for another session. Let us stipulate
that the source node i has data intended for destination
node d(i). We assume that each source node has an in-
finite reservoir of packets to send to its destination. The
source-destination association does not change with time,
although the nodes themselves move.
We next describe the transmission model. At (slotted) time
t, let Pi(t) be the transmit power of node i, and ij(t)
be the channel gain from node i to node j, such that the
received power at node j is Pi(t)ij . At time t, node i
transmits data at rate R packets/sec to node j if
Pi(t)ij(t)
N0 +
1
L
P
k 6=i Pk(t)ij(t)
> ; (1)
where  is the signal-to-interference ratio (SIR) require-
ment for successful communication, N0 is the background
noise power, and L is the processing gain of the system.
For a narrowband system, L = 1, while for a spread-
spectrum CDMA system, L is larger than 1. In this pa-
per, we only consider large-scale path loss characteristics
in the fading channel model. The channel gain is given by
ij(t) :=
1
jXi(t) Xj(t)j ;
where  is a parameter greater than 2.
We will consider two models. In the first model, packets
are only transmitted directly from the source to the des-
tination, without relaying through other nodes. In other
words, j(i) = d(i). In the second model, nodes can serve
as relays for packets intended for other nodes. We assume
that each node has an infinite buffer to store such packets.
At any time t, a scheduler chooses which nodes will be
senders, and the power levels Pi(t) for these senders. The
objective of the scheduler for both models is to ensure
1361 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
a high long-term throughput for each S-D pair. More
precisely, consider a scheduling and relay policy . Let
Mi (t) be the number of source node i packets that des-
tination d(i) receives at time t under policy . Given the
random trajectories of the users, we shall say a long term
throughput of (n) is feasible if there is a policy  such
that for every S-D pair i,
lim inf
T!1
1
T
TX
t=1
Mi (t)  (n):
We note that the throughput (n) is a random quantity as it
depends on the random locations of the users. The index-
ing by the system size n emphasizes that we are interested
in studying the asymptotic behavior as n becomes large.
3 Results
3.1 Fixed Nodes
First we review results of Gupta and Kumar [4]. They fo-
cus on a static model, where nodes are not mobile. The
node positions fXig are i.i.d. and uniformly distributed in
the open disk of unit area, but fixed over time. The desti-
nation for each source node is chosen to be the node clos-
est to a randomly chosen point on the disk. The destina-
tions are all chosen independently. Relaying is allowed in
their model. The following results yield upper and lower
bounds on the asymptotically feasible throughput.
Theorem 3.1 (Main result 4 in [4]) There exists constants
c and c0 such that
lim
n!1Pr

(n) =
cRp
n logn
is feasible

= 1;
and
lim
n!1Pr

(n) =
c0Rp
n
is feasible

= 0;
Thus, within a factor of
p
log n, the throughput per S-D
pair goes to zero like R=
p
n in the case when the nodes
are fixed.
3.2 Mobile Nodes Without Relaying
The reason why the throughput for fixed nodes goes to
zero is that the number of relay nodes a packet has to go
through scales as
p
n. However, in our model of mobile
nodes, any two nodes can be expected to be close to each
other every from time to time. This suggests that we may
be able to improve the capacity by not relaying at all, and
only letting sources transmit directly to destinations. We
now show that without relaying, there is no way to achieve
an 0(1) throughput per O-D pair.
We first need the following Lemma. This fact is already
established in the proof of Theorem 2.1(ii) in [4], but we
include the proof here for completeness.
Lemma 3.2 Consider a scheduling policy that schedules
direct transmissions only. Fix an arbitrary time t. Let S(t)
be the set of source nodes that are scheduled successful
transmission to their respective destinations. ThenX
i2S(t)
jXi(t) Xj(i)(t)j  B;
where
B := 2 =2
 + L

:
Proof: Writing down the SIR inequalities, we get for
every i 2 S(t),
Pi(t)i;j(i)(t)
N0 +
1
L
P
k2S(t);k 6=i Pk(t)k;j(i)(t)
 :
This is equivalent to:
Pi(t)i;j(i)(t)
N0 +
1
L
P
k2S(t) Pk(t)k;j(i)(t)
 L
 + L
:
Substituting
ij(t) =
1
jXi(t) Xj(t)j ;
we get the bound:
jXi(t) Xj(i)(t)j (2)
  + L
L
Pi(t)
N0 +
1
L
P
k2S(t)
Pk(t)
jXk(t) Xj(i)(t)j
  + L
L
Pi(t)
N0 +
1
L(

4 )

2
P
k2S(t) Pk(t)
(3)
since jXk(t)   Xj(i)(t)j  2p . Summing over all active
S  D pairs at time t, we getX
i2S(t)
jXi(t) Xj(i)(t)j
  + L
L
P
i2S(t) Pi(t)
N0 +
1
L(

4 )

2
P
k2S(t) Pk(t)
 2 =2 + L

;
1362 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
which proves the Lemma upon setting
B := 2 =2
 + L

:

This Lemma shows that the number of simultaneous long-
range communication is limited by interference. Since the
distance between the source and destination is O(1) most
of the time, this limitation in turn puts a bound on the per-
formance of any strategy which uses only direct commu-
nication.
Theorem 3.3 Assuming that the policy is only allowed to
schedule direct transmission between the source and des-
tination nodes, and no relaying is permitted. If c is any
constant satisfying
c >

2

1 +
2


 =2
 + L

 1
1+=2
;
then
Pr
n
(n) = cn
  1
1+=2R is feasible
o
= 0
for sufficiently large n.
This result says that without relaying, the achievable
throughput per S-D pair goes to zero at least as fast as
n
  1
1+=2 .
Proof: We will argue by contradiction. Fix a c > 0
and a policy  that schedules direct transmission only, and
suppose a throughput of (n) = cn 
1
1+=2R is feasible.
Focus on a source node i, and let AT (i) be the set of time
instants up until time T where node i is scheduled suc-
cessful transmission to the destination d(i). By definition
of feasible throughputs,
lim inf
T!1
jAT (i)j
T
 cn  11+=2 : (4)
Consider the process
Di(t) := jXi(t) Xj(i)(t)j; t = 1; 2; : : :
By stationarity and ergodicity of this process, (4) implies
that almost surely,
lim inf
T!1
1
T
X
t2AT (i)
Di(t) 
Z F 1(cn  11+=2 )
0
zdF (z)
where F is the cdf of the random variable Di(t). This
holds for all source nodes i. Summing over all i, we have
lim inf
T!1
1
T
nX
i=1
X
t2AT (i)
Di(t)  n
Z F 1(cn  11+=2 )
0
zdF (z);
which is equivalent to:
lim inf
T!1
1
T
TX
t=1
X
i2S(t)
Di(t)  n
Z F 1(cn  11+=2 )
0
zdF (z):
Here S(t) is the set of source nodes which are scheduled
successful transmission by the policy at time t. The last
inequality in turn implies that there must exist a time  ,
such that
X
i2S()
Di()  n
Z F 1(cn  11+=2 )
0
zdF (z): (5)
Conditional on Xj(i)(t) = x in the open disk D, it holds
that for z1= < j 1=2   xj,
Pr

Di(t) < zjXj(i)(t) = x
	
= z2=;
the probability that node i is within a neighborhood of ra-
dius z from node d(i). Hence,
lim
z!0
F (z)=z2=
= lim
z!0
z 2=
Z
x2D
Pr

Di(t) < zjXj(i)(t) = x
	
dx
=
Z
x2D
lim
z!0
z 2=Pr

Di(t) < zjXj(i)(t) = x
	
dx
= 
where the interchange of limit and integration follows
from the Dominated Convergence Theorem.
Substituting this into the integral in (5), we get
lim
n!1n
Z F 1(cn  11+=2 )
0
zdF (z) =
c1+=2
(1 + 2=)
:
If
c >

2

1 +
2


=2
 + L

 1
1+=2
;
then
lim
n!1n
Z F 1(cn  11+=2 )
0
zdF (z) > B
where
B := 2 =2
 + L

:
Hence, for sufficiently large n, inequality (5) contradicts
Lemma 3.2. For sufficiently large n, the probability that
cn
  1
1+=2R is a feasible throughput is zero. 
1363 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
3.3 Mobile Nodes With Relaying
The problem of only using direct transmission between the
source and destination is that too much of the communica-
tion is long-range, and the resulting interference limits the
number of concurrent transmissions. This suggests that
the total throughput of the network can be increased if we
constrain transmission to nearest neighbors. Indeed, The-
orem 3.4 below demonstrates that O(n) concurrent suc-
cessful transmissions per time slot are possible. The prob-
lem with this approach is that the source and the desti-
nation node of a session are nearest neighbors only for a
very small fraction of time, on the order of 1=n, vanishing
as the user density increases. Therefore, although we can
schedule O(n) communicating sender-receiver pairs per
time slot, the fraction of pairs that actually has a packet to
transmit vanishes for large n.
The idea now is to spread out packets to a large number
of intermediate relay nodes that temporarily buffer pack-
ets until final delivery to the destination is possible. For a
source-destination pair S-D, all the other n  2 nodes can
serve as relay nodes. The goal is that in steady-state, the
packets of every source node will be distributed across all
the nodes in the network, hence ensuring that every node
in the network will have packets buffered destined to ev-
ery other node (except itself). This ensures that a sched-
uled sender-receiver pair always has a packet to send, in
contrast to the case of direct transmission.
The question is how many times a packet has to be relayed
in order to spread traffic uniformly to all nodes. In fact,
as the node location processes fXi(t)g are independent,
stationary and ergodic, it is actually sufficient to relay only
once. This is because the probability for an arbitrary node
to be scheduled to receive a packet from a source node S is
equal for all nodes and independent of S. Each packet then
makes two hops, one from the source to its random relay
node, and one from that relay node to the destination. As
no packet is transmitted more than twice, the achievable
total throughput is O(n).
We now make the above argument rigorous. We first
exhibit a scheduling policy  to select random sender-
receiver pairs in each time slot t, such that all the pairs
can successfully transmit in time slot t. We will then use
this policy as a building block to achieve O(1) throughput
per S-D pair for large n.
The scheduling policy  is as follows. Let us focus on a
particular time slot t. To simplify notation, we will drop
the time index t in the following discussion. We fix a
sender density parameter  2 (0; 1). We randomly des-
ignate nS = n of the nodes as senders in each time slot,
and the remaining nR nodes as potential receivers. Specif-
ically, we randomly pick one out of

nS
n

equally likely
partitions of the n nodes into the set of senders S and the
set of potential receivers R. Each sender node transmits
packets to its nearest neighbor among all nodes in R, us-
ing unit transmit power (Pi = 1). Among the nS sender-
receiver pairs, we retain those for which the interference
generated by the other senders is sufficiently small that
transmission is possible. Let Nt be the number of such
pairs. Theorem 3.4 below shows that the number of fea-
sible sender-receiver pairs Nt is O(n). Note that the set
of sender-receiver pairs is random and that it depends only
on the node locations fXig.
Theorem 3.4 For the scheduling policy , the expected
number E [Nt] of feasible sender-receiver pairs is O(n),
i.e.,
lim
n!1
E [Nt]
n
=  > 0: (6)
Furthermore, for two arbitrary nodes i and j, the proba-
bility that (i; j) is scheduled as a sender-receiver pair is
O(1=n).
We can now apply this scheduling policy  to our basic
problem. The overall algorithm is divided into two phases:
(1) scheduling of packet transmissions from sources to re-
lays (or the final destination), and (2) scheduling of packet
transmissions from relays (or the source) to final destina-
tions. These two phases are interleaved: in the even time-
slots, phase 1 is run; in the odd time-slots, phase 2 is run.
In phase 1, we can apply the scheduling policy  to trans-
mit packets from sources to relays or destinations. In
phase 2, we again apply the policy , but this time to trans-
mit packets from relays to final destinations (or, as in phase
1, from a source directly to the destination). More specif-
ically, when a receiver is identified for a sender under ,
the sender checks if it has any packets for which the re-
ceiver is the destination; if so, it will transmit it. It should
be noted that every packet goes through at most two hops:
it is transmitted once in phase 1 from its source to an inter-
mediate relay, and once in phase 2 from a relay to the final
destination. We allow for packets to be directly transmit-
ted from their source to their destinations in both phases,
if a sender-receiver pair happens to be a source-destination
pair as well.
Let us analyze the throughput per S-D pair under this two-
phased scheme. As  only depends on node locations and
because the node locations fXi(t)g are i.i.d., stationary,
and ergodic, the long-term throughput between any two
nodes is equal to the probability that these two nodes are
1364 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
n−1 routes
phase 1 phase 2
Destination D
Direct transmission
Source S
Relay nodes
Figure 1: The two-phase scheduling policy viewed as a
queuing system, for a source-destination pair: in phase 1,
a packet at S is served by a queue of capacity O(1), and is
forwarded either to the destination or to one of n  2 relay
nodes with equal probability. The service rate at each relay
node R is O(1=n), for a total session rate of O(1).
selected by  as a feasible sender-receiver pair. Accord-
ing to Theorem 3.4, this probability is O(1=n). Now, for a
given S-D pair, there is one direct route and n 2 two-hop
routes which go through one relay node R. The through-
put over the direct route is O(1=n). For each two-hop
route, we can consider the relay node R as a single server
queue (cf. Fig. 1). Applying Theorem 3.4, we see that
both the arrival rate and the service rate of this queue is
the same and O(1=n). Summing over the throughputs of
all the n   1 routes, it can be seen that the total average
throughput per S-D pair is O(1). We have proved the fol-
lowing Theorem, which is the main result of this paper.
Theorem 3.5 The two-phased algorithm achieves a
throughput per S-D pair of O(1), i.e. there exists a con-
stant c > 0 such that
lim
n!1Pr f(n) = cR is feasibleg = 1:
Note that the largest possible throughput is c = =2. We
now prove Theorem 3.4.
Proof: We consider a fixed time t. Let U1; : : : UnS be the
random positions of the senders in S . Let V1; : : : ; VnR be
the positions of nodes in the receiver setR. These random
variables are i.i.d. uniformly distributed on the open disk
of unit area. For each node s 2 S , let its intended receiver
r(s) 2 R be the node which is nearest to s among all
nodes in R.
We now analyze the probability of successful transmission
for each chosen sender-receiver pair. By symmetry, we can
just focus on one such pair, say (1; r(1)). The event of suc-
cessful transmission depends on the positions U1; : : : UnS
and V1; : : : ; VnR . Let Qi be the received power from
sender node i at receiver node r(1), and
Qi = jUi   Vr(1)j :
The node r(1) satisfies:
r(1) = argminj jU1   Vjj:
The total interference at node r(1) is given by I =P
i6=1Qi. The signal-to-interference ratio for the trans-
mission from sender 1 at receiver r(1) is given by:
SIR =
Q1
N0 +
1
LI
:
1QQ
Ui
Qi
i
1
V
Zi
r(1) Vr(1)V
|u|
U1U
|u|
1
Figure 2: An illustration of random variables used in the
proof: sender location U1, receiver location Vr(1), received
signal power Q1, scaled distance to random receiver Zi,
and scaled interfering sender distance Qi.
We now analyze the asymptotics of Q1 and I as n ! 1.
Now,
Q1 = max
j=1;:::;nR
Zj;
where Zj = jU1 Vj j . Let us first condition on U1 = u
for some u in the open disk. A disk centered at u and of
radius r < ( 1=2   juj) lies entirely inside the unit disk
(cf. Fig. 2). Then for every z > r  and for all j,
Pr fZj > zjUi = ug = Pr
n
jVj   uj < z 
1

o
= z 
2
 (7)
Conditional on U1 = u, the random variables Zj’s are
i.i.d. By a standard result on the asymptotic distribution
of extremum of i.i.d. random variables [1, p.258-260], the
extremum Q1 of nR i.i.d. random variables whose cdf
satisfies
lim
nR!1
1  FZ(x)
1  FZ(kx) = k
b (8)
satisfies
lim
nR!1
Pr fQ1  anRxg = exp

 x b

; (9)
1365 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
where anR is given by F
 1
Z (1   1=nR) = (nR)=2 =
[(1   )n]=2. Thus, the asymptotic distribution of Q1
conditional on U1 = u depends only on the tail of the
distribution of the Zj’s, and is given by:
lim
n!1Pr fQ1 < anRxjU1 = ug = FQ(x) (10)
where Q has a cdf:
FQ(x) =

exp
  x 2= x  0
0 x < 0
Hence, for every x > 0,
lim
n!1Pr fQ1 < anRxg
= lim
n!1
Z
u2D
Pr fQ1 < anRxjU1 = ug du
=
Z
u2D
lim
n!1Pr fQ1 < anRxjU1 = ug du
= FQ(x):
The interchange of limit and integration follows from the
Dominated Convergence Theorem. We conclude that
[(1  )n] =2Q1 D! Q: (11)
We now turn to the interference I =
PnS
i=2Qi. Condi-
tional on Vr(1) = u, we observe that for i 6= 1, Q0is are
i.i.d. and have the same distribution as the Zi’s conditional
on U1 = u. Hence, the distribution of Qi conditional on
Vr(1) = u has the same tail as given in (7). From the the-
ory of stable random variables [2, pp.448, Theorem 2], it
follows that, conditional on Vr(1) = u,

 

1 
2


nS
 =2
I =

 

1 
2


n
 =2
I
D
! I;
(12)
where I has the stable distribution with characteristic
exponent 2 , and does not depend on u.
Again, the asymptotic limit above depends only on the
tail of the conditional distributions of the individual Zi’s,
which does not depend on u. Using a similar argument as
above for Q1, we conclude that (12) in fact holds uncon-
ditionally.
Finally, we claim that the signal power Q1 and the total
interference I are asymptotically independent (although
they are in general not independent for finite n.). The ar-
gument is as follows. Eqn. (12) implies that the total inter-
ference I is asymptotically independent of Vr(1), since the
limiting distribution of I conditional on Vr(1) = u does
not depend on u. Note also that conditional on Vr(1), U1
and I are independent. Hence, in fact, I is asymptotically
independent of the pair (U1; Vr(1)). But the signal power
Q1 is a continuous function of U1 and Vr(1), and hence by
the Continuous Mapping Theorem, I and Q1 are asymp-
totically independent.
Combining this last fact with (11) and (12), we get the
result on the probability of successful transmission from
node 1 to node r(1):
Pr fSIR > g = Pr

Q1
N0 +
1
LI
> 

! Pr

Q
I
> 

> 0;
(13)
where
 =

L


1   

1  2

=2
; (14)
where  (s) =
R1
0 x
s 1e xdx is the standard gamma
function. The last inequality follows from the fact that
Q and I can be chosen independent and Q has infinite
support.
Therefore, as there are nS = n senders attempting to
transmit, the expected number of feasible sender-receiver
pairs is E [Nt] = n  Pr fSIR > g, i.e.,  =  
Pr fSIR > g. Furthermore, as  only depends on node
locations, and as the node locations fXig are i.i.d., the
probability of success of any specific sender-receiver pair
is equal, and thus O(1=n). This completes the proof.

The essence of the proof of Theorem 3.4, and the funda-
mental reason why we can have O(n) concurrent nearest
neighbor transmission, is the fact that the received power
at the nearest neighbor is of the same order as the total
interference from O(n) number of interferers. A similar
phenomenon has been observed in [5] in the cellular set-
ting, where they have shown that, provided  > 2, the
capture probability of the nearest transmitter to the bases-
tation does not go to zero as the number of interferers be-
come large. Although these results may seem surprising
on first sight, they are all based on the following property:
if W1; : : : ;Wn are i.i.d. random variables such that the
cdf F (w) decays slower than w 1 as w ! 1, then the
largest of them is of the same order as the sum. In the con-
text of our problem, Wi’s are the received powers from the
transmitting nodes.
The technical complication in the proof of Theorem 3.4
is due to the fact that both the distribution of the received
power from the sender and the distribution of the inter-
ference depends on the location of the receiver. This is
primarily due to the edge effects of the disk, and this de-
pendency would not be present if for example the nodes
are randomly located on the surface of a sphere. Fortu-
nately, in the regime we are interested in, the asymptotic
distributions depends only on what happens in the local
neighborhood around the receiver, and this is independent
1366 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
of where the receiver is in the open disk.
3.4 Sender-Centric vs. Receiver-Centric Ap-
proach
In the proof of Theorem 3.4, we have used a sender-centric
approach, in that it is the senders that select the clos-
est receiver to send to. We could also have considered a
receiver-centric approach, where each receiver selects the
closest sender from which to receive. It might seem that
the situation is symmetric, and that a similar proof would
carry through to arrive at the same result. However, this is
not the case.
In the sender-centric approach, several senders may select
the same receiver. This is not problematic from a techni-
cal point of view. By analogy, in the receiver-centric ap-
proach, it is possible that several receivers select the same
sender. We can either assume that a sender is indeed able
to generate signals for several receivers, or we can assume
that the sender has to select only one receiver to which to
send to. Both assumptions lead to difficulties in an analo-
gous proof. Under the former assumption, we have to ac-
count for the elimination of sender-receiver pairs because
the sender has to be unique; simple worst-case bounds can
be found, but turn out to be too crude to improve upon
the sender-centric capacity. Under the latter assumption,
we have to account for the fact that a single sender can
generate several unit-power interference signals (or analo-
gously, the fact that the desired signal is only a fraction of
unit power). We have not found an elegant way to integrate
these complications into the above proof.
However, note that the receiver-centric approach is prefer-
able in terms of the signal-to-interference ratio for a sin-
gle receiver. The reason is that in the receiver-centric ap-
proach, the signal from the selected sender is always the
strongest. If fQig are the received powers from the nS
senders, then the received signal power is max(Qi), while
the remaining nS 1 signals are interference. On the other
hand, in the sender-centric approach used in our proof, the
designated receiver is selected as the maximum of an in-
dependent set fZig of nR random variables, where Zi has
identical distribution as Qi1. The received signal power is
max(Zi), and the interference power is
P
Qi (where the
sum is over nS   1 terms).
Let us assume first that  = 1=2, i.e., nS = nR = n=2.
The power of the received signal is the maximum of nS
i.i.d. random variables in both cases; hence, they are dis-
tributed equally. However, the interference in the receiver-
centric case is stochastically smaller than in the sender-
1Ignoring edge effects.
centric case: in the former, the interference is the sum of
nS   1 random signal powers, whereas in the latter, it is
the sum of nS random signal powers minus the strongest
of these signals. Therefore, the SIR for the receiver-
centric approach is smaller on average than in the sender-
centric approach. Note that the probability of capture
Pr fSIR > g for a single receiver decreases with increas-
ing  for the sender-centric approach, while it does not
depend on  in the receiver-centric approach. Hence, the
relative advantage of the receiver-centric approach holds
at least for   1=2.
4 Numerical Results
We have examined the throughput capacity both through
numerical evaluation of the asymptotic probability of cap-
ture developed in the preceding section, and through sim-
ulation of random network topologies.
We have evaluated the asymptotic fraction of feasible pairs
 for the special case  = 4, because for this case, the nor-
malized interference I has Lévy distribution2 [7], with
cdf
FI(x) = 2

1 Q
r

x

; (15)
where Q(:) is the standard Gaussian cdf, with  = 1=23.
It is therefore straightforward to numerically evaluate (13)
through Monte-Carlo simulation.
We have compared the fraction of feasible pairs  for  =
6dB and L = 1 predicted by our model with simulations
based on n = 1000 nodes (cf. Fig. 3). The simulation
results are averaged over 20 random topologies. Figure
4 shows the simulated normalized throughput for  = 2,
3, and 4, and the throughput predicted by the asymptotic
model for  = 4. There is very good agreement between
the analytical model and simulation results.
It is evident from the figure that given , there exists an
optimal sender density  that maximizes the throughput.
If  is too small, then we do not exploit the potential for
spatial channel reuse. If  is too large, then the interference
power becomes too dominant. The optimal  obviously
depends on . For small , interference limits the spatial
channel reuse. Hence, the sender density has to be small.
2There is no closed form for the distribution or density function of
I for general ; only the Laplace transform of its density is known
explicitly [2, 7], and is given by  I

(s) = exp( s2=).
3This can be seen by comparing the Laplace transform of the den-
sity of non-negative strictly stable random variables in [2, page 448]
with the expression for the characteristic function of general stable ran-
dom variables in [7, page 5].
1367 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
−1 −0.8 −0.6 −0.4 −0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
−1
−0.8
−0.6
−0.4
−0.2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
x
y
n=1000, θ=0.41
Figure 3: An example of a random topology with n =
1000 nodes, for sender density  = 0:41. Senders are
depicted as red squares, receivers as blue circles. A line
connects each sender to its closest receiver.
For large , interference is more localized, and the optimal
 and the maximum throughput are larger.
5 Discussion
5.1 Distributed Implementation
Although in our problem formulation, we allow central co-
ordinated scheduling, relaying and routing, it should be
noted that the algorithm obtained above can be imple-
mented in completely distributed manner. At each time
instant, each node can randomly and independently de-
cide whether it wants to participate in phase 1 or phase 2,
and whether it wants to be a sender or a potential receiver.
Each sender then seeks out a potential receiver nearest to
it, and attempts to send data to it. The access is uncoor-
dinated; in fact, multiple senders may attempt to transmit
to the same receiver. Whether a sender is “captured” is
a random event, much like standard MAC random access
protocols. What our analysis showed is that the probabil-
ity of success is reasonable even in a network with many
users.
Note that the two-phased algorithm used in the proof was
chosen for mathematical convenience. As the capacity in
both phases is identical, the expected delay experienced
by a packet from source to destination would actually be
infinite even for a finite number of nodes n. It is straight-
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
0.12
0.14
0.16
θ
Per−node throughput (β=6dB,n
sim
=1000)
theoretical,α=4
simulated,α=2  
simulated,α=3  
simulated,α=4  
Figure 4: The normalized per-node throughput, as a func-
tion of the sender density , for different values of . For
 = 4, the throughput predicted by the model is also
shown.
forward to fix this problem, e.g., by allowing both S-R and
R-D transmissions to occur concurrently, but giving abso-
lute priority to R-D (phase 2) transmission in all scheduled
sender-receiver pairs. A detailed study of local scheduling
strategies and their impact on end-to-end delay is the sub-
ject of future work.
5.2 Related Work
Frenkiel et al., in [3], have introduced the concept of an In-
fostation for delay-insensitive data applications. An Info-
station is a high-speed wireless basestation that does away
with ubiquitous coverage. The motivation is that if de-
lay is unimportant, then capacity is maximized by using
the entire transmit power budget when the user is close to
the basestation, and no power when the user is far away.
While the work on Infostations has motivated us to look at
delay-insensitive applications, our focus is different. We
are not chiefly concerned about maximizing the capacity
of a point-to-point channel subject to a power budget, but
instead we are interested in the degree of spatial reuse in an
entire network of mobile nodes that all desire to commu-
nicate, and we propose a new type of multiuser diversity
to achieve high overall capacity.
Hajek, Krishna and LaMaire have studied a related inter-
ference model [5]. They examine the probability of cap-
ture for a single receiver for an asymptotically large num-
ber of senders. They show that in the limit, this proba-
bility only depends on the roll-off exponent , but not on
other channel effects such as fading and shadowing. While
1368 IEEE INFOCOM 2001
0-7803-7016-3/01/$10.00 ©2001 IEEE
their results are not directly applicable to our setting, we
nevertheless believe that this robustness property to other
channel effects carries over.
In their numerical experiments, they report that for  =
4 and  = 6dB, the asymptotic probability of capture is
approximately 0:319. In our setting, as can be seen from
Fig. 4, the probability of capture is approximately 0:14.
The reason for this difference is that we study a sender-
centric scheduling policy, as discussed earlier in Section
3.4, while Hajek et al. study the probability of capture of
a single receiver.
Finally, as discussed earlier, Gupta and Kumar [4] have
studied the capacity of random, but fixed ad-hoc networks.
Their main insights are that communication must be lim-
ited to “near” neighbors in order to permit dense spatial
channel reuse. However, the throughput per session goes
to zero as the number of nodes n scales up, because each
session requires on the order of
p
n hops. A similar prob-
lem setup has also been considered by Shepard [8].
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we have examined the asymptotic through-
put capacity of wireless ad-hoc networks. We have iden-
tified a new type of multiuser diversity that exploits long
time-scale fluctuations in the fading process due to node
mobility. Our results show that direct communication be-
tween sources and destinations is not sufficient to exploit
this diversity, because they are too far apart most of the
time. We propose to spread traffic randomly to interme-
diate relay nodes to take advantage of additional “routes”
between a source and a destination. A single relay node is
sufficient to use the entire throughput capacity of the net-
work within the limits imposed by the interference model.
This explains the dramatic performance improvement over
a fixed ad-hoc network, where O(
p
n) intermediate relay
nodes are necessary.
A key assumption underlying this result is the complete
mixing of the trajectories of the nodes in the network, so
that every node can get close to any other node. In prac-
tice, this assumption may not hold, or the delay to wait for
such events to happen may be too long. As such, the result
should be viewed as a theoretical one. What the theory
does suggest is that there is ample opportunity to trade off
delay and throughput in mobile wireless networks. The
result of this paper can be considered as an extreme point
in the tradeoff.
The ideas in this paper are not relevant to real-time appli-
cations such as voice communications. However, wireless
data services are expected to grow quickly over the next
few years. A subset of these services, such as email and
database synchronization, do indeed possess very loose
delay constraints (on the order of hours). Also, wireless
devices are bound to become smaller and more pervasive
in the future; they will not only be carried by humans,
but integrated into physical objects (such as cars, electri-
cal appliances, etc.) It is unlikely that the density of base-
stations will keep pace, due to regulatory and environmen-
tal hurdles in deploying them. Thus, there is a clear oppor-
tunity for wireless ad-hoc networks to extend the reach of
wireless communication. Our results suggest that delay-
tolerant applications can take advantage of node mobility
to significantly increase the throughput capacity of such
networks.
References
[1] H. A. David. Order Statistics (2nd ed.). Wiley, New
York, 1981.
[2] William Feller. An Introduction to Probability Theory
and Its Applications (Volume II, 2nd ed.). John Wiley
& Sons., New York, 1971.
[3] Richard Frenkiel, B. R. Badrinath, Joan Borras, and
Roy Yates. The Infostations challenge: Balancing cost
and ubiquity in delivering wireless data. Preprint, Au-
gust 1999.
[4] Piyush Gupta and P. R. Kumar. The Capacity of Wire-
less Networks. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory, 46(2):388–404, March 2000.
[5] B. Hajek, A. Krishna, and R.O. LaMaire. On the
capture probability for a large number of stations.
IEEE Transactions on Communications, 45(2):254–
260, February 1997.
[6] R. Knopp and P. A. Humblet. Information Capac-
ity and power Control in Single-Cell Multiuser Com-
munications. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Communications,
Seattle, June 1995.
[7] Gennady Samorodnitsky and Murad S. Taqqu. Stable
Non-Gaussian Random Processes. Chapman & Hall,
1994.
[8] Timothy J. Shepard. A Channel Access Scheme for
Large Dense Packet Radio Networks. In Proc. ACM
SIGCOMM ’96, San Francisco, Calif., August 1996.
1369 IEEE INFOCOM 2001

