Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, MS            1
BIOINFORMATICS AND COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY, MS
Banner Code: SC-MS-BCB
Don Seto, Program Director
Colgan Hall, Room 312
Science and Technology Campus
Phone: 703-993-8400
Email: binf@gmu.edu
Website: ssb.gmu.edu
In the field of bioinformatics and computational biology, specialists
collect, store, analyze and present complex biological data. Through
this work, critical contributions are made to basic biology, disease
detection, drug design, modeling biosystems, forensics, agriculture, and
environmental sciences through the combination of biological analysis
and high-performance computing. This degree addresses the growing
national and regional demand for trained computational biologists. It
combines a solid foundation in biotechnology with the computational
skills required for bioinformatics. The flexibility of the degree structure
permits students to custom design their curriculum under an advisor's
guidance, making the program especially relevant for students employed
in today's diverse biotechnology workplace. Students completing the
program are qualified to pursue careers that require knowledge of current
bioinformatics methods and applications, and the ability to develop and/
or use new bioinformatics software.
Courses are generally offered in the late afternoon or early evening to
accommodate students with full-time employment outside the university.
Students employed at area biotechnology organizations may take up to
6 credits (out of 31) for bioinformatics work done on the job, under the
guidance of a faculty member. This work-related project may be applied
as either a 3-credit research project or a 6-credit master's thesis.
All courses are also offered online, allowing students to participate in
class without having to travel to campus. Further information can be
found on with Mason Online (http://masononline.gmu.edu).
Admissions & Policies
Admissions
University-wide admissions policies can be found in the Graduate
Admissions Policies section of this catalog.
To apply for this program, please complete the George Mason University
Admissions Application (https://www2.gmu.edu/admissions-aid/apply-
now).
Eligibility
Applicants should have a bachelor's degree in biology, computer science,
or a related field, with a GPA of at least 3.00 in their last 60 credits
of study. Applicants should have taken courses in biology, computer
science, calculus, physical chemistry, and statistics. Students with
deficiencies in one or more of these areas may be required to take
additional courses from the undergraduate curriculum.
Application Requirements
To apply, prospective students should complete a George Mason
University Admissions Application (https://www2.gmu.edu/admissions-
aid/apply-now), supply two copies of official transcripts from each
college and graduate institution attended, a current résumé, and an
expanded goals statement. Applicants should also include three letters
of recommendation and official scores obtained on the GRE general
exam. The GRE requirement will be waived if the student holds a master's
degree from a regionally accredited U.S. institution. TOEFL scores are
required for all international applicants.
Policies
For policies governing all graduate programs, see AP.6 Graduate Policies.
Requirements
Degree Requirements
Total credits: 31
Students should refer to the Admissions & Policies tab for specific
policies related to this program.
Bioinformatics Core Courses
BINF 630 Bioinformatics Methods 3
BINF 631 Molecular Cell Biology for Bioinformatics 3
BINF 634 Bioinformatics Programming 3
BINF 701 Systems Biology 3
Total Credits 12
Advanced Bioinformatics
Advanced bioinformatics courses numbered BINF 730 and
above
3
Total Credits 3
Bioinformatics Seminar
BINF 704 Colloquium in Bioinformatics 1
Total Credits 1
Research Project or Thesis and Electives
Select either a research project or a master's thesis and electives
courses.
Research Project
BINF 798 Research Project 3
Select 12 credits of elective in bioinformatics and
computational biology, biology and biotechnology, or
computational sciences, as approved by the advisor
12
Total Credits 15
Thesis
BINF 799 Master's Thesis 6
2         Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, MS
Select 9 credits of electives in bioinformatics and
computational biology, biology and biotechnology, or
computational sciences, as approved by the advisor
9
Total Credits 15

