 
Vol. 41, No. 1, March 2004   43 
SRELS Journal of Information Management 
Vol. 41, No. 1, March 2004, Paper E. p43-55 
BIOINFORMATICS AND INTERNET: NEW PARADIGM TO 
DISCIPLINES AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
Shiva Kanaujia* 
The paper deals with the Bioinformatics and Internet. It introduces Bioinformatics and 
leads to Internet and its relation with Bioinformatics. Further discusses the various 
facilities, services provided by Internet for Bioinformatics. It further mentions required 
resources. Explains the links available on Internet, various products and services, 
involvement of private firms. It highlights some aspects related with techniques and 
tools for Bioinformatics on Internet. Explains some searching methods and role of 
library and information centres regarding Bioinformatics and Internet. Concludes with 
the idea that shows the importance of Bioinformatics on Internet 
KEYWORDS/DESCRIPTORS: Bioinformatics; Internet; Internet Links; Searching 
Methods 
1 INTRODUCTION 
Bioinformatics is a new and emerging branch of Biotechnology that has come 
up very recently. It mainly involves the use of software to utilize information 
from vast biological database that is developed by experienced Biotechnologists.  
Gene sequencing is a part of Bioinformatics wherein a lot of data related to 
biotechnology is processed. This brings biotechnology within the ambit of 
information technology, and hence the label, Bioinformatics. In fact 
Bioinformatics is a new discipline that involves molecular biology and computer 
science. Presently genomic research, sequencing of human genome and advances 
in disease related issues have required and helped in developing this at fast level. 
So we can say that in Bioinformatics, computers are required to store, retrieve, 
analyze or predict the composition or the structure of biomolecules.  It is the 
fascinating hybrid of computer science and biology. 
* Jr. Research Fellow, Dept. of Library and Information Science, University of Lucknow,
  Lucknow, INDIA. 
   Shiva Kanaujia 
 44  SRELS Jl. Info. Manage. 
The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI 2001) defines 
Bioinformatics as [1]:  
"Bioinformatics is the field of science in which biology, computer science, 
and information technology merge into a single discipline...There are three 
important sub-disciplines within Bioinformatics: the development of new 
algorithms and statistics with which to assess relationships among members of 
large data sets; the analysis and interpretation of various types of data including 
nucleotide and amino acid sequences, protein domains, and protein structures; and 
the development and implementation of tools that enable efficient access and 
management of different types of information."  
Bioinformatics is a particularly international subject, with a notably high 
degree of information sharing among researchers in different countries. It is also 
known as computational biology e.g., USC Computational Biology, NCSA 
Computational Biology. 
2 USE OF INTERNET IN BIOINFORMATICS  
When we talk about sources of biological information and computers for 
providing it, we can not ignore the role and impact of information superhighway 
i.e., Internet. Internet is the most potential tool of this information age and it is 
serving as a platform for Bioinformatics tool. It provides the opportunity to search 
that information, which was available only by reaching to the information centre.  
2.1 Areas of Services 
The Internet provides various facilities for Bioinformatics, such as; 
• Bioinformatics research 
• Courses 
• Resources 
• Biological databases 
• Construction tools 
• Software resources 
• WWW search tools 
• Courses of Bioinformatics 
Bioinformaticsand Internet: New Paradigm to Disciplines...  
Vol. 41, No 1, Marh 2004    45 
• Advanced topics in Bioinformatics 
• Scientific databases 
• Electronic journals 
• Asking queries from the librarian in online manner 
• News events and activities such as; announcement for Bioinformatics 
interest group, meetings on federated databases, molecular biosciences and 
technology seminars. 
2.2 World Wide Web Virtual Library: Biotechnology 
This directory, provided by Cato Research Ltd., contains over 1000 URLs 
specific to biotechnology, pharmaceutical development, and related fields. The 
emphasis is on product development and the delivery of products and services [2].  
2.3 Subject Specific Sites 
These sites are more likely to concentrate on a particular area of 
Bioinformatics. These sites are further divided into the various areas of 
Bioinformatics e.g., Codon usage, and Genome analysis/Genomic comparisons, 
Phylogenetics etc.  
2.4 General Bioinformatics Web Sites 
Many of the sites are offering the same sorts of links and many to other 
Bioinformatics sites; many have links to a Sequence Retrieval System or other 
facilities for sequence retrieval.  These are categorized as under: 
• Academic Sites 
• Corporate/Government Sites 
2.5 Access to Journals 
Providing access to journals such as; Nature, Science, Molecular biology and 
Evolution, Nucleic Acids Research, Bioinformatics, The Journal of Molecular 
Biology, Genetics, New Scientist, Online Journal of Bioinformatics, Internet 
Science Journal. 
   Shiva Kanaujia 
 46  SRELS Jl. Info. Manage. 
2.6 As a Centre for Biotechnology Information 
One can explore extensive sites of resources and including newsletters, 
Bioinformatics databases, and links to the major medical bibliographic databases. 
It not only connects to textual databases but also to Protein Structure Servers. 
These include 3DB browser, biomolecular modeling and structural classification 
of proteins etc. Biotechnologists can reach any Bioinformatics Centers on 
Internet. From DNA Databank Japan to European Bioinformatics Centre can be 
reached by using Internet. One can search databases on protein, nucleotides, and 
protein structure. 
2.7 News Services  
Various news services can be categorized as following:  
2.7.1. Via e-mail: It can serve as an important tool for being aware of new 
developments. The Scientist is providing this service with frequent 
coverage of Bioinformatics news. For this facility registration is free. It 
enables news automatically be sent via e-mail the tables of contents for 
each bi-weekly issue [3].  
2.7.2. Directories of news sites: Some directories of news sites are focusing in 
Bioinformatics. Southwest Biotechnology and Informatics Center 
(SWBIC) is a good "launch pad" to news sites [4].  
2.7.3. Headline news service: Genomics Today is a daily headline news service 
that provides links to genomics news in other sites. It culls the relevant 
headlines from a wide variety of sources including wire services, 
newspapers, Yahoo, selected web sites, and university news sites. The 
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America sponsors it [5].  
2.7.4. News Network: Genome News Network is a good source for news on 
scientific, as opposed to business, aspects of Bioinformatics. 
Bioinformatics news is clearly marked. The short news summaries are to 
be commended for giving the full citation to the original scientific article 
at the end of each news piece. In addition to news there are also featured 
articles and a few educational links [6].  
2.7.5. Conferences etc.: Internet also informs about conferences and other 
platforms where designers and architects of high-performance computer 
chips, software and systems can share their vies and ideas for developing 
Bioinformaticsand Internet: New Paradigm to Disciplines...  
Vol. 41, No 1, Marh 2004    47 
more sophisticated and useful tools for Internet for Bioinformatics. IT 
provides detailed information about conferences, symposiums like 
Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology [7] and Pacific Symposium on 
Biocomputing  [8].  
3 RESOURCES 
For running any kind of service resources are required by Internet to be 
efficient in Bioinformatics. The resources include, Bioinformatics resources 
hardware, seminars, databases, agencies and societies, archives, centres, genome 
centres, genome databases and protein structure servers. It works with the help of 
Profile Search, Profile Scan, Manual, User’s Guide, Help Page. These resources 
are also the part of provided information to users about.  
4 BIOINFORMATICS, INTERNET AND LINKS 
Internet facilitates linking to current programs and initiatives utilizing the 
Internet to form clearing-houses and distributed networks of biological 
information [9]. Some are integrated system for agricultural genome analysis, 
including databases, conferences, publications, courses, and a particularly good 
plant genome online database tutorial [10]. Links to many tools and programs are 
available from the National Institutes of Health for sequence analysis and 
molecular biology, including databases, protocols and tutorials [11]. Many a 
pages include links to a number of model organism databases, banks and tables, 
and to a number of genetic databases. Dept. of Molecular and Cellular Biology, 
Harvard University is maintaining such kind of service [12]. Presently "Molecules 
R US", which is a World Wide Web (WWW) Forms interface, facilitates access 
(browsing, searching and retrieval) to the molecular structure data contained 
within the Brookhaven Protein Data Bank (PDB). Through the Molecules R US 
request FORM, one may request a PDB data file to be returned in one of several 
different formats [13].  
Bioinformatics online is providing “Tables of Contents” and abstracts for 
Bioinformatics issues published since 1996 [14]. Center for Genomics and 
Bioinformatics at Indiana University is doing the service including links to major 
Internet resources in Bioinformatics and also links to granting agencies, meetings, 
various genome projects and a large list of sequence analysis tools and databases 
and all this is possible due to Internet [15].  
   Shiva Kanaujia 
 48  SRELS Jl. Info. Manage. 
This is the Internet that is providing access to the site of the University of 
California, Santa Cruz containing working drafts for the human genome and the 
mouse genome. The human genome is over 90% complete. Approximately 85% 
of the sequence is in a highly accurate 'finished' state. The other 15% is merely 
'draft' quality. Some care must be taken when interpreting draft regions, but these 
are still very useful to the working scientist [16]. One can access to SRS, EMBL, 
SWISS-PROT, and TrEMBL, RHdb and MSD databases of European 
Bioinformatics Centre [17]. 
5 BIOINFORMATICS: PRODUCTS AND SERVICES 
Like information products and services, Bioinformatics is also offering these 
“products and services”. We can be benefited for various products and services 
like American Type Culture Collection [18], Biotechnology Industry 
Organization [19], Professional directories [20], National Biotechnology 
Information Facility of New Mexico State University [21], Proteome Inc. 
Products and Services [22], Protein Data Bank [23], Online resources for 
biotechnology professionals [24].  
6 INVOLVEMENT OF PRIVATE FIRMS 
Various firms are maintaining Bioinformatics tools, for example- Federal 
Biotechnology Transfer Directory, a database of over 4,300 records of federal 
research projects and patents is maintained by a private consulting firm [25]. We 
can find non-profit, academe-based organizations, which are committed to 
opening access to Bioinformatics research projects, providing Open Source 
software for Bioinformatics by hosting its development, and keeping biological 
information freely available. For example, Bioinformatics.Org is a community 
focused on the freedom of information as it pertains to the bioscience [26]. Yahoo 
Directory of Medicine: Bioinformatics can be mentioned here which provides 
links to pages covering a wide variety of Bioinformatics categories, including: 
Bioinformatic Servers, Conferences, Human Genetics, Institutes, Professional 
Organizations, Schools, Departments and Programs, and Telemedicine [27].  
7 INTERNET EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES FOR BIO-
INFORMATICS 
Biotechnology organizations are making their biological information available 
on the Internet. Some Indian universities are doing it also. We can mention here 
Centre for Biotechnology, Delhi University [28] and Bioinformatics Centre, Pune. 
Bioinformaticsand Internet: New Paradigm to Disciplines...  
Vol. 41, No 1, Marh 2004    49 
The Bioinformatics Centre of Pune provides upto-date and accurate information 
in the area of Biotechnology. It has emphasis on virology, proteins and nucleic 
acid sequences and structures, microbial strain data. It also provides an access to 
the other related areas through networks. Apart from answering the bibliographic 
queries and supplying the sequence data, the Centre also offers unique facilities 
for data analysis. The hardware, software and the expertise are available at this 
Centre. This availability facilitates the users in every possible way. The Center is 
equipped with the state-of-the-art services and facilities in terms of hardware, 
software, and information storage and retrieval [29]. Another one, 
Biotechindia.com provides information of facts. Their catalogue requests are 
solved. The services on Internet provide connection with R&D Systems Inc., 
Super Array Biosciences Corporation, Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., Cambrex 
Bioscience Rockland Inc., Cambrex Bioscience Walkersville Inc., Peninsula 
Laboratories Inc., Bellco Biotechnology Inc. of USA, and Bachem AG, 
Switzerland 
8 COURSES FOR INTERNET RESOURCES AND BIOINFORMATICS 
TOOLS 
Programming courses are being run on Internet for Bioinformatics and 
Internet, which requires basic Unix commands, file editing on Unix, telnet, FTP, 
E-mail, WWW and HTML. Online tutorials are available for starters. For example 
Stanford University has various courses for Bioinformatics in computing syllabus 
like “Stanford Algorithms in Computational Biology (MIS 214) Online, “Stanford 
Molecular Biology (Biochem 203), “Stanford Computational Biology Biochem 
(218 Online) [30].  
Arranging workshops can provide an overview of the Bioinformatics/ 
computational molecular biology tools available for use over the Internet. The 
workshops can enable participants for: 
• Becoming familiar with databases and analysis tools on the Internet.  
• Participating in hands-on computer labs to practice the use of these tools.  
• Learning skills that allow exploring and exploiting more specific tools that 
may be useful. 
9 SEARCHING 
Various ways are available to search; a text-based query can be submitted 
through the system like Entrez system [31]. A sequence query can be submitted 
   Shiva Kanaujia 
 50  SRELS Jl. Info. Manage. 
through the program [32]. To search a particular type of database or item, it 
should be selected from the menu. Various lists include a number of databases. 
The list can be accessed by category/type of database or alphabetically by title. By 
clicking on the short description of each database, a paragraph-long description 
can be accessed from the database. Another system, Sequence Retrieval System 
interface provides links to sites that allow web based searching and retrieval of 
nucleotide and protein sequence. With the facility to query most of the major 
Bioinformatics databases and retrieve textual information but it is not the 
complete list. 
10 ROLE AND USE BY LIBRARY AND INFORMATION CENTRES 
As the library and information centres are playing a great role in 
Bioinformatics. Separate “Bioinformatics” have been established and many 
organizations are planning for it. As the field is vast and holds a wide potentiality 
for future prospects so some aspects should always be kept in mind. These are as 
following: 
1. Researchers should be well informed about the services on Internet 
regarding Bioinformatics. 
2. The user community must be taught and learnt the tools and techniques to 
explore Bioinformatics available on Internet. 
3. Some customized services can be started, which can be provided in any of 
the manner i.e., in anticipation and on demand. 
4. These customized services can include searching of databases, graphical 
information, and recent developments in the requested subject-discipline, 
providing news facilities by e-mail service. 
5. The “Bioinformatics” of the organization can offer documentation services 
regarding availability of biological information on Internet and available 
other Bioinformatics services on Internet. 
6. By using available resources of Bioinformatics on Internet, users can be 
informed about their availability. 
7. Internet can help in a wide manner as it can help them in searching that 
information which is available far from their organization and country. 
8. As Internet is spreading the “Bioinformatics”, it should be vital to publicize 
the role of Internet.  Organization should provide facilities for data analysis 
of Bioinformatics from Internet. 
Bioinformaticsand Internet: New Paradigm to Disciplines...  
Vol. 41, No 1, Marh 2004    51 
9. As hardware, software and the expertise are required for various activities 
and services so these should be facilitated for the users. 
11 CONCLUSION 
Like other fields of knowledge, Bioinformatics has grown and seeing the 
researches going on in the genetic scenario, nobody can ignore the increasing 
impact of Bioinformatics. We can relate it with the increasing impact of Internet 
in information scenario. The future holds the ever increasing dependability on 
information and information technology so it can be said that Internet is an 
efficient tool for accessing the Bio-information in the form of Bioinformatics. The 
need is to know, explore and exploiting it. 
REFERENCES 
1. www.cats.ucsc.edu 
2. www.cato.com/biotech/ 
3. www.the-scientist.com 
4. www.nbif.org/links/1.20.php 
5. www.genomics.phrma.org/today/ 
6. www.gnn.tigr.org/main.shtml 
7. www.ebi.ac.uk/ismb-97/papers2.html 
8. www.cgl.ucsf.edu/psb/ 
9. www.Biosis.org.zrdocs/zoolinfo/biol_inf.htm 
10. www.ars-genome.cornell.edu/ 
11. www.molbio.info.nih.gov/molbio/ 
12. www.golgi.harvard.edu/Biolinks.html 
13. www.molbio.info.nih.gov/cgi-bin/pdb 
14. www.oup.co.uk/bioinformatics/contents/ 
15. www.cgb.indiana.edu/bioinformatics/resources 
16. www.genome.ucsc.edu/ 
17. www.ebi.ac.uk/index.html 
18. www.atcc.org 
19. www.bio.org/welcome.html 
20. www.biotech-register.com/ 
21. www.nbif.org 
   Shiva Kanaujia 
 52  SRELS Jl. Info. Manage. 
22. www.proteome.com/services/index.html 
23. www.rcsb.org/pdb/ 
24. www.sciewb.com 
25. www.bioinfo.com/fbdhome.html 
26. www.bioinformatics.org 
27. www.yahoo.com 
28. www.cbt.org  
29. www.unipune.ernet.in 
30.  www.mcrcr0.med.nyu.edu/rcr/molbio/syllabus-98.html 
31. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez/index.html 
32. www.ncbi.lm.nih.gov/BLAST 
Appendix-1 
Internet educational resources for Bioinformatics:  
• NCBI: sequence data repository, US Bioinformatics center. http://www. 
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
• EBI: sequence data repository, European Bioinformatics center. http:// 
www.ebi. ac.uk/ 
• Pasteur: France bioinfo. center, Bio Netbook is an excellent database of 
Internet information for biosciences, Bioinformatics. http://bioweb. 
pasteur.fr/intro-uk.html Bio Netbook 
• ExPASy/SWISSPROT: protein sequence data center. http://www.expasy. 
ch/ good list of bioinfo resources  
• Sanger: European sequencing, Bioinformatics center. http://www.sanger. 
ac.uk/ 
• Weizmann: Israel Bioinformatics center. http://bioinformatics.weizmann. 
ac.il/ 
• GenomeWeb: Bioinformatics resources. http://www.hgmp.mrc.ac.uk/ 
GenomeWeb/  
Bioinformaticsand Internet: New Paradigm to Disciplines...  
Vol. 41, No 1, Marh 2004    53 
• CSHL: US sequencing, Bioinformatics center. http://www.cshl.org/ 
• WUSTL: US sequencing, Bioinformatics center. http://www.ibc.wustl. 
edu/ 
• Stanford genome center US sequencing, Bioinformatics center. http:// 
genome-www.stanford.edu/: 
• TIGR: US sequencing, Bioinformatics center. http://www.tigr.org/ 
• Celera: US commercial sequencing, Bioinformatics center. http://www. 
celera.com/ 
• GenomeNet: Japan Bioinformatics center http://www.genome.ad.jp/ 
• Bionet: Usenet network news for biology. http://www.bio.net/ 
• BioMedNet: Bioinformatics resources including HMS Beagle, 
http://www.bmn. com/ 
• BioInform mostly commercial news, services - good list of companies in 
Bioinformatics. http://www.bioinform.com/ 
Appendix- 2 
Web Sites in the News: 
• Bioinformatics via D'Trends: A good place to begin your research on the 
field, because it provides all of the background information by the person 
who coined the term himself --Dr. Hwa A. Lim (aka HAL)  
• Human Genome Project Information Web Site: A government source and 
a great place to go for most of the information relating to current genome 
research. Sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy Human Genome 
Program.  
• The National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI): Grant 
information, intramural research, ethical, legal and social implications, 
genomic and genetic resources. Also includes links to the policy and 
public affairs, workshops and conferences, and "The Genome Hub."  
   Shiva Kanaujia 
 54  SRELS Jl. Info. Manage. 
• Bioinformatics at the NIH: Contents include what's new, general 
information, impact to agency, and funding links. Also has a link to BIST 
(Biomedical Information Science Technology Initiative). 
• Center for the Study of Comparative Functional Genomics/Faculty: Did 
you know the University at Albany has a local site? This site is well-
equipped with mission statement, news, research, faculty descriptions and 
recent publications, seminars, employment, and pre-doctoral graduate 
program general and contact information.  
• Buffalo Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics: In addition to having a 
link to news, this site also provides a wonderful overview with valuable 
information on informatics, bioinformatics, functional informatics and the 
future, with particular attention associated events in Western New York. 
• Bioinformatics: A site that provided basic knowledge on the subject as 
well as the goals of the site. Explains why there should be interest in the 
field and had given relevant obtainable links for further research. Site 
contains links to scholarly journals, dictionary and FAQs. 
• Bioinform: The Global Bioinformatics News Service Explore a New 
York-based journal, published every other Monday, focused exclusively 
on current events in the global Bioinformatics community. 
• Bioinformatics.org: The site contains links to news (and news archives), 
repositories, mailing lists, and bulleting board. New additions include 
FAQ and Banner Exchange pages. 
• Bioinformatics News: Self-described as a "Yahoo-like hierarchical Web 
directory." A Weblog that provides daily updates and links to news items 
and stories of interest to Bioinformatics community. 
• Bioinformatics homepage: Internet Resources for Bioinformatics 
Coordinator: Dr. George Michaels. The aim of this page is to provide CSI 
students and researchers of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology an 
internet resource for their research as well as news, events, activities. 
Other Sites of Interest: 
• NASA Bioinformatics: A government site via NASA (National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration) which branches the field into two 
Bioinformaticsand Internet: New Paradigm to Disciplines...  
Vol. 41, No 1, Marh 2004    55 
subareas: Center for Informatics and Information Technology. These two 
areas include 3D construction, simulation, virtual reality, and 
neurotechnology. Site has links to virtual live science, space biology, 
image gallery, publications and people. There are also staff and contact 
information for students interested in their lab. 
• Bioinformatics at Latrobe University: In addition to course description, 
this site describes bioinformatics, DNA and protein structure and 
molecular modeling, and the human genome. Discusses the field's 
popularity and has a very nice link to a powerpoint presentation with 
extensive details on concepts and terminology.  
• Gerstein Group-Yale Bioinformatics: With much to die for regarding the 
field, Mark Gerstein, Assistant Professor of Molecular Biophysics and 
Biochemistry and Computer Science has a premiere Web source. It 
includes research on genomics, structure and expression with links to 
lectures, papers, people, jobs and calendar searches for events.  
• Masters of Science in Bioinformatics: Through Georgia Instititute of 
Technology, this site is tailored for students in pursuit of graduate degrees. 
Despite its promotion of the graduate program, it does piece together 
useful and brief information for those doing some background research on 
the field as a career. Also provides application and FAQ. 

