IJCA Special Issue on “Computer Aided Soft Computing Techniques for Imaging and Biomedical Applications” 
CASCT, 2010. 
69 
 
A Study on Applications of Grid Computing in 
Bioinformatics  
Manjula.K.A  
Department of Information Technology 
Kannur University 
Kerala, India  
Dr.G.Raju 
Department of Information Technology 
Kannur University 
Kerala, India
 
 
 
 
ABSTRACT 
Huge volume of biological data, which is heterogeneous, 
autonomous and dynamic in nature, is being produced at a rapid 
pace throughout the community. Along with the increase in 
biological data, many tools are being designed to analyze them by 
different research groups. Integration of these biological data and 
tools is becoming one of the major topics in the bioinformatics 
community. Grid computing is emerging as a key infrastructure 
for a wide range of disciplines for resource sharing and 
collaboration over wide and open networks. Provided with 
fundamental mechanisms of access to distributed databases and 
tools, the grid is an ideal candidate for the integration of 
bioinformatics applications.   
Keywords 
Bioinformatics, Grid Computing, BioGrid.  
1. INTRODUCTION 
Research in the area of bioinformatics has grown with each 
passing day in recent years as demands for more computing 
power increased. The solutions to these demands usually involve 
using parallelism techniques. Although Cluster environments can 
reduce the execution time and increase alignment efficiency, they 
may not be a good solution when aligning very large genomic 
databases, which are of distributed nature. This is where Grid 
computing can play a significant role. Grid Computing can 
coordinate the resources of distributed virtual organizations and 
satisfy a great many computational demands [1]. In addition to 
integrating distributed resources, Grid Computing can reduce 
server idle times via management of integrated computing 
resources. Considering the capabilities of Grid Computing, this 
paper looks at the benefits of using Grid Computing in 
bioinformatics and how such a combination will enhance the 
applications of bioinformatics. In the following sections this 
paper briefly discusses about Grid Computing and 
bioinformatics, followed by the benefits of such combinations 
and finally looks at some of the initial works in this area.  
2. GRID COMPUTING  
The term, grid computing, has become one of the latest 
buzzwords in the IT industry. Grid is a system that coordinates 
resources that are not subject to centralized control using 
standard, open, general-purpose protocols and interfaces to 
deliver nontrivial qualities of service [2]. Grid computing can be 
thought of as distributed and large scale cluster computing and as 
a form of network distributed parallel processing. This 
innovative approach of computing leverages on existing IT 
infrastructure to optimize resources and manage data as well as 
computing workloads [3].  
Grid is an infrastructure that involves the integrated and 
collaborative use of computers, networks, databases and 
scientific instruments owned and managed by multiple 
organizations. Grid computing is applying the resources of many 
computers in a network to a single problem at the same time - 
usually to a scientific or technical problem that requires a great 
number of computer processing cycles or access to large amounts 
of data (Figure 1). Grid computing requires the use of software 
that can divide and farm out pieces of a program to as many as 
several thousand computers. Grid middleware provides users 
with seamless computing ability and uniform access to resources 
in the heterogeneous grid environment [4].   
 
 
 
Figure 1. Grid Computing Structure 
Grid computing appears to be a promising trend for three reasons 
[5]: 
 Its ability to make more cost effective use of a given amount 
of computer resources. 
 As a way to solve problems that can't be approached without 
an enormous amount of computing power. 
IJCA Special Issue on “Computer Aided Soft Computing Techniques for Imaging and Biomedical Applications” 
CASCT, 2010. 
70 
 
 This suggests that the resources of many computers can be 
cooperatively and perhaps synergistically harnessed and 
managed as a collaboration toward a common objective.  
Grid computing is becoming a critical component of science, 
business, and industry [6]. Grids could allow the analysis of huge 
investment portfolios in minutes instead of hours, significantly 
accelerate drug development, and reduce design times and 
defects. With computing cycles plentiful and inexpensive, 
practical grid computing would open the door to new models for 
compute utilities, a service similar to an electric utility in which 
a user buys computing time on-demand from a provider.  
Larger bodies of scientific and engineering applications stands to 
benefit from grid computing, including molecular biology, 
weather forecasting, financial and mechanical modeling, 
immunology, circuit simulation, aircraft design, fluid mechanics, 
biophysics, biochemistry, biology, scientific instrumentation, 
drug design , tomography, high energy physics, data mining, 
financial analysis, nuclear simulations, material science, 
chemical engineering, environmental studies, climate modeling, 
neuroscience/brain activity analysis, structural analysis, 
mechanical CAD/CAM, and astrophysics. 
3. BIOINFORMATICS 
Bioinformatics is the combination of biology and information 
technology. This discipline encompasses computational tools and 
methods used to manage, analyze and manipulate large sets of 
biological data. Bioinformatics is essential for achieving so many 
complex tasks such as  use of  genomic information in 
understanding human diseases, identification of new molecular 
targets for drug discovery and in unraveling human evolution 
mysteries. Essentially, bioinformatics has three components [7]: 
 The creation of databases, allowing the storage and 
management of large biological data sets. 
 The development of algorithms and statistics, to determine 
relationships among members of large data sets. 
 The use of these tools for the analysis and interpretation of 
various types of biological data, including DNA, RNA and 
protein sequences, protein structures, gene expression 
profiles, and biochemical pathways. 
The combination of IT with biology proves to be of immense use 
mainly because of two reasons- 
 First, many bioinformatics problems require the same task 
to be repeated millions of times. For example, comparing a 
new sequence to every other sequence stored in a database 
or comparing a group of sequences systematically to 
determine evolutionary relationships.  
 Second, computers are required for their problem-solving 
power. Typical problems that might be addressed using 
bioinformatics could include solving the folding pathways of 
protein given its amino acid sequence, or deducing a 
biochemical pathway given a collection of RNA expression 
profiles.  
There are useful bioinformatics tools which can be of great help 
to biologists. One such tool is BLAST (Basic Local Alignment 
Search Tool), which finds regions of local similarity between 
sequences. The program compares nucleotide or protein 
sequences to sequence databases and calculates the statistical 
significance of matches. BLAST can be used to infer functional 
and evolutionary relationships between sequences as well as help 
identify members of gene families [8]. The Figure 2 represents a 
sample BLAST result page scrolling through which provides 
information  such as  unique request ID (RID),  query-database 
information,  a link to taxonomy reports, a graphical display 
showing alignments to the query sequence, descriptions of 
sequences producing significant alignments, and pair wise 
alignments between the query sequence and each BLAST hit 
sequence. 
 
 
Figure 2. Execution of BLAST 
Biological data are being produced at a phenomenal rate. Most 
common analyses have evolved to a larger scale, for example 
from the study of a single gene/protein to a whole 
genome/proteome, from a single metabolic pathway to Systems 
Biology.  Hence, now Bioinformatics is requiring research 
infrastructures able to store very large biological data sets, 
complex and heterogeneous, and to make these data available for 
intensive scientific computing. 
The future of bioinformatics is integration [9]. Facing to this 
growing need, we should take advantage of the new 
developments in computing such as distributed computing. 
4. NEED FOR GRID COMPUTING IN 
BIOINFORMATICS 
The bioinformatics research area is now faced with a mountain of 
ever-increasing and distributed information. For example, 
finding a single gene of the Oryza sativa (rice) genome one must 
spend weeks, if not months, wandering through approximately 40 
million base pairs. These data are scattered in many data 
repositories. Thus, not only do we need an efficient tool to 
visualize and analyze DNA data, but the integration and 
exchange of information on a particular gene or coding regions 
from different international collaborative databases needs to be 
done in a careful, but robust manner as well.  Along with the 
increase in biological data as seen in Table 1, many tools 
[Table2] are being designed to analyze them by different research 
groups [10]. Integration of these biological data and tools is 
becoming one of the major topics in the bioinformatics 
IJCA Special Issue on “Computer Aided Soft Computing Techniques for Imaging and Biomedical Applications” 
CASCT, 2010. 
71 
 
community. One of the goals of the integration is to enable users 
to access bioinformatics tools and up-to-date biological data 
across multiple heterogeneous databases.   
Table 1. Size of Some Biological Databases 
Name Nature Rev. Entries Size(MB) 
GenBank Gene 
Sequence 
153 56,620,500 224,000 
EMBL Gene 
Sequence 
86 69,783,593 100,000 
Swiss-
Prot 
Protein 
Sequence 
49.5 216,380 824 
TrEMBL Protein 
Sequence 
32.5 2,807,081 6,347 
PROSITE Protein 
Signature 
19.25 1,411 14 
pFAM-A Protein 
Signature 
19.0 8,183 2,104 
PDB Protein 
Structure 
Apr. 
2006 
36,121 23,316 
 
Table 2. Example of BioInformatics Programs 
PSSP: Protein secondary structure prediction;  
 MSA: Multiple Sequence Alignment 
 
Grid computing is emerging as a key infrastructure for a wide 
range of disciplines for resource sharing and collaboration over 
wide and open networks. Provided with fundamental 
mechanisms of access to distributed databases and tools, the grid 
is an ideal candidate for the integration of bioinformatics 
applications. 
Massive computing resources are often required for large-scale 
bioinformatics analyses. Many bioinformatics tools such as 
BLAST and HMMER require powerful computers for better 
performance. However, small or mid-scale biological laboratories 
cannot afford powerful servers or dedicated clusters. Instead, 
they usually have dozens of personal computers and workstations 
which are often relatively idle. Grid technology provides an 
alternative approach for these laboratories to utilize distributed 
idle resources to meet the needs of computational capability. 
Location transparency is an important feature of grid technology 
[11]. Users can access applications without being aware of where 
these packages are installed. The parallel version bioinformatics 
tools when used in grid environment can help us reduce the 
waiting time of alignment and improve performance of complex 
tasks such as sequence alignment. 
The emerging grid computing technologies enable bioinformatics 
scientists to conduct their researches in a virtual laboratory, in 
which they share public databases, computational tools as well as 
their analysis workflows [12].  The implementation of existing 
bioinformatics applications on Grids represent a cost-effective 
alternative for addressing highly resource-demanding and data-
intensive bioinformatics tasks [13]. 
5. BIOLOGICAL GRID PROJECTS 
AROUND THE WORLD  
Given the possibilities of grid computing, it is no surprise that 
there is a huge interest in grid  computing technology  around the 
world. Many genomes have been sequenced and their annotation 
requires larger and larger databases. The storage and the 
exploitation of these genomes and of the huge flux of data 
coming from post-genomics put a quickly growing pressure on 
the computing tools and resources in the laboratories.  The 
integration of a platform dedicated to biology into GRID opens 
up new perspectives in terms of computing resources and data 
storage and there are  BioGrid projects and works proceeding 
around the world. EuroGrid BioGrid [14], Asia Pacific BioGrid 
[15], UK BioGrid [16], North  Carolina (NC) BioGrid [17],  and 
Singapore BioGrid [18] are some of them.  
The EuroGrid BIO–GRID aims to develop intuitive user 
interfaces for selected packages from different areas of 
biomolecular research and compatibility interfaces with their 
databases. The result will be an integrated biomolecular toolkit 
that allows streamlined work processes, and a job execution 
component that makes all systems in the BIO–GRID available for 
simulation runs with a uniform and intuitive user interface. 
The UK BioGrid is called MyGrid. MyGrid is an e-Science Grid 
project that aims to help biologists and bioinformaticians to  
perform workflow-based in silico experiments, and help to 
automate the management of such workflows through 
personalization, notification of change and publication of 
experiments.  
The NC Grid is providing the computing data storage, and 
networking capabilities to support the genomics revolution. 
Members of the North Carolina Genomics and Bioinformatics 
Consortium are working with computer and networking 
companies to create the North Carolina Bioinformatics Grid [17]. 
An information network is being built at Indiana University for 
large data and computationally intensive applications in several 
sciences, using advanced data grid technologies. With national 
and international collaborations in physics, bioinformatics, 
Name Algorithm Input data 
BLAST Similarity Gene/Protein Sequence 
FASTA Similarity Gene/Protein Sequence 
SSearch Similarity Gene/Protein Sequence 
ClustalW MSA Protein Sequence 
Multalin MSA Protein Sequence 
PattInProt Pattern/Profile Sequence, Pattern, profile 
GOR4 PSSP Protein Sequence 
SIMPA96 PSSP Protein Sequence 
SOPMA PSSP Protein Sequence 
IJCA Special Issue on “Computer Aided Soft Computing Techniques for Imaging and Biomedical Applications” 
CASCT, 2010. 
72 
 
geology, and computer science, this will provide scientists access 
to local and globally distributed computing resources. The 
Singapore BioGrid is applying Clustal-G on Grid system to 
implement sequence alignment [18].  
These projects around the world are all using grid technology for 
bioinformatics. The BioGrid technology is turning out to be the 
most popular and effective in solving biology problems. 
6. CONCLUSION 
Grid computing can be a good solution for the challenges faced 
in bioinformatics field. Since bioinformatics demands more 
computing power, integration of distributed, huge and complex 
data as well as applications of heterogeneous networks, Grid 
computing environments can be a right choice. The integration of 
a platform dedicated to biology into GRID opens up new avenues 
in terms of computing resources and data storage. There are  
BioGrid projects  like  EuroGrid BioGrid , Asia Pacific BioGrid, 
UK BioGrid , North Carolina BioGrid which are aimed to 
contribute to the field of biological computing. The BioGrid 
technology is opening up new perspectives for bioinformatics. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] C. T. Yang, T. F. Han and H. C. Kan, “G-BLAST: a Grid-
based solution for  mpiBLAST on computational Grids”, 
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 
vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 225-255, 2009. 
[2] I. Foster, “What is the Grid? A Three Point Checklist”, July 
20, 2002. Available: http://www.mcs.anl.gov/~itf/Articles/ 
WhatIsTheGrid.pdf. 
[3] M. Rabb and C. Doninger, “Grid computing and SAS”, SAS 
Institute Inc.US, 2004, Avaliable: 
http://support.sas.com/rnd/ 
scalability/papers/101948_1204.pdf. 
[4] P. Asadzadeh, R. Buyya1, C. L. Kei, D. Nayar, and S. 
Venugopal, “Global Grids and Software Toolkits: A Study 
of Four Grid Middleware Technologies”, Available: 
http://www.buyya.com/ papers/gmchapter.pdf. 
[5] B. Fran, F. Geoffrey and H. Anthony, “Grid Computing : 
Making the Global Infrastructure a Reality”, Chichester : 
Wiley, 2003.  
[6] J. H. Kaufman, T. J. Lehman, and J. Thomas, “Grid 
computing made simple”, The Industrial Physicist, pp 32-
33, Aug- Sept 2003. 
[7] R. Gupta, “Bio-Informatics,Bonding genes with IT”, in 
INDIACOM 2010, Jaipur, Feb 2010.  
[8] BLAST, Available: http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov. 
[9] J. Fox, “What is bioinformatics?”, The Science Creative 
Quarterly, Issue4, 2009. 
[10] C.Blanchet, R. Mollon, D. Thain and G. Deleage, “Grid 
Deployment of Legacy Bioinformatics Applications with 
Transparent Data Access”, in 7th IEEE/ACM International 
Conference, Barcelona, pp 120-127, 28-29 Sept. 2006. 
[11] Y. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Yu, G. Gao, and J. Luo, “ABCGrid: 
Application for Bioinformatics Computing Grid”, 
Bioinformatics, 23(9), pp 1175-1177, 2007. 
[12] X. Gong, K. Nakamura, K. Yura and N. Go, “Toward 
Building Grid Applications in Bioinformatics”, in Fourth 
Australasian Symposium on Grid Computing and e-
Research (AusGrid 2006), Hobart, Australia, 2006. 
[13] J. Andrade, M. Andersen, A. Sillén, C.Graff and J.Odeberg, 
“The use of grid computing to drive data-intensive genetic 
research”, European Journal of Human Genetics, 15, 694–
702, March 2007. 
[14] Eurogrid,  www.eurogrid.org 
[15] APBiogrid,  http:// www.apbionet.org/apbiogrid 
[16] Mygrid,  www.MyGrid.org.uk 
[17] Ncbiogrid,  www.ncbiogrid.org 
[18] Singapore BioGrid, www.bic.nus.edu.sg/biogrid 
 
 

