1
Bioinformatics and Scientific Computing
Contact:
Lecturer: Angel Rubio
Phone: 2810
E-mail: arubio@ceit.es
Questions? Thursdays and Fridays after the class. Any other time 
if we set the meeting beforehand. 
2
Bioinformatics definition
Bioinformatics involves the use of techniques such 
as applied mathematics, informatics, statistics, 
computer science, artificial intelligence, chemistry 
and biochemistry to solve biological problems 
(usually on the molecular level) creating and using 
mathematical models and computer programs.
Bioinformatics
• Bioinformatics is a science in which Biology and Computing science
get together to form just one discipline. 
3
Prevention programmes
Genomic profiling
4
Molecular diagnosis
Medical image analysis
(not part of bioinformatics!)
5
Haptics, surgery trainers, surgery robotics
(again, not part of bioinformatics… snif!)
Molecular anlysis of tissues
6
Why Bioinformatics?
• Accumulation of experimental data in Biology
– New high troughput experiments give a huge number of data difficult
to manage (proteomics and microarrays as we will see).
• Store and analyze this existing dispersed information. 
• A bottleneck in investigation tasks is high data throughput
– It cannot be managed with the existing analysis techniques.
• New tools to do the analysis and interpretation of biological data.
Objectives of the course:
• Introduction to Bioinformatics and 
Computational Biology
• Create a bioinformatics profile in science and 
ingineering students
• Describe the problems and their solutions in 
the “new genomic era”
• Present a perspective of the main working 
lines in this area
7
Requirements:
• What is it required?:
– Basic knowledge of statistics, mathematics and programming
– Biology is provided by this course.
How are the classes going to be
• Theory:
– General view of problems in bioinformatics and most used 
methods
– Examples of real applications
• Practice:
– Appoximately 1/3 of the clasess.
– Practical experience using the available tools
– Possibility of generating good question for the classes
8
Evaluation. Two sort of students:
“I just want to fire and forget… Timetable was good”
• If this is your case, you have to pass the final exam. 
– Not too much to study –provided that you went to the classes!!-
– If you do a good exam you mark will be about 7 or 8.
“Bioinformatics is the subject I always dreamt of”
• Great!! I would like to develop a research work with the
students (that is, with you) on finding early markers for lung or
colorectal cancer. 
– If we do a good work, we will try to publish a paper on this and
present the results in a conference.
– It can be a good opprtunity to taste the flavour of research.
– Marks would be better in this case
Bibliography:
• Introduction to Bioinformatics. Arthur M. Lesk. 
Introduction to Bioinformatics. Oxford University 
Press. 2005.
• An Introduction to Bioinformatics Algorithms 
(Computational Molecular Biology S.)  Neil C. Jones, 
Pavel A. Pevzner
• Bioinformatics for Dummies. Jean-Michel Claverie, 
Cedric Notredame
9
Bibliography:
• Structural Bioinformatics. Philip E. Bourne, Helge
Weissig. Wiley-Liss. 2003
• DNA Microarrays and Gene Expression : From 
Experiments to Data Analysis and Modeling. Pierre 
Baldi, G. Wesley Hatfield, Wesley G. Hatfield. 
Cambridge University Press. 2002.
Web sites:
• http://www.bioalgorithms.info/
• http://biotech.icmb.utexas.edu/pages/bioinform/biresources.html
• http://www.bioinfo.utmb.edu/bioinfo/bioinfo.html
10
Course program:
Detailed contents:
• Introductory concepts and 
motivation of the course
– DNA, genes and  chromosomes
– From a gene to a protein
– Proteins and macromolecular 
complexes
• Databases in Biology
– Basic concepts in data basis 
– Most used data basis in 
Bioinformatics
• From genes to proteins: genetic 
expression analysis
– DNA Microchips: Basic 
principles and data analysis  
– Most used analysis algorithms 
• Data mining in Bioinformatics
– Associative rules
– Text mining
• Sequence comparison
– Comparison criteria and 
homology concepts 
– Multiple alignments and profiles 
• Phylogenies
– Distances and similarity among 
sequences 
– Classification and construction 
of phylogenetic trees
• Protein structure and nucleic acids
– Structure principles of proteins
– Experimental resolution of 
structures 
– Structure prediction
Chapter 1: Introductory concepts
Brief introduction Molecular Biology
From gene to protein
11
Chapter 2: Data bases
Data bases most used in Bioinformatics. Information sources 
available. Access. 
Chapter 3: Genetic expression analysis. 
Genetic expression motivation. Most used technologies. Flow analysis. Data 
preprocessing. Supervised and non supervised learning. Grouping techniques. 
Practical problems. 
12
Chapter 4: Bioinformatics data mining
Associative rules. Scientific text mining. Biological enrichment. Notes. 
Matricial factorization algorithms. Practical cases.
Data
Selection
Pre-processing and
transformations Data 
Mining
Interpretation/
Evaluation
Patterns Knowledge!!
Transformed
dataRelevant data
Christmas!
13
Chapter 5: Sequence analysis
Finding similar sequences. Nucleotides and amino acids sequences analysis. Alignment 
algorithms. Practical cases.
atgcacttgagcagggaagaaatccacaaggactcaccagtctcctggtctgcagagaagacagaatcaacatgagcacagcaggaaaagtaatcaaa
tgcaaagcagctgtgctatgggagttaaagaaacccttttccattgaggaggtggaggttgcacctcctaaggcccatgaagttcgtattaagatggtggct
gtaggaatctgtggcacagatgaccacgtggttagtggtaccatggtgaccccacttcctgtgattttaggccatgaggcagccggcatcgtggagagtgtt
ggagaaggggtgactacagtcaaaccaggtgataaagtcatcccactcgctattcctcagtgtggaaaatgcagaatttgtaaaaacccggagagcaact
actgcttgaaaaacgatgtaagcaatcctcaggggaccctgcaggatggcaccagcaggttcacctgcaggaggaagcccatccaccacttccttggcat
cagcaccttctcacagtacacagtggtggatgaaaatgcagtagccaaaattgatgcagcctcgcctctagagaaagtctgtctcattggctgtggattttc
aactggttatgggtctgcagtcaatgttgccaaggtcaccccaggctctacctgtgctgtgtttggcctgggaggggtcggcctatctgctattatgggctgta
aagcagctggggcagccagaatcattgcggtggacatcaacaaggacaaatttgcaaaggccaaagagttgggtgccactgaatgcatcaaccctcaag
actacaagaaacccatccaggaggtgctaaaggaaatgactgatggaggtgtggatttttcatttgaagtcatcggtcggcttgacaccatgatggcttccc
tgttatgttgtcatgaggcatgtggcacaagtgtcatcgtaggggtacctcctgattcccaaaacctctcaatgaaccctatgctgctactgactggacgta
cctggaagggagctattcttggtggctttaaaagtaaagaatgtgtcccaaaacttgtggctgattttatggctaagaagttttcattggatgcattaataac
ccatgttttaccttttgaaaaaataaatgaaggatttgacctgcttcactctgggaaaagtatccgtaccattctgatgttttgagacaatacagatgttttcc
cttgtggcagtcttcagcctcctctaccctacatgatctggagcaacagctgggaaatatcattaattctgctcatcacagattttatcaataaattacattt
gggggctttccaaagaaatggaaattgatgtaaaattatttttcaagcaaatgtttaaaatccaaatgagaactaaataaagtgttgaacatcagctgggg
aattgaagccaataaaccttccttcttaaccatt
Chapter 6: Phylogeny
Phylogeny fundamentals. Sequence phylogenies. Quantification of relationship among 
sequences. Phylogenetic trees construction. Algorithms. Practical problems.
14
Chapter 7: Proteins ans nucleic acids structure
Proteins structure, Experimental determination of the structure, X ray Crystallography, Nuclear 
magnetic resonance (NMR), 3D electronic microscopy, Bioinformatic prediction of structure, 
Fuctional sequence motives, Structural / functional scopes.Practical problems.
ββαβββββββββββββββββββββββββββ
αββ
αααα
ααα
ααα
ααα
αα
ααααα
αααα
αααααα
αααααααααααααααααααααα
Chapter 8: Protemics
Protein identification, bidimensional genes, Mass spectrometry, 
Interaction networks. 
15
QUESTIONS?
Material for the first class:
• I will leave the slides in the web page of the
subject.
• Primer on Molecular Genetics:
http://www.ornl.gov/sci/techresources/Human_Gen
ome/publicat/primer/primer.pdf
• A quick introduction to elements of Biology:
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/microarray/biology_intro.html
PDF Presentations:

