Bioinformatics: an overview for cancer research 
 
M. Al-Rajab
1
, J. Lu
1
 
1
School of Computing and Engineering, University of Huddersfield, Huddersfield, United Kingdom 
 
 
Abstract - Bioinformatics is a new science that is glowing 
out in the recent years. It is a multidisciplinary science that 
is made out of different kinds of other scientific fields like 
biology, computer science, chemistry, statistics, mathematics 
and others. It was a big challenge for researchers to describe 
this new field in a systematic scientific way and bring out the 
attention of its applications and services; one of these 
important services that Bioinformatics can be applied in, is 
the cancer studies, research and therapies for many 
beneficial reasons.  This paper will give a clear glance 
overview of bioinformatics, its definition, aims, applications, 
technologies, the large amount of data produced in the 
biological field and how bioinformatics can organize, analyze 
and store them, discuss some algorithms that can be 
implemented over bioinformatics data, and how to apply 
bioinformatics to discover and diagnose diseases like cancer. 
Keywords: Bioinformatics, Applications, Technologies, 
Data, Algorithms, Cancer.  
 
1 Introduction 
  Bioinformatics is a new multidisciplinary field that 
comes out from the combination of other sciences and fields 
like biology, computer science, statistics, chemistry, 
mathematics and even more [3, 6, 8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 17]. In 
recent years new sciences have risen up due to the demand in 
understanding more the world around us like Bioinformatics, 
Biotechnology, Computational Biology, Biochemistry and 
others. It was a big challenge for researchers and scientists to 
give an adequate definition for each of these newly emerged 
sciences [5, 9, 18]. One of these sciences that have a huge 
influence in the medical field is Bioinformatics but also can 
play a key role in other fields like agriculture, livestock and 
even space explorations [1, 19]. Bioinformatics which 
attracts people in the academic field in addition an interest to 
those in the medical industry [4, 15, 20, 21]. 
There were many contributions to define and explain 
Bioinformatics in scientific ways, but all researchers agree 
that it is a combination of Biology, Computer Science, 
Statistics and Mathematics. Each one of these disciplines is 
playing an important role for collecting, organizing, 
analyzing and digitizing the biological data and even 
classifying and storing it in an efficient manner [1, 3, 12, 16, 
19]. 
The main purpose of this paper is explore and explain 
Bioinformatics in a more scientific way, the paper will try to 
define Bioinformatics scientifically and try highlight 
applications of bioinformatics in the medical sector specially, 
and in the diagnosis of critical diseases like cancer. The race 
of bioinformatics research is now passing long rounds in 
many areas in the Biological life, so; the goal of this paper is 
to provide an overview summary of bioinformatics definition 
from different articles written in this field, what are the main 
implementations and aims under the skin of this science, 
how to understand the data and what are the most important 
databases used, give a snapshot over the most common 
algorithms implemented in the field and how important to 
apply bioinformatics in the cancer research and study. 
This paper will target four categories of readership who are 
interested in the field. (1) Students who are interested in 
studying this new field. (2) Instructors who would like to 
prepare a fundamental course to teach in bioinformatics. (3) 
Researchers who would like to understand more about 
Bioinformatics and the relationship with cancer. (4) Experts 
in the medical field who are interested in implementing the 
understanding of this field in the medical life. 
The remainder of this paper will be structured as follows: 
Section 2 will discuss the background in methodologies 
applied in this paper; while Section 3 will focus on 
Bioinformatics definition, on the other hand section 4 will 
figure out the aim of studying the field. Moreover in section 
5 data, data types and databases will be presented in 
Bioinformatics. On the other hand, section 6 will discuss the 
most common Algorithms implemented in Bioinformatics. 
Section 7 will discuss the role of Bioinformatics in cancer 
research and how important to be implemented in that field. 
In section 8 current problems in Bioinformatics are 
represented, and finally section 9 will conclude this paper. 
2  Background in methodologies 
 As well as sufficient number of papers, articles, 
websites, and books are talking about Bioinformatics. It was 
clear to us that all have no unified definition for 
Bioinformatics as a science or a new born field emerging in 
the life of biology and technology, add to that there were rare 
papers systematically constructing and directing the road for 
all Bioinformatics basic knowledge. From this point an effort 
was implemented to conduct a deep search to collect as many 
papers and articles discussing the historical and 
fundamentals of Bioinformatics in order to establish a 
unified basis form understanding the basics of Bioinformatics 
and links that with importance of applying the field in the 
cancer study, research and therapy.  More than seventy 
papers, articles, websites and books that are talking about 
introduction in bioinformatics were collected. A profound 
reading took place to classify the papers. To write about the 
basics, we put out all the keywords (bioinformatics, database, 
algorithms, technologies, cancer, applications), then we 
started classifying the papers related to the collected data as 
in Table 1.  
Table 1: Summery of Papers Number Read 
Topics No. of Papers 
Bioinformatics Definition 49 
Databases 12 
Algorithms 6 
Technologies and Tools 12 
Applications 12 
Cancer 12 
 
To remark the numbers in the table, 49 references were 
introducing a definition to Bioinformatics, 12 of them talked 
about the databases in bioinformatics, 6 discussed the most 
important algorithms used in Bioinformatics, 12 mentioned 
out the most important technologies and tools used in the 
field, the same number discussed where Bioinformatics is 
applied, and also the same number introduced the 
relationship of the field with cancer. After that grouped out 
the data that are relevant together from the different 
resources and put them together for the literature review and 
the findings. It was noticed that the different resources 
collected were not focusing on a basic knowledge of 
Bioinformatics, they started by defining the field then 
highlighting one part of the field like databases, tools, 
applications, algorithms, etc… 
Our contribution in this paper is to gather all the distributed 
fundamental information about Bioinformatics and 
summarize them in a systematic fundamental way. Jawdat 
[1] discussed that the storage and analysis of biological data 
using certain algorithms and computer software is called 
Bioinformatics, so it was defined as the design, construction 
and use of software tools to generate, store, annotate, access 
and analyze data and information related to molecular 
biology.  The authors in [2] said that bioinformatics is 
basically a study to model, to organize, to understand and to 
discover interesting information associated with the large 
scale molecular biological databases. The term Bio 
(Molecular Biology) informatics (Information Technology) 
which encompasses tools and methods used to manage, 
analyze, and manipulate large set of biological data.  In [3] 
the authors claimed that the use of bioinformatics to 
organize, manage, and analyze genomic data which is the 
genetic material of an organism, this new IT discipline fuses 
computing, mathematics, and biology to meet the many 
computational challenges in modern molecular biology and 
medical research. Chavan in [4] argued that biological data 
include extensive information regarding genomic sequences 
of different species, changes due to evolution, and changes in 
their protein sequences. Such a massive data cannot be 
handled with ease. This requires systematic sieving of data to 
categorize and catalogue them. Based on this need arose the 
field of Bioinformatics. So Bioinformatics can be defined as 
the discipline, which encompasses branches like biology, 
computer science, IT and mathematics. It is a science of 
managing and analyzing vast biological data using advanced 
computing techniques. On the other hand, in [5] the authors 
commented that defining the terms bioinformatics and 
computational biology in addition is not an easy task. They 
are both multidisciplinary fields, involving researchers from 
different areas of specialty, including (but in no means 
limited to) statistics, computer science, physics, 
biochemistry, genetics, molecular biology and mathematics. 
In [6] Zadeh defines bioinformatics as a new discipline that 
has emerged from the areas of biology, biochemistry, and 
computer science. Bioinformatics is an interdisciplinary and 
rapidly evolving field that has emerged from the fields of 
biology, chemistry and computer science. Add to that 
Kasabov in [7] said that bioinformatics is concerned with the 
application and the development of the methods of 
information sciences for the analysis, modeling and 
knowledge discovery of biological processes in living 
organisms. Furthermore in [8] the authors illustrate 
Bioinformatics as the combination of biology and 
information technology which focuses on cellular and 
molecular levels for application in modern biotechnology. So 
as a result they said that Bioinformatics is the combination of 
biology and information technology. It is the branch of 
science that deals with computer based analysis of large 
biological data sets. Fenstermacher in [9] is defining 
Bioinformatics as a multifaceted discipline combining many 
scientific fields including computational biology, statistics, 
mathematics, molecular biology, and genetics. So 
Bioinformatics is conceptualizing biology in terms of 
macromolecules and then applying “informatics” techniques 
to understand and organize the information associated with 
these molecules, on a large scale. Moreover, Nair in [10], 
explained Bioinformatics to be the application of computer 
sciences and allied technologies to answer the questions of 
Biologists, about the mysteries of life. In addition the authors 
in [11] discussed that bioinformatics is a new and rapidly 
evolving discipline that has emerged from the fields of 
experimental molecular biology and biochemistry, and from 
the artificial intelligence (AI), database, pattern recognition, 
and algorithms disciplines of computer science. Finally, in 
[12] the authors summarized the definition of bioinformatics 
as the application of computer technology to the management 
of biological information. 
 
3 Bioinformatics Definition 
 The origin of bioinformatics goes back to Mendel’s 
discovery of genetic inheritance in 1865. Since the 1953, big 
revolution achievements took place by James Watson and 
Francis Crick as they determined the structure of DNA [13]. 
Later in 1960s, the hard work of bioinformatics research 
started, symbolized by Dayhoff’s atlas of protein sequences 
and the early modeling analysis of protein and RNA 
structures [12]. After a while, the term Bioinformatics came 
to sense and use in around 1990s and was described by the 
management and analysis of DNA, RNA, and protein 
sequence data.  Later in 2000 a big achievement took place 
which is the announcement of the initial draft of the Human 
Genome Sequence. Later after 13 years of research and work 
from 1990 up to spring 2003, in which the official 
announcement of the Human Genome Sequence Project took 
place. In this project around 20,000 – 25,000 of human genes 
where discovered, so the access to this huge amount of gene 
data and its information was not an easy task for the 
biologists and for this it opened the doors for a new era in 
modern biology with an assistant to new computerized 
technology or in other words the marriage between Biology 
and Computer Science to bear a new baby known as 
Bioinformatics which will play a significant role in 
gathering, analyzing, classifying and storing genetic data 
collected from the human project or at biological points in a 
more efficient or powerful way. From here raised the 
question, what is the importance of Computers in Biology? 
The accurate answer of this question will be resulted out 
from the following formula: Biology + Computer Science = 
Bioinformatics. So what is Bioinformatics? What are the 
main problems that this field can help in?  
As a result of the literature review, Bioinformatics can be 
defined from different perspectives, first from the English 
Oxford Dictionary, and then from the summary of all 
researchers’ definitions. 
Bioinformatics: (According to the Oxford English 
Dictionary) (Molecular) bio – informatics: bioinformatics is 
conceptualizing biology in terms of molecules (in the sense 
of Physical chemistry) and applying “informatics techniques” 
(derived from disciplines such as applied math, computer 
science and statistics) to understand and organize the 
information associated with these molecules, on a large scale. 
In short, bioinformatics is a management information system 
for molecular biology and has many practical applications. 
So, Bioinformatics can be defined as a new hybrid emerging 
field of science in which biology, computer science, 
mathematics, statistics and Information Technology merge 
and interact together to form a whole new discipline field. It 
is a science used to manage, analyze, organize, and classify 
the huge amount of biological data by using well developed 
algorithms, computational and statistical techniques, 
designing and construction of software tools and theories to 
solve different problems arising from biological data and 
help in generating, storing, accessing and analyzing data and 
information that are related to molecular biology. Noting that 
the suffix “informatics” is from European origin; 
“informatique” means and indicates computer science in 
French and Bio means Biology [13]. Figure 1 below 
illustrates all the sciences that make up the Bioinformatics 
field. 
Bioinformatics
Computer 
Sciences
Biology
Biochemistry
StatisticsMathematics
Information 
Technology
 
Figure 1: Bioinformatics multidisciplinary sciences 
Bioinformatics has four main components: Databases, 
Computational Tools, Algorithms and Software. Biologists 
and other related people must be aware of the difference 
between Bioinformatics and Computational Biology and this 
is not an easy task, the latter is not a “field” like 
bioinformatics but it is “an approach” involved in using 
computers to study biology [9]. So, bioinformatics is 
concerned with information while computation biology is 
concerned with hypothesis [14]. 
4   Bioinformatics Aims 
 There are five main aims of Bioinformatics [12]: 
1. To organize the biological data in an easy manner that 
helps biologists and researchers to store and access exiting 
information. 
2. To develop and design software tools that help in the 
analysis and management of data. 
3. To use these biological data in the analysis and 
interpretation of the results in a biological meaningful 
manner. 
4. To assist researchers in the pharmaceutical industry to 
understand the protein structures that lead and help in the 
drugs industry development. 
5. To help and assist physicians in the medical fields to 
understand gene structures that will help in detecting and 
diagnosing disease like cancer. 
 
5 Biological Data, Data types and 
Databases 
 Biological Data is often characterized by huge size. 
There are four important data generated and collected at 
biological points [10]: DNA, RNA, Protein Sequences, and 
Micro Array images. The first 3 of them are text data and the 
last one is a digital image. As the different biological data 
generated, it can be noticed that these data is represented 
with different types. There are four types of the data 
structures [13]: String to represent DNA, RNA, and protein 
sequences; Trees to represent protein structures; Graphs to 
represent metabolic and signaling pathways; and Strings 
(like words and phrases) are also used to express comments 
that reflect meanings to researchers. Moreover, researchers 
and biologists are also interested in substrings, subtrees and 
subgraphs.  
The large, huge and complex amount of biological data 
needed to be stored, accessed and manipulated in an efficient 
and powerful manner. So it was the need to build 
Bioinformatics databases which are classified into sequence 
databases, microarray databases, genome databases, protein 
structures databases and many more [2].  
The sequence databases represent sequence information of all 
the organisms. GeneBank at the National Center for 
Biotechnology information, EMBL (European Molecular 
Biology Laboratory) DNA database,  Bethesda and DNA 
Data Bank Japan (DDNJ), and Protein databases at SWISS-
PORT (Protein sequence database at Swiss Institute of 
Bioinformatics, Geneva) all of them are the largest databanks 
of the sequence databases.  Micro array databases include 
micro array gene expression under different biological 
conditions. Example databases of this category are Array 
Express, and Gene Expression mnibus. Genome databases 
collect organisms’ gene (DNA) sequences. Example of this 
category databases are Xenbase, Corn, SEED, and RGD. 
There is another example of Bioinformatics databases that 
comes from the integration with cheminformatics which is 
the DrugBank database 
(http://redpoll.pharmacy.ualberta.ca/drugbank), this database 
contains 4300 drug entries for and more than 6000 protein 
sequences which are linked to these drug entries [1]. 
6 Common Bioinformatics Algorithms 
[12-13] 
 This section sheds the light on algorithms that are of 
interest to bioinformatitions and researchers. The following 
are some of the most important algorithmic trends in 
bioinformatics: 
1. Finding similarities among strings (such as proteins of 
different organisms). 
2. Detecting certain patterns within strings (such as 
genes). 
3. Finding similarities among parts of spatial structures 
(such as motifs). 
4. Constructing trees (called phylogenetic trees expressing 
the evolution of organisms whose DNA or proteins are 
currently known). 
5. Classifying new data according to previously clustered 
sets of annotated data. 
6. Reasoning about microarray data and the corresponding 
behavior of pathways. 
7 Bioinformatics Applications in Cancer 
Research 
 Cancer is classified as a genetic disease in which the 
cells cannot follow the sequential phases of the cell cycle and 
divide in a normal manner. That is cells will lose the control 
in the cell cycle and starts to divide uncontrollably and the 
chromosomes of the cancer cells will be arranged incorrectly, 
or have large pieces missing. 
Due to large and fast steps in the medical field research, a lot 
of efforts are extended in order to find a way to detect, 
diagnose and treat such hazardous disease. Also the raise of 
the Human Genome project discovery in 2003 had put more 
pressure on Bioinformatics to be applied in the cancer 
therapy.  Bioinformatics is now being applied in the cancer 
research and therapy [21], and it is clear that experts and 
researchers have implemented rapid and expanded amount of 
research on the tools of bioinformatics that are considered 
necessary during the cancer therapies. One of these 
applications is to use the computerized models that represent 
biological data and information to know about the quantity of 
cancer cells in the body or about the biological state of the 
patient [22]. Such way has a positive result after the cancer 
therapy in which experts are now being able to monitor the 
tumor growth that was not possible earlier during the 
absence of bioinformatics. In addition, many studies have 
indicated that gene expression of cancer cells is imperative 
and this will ensure efficient results after the treatment [9, 
23]. Also bioinformatics can be applied to cancer by using 
the database among the cancer cells’ expression and to study 
the drug response and tumor response also [23]. Until now 
bioinformatics studies show that it had succeeded in the cases 
of breast and ovarian cancer and future will insure the 
effectiveness of bioinformatics in the therapies of other 
cancer types [24]. Moreover, bioinformatics has made it 
possible for therapists to analyze immune responses that 
allow an understanding of the differences between controlled 
and uncontrolled tumors for better treatment of cancer 
patients. In other words bioinformatics succeeded in 
explaining out the effects of the chemotherapy and the 
radiation therapy with the help of the mathematical models 
that are part of the bioinformatics discipline. It was noticed 
that experts and physicians try to use the multiple databases 
available and the different search engines like Google in 
order to look for biological data and apply bioinformatics in 
cancer research and treatment, that due to some 
organizations and experts limit their work and information 
and do not allow other experts to benefit from the same work 
and information. In other words, integration of 
bioinformatics databases data types, and structures are an 
important factor to decide the future of Bioinformatics 
application the medical field science and especially in the 
cancer treatment and therapies. 
The Human Genome Project has enriched the human 
research community with massive amount of huge biological 
data and information by the year 2003 [1]. In this case 
Bioinformatics has found its applications in many areas, and 
below is a list of some of the important problems where 
applications in Bioinformatics can be applied in[4, 10]: 
• Analyzing DNA sequence data to locate genes. 
• Analyzing RNA sequence data to predict their structures. 
• Analyzing protein sequence data to predict their location 
inside the cell. 
• Analyzing gene expression images. 
• Understanding genetic diseases like cancer, cystic fibrosis, 
and sickle cell anemia. 
• For gene therapy in general. 
• In designing drugs for better treatment, and avoid drugs 
side effects and develop better drug delivery system.  
Moreover, NASA’s experts are using Bioinformatics in their 
operations to explore the space and study the universe. So, 
NASA is also interested in Bioinformatics in their researches 
and discoveries. 
8 Conclusions 
 The paper tried to give an overview of this 
multidisciplinary field, by forming a unique clear definition 
that is introduced by the reaction of Biology and Computer 
Science in addition to some assessment factors like statistics 
and mathematics to result into the newly born field 
“Bioinformatics” after this strong reaction.  At the end the 
paper highlighted the importance of applying bioinformatics 
in cancer research which will open the horizons for experts 
and researchers to continue in this specialized field.  The 
future of Bioinformatics will be bright in many biological 
and life areas, but one of the important issues that must be 
worked in for this; is the integration of the wide and huge 
amount of data sources and databases to unify them for better 
life and for a huge revolution in the biological life as will 
reaching the moon. 
9 References 
  
[1] Jawdat, D.; , "The Era of Bioinformatics," Information 
and Communication Technologies, 2006. ICTTA '06. 2nd , 
vol.1, no., pp.1860-1865, 0-0 0 
[2]  Raut, S.A.; Sathe, S.R.; Raut, A.; , "Bioinformatics: 
Trends in gene expression analysis," Bioinformatics and 
Biomedical Technology (ICBBT), 2010 International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.97-100, 16-18 April 2010 
[3] See-Kiong Ng; Limsoon Wong; , "Accomplishments 
and challenges in bioinformatics," IT Professional , vol.6, 
no.1, pp. 44- 50, Jan.-Feb. 2004 
[4] Dr.(Mrs.) Padma R. Chavan; , “Application of 
Bioinformatics in the Field of Cancer Research”, 11th 
Workshop on Medical Informatics & CME on Biomedical 
Communication, vol., no., 20-22 November 2008. 
[5] Ackovska, N.; Madevska-Bogdanova, A.; , "Teaching 
Bioinformatics to Computer Science Students," Computer as 
a Tool, 2005. EUROCON 2005.The International 
Conference on Computers as a Tool, vol.1, no., pp.811-814, 
21-24 Nov. 2005 
[6] Zadeh, J.; , "An undergraduate program in 
bioinformatics," Potentials, IEEE , vol.25, no.3, pp.43-46, 
July-Aug. 2006 
[7] Kasabov, N.; , "Bioinformatics: a knowledge 
engineering approach," Intelligent Systems, 2004. 
Proceedings. 2004 2nd International IEEE Conference , 
vol.1, no., pp. 19- 24 Vol.1, 22-24 June 2004 
[8] Fulekar, M.H. and J. Sharma. 2008. “Bioinformatics 
Applied in Bioremediation”. Innovative Romanian Food 
Biotechnology. Vol. 2 No. 2. pp 28-36. 
[9] David Fenstermacher, Introduction to bioinformatics: 
Research Articles, Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science and Technology, v.56 n.5, p.440-446, 
March 2005 
[10]  Achuthsankar S Nair, ; “Computational Biology & 
Bioinformatics – A gentle Overview”, Communications of 
Computer Scioety of India, January 2007. 
[11]  Doom, T.; Raymer, M.; Krane, D.; Garcia, O.; , 
"Crossing the interdisciplinary barrier: a baccalaureate 
computer science option in bioinformatics," Education, IEEE 
Transactions on , vol.46, no.3, pp. 387- 393, Aug. 2003 
[12]  Jana, R., Aqel, M., Srivastava, P., and Mahanti, P. K., 
Soft Computing Methodologies in Bioinformatics, European 
Journal of Scientific Research, Vol. 26, No. 2, pp. 189-203, 
2009. 
[13]  Jacques Cohen, Computer science and bioinformatics, 
Communications of the ACM, v.48 n.3, p.72-78, March 
2005 
[14]  DOMOKOS, A.. BIOINFORMATICS AND 
COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY. Bulletin of University of 
Agricultural Sciences and Veterinary Medicine Cluj-Napoca. 
Horticulture, North America, 6527, p. 571 – 574, 09 2008. 
[15]  Poe, D.; Venkatraman, N.; Hansen, C.; Singh, G.; , 
"Component-Based Approach for Educating Students in 
Bioinformatics," Education, IEEE Transactions on , vol.52, 
no.1, pp.1-9, Feb. 2009 
[16]  Bayat A. Science, medicine, and the future: 
Bioinformatics. BMJ. 2002;324:1018–1022. 
[17]  National Center for Biotechnology, "Bioinformatics 
Factsheet," 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/About/primer/bioinformatics.ht
ml, last accessed June 13, 2012. 
[18]  Gavin J. Gordon, Bioinformatics in Cancer and Cancer 
Therapy (Cancer Drug Discovery and Development) [Kindle 
Edition] , ISBN: 978-1-58829-753-2 e-ISBN: 978-1-59745-
576-3, Library of Congress Control Number: 2008931368 
[19]  Jacques Cohen, Computer science and bioinformatics, 
Communications of the ACM, v.48 n.3, p.72-78, March 
2005 
[20]  Umarji, M.; Seaman, C.; Koru, A.G.; Hongfang Liu; , 
"Software Engineering Education for Bioinformatics," 
Software Engineering Education and Training, 2009. 
CSEET '09. 22nd Conference on , vol., no., pp.216-223, 17-
20 Feb. 2009 
[21]  Simon R. Bioinformatics in cancer therapeutics-hype 
or hope?. Nat Clin Pract Oncol. 2005;2:223 
[22]  Goldin, L.; , "Bioinformatics Integration for Cancer 
Research-Goal Question analysis," Information Technology: 
Research and Education, 2006. ITRE '06. International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.248-252, 16-19 Oct. 2006 
[23]  Kihara D, Yang YD, Hawkins T. Bioinformatics 
resources for cancer research with an emphasis on gene 
function and structure prediction tools. Cancer Inform. 
2007;2:25-35. 
[24]  Ardekani AM, Aslani F, Lakpour N. Application of 
genomics and proteomics technologies to early diagnosis of 
reproductive organ cancers. J Reprod Infertil. 2007;8(3):259-
278. 

