Programme overview 
Bioinformatics is a broad subject in which biology, medicine, 
computer science and statistics intertwine. Many times the 
basis for bioinformatics is the massive amount of biological 
data derived from genomic studies, structural biology and 
other areas of biology and medicine. Computational biology 
also involves mathematical modelling of biological systems.
Special features of the programme
• A combination of advanced research with training 
 of current techniques, as well as the development of novel 
 software tools 
• Close connections to research in an international 
 environment 
• Proteomics, genomics and transcriptomics data will be 
 analysed and combined to gain a global understanding of 
 an organism or groups of organisms
Programme modules/courses
Bioinformatics and Sequence Analysis, Bioinformatics: Pro-
gramming in Python, Modelling Biological Systems, Process-
ing and Analysis of Biological Data, DNA Sequencing Infor-
matics, electives and a Master’s degree project.
 Most courses are full-time studies, and you usually take 
only one course at a time. The courses are typically teaching-
intensive, with lectures and seminars as well as theoretical 
and practical exercises. You are expected to spend about 40 
hours per week on studies, self-studies included. Normally 
you take 30  credits per semester, i.e. a total of 60 credits 
per year.
Career prospects
Graduates have a diverse set of employers to choose be-
tween, both in industry, health care and academia. You 
can work as a bioinformatician, biostatistician, biocomput-
ing specialist or related positions. Previous graduates have 
found employment with Silicon Genetics and Novozymes, as 
well as in research groups including Harvard Medical School.
Entry requirements and how to apply
ENTRY REQUIREMENTS
An undergraduate degree corresponding to a B.Sc. in molec-
ular biology, biomedicine, biology, biochemistry, bio-phys-
ics, bioinformatics or biotechnology, or an undergraduate 
degree corresponding to a B.Sc. in computational science, 
mathematics or mathematical statistics with the recom-
mendation of cell biology to be included. English 6/English 
Course B. See www.lunduniversity.lu.se for details on Eng-
lish proficiency levels.
HOW TO APPLY
1. Apply online: Go to www.lunduniversity.lu.se/ 
bioinformatics. Click on “Apply” and follow the instructions 
for the online application at www.universityadmissions.se, 
the Swedish national application website. Rank the chosen 
programmes in order of preference.
MSc in Bioinformatics
LUND UNIVERSITY, SWEDEN
“Studying Bioinformatics allows me to apply and master 
my skills in analytical thinking and programming as well 
as apply my knowledge in molecular biology and adjacent 
areas; moreover, bioinformatics is not only about having 
that set of knowledge and skills – it’s about combining 
them with scientific approaches to offer new solutions 
to biological problems. In the big picture, I see bioin-
formatics building a path for a new set of discoveries in 
the field.”
Jelena Calyseva from Lithuania
• Master of Science in Bioinformatics
• 2 years, full time, 120 ECTS credits
• Department of Biology
• Lund Campus
• Application deadline: 15 January 2017
• Programme start: August 2017
2. Submit your supporting documents: Check what docu-
ments you need to submit (i.e. official transcripts, degree 
diploma/proof of expected graduation, translations,  proof 
of English, passport) and how you need to submit them at 
www.universityadmissions.se.
4. Pay the application fee (when applicable).
SELECTION CRITERIA/ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Selection of students is based on grades on academic courses 
of relevance for the Master’s programme. 
TUITION FEES
There are no tuition fees for EU/EEA citizens. For non-
EU/EEA citizens the tuition fee for this programme is 
SEK 145 000 per year. For details on tuition fees, see 
www.lunduniversity.lu.se.
About Bioinformatics at the Faculty of Science 
Bioinformatics is a multidisciplinary field between biology, 
biochemistry, physics and medicine. New technologies in high 
throughput genomics and proteomics have revolutionised 
modern research in biology and medicine during the past 
decade. Scientific discovery now relies heavily on efficient 
handling and analysis of the enormous amounts of data 
generated from wet lab experiments. The Bioinformatics pro-
gram train students from diverse fields in the computational 
analysis of biological data.
CONTACT
Programme webpage:
www.lunduniversity.lu.se/bioinformatics 
Study Advisor
Lotta Persmark, lotta.persmark@biol.lu.se
+46 46 222 3728
About Lund University
Lund University was founded in 1666 and is repeated-
ly ranked among the world’s top 100 universities. The 
University has 41,000 students and 7,500 staff based in 
Lund, Helsingborg and Malmö. We are united in our 
efforts to understand, explain and improve our world 
and the human condition.
 
Lund is Sweden’s most attractive study destination. The 
University offers one of the broadest ranges of pro-
grammes and courses in Scandinavia, based on cross-dis-
ciplinary and cutting-edge research. The compact uni-
versity campus encourages networking and creates the 
conditions for scientific breakthroughs and innovations. 
The University has a clear international profile, with 
partner universities in over 70 countries. 
Funding of more than SEK 5 billion a year goes to re-
search at eight faculties, which gives us one of Sweden’s 
strongest and broadest ranges of research activity. Over 
30 of our research fields are world-leading, according to 
independent evaluations.
 
Two of the world’s leading materials research facilities 
are currently under construction in Lund: the MAX IV 
Laboratory, inaugurated in June 2016, is the leading 
synchrotron radiation facility in the world, and the Eu-
ropean research facility ESS, which will house the world’s 
most powerful neutron source. The two facilities will be 
of decisive importance for future scientific and industrial 
development in both materials science and life science. 
Learn more at www.lunduniversity.lu.se
Ask questions and follow news at
 facebook.com/lunduniversity
D
isclaim
er: C
h
an
g
es m
ay h
ave b
een
 m
ad
e sin
ce th
e p
rin
tin
g
 o
f th
is fact sh
eet. Please see w
w
w
.lu
n
d
u
n
iversity.lu
.se fo
r an
y u
p
d
ates.

