Bioinformatics, P.S.M.            1
Bioinformatics, P.S.M.
COLLEGE OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY (http://cst.temple.edu)
About the Program
Bioinformatics is the science that happens when computers are joined with the latest discoveries in genomics, biochemistry, and biophysics. It is a
rapidly growing field that brings together elements of biology, chemistry, computer science, physics, and statistics. The Bioinformatics degree at Temple
University, a leader in the field, is a two-year Professional Science Master’s (P.S.M.) degree that features:
• an interdisciplinary approach involving scientists from across Temple University;
• classes taught by esteemed tenure and tenure-track faculty as well as by our industry and government partners;
• hands-on training in professional and management skills;
• partnerships with industry and government leaders, including a diverse and active External Advisory Board;
• access to real-world independent research projects; and
• an applied focus on responsibility and ethics in research and policy.
Time Limit for Degree Completion: 2 years
Campus Location: Main
Full-Time/Part-Time Status: The degree program can be completed on a full- or part-time basis. Most of the classes are offered in the evenings or on
weekends to enable full-time working professionals to be enrolled in the program. International students are required to register as full-time students.
Interdisciplinary Study: Students in the Temple University Bioinformatics master’s degree program benefit from an advanced curriculum developed by
leading Temple faculty in the Departments of Biology, Chemistry, and Computer and Information Sciences. The program has been designed to provide
students with extensive skills in computer programming as well as deep knowledge in genomics and structural biology. All three areas are required in
this challenging and exciting field. Because the degree is a Professional Science Master's, the program also offers:
• professional skills through courses in professional development;
• a research internship in a biotech company or other research center; and
• connections to key employers in the Philadelphia area.
Accreditation: Temple University is fully accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education.
Areas of Specialization: The degree program designed by some of the top scientists in the areas of genomics, evolutionary medicine, and structural
bioinformatics allows students to specialize in Genetics/Genomics, Structural Bioinformatics, or Computational Bioinformatics as part of the capstone
research and choice of electives. Students are trained to analyze genomic and proteomic data generated from large-scale sequencing and related
efforts that form the foundation of personalized medicine.
Job Prospects: Official job placement is not offered, but Bioinformatics is an area of rapid job growth and has become an essential part of healthcare
research and the biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries. Graduates of P.S.M. programs are in high demand, which underscores the P.S.M. as an
attractive career path for those who do not wish to become academic researchers or pursue a doctorate.
Non-Matriculated Student Policy: Non-matriculated students may enroll in a total of three courses (9 credits) with permission of the instructor and the
Biology Department.
Financing Opportunities: Financial assistance in the form of Research or Teaching Assistantships is not offered at this time.
Admission Requirements and Deadlines
Application Deadline:
Fall: March 1; December 15 international
Applications are processed on a continual basis. Ordinarily, the applicant is informed of an admissions decision within four to six weeks of receipt of all
supporting application documents. Late applications may be considered for admission.
APPLY ONLINE to this graduate program.
Letters of Reference:
Number Required: 3
2         Bioinformatics, P.S.M.
From Whom: Letters should be obtained from college/university faculty or faculty who are familiar with the applicant's competency. If the applicant has
an established career in a related field, the applicant’s immediate supervisor should provide one of the letters.
Coursework Required for Admission Consideration: Applicants should have a strong background in one or more STEM fields: Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics.
Bachelor's Degree in Discipline/Related Discipline: The Bioinformatics P.S.M. program has been designed for recent graduates and professionals
who have a bachelor's degree or equivalent in a STEM field.
Statement of Goals: In approximately 500 to 1,000 words, specify your interest in the Bioinformatics P.S.M. program, your career goals, and your
academic and professional achievements.
Standardized Test Scores:
GRE: Required. A combined minimum score of 305 on the quantitative and verbal reasoning sections of the new test is expected.
TOEFL: 90 iBT or 575 PBT minimum
Interview: An in-person or SKYPE interview is required.
Transfer Credit: Graduate credits from an accredited institution may be transferred into the Bioinformatics P.S.M. program. The credits must be
equivalent to coursework offered by the Biology Department at Temple University. A grade of "B" or better must have been earned for the credits to
transfer. The P.S.M. in Bioinformatics Steering Committee makes recommendations to the Department Chair for transferring credit on an individual
basis. The maximum number of credits a student may transfer is 6.
Program Requirements
General Program Requirements:
Number of Credits Required Beyond the Baccalaureate: 30
Required Courses:
Core Courses
BIOL 5312 Biostatistics 3
BIOL 5403 Genomics 3
BIOL 5411 Structural Bioinformatics I 3
BIOL 5506 Professional Development Seminar for PSM in Biotechnology 1
BIOL 5509 Computational Genomics 3
BIOL 5511 Ethics in Bioinformatics 2
BIOL 9995 Capstone Research Experience 1 3
CHEM 5412 Structural Bioinformatics II 3
CIS 5015 Scripting for Sciences and Business 3
Electives 2 6
Genetics/Genomics
BIOL 3101 Evolution
BIOL 3211 Human Evolution
BIOL 5225 Evolutionary Genetics Genomics
BIOL 5479 Biotechnology
BIOL 5505 Ethics Regulation and Policy in Biotechnology
Structural Bioinformatics
CHEM 3405 Physical Chemistry of Biomolecules
CHEM 5301 Quantum Chemistry
CHEM 5302 Statistical Thermodynamics
CHEM 8302 Computational Chemistry
PS 8128 Principles in Drug Discovery
Computational Bioinformatics
CIS 5105 IT Process Management
CIS 5106 System Development Processes
CIS 5107 Comp Systems Security&Privacy
CIS 5108 Emerging Technologies
Bioinformatics, P.S.M.            3
CIS 9669 Distributed and Parallel Computer Systems
Total Credit Hours 30
1
BIOL 9995 is taken for a total of three credits over two terms, as shown in the Plan of Study Grid below.
2
Students choose elective courses within any one of the three departmental foundations for the program, i.e., Biology, Chemistry, or Computer
and Information Sciences.
Plan of Study Grid
Year 1
Fall Credit Hours
BIOL 5403 Genomics 3
BIOL 5411 Structural Bioinformatics I 3
CIS 5015 Scripting for Sciences and Business 3
 Term Credit Hours 9
Spring
BIOL 5509 Computational Genomics 3
CHEM 5412 Structural Bioinformatics II 3
Elective 3
 Term Credit Hours 9
Year 2
Fall
BIOL 5312 Biostatistics 3
BIOL 5506 Professional Development Seminar for PSM in Biotechnology 1
BIOL 5511 Ethics in Bioinformatics 2
BIOL 9995 Capstone Research Experience 1
 Term Credit Hours 7
Spring
BIOL 9995 Capstone Research Experience 2
Elective 3
 Term Credit Hours 5
 Total Credit Hours: 30
Additional Requirements:
All graduate-level courses must be passed with a "B-" or better.
Attendance at scheduled departmental colloquia is required.
Culminating Events:
Capstone Project:
BIOL 9995 Capstone Research Experience constitutes a culminating event of the Bioinformatics P.S.M. and requires the submission of a written project
and oral presentation of the results. Capstone research may be completed in any laboratory at Temple University at the invitation of the Principal
Investigator (PI) or through an internship/co-op/full-time job in the field of Bioinformatics in industry, the healthcare system, or a government agency.
Since all P.S.M. in Bioinformatics classes are offered in the evening, students can avail themselves of these opportunities during the day. The process of
locating internships is facilitated by the P.S.M. in Bioinformatics program based on the specific research and career interests of the individual student.
Contacts
Program Web Address:
http://bioinformatics.cst.temple.edu/
Department Information:
Dept. of Biology
255 Biology-Life Sciences Building
1900 N. 12th Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122-6078
hey@temple.edu
4         Bioinformatics, P.S.M.
215-204-8854
Mailing Address for Application Materials:
P.S.M. in Bioinformatics Program
340 Carnell Hall (041-03)
1803 N. Broad Street
Philadelphia, PA 19122-6104
Mailing Address for Application Materials from International Applicants:
P.S.M. in Bioinformatics Program
ATTN: Jason Pfeffer
1803 N. Broad Street, 340 Carnell Hall (041-03)
Philadelphia, PA 19122-6104
jpfeffer@temple.edu
215-204-2149
Department Contacts:
Program Co-Directors:
Jody Hey, Ph.D.
hey@temple.edu
Ronald Levy, Ph.D.
ronlevy@temple.edu
P.S.M. Program Coordinator:
Seema Freer, Ph.D.
sfreer@temple.edu

