1
The Computer Meets Medicine and
Biology: Emergence of a Discipline
EDWARD H. SHORTLIFFE AND MARSDEN S. BLOIS†
After reading this chapter, you should know the answers to these questions:
● Why is information management a central issue in biomedical research and clinical
practice?
● What are integrated information management environments, and how might we
expect them to affect the practice of medicine, the promotion of health, and biomed-
ical research in coming years?
● What do we mean by the terms medical computer science, medical computing, biomed-
ical informatics, clinical informatics, nursing informatics, bioinformatics, and health
informatics?
● Why should health professionals, life scientists, and students of the health professions
learn about biomedical informatics concepts and informatics applications?
● How has the development of modern computing technologies and the Internet
changed the nature of biomedical computing?
● How is biomedical informatics related to clinical practice, biomedical engineering,
molecular biology, decision science, information science, and computer science?
● How does information in clinical medicine and health differ from information in the
basic sciences?
● How can changes in computer technology and the way medical care is financed influ-
ence the integration of medical computing into clinical practice?
1.1 Integrated Information Management: Technology’s
Promise1
After scientists had developed the first digital computers in the 1940s, society was told
that these new machines would soon be serving routinely as memory devices, assisting
with calculations and with information retrieval. Within the next decade, physicians and
other health workers had begun to hear about the dramatic effects that such technology
would have on medical practice. More than five decades of remarkable progress in com-
puting have followed those early predictions, and many of the original prophesies have
3
1 Portions of this section are adapted from a paper presented at Medinfo98 in Seoul, Korea (Shortliffe, 1998a).
† Deceased
4 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
come to pass. Stories regarding the “information revolution” fill our newspapers and
popular magazines, and today’s children show an uncanny ability to make use of com-
puters as routine tools for study and entertainment. Similarly, clinical workstations are
now available on hospital wards and in outpatient offices. Yet many observers cite the
health care system as being slow to understand information technology, to exploit it for
its unique practical and strategic functionalities, and to incorporate it effectively into the
work environment. Nonetheless, the enormous technological advances of the last
two decades—personal computers and graphical workstations, new methods for
human–computer interactions, innovations in mass storage of data, personal digital
assistants, the Internet and the World Wide Web, wireless communications—have all
combined to make routine use of computers by all health workers and biomedical sci-
entists inevitable. A new world is already with us, but its greatest influence is yet to
come. This book will teach you both about our present resources and accomplishments
and about what we can expect in the years ahead.
It is remarkable that the first personal computers did not appear until the late
1970s, and the World Wide Web dates only to the early 1990s. This dizzying rate of
change, combined with equally pervasive and revolutionary changes in almost all
international health care systems during the past decade, makes it difficult for health
care planners and institutional managers to try to deal with both issues at once.
Yet many observers now believe that the two topics are inextricably related and that
planning for the new health care environments of the twenty-first century requires a
deep understanding of the role that information technology is likely to play in those
environments.
What might that future hold for the typical practicing clinician? As we shall discuss
in detail in Chapter 12, no clinical computing topic is gaining more attention currently
than is the issue of electronic health records (EHRs). Health care organizations are
finding that they do not have systems in place that allow them to answer questions that
are crucially important for strategic planning and for their better understanding of how
they compare with other provider groups in their local or regional competitive environ-
ment. In the past, administrative and financial data were the major elements required
for such planning, but comprehensive clinical data are now also important for institu-
tional self-analysis and strategic planning. Furthermore, the inefficiencies and frustra-
tions associated with the use of paper-based medical records have become increasingly
clear (Dick and Steen, 1991 [revised 1997]), especially when inadequate access to clini-
cal information is one of the principal barriers that clinicians encounter when trying to
increase their efficiency in order to meet productivity goals for their practices.
1.1.1 Electronic Health Records: Anticipating the Future
Many health care institutions are seeking to develop integrated clinical workstations.
These are single-entry points into a medical world in which computational tools assist
not only clinical matters (reporting results of tests, allowing direct entry of orders by
clinicians, facilitating access to transcribed reports, and in some cases supporting
telemedicine applications or decision-support functions) but also administrative and
financial topics (e.g., tracking of patients within the hospital, managing materials and
inventory, supporting personnel functions, and managing the payroll), research (e.g.,
analyzing the outcomes associated with treatments and procedures, performing quality
assurance, supporting clinical trials, and implementing various treatment protocols),
scholarly information (e.g., accessing digital libraries, supporting bibliographic search,
and providing access to drug information databases), and even office automation (e.g.,
providing access to spreadsheets, word processors). The key idea, however, is that at the
heart of the evolving clinical workstation lies the medical record in a new incarnation:
electronic, accessible, confidential, secure, acceptable to clinicians and patients, and
integrated with other types of nonpatient-specific information.
Inadequacy of the Traditional Paper Record
The paper-based medical record is woefully inadequate for meeting the needs of mod-
ern medicine. It arose in the nineteenth century as a highly personalized “lab notebook”
that clinicians could use to record their observations and plans so that they could be
reminded of pertinent details when they next saw the same patient. There were no
bureaucratic requirements, no assumptions that the record would be used to support
communication among varied providers of care, and few data or test results to fill up
the record’s pages. The record that met the needs of clinicians a century ago has strug-
gled mightily to adjust over the decades and to accommodate to new requirements as
health care and medicine have changed.
Difficulty in obtaining information, either about a specific patient or about a general
issue related to patient management, is a frustrating but common occurrence for prac-
titioners. With increasing pressures to enhance clinical productivity, practitioners have
begun to clamor for more reliable systems that provide facile, intuitive access to the
information they need at the time they are seeing their patients. The EHR offers the
hope for such improved access to patient-specific information and should provide a
major benefit both for the quality of care and for the quality of life for clinicians in
practice.
Despite the obvious need for a new record-keeping paradigm, most organizations
have found it challenging to try to move to a paperless, computer-based clinical record
(see Chapters 12 and 13). This observation forces us to ask the following questions:
“What is a health record in the modern world? Are the available products and systems
well matched with the modern notions of a comprehensive health record?” Companies
offer medical record products, yet the packages are limited in their capabilities and
seldom seem to meet the full range of needs defined within our complex health care
organizations.
The complexity associated with automating medical records is best appreciated if
one analyzes the processes associated with the creation and use of such records rather
than thinking of the record as an object that can be moved around as needed within
the institution. For example, on the input side (Figure 1.1), the medical record
requires the integration of processes for data capture and for merging information
from diverse sources. The contents of the paper record have traditionally been organ-
ized chronologically—often a severe limitation when a clinician seeks to find a specific
piece of information that could occur almost anywhere within the chart. To be useful,
Emergence of a Discipline 5
the record system must make it easy to access and display needed data, to analyze
them, and to share them among colleagues and with secondary users of the record
who are not involved in direct patient care (Figure 1.2). Thus, the computer-based
medical record is best viewed not as an object, or a product, but rather as a set of
processes that an organization must put into place, supported by technology (Figure
1.3). Implementing electronic records is inherently a systems-integration task; it is not
possible to buy a medical record system for a complex organization as an off-the-shelf
product. Joint development is crucial.
The Medical Record and Clinical Trials
The arguments for automating medical records are summarized in Chapters 2 and 12
and in the Institute of Medicine’s report on computer-based patient records (CPRs;
Dick and Steen, 1991 [revised 1997]). One argument that warrants emphasis is the
importance of the electronic record in supporting clinical trials—experiments in which
data from specific patient interactions are pooled and analyzed in order to learn about
the safety and efficacy of new treatments or tests and to gain insight into disease
processes that are not otherwise well understood. Medical researchers are constrained
today by clumsy methods for acquiring the data needed for clinical trials, generally rely-
ing on manual capture of information onto datasheets that are later transcribed into
6 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Figure 1.1. Inputs to the medical record. The traditional paper medical record is created by a
variety of organizational processes that capture varying types of information (notes regarding
direct encounters between health professionals and patients, laboratory or radiologic results,
reports of telephone calls or prescriptions, and data obtained directly from patients). The record
thus becomes a merged collection of such data, generally organized in chronological order.
computer databases for statistical analysis (Figure 1.4). The approach is labor-intensive,
fraught with opportunities for error, and adds to the high costs associated with ran-
domized prospective research protocols.
The use of EHRs offers many advantages to those carrying out clinical research.
Most obviously, it helps to eliminate the manual task of extracting data from charts or
filling out specialized datasheets. The data needed for a study can be derived directly
from the EHR, thus making research data collection a by-product of routine clinical
record keeping (Figure 1.5). Other advantages accrue as well. For example, the record
environment can help to ensure compliance with a research protocol, pointing out to a
clinician when a patient is eligible for a study or when the protocol for a study calls for
a specific management plan given the currently available data about that patient. We are
also seeing the development of novel authoring environments for clinical trial protocols
that can help to ensure that the data elements needed for the trial are compatible with
the local EHR’s conventions for representing patient descriptors.
Emergence of a Discipline 7
Figure 1.2. Outputs from the medical record. Once information is collected in the traditional
paper medical record, it may be provided to a wide variety of potential users of the chart. These
users include health professionals and the patients themselves but also a wide variety of “sec-
ondary users” (represented here by the individuals in business suits) who have valid reasons for
accessing the record but who are not involved with direct patient care. Numerous providers are
typically involved in a patient’s care, so the chart also serves as a means for communicating among
them. The mechanisms for displaying, analyzing, and sharing information from such records
results from a set of processes that often vary substantially across several patient care settings and
institutions.
1.1.2 Recurring Issues that Must Be Addressed
There are at least four major issues that have consistently constrained our efforts to
build effective patient record systems: (1) the need for standards in the area of clini-
cal terminology; (2) concerns regarding data privacy, confidentiality, and security;
(3) challenges of data entry by physicians; and (4) difficulties associated with the inte-
gration of record systems with other information resources in the health care setting.
The first of these issues is discussed in detail in Chapter 7, and privacy is one of the
central topics in Chapter 10. Issues of direct data entry by clinicians are discussed in
Chapters 2 and 12 and throughout many other chapters as well. In Section 1.1.3 we
examine recent trends in networking and ask how communications are changing the
way in which the patient care record can be better integrated with other relevant infor-
mation resources and clinical processes, which are currently fragmented and poorly
coordinated.
8 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Figure 1.3. Complex processes demanded of the record. As shown in Figures 1.1 and 1.2, the
medical record is the incarnation of a complex set of organizational processes, which both gather
information to be shared and then distribute that information to those who have valid reasons for
accessing it. Paper-based documents are severely limited in meeting the diverse requirements for
data collection and information access that are implied by this diagram.
1.1.3 Integrating the Patient Record with Other Information
Resources
Experience has shown that physicians are “horizontal” users of information technology
(Greenes and Shortliffe, 1990). Rather than becoming “power users” of a narrowly
defined software package, they tend to seek broad functionality across a wide variety of
systems and resources. Thus, routine use of computers, and of EHRs, will be most easily
achieved if the computing environment offers a critical mass of functionality that makes
the system both smoothly integrated and useful for essentially every patient encounter.
With the introduction of networked systems within our health care organizations,
there are new opportunities to integrate a wide variety of resources through single clin-
ical workstations (see Chapter 10). The nature of the integration tasks is illustrated in
Figure 1.6, in which various workstations are shown at the upper left (machines for use
by patients, clinicians, or clerical staff) connected to an enterprise-wide network or
intranet. In such an environment, diverse clinical, financial, and administrative data-
bases all need to be accessed and integrated, typically by using networks to tie them
Emergence of a Discipline 9
Medical
record
Data sheets
Computer database
Analyses
Results
Clinical trial design
• Definition of data elements
• Definition of elegibility
• Process descriptions
• Stopping criteria
• Other details of the trial
Figure 1.4. Conventional data collection for clinical trials. Although modern clinical trials rou-
tinely use computer systems for data storage and analysis, the gathering of research data is often
a manual task. Physicians who care for patients enrolled in trials are often asked to fill out spe-
cial datasheets for later transcription into computer databases. Alternatively, data managers are
hired to abstract the relevant data from the traditional paper chart. The trials are generally
designed to define data elements that are required and the methods for analysis, but it is common
for the process of collecting those data in a structured format to be left to manual processes at the
point of patient care.
together and a variety of standards for sharing data among them. Thus the clinical data
repository has developed as an increasingly common idea. This term refers to a central
computer that gathers and integrates clinical data from diverse sources such as the
chemistry and microbiology laboratories, the pharmacy, and the radiology department.
As is suggested in the diagram, this clinical database can provide the nidus for what will
evolve into an EHR as more and more clinical data become available in electronic form
and the need for the paper documents shrinks and eventually vanishes.
Another theme in the changing world of health care is the increasing investment in
the creation of clinical guidelines and pathways (see Chapter 20), generally in an effort
to reduce practice variability and to develop consensus approaches to recurring man-
agement problems. Several government and professional organizations, as well as indi-
vidual provider groups, have invested heavily in guideline development, often putting an
emphasis on using clear evidence from the literature, rather than expert opinion alone,
10 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Medical record system
Clinical
data
repository
Clinical trial
database
Analyses
Results
Clinical trial design
• Definition of data elements
• Definition of eligibility
• Process descriptions
• Stopping criteria
• Other details of trail
Figure 1.5. Role of electronic health records (EHRs) in supporting clinical trials. With the intro-
duction of computer-based patient record (CPR) systems, the collection of research data for clin-
ical trials can become a by-product of the routine care of the patients. Research data may be
analyzed directly from the clinical data repository, or a secondary research database may be cre-
ated by downloading information from the online patient records. The manual processes in Figure
1.4 are thereby eliminated. In addition, the interaction of the physician with the medical record
permits two-way communication, which can greatly improve the quality and efficiency of the clin-
ical trial. Physicians can be reminded when their patients are eligible for an experimental proto-
col, and the computer system can also remind the clinicians of the rules that are defined by the
research protocol, thereby increasing compliance with the experimental plan.
as the basis for the advice. Despite the success in creating such evidence-based guidelines,
there is a growing recognition that we need better methods for delivering the decision
logic to the point of care. Guidelines that appear in monographs or journal articles tend
to sit on shelves, unavailable when the knowledge they contain would be most valuable
to practitioners. Computer-based tools for implementing such guidelines, and integrat-
ing them with the EHR, present a potential means for making high-quality advice avail-
able in the routine clinical setting. Many organizations are accordingly attempting to
integrate decision-support tools with their nascent electronic record systems.
Rethinking Common Assumptions
One of the first instincts of software developers is to create an electronic version of an
object or process from the physical world. Some familiar notion provides the inspiration
Emergence of a Discipline 11
Enterprise Intranet
(wired and wireless)
Research
databases
Library
resources
Clinical database/
electronic health
record
Pharmacy
Microbiology
Radiology
Clinical
laboratory Educational
programs
Administrative
and financial sytems
Clinical devices for data
entry and information
access
Clerical
workstations
Patient
access
Figure 1.6. Networking the organization. We already live in an era when large hospitals and
health care systems have implemented widespread networking technologies that allow diverse sys-
tems and users to communicate with one another within their organization. The enterprise
intranet is a locally controlled network that extends throughout a health care system. It allows
specialized workstations to access a wide variety of information sources: educational, clinical,
financial, and administrative. An electronic health record (EHR) emerges from such an architec-
ture if a system is implemented that gathers patient-specific data from multiple sources and
merges them for ease of access by users such as those illustrated in Figure 1.2. Such systems are
often called clinical data repositories, particularly if they do not yet contain the full range
of information that would normally occur in a medical record. The enterprise intranet faces
challenges of connectivity and integration that are a microcosm of what the larger community
experiences in trying to link EHRs and other clinical systems from different organizations.
for a new software product. Once the software version has been developed, however,
human ingenuity and creativity often lead to an evolution that extends the software ver-
sion far beyond what was initially contemplated. The computer can thus facilitate par-
adigm shifts in how we think about such familiar concepts.
Consider, for example, the remarkable difference between today’s word processors
and the typewriter, which was the original inspiration for their development. Although
the early word processors were designed largely to allow users to avoid retyping papers
each time a minor change was made to a document, the word processors of today bear
little resemblance to a typewriter. Consider all the powerful desktop-publishing facili-
ties, integration of figures, spelling correction, grammar aids, etc. Similarly, today’s
spreadsheet programs bear little resemblance to the tables of numbers that we once cre-
ated on graph paper. Also consider automatic teller machines (ATMs) and their facili-
tation of today’s worldwide banking in ways that were never contemplated when the
industry depended on human bank tellers.
It is accordingly logical to ask what the health record will become after it has been
effectively implemented on computer systems and new opportunities for its enhance-
ment become increasingly clear to us. It is unlikely that the computer-based health
record a decade from now will bear much resemblance to the antiquated paper folder
that still dominates many of our health care environments. One way to anticipate the
changes that are likely to occur is to consider the potential role of wide-area network-
ing and the Internet in the record’s evolution.
Extending the Record Beyond the Single Institution
In considering ongoing trends in information technology that are likely to make changes
inevitable, it would be difficult to start with any topic other than the Internet. The
Internet began in 1968 as a U.S. research activity funded by the Advanced Research
Projects Agency (ARPA) of the Department of Defense. Initially known as the
ARPAnet, the network began as a novel mechanism for allowing a handful of defense-
related mainframe computers, located mostly at academic institutions or in the defense
industry, to share data files with each other and to provide remote access to computing
power at other locations. The notion of electronic mail arose soon thereafter, and
machine-to-machine electronic mail exchanges quickly became a major component of
the network’s traffic. As the technology matured, its value for nonmilitary research
activities was recognized, and by 1973 the first medically related research computer had
been added to the network (Shortliffe, 1998b, 2000).
During the 1980s, the technology began to be developed in other parts of the world,
and the National Science Foundation took over the task of running the principal high-
speed backbone network in the United States. The first hospitals, mostly academic cen-
ters, began to be connected to what had by then become known as the Internet, and in
a major policy move it was decided to allow commercial organizations to join the net-
work as well. By April 1995, the Internet in the United States had become a fully com-
mercialized operation, no longer depending on the U.S. government to support even the
major backbone connections. Many people point to the Internet as a superb example of
the facilitating role of federal investment in promoting innovative technologies. The
12 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Internet is a major societal force that arguably would never have been created if the
research and development, plus the coordinating activities, had been left to the private
sector.
The explosive growth of the Internet did not occur until the late 1990s, when the
World Wide Web (which had been conceived initially by the physics community as a way
of using the Internet to share preprints with photographs and diagrams among
researchers) was introduced and popularized. The Web is highly intuitive, requires no
special training, and provides a mechanism for access to multimedia information that
accounts for its remarkable growth as a worldwide phenomenon.
The societal impact of this communications phenomenon cannot be overstated, espe-
cially given the international connectivity that has grown phenomenally in the past 15
years. Countries that once were isolated from information that was important to citi-
zens, ranging from consumers to scientists to those interested in political issues, are now
finding new options for bringing timely information to the desktop machines of indi-
viduals with an Internet connection.
There has accordingly been a major upheaval in the telecommunications industry,
with companies that used to be in different businesses now finding that their activities
and technologies have merged. In the United States, legislation was passed in 1996 to
allow new competition to develop and new industries to emerge. There is ample evi-
dence of the merging of technologies such as cable television, telephone, networking,
and satellite communications. High-speed lines into homes and offices are widely avail-
able, wireless networking is ubiquitous, and inexpensive mechanisms for connecting to
the Internet without using a computer (e.g., using cell phones) have also emerged. The
impact on all individuals is likely to be great and hence on our patients and on their
access to information and to their health care providers. Medicine cannot afford to
ignore these rapidly occurring changes.
1.1.4 A Model of Integrated Disease Surveillance2
To emphasize the role that the nation’s networking infrastructure could play in inte-
grating clinical data and enhancing care delivery, let us envision one model of how dis-
ease surveillance, prevention, and care could be influenced by information and
communications technology a decade or so from now. Imagine the day when all
providers, regardless of practice setting (hospitals, emergency rooms, small offices, com-
munity clinics, military bases, multispecialty groups, etc.) use EHRs in their medical
practices both to assist in patient care and to provide patients with counsel on illness
prevention. The full impact of this use of electronic resources will occur when data from
all such records are pooled in regional and national surveillance databases (Figure 1.7),
mediated through connectivity with the Internet. The challenge, of course, is to find a
way to integrate data from such diverse practice settings, especially since it is inevitable
that multiple vendors and system developers will be active in the marketplace, compet-
ing to provide value-added capabilities that will excite and attract the practitioners for
whom their EHR product is intended.
Emergence of a Discipline 13
2 This section is adapted from a discussion that originally appeared in (Shortliffe and Sondik, 2004).
The practical need to pool and integrate clinical data from such diverse resources and
systems emphasizes the practical issues that must be addressed if this vision is to be
achieved. Interestingly, most of the potential barriers are logistical, political, and finan-
cial rather than technical in nature:
● Encryption of data: Concerns regarding privacy and data protection require that
Internet transmission of clinical information occur only if those data are encrypted,
with an established mechanism for identifying and authenticating individuals before
they are allowed to decrypt the information for surveillance or research use.
● HIPAA-compliant policies: The privacy and security rules that resulted from the 1996
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) do not prohibit the
pooling and use of such data (see Chapter 10), but they do lay down policy rules and
technical security practices that must be part of the solution in achieving the vision
proposed.
● Standards for data transmission and sharing: Sharing data over networks requires that
all developers of EHRs and clinical databases adopt a single set of standards for com-
municating and sharing information. The de facto standard for such sharing, Health
Level 7 (HL7), is widely used but still not uniformly adopted, implemented, or utilized
(see Chapter 7).
● Standards for data definitions: A uniform “envelope” for digital communication, such
as HL7, does not assure that the contents of such messages will be understood or stan-
dardized. The pooling and integration of data requires the adoption of standards for
clinical terminology and for the schemas used to store clinical information in data-
bases (see Chapter 7).
14 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Provider
Provider
Provider
Provider
Provider
EHR
EHR
EHR
EHR
EHR
Internet
Regional and national
surveillance databases
Protocols and
guidelines
for standards of care
Different vendors
Figure 1.7. A future vision of surveillance databases, in which clinical data are pooled in regional
and national repositories through a process of data submission that occurs over the Internet (with
attention to privacy and security concerns as discussed in the text). When information is effec-
tively gathered, pooled, and analyzed, there are significant opportunities for feeding back the
results of derived insights to practitioners at the point of care.
● Quality control and error checking: Any system for accumulating, analyzing, and uti-
lizing clinical data from diverse sources must be complemented by a rigorous
approach to quality control and error checking. It is crucial that users have faith in
the accuracy and comprehensiveness of the data that are collected in such reposito-
ries, because policies, guidelines, and a variety of metrics can be derived over time
from such information.
● Regional and national surveillance databases: Any adoption of the model in Figure 1.7
will require mechanisms for creating, funding, and maintaining the regional and
national databases that are involved. The role of state and Federal governments will
need to be clarified, and the political issues addressed (including the concerns of some
members of the populace that any government role in managing or analyzing their
health data may have societal repercussions that threaten individual liberties, employ-
ability, etc.).
With the establishment of surveillance databases, and a robust system of Internet inte-
gration with EHRs, summary information can flow back to providers to enhance their
decision making at the point of care (Figure 1.7). This assumes standards that allow
such information to be integrated into the vendor-supplied products that the clinicians
use in their practice settings. These may be EHRs or, increasingly, order-entry systems
that clinicians use to specify the actions that they want to have taken for the treatment
or management of their patients. Furthermore, as is shown in Figure 1.7, the databases
can help to support the creation of evidence-based guidelines, or clinical research pro-
tocols, which can be delivered to practitioners through the feedback process. Thus one
should envision a day when clinicians, at the point of care, will receive integrated, non-
dogmatic, supportive information regarding:
● Recommended steps for health promotion and disease prevention
● Detection of syndromes or problems, either in their community or more widely
● Trends and patterns of public health importance
● Clinical guidelines, adapted for execution and integration into patient-specific deci-
sion support rather than simply provided as text documents
● Opportunities for distributed (community-based) clinical research, whereby patients
are enrolled in clinical trials and protocol guidelines are in turn integrated with the cli-
nicians’ EHR to support protocol-compliant management of enrolled patients
Implementing the National Health Information Infrastructure
As was previously mentioned, large provider organizations, including hospitals and dis-
tributed health systems, routinely use networking technology as the infrastructure on
which they build their computer-based communications channels (Figure 1.6). With
departmental computer systems (e.g., radiology, clinical laboratory, microbiology, and
pharmacy) connected to the network, institutions generally collect and store data in a
central clinical data repository. Over time, as this repository becomes more and more
comprehensive, it effectively becomes an EHR. Clinicians access the patient data in such
repositories using a variety of methods, ranging from tethered workstations installed in
Emergence of a Discipline 15
offices or nursing stations to handheld wireless devices such as personal digital assistants
(PDAs) or tablet computers. Clerical staff members use the same network to enter and
access information, and sometimes patients are invited to enter their histories, to access
educational materials, or even to review their personal clinical data over such networks.
Data may be submitted to research databases, and the users of the network typically
have access to library resources or to administrative or financial systems. The integration
of such resources within an organization depends on a robust enterprise intranet
(Figure 1.6). The implementation and maintenance of an advanced network is one of the
fiscal and organizational challenges faced by complex provider institutions.
In the outpatient setting, both small and large networks are becoming commonplace
(Figure 1.8). Within an ambulatory practice, physicians and other personnel may have
several computers networked together and sharing data from an EHR system. The full
utility of the system depends on gateways from these local networks into the Internet
because that is where the patients and business associates (such as pharmacies and clin-
ical laboratories) increasingly access and provide information. Several EHR products
provide specialized Web interfaces so that patients can access their physician’s practice
for purposes ranging from appointment scheduling to review of laboratory results and
drug lists.
The future vision of Figure 1.7 requires that the surveillance databases that need to
be built will depend on the submission of data over the Internet from clinical databases
that reside in large organizations (Figure 1.6) and outpatient practice settings (Figure
1.8). Furthermore, the delivery of information to these settings depends on an infra-
structure that supports the integration of decision-support elements with the records
16 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Local network
(wired and wireless) Library
resources
Outside
laboratories
Clerical
workstations
Administrative
and financial systems
Research
databases
External
pharmacies
Outside
radiology
Educational
programs
Patient
access
InternetGateway
Clinical database/
electronic health
record
Clinical devices for data
entry and information
access
Figure 1.8. Communications networks are increasingly found in outpatient practice settings,
including small office practices, but much of their value is enhanced when they are linked through
gateways to the Internet and to information resources, organizations, and individuals beyond
their own doors.
and order-entry systems used in these same practice environments. We must tap into
these clinical data, as a by-product of routine patient encounters, if we want to create
shared research and surveillance databases (Figure 1.7). If the submission of data for
research or surveillance purposes requires an extra step, or special effort by busy clini-
cians, the process likely will fail, regardless of the good intentions of practitioners.
Moreover, this extra step should not be necessary. We can build integrated systems on
standards that allow automated data submission and collection via the Internet in a
secure, responsible, and confidential manner.
Thus the vision laid out in Figure 1.7 depends on the creation of a National Health
Information Infrastructure (NHII) (Figure 1.9), which links all practices and practition-
ers in the country (see Chapter 15 for an extensive discussion), offering them value in
terms of access to information, decision support when desired, communication chan-
nels with patients and colleagues, and even support for their business operations (e.g.,
by online submission of invoices to payers that carries the potential for error checking
and real-time verification, which will, in turn, greatly shorten the payment cycle for
accounts receivable). This idealistic model addresses a large number of the serious prob-
lems facing our health care system, ranging from error prevention and reduction in
practice variation to reduced administrative costs and enhanced efficiency. The public
health system, including disease surveillance, will be only one of the many beneficiaries
of such a transition.
Emergence of a Discipline 17
Patients
Healthy
individuals
Local health
systems
Surveillance
and public health
databases Information
resources
(medline etc.)
Vendors of various
types (e.g.,
pharmaceutical
companies)
Health science
schools
Government medical
research agencies
Communicable
disease
agencies
Pharmaceutical
regulators
Other hospitals
and physicians
Government
health
Insurance
Programs
3rd party
payers
 Internet
Outpatient
practices
Figure 1.9. Moving beyond the organization. The integrated interconnectivity of all the clinical
systems, building on networking technology and standards for data exchange and privacy protec-
tion, creates a National Health Information Infrastructure (NHII), which supports clinical care,
research, and the public health. The enterprise Internet is the integration of an organization’s
intranet (Figure 1.6, encapsulated in the box here labeled “Local Health System”) with the full
potential of the worldwide Internet. Both providers and patients increasingly access the Internet
for a wide variety of information sources and functions suggested by this diagram (see text).
The Cycle of Information Flow in Clinical Care
The concepts outlined above lead to a composite model of cyclical information flow in
the future, as is shown in Figure 1.10. Beginning at the left of the diagram, physicians
caring for patients use electronic health records. Information from these records will be
forwarded automatically to regional and national registries as well as to research data-
bases (if the patient is enrolled in a community-based clinical trial). The information
can be used to develop standards for prevention and treatment, with major guidance
from biomedical research. Researchers can draw information either directly from the
health records or from the pooled data in registries. The standards for treatment in turn
will be translated into protocols, guidelines, and educational materials. This new knowl-
edge and decision-support functionality will be delivered via the NHII back to the cli-
nicians so that the information informs the practice of medicine at the point of care,
where it is integrated seamlessly with EHRs and order-entry systems.
Implications for Patients
As the number of Internet users grows, it is not surprising that increasing numbers of
patients, as well as healthy individuals, are turning to the Internet for health informa-
tion (see Figure 1.9). It is a rare North American physician who has not encountered a
patient who comes to an appointment armed with a question, or a stack of laser-printed
18 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Electronic
health
records
Regional and
national
registries
Biomedical
research
Standards for
prevention
and
treatment
Creation of
protocols,
guidelines, and
educational
materials
Information, decision-
support, and order-entry
systems
Physicians
caring for
patients
Figure 1.10. The ultimate goal is to create a cycle of information flow, whereby data from dis-
tributed electronic health records (EHRs) are automatically submitted to registries and research
databases. The resulting new knowledge then can feed back to practitioners at the point of care,
using a variety of computer-supported decision support delivery mechanisms.
pages, that arose due to medically related searches on the Web. The companies that pro-
vide search engines for the Internet report that medically related sites are among the
most popular ones being explored by consumers. As a result, physicians and other care
providers must be prepared to deal with information that patients discover on the Web
and bring with them when they seek care from clinicians. Some of the information is
timely and excellent; in this sense physicians can often learn about innovations from
their patients and will need to be increasingly open to the kinds of questions that this
enhanced access to information will generate from patients in their practices. On the
other hand, much of the health information on the Web lacks peer review or is purely
anecdotal. People who lack medical training can be misled by such information, just as
they have been in the past by printed information in books and magazines dealing with
fad treatments from anecdotal sources. In addition, some sites provide personalized
advice, often for a fee, with all the attendant concerns about the quality of the sugges-
tions and the ability to give valid advice based on an electronic mail or Web-based
interaction.
In a more positive light, the new communications technologies offer clinicians cre-
ative ways to interact with their patients and to provide higher quality care. Years ago
medicine adopted the telephone as a standard vehicle for facilitating patient care, and
we now take this kind of interaction with patients for granted. If we extend the audio
channel to include our visual sense as well, the notion of telemedicine emerges (see
Chapter 14). Although there are major challenges, which are largely regulatory and fis-
cal, to be overcome before telemedicine is likely to be widely adopted for direct patient
care (Grigsby and Sanders, 1998), there are specialized settings in which it is already
proving to be successful and cost-effective (e.g., international medicine, teleradiology,
and video-based care of patients in state and federal prisons).
A potentially more practical concept in the short term is to use computers and the
Internet as the basis for communication between patients and providers. For exam-
ple, there has been rapid growth in the use of electronic mail as a mechanism for
avoiding “telephone tag” and allowing simple questions to be answered asynchro-
nously (the telephone requires synchronous communication; electronic mail does
not). More exploratory, but extremely promising, are communications methods
based on the technology of the Web. For example, there are young companies that
work with managed care organizations and health care systems to provide Web-based
facilities for disease management. Patients log in to a private Web site, provide infor-
mation about the status of their chronic disease (e.g., blood glucose readings in dia-
betes), and later obtain feedback from their physician or from disease managers who
seek to keep the patients healthy at home, thereby decreasing the need for emergency
room or clinic visits.
1.1.4 Requirements for Achieving the Vision
Many of the concepts proposed above depend on the emergence of an Internet with
much higher bandwidth and reliability, decreased latency, and financial models that
make the applications cost-effective and practical. Major research efforts are underway
to address some of these concerns, including the federal Large-Scale Networking
Emergence of a Discipline 19
activity in the United States.3 In addition, academic institutions have banded together
in a consortium designed to create new test beds for high-bandwidth communications
in support of research and education. Their initial effort has built on existing federally
funded or experimental networks and is known as Internet 2.4 Exploratory efforts that
continue to push the state of the art in Internet technology all have significant implica-
tions for the future of health care delivery in general and of the computer-based health
record in particular (Shortliffe, 1998c).
Education and Training There is a difference between computer literacy (familiarity
with computers and their routine uses in our society) and knowledge of the role that
computing and communications technology can and should play in our health care sys-
tem. We are generally doing a poor job of training future clinicians in the latter area and
are thereby leaving them poorly equipped for the challenges and opportunities they will
face in the rapidly changing practice environments that surround them (Shortliffe,
1995a).
Furthermore, much of the future vision we have proposed here can be achieved only
if educational institutions produce a cadre of talented individuals who not only com-
prehend computing and communications technology but also have a deep understand-
ing of the biomedical milieu and of the needs of practitioners and other health workers.
Computer science training alone is not adequate. Fortunately, we have begun to see
the creation of formal training programs in biomedical informatics that provide cus-
tom-tailored educational opportunities. Many of the trainees are life science
researchers, physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and other health professionals who see the
career opportunities and challenges at the intersections of biomedicine, information sci-
ence, computer science, and communications technologies. The demand for such indi-
viduals far outstrips the supply, however, both for academic and industrial career
pathways (Greenes and Shortliffe, 1990). We need more training programs, expansion of
those that already exist, plus support for junior faculty in health science schools who
may wish to seek additional training in this area.5
Organizational and Management Change Finally, as implied above, there needs to
be a greater understanding among health care leaders regarding the role of process
reengineering in successful software implementation. Health care provides some of
the most complex organizational structures in society, and it is simplistic to assume
that off-the-shelf products will be smoothly introduced into a new institution without
major analysis, redesign, and cooperative joint-development efforts. Underinvestment
and a failure to understand the requirements for process reengineering as part of soft-
ware implementation, as well as problems with technical leadership and planning,
account for many of the frustrating experiences that health care organizations report
in their efforts to use computers more effectively in support of patient care and
provider productivity.
20 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
3 Large-Scale Networking initiative is the successor to the Next Generation Internet program, which was
active in the 1990s. See http://www.itrd.gov/subcommittee/lsn.html
4 See www.internet2.org
5 A directory of some existing training programs is available on the Web at http://www.amia.org/
resource/acad&training/f1.html
The vision of the future described here is meant to provide a glimpse of what lies ahead
and to suggest the topics that need to be addressed in a book such as this one. Essentially
all of the following chapters touch on some aspect of the vision of integrated systems,
which extend beyond single institutions. Before embarking on these topics, however, let us
emphasize two points. First, the vision presented earlier in this section will become reality
only if individual hospitals, academic medical centers, and national coordinating bodies
provide the standards, infrastructure, and resources that are necessary. No individual sys-
tem developer, vendor, or administrator can mandate the standards for connectivity and
data sharing implied by an integrated environment such as the one illustrated in Figure
1.9. A national initiative of cooperative planning and implementation for computing and
communications resources within single institutions and clinics is required before practi-
tioners will have routine access to information. A uniform environment is required if tran-
sitions between resources are to be facile and uncomplicated.
Second, although our vision focused on the clinician’s view of integrated information
access, other workers in the field have similar needs that can be addressed in similar
ways. The academic research community has already made use of much of the technol-
ogy that needs to be coalesced if the clinical user is to have similar access to data and
information.
With this discussion as background, let us now consider the discipline that has led to
the development of many of the facilities that need to be brought together in the inte-
grated medical-computing environment of the future. The remainder of this chapter
deals with medical computing as a field and with medical information as a subject of
study. It provides additional background needed to understand many of the subsequent
chapters in this book.
1.2 The Use of Computers in Biomedicine
Biomedical applications of computers is a phrase that evokes different images depending
on the nature of one’s involvement in the field. To a hospital administrator, it might sug-
gest the maintenance of medical records using computers; to a decision scientist,
it might mean the assistance of computers in disease diagnosis; to a basic scientist, it
might mean the use of computers for maintaining and retrieving gene-sequencing infor-
mation. Many physicians immediately think of office-practice tools for tasks such as
patient billing or appointment scheduling. The field includes study of all these activities
and of a great many others too. More important, it includes the consideration of vari-
ous external factors that affect the biomedical setting. Unless you keep in mind these
surrounding factors, it may be difficult to understand how biomedical computing can
help us to tie together the diverse aspects of health care and its delivery.
To achieve a unified perspective, we might consider three related topics: (1) the appli-
cations of computers in biomedicine; (2) the concept of medical information (why it is
important in medical practice and why we might want to use computers to process it);
and (3) the structural features of medicine, including all those subtopics to which com-
puters might be applied. The first of these is the subject of this book. We mention the
second and third topics briefly in this and the next chapter, and we provide references in
the Suggested Readings section for those students who wish to learn more.
Emergence of a Discipline 21
The modern computer is still a relatively young device. Because the computer as a
machine is exciting, people may pay a disproportionate amount of attention to it as
such—at the expense of considering what the computer can do given the numbers, con-
cepts, ideas, and cognitive underpinnings of a field such as medicine. In recent years,
computer scientists, philosophers, psychologists, and other scholars have collectively
begun to consider such matters as the nature of information and knowledge and how
human beings process such concepts. These investigations have been given a sense of
timeliness (if not urgency) by the simple existence of the computer. The cognitive activ-
ities of clinician begins in practice probably have received more attention over the past
two decades than in all previous history (see Chapter 4). Again, the existence of the
computer and the possibilities of its extending a clinician’s cognitive powers have moti-
vated most of these studies. To develop computer-based tools to assist with decisions,
we must understand more clearly such human processes as diagnosis, therapy planning,
decision making, and problem solving in medicine.
1.2.1 Terminology
Since the 1960s, by which time almost anyone doing serious biomedical computation
had access to some kind of computer system, people have been uncertain what name
they should use for the biomedical application of computer science concepts. The name
computer science was itself new in 1960 and was only vaguely defined. Even today, com-
puter science is used more as a matter of convention than as an explanation of the field’s
scientific content.
We use the phrase medical computer science to refer to the subdivision of computer
science that applies the methods of the larger field to medical topics. As you will see,
however, medicine has provided a rich area for computer science research, and several
basic computing insights and methodologies have been derived from applied medical-
computing research.
The term information science, which is occasionally used in conjunction with com-
puter science, originated in the field of library science and is used to refer, somewhat
generally, to the broad range of issues related to the management of both paper-based
and electronically stored information. Much of what information science originally set
out to be is now drawing renewed interest under the name cognitive science.
Information theory, in contrast, was first developed by scientists concerned about the
physics of communication; it has evolved into what may be viewed as a new branch of
mathematics. The results scientists have obtained with information theory have illumi-
nated many processes in communications technology, but they have had little effect on
our understanding of human information processing.
The terms biomedical computing or biocomputation have been used for a number of
years. They are nondescriptive and neutral, implying only that computers are employed
for some purpose in biology or medicine. They are often associated with bioengineering
applications of computers, however, in which the devices are viewed more as tools for a
bioengineering application than as the primary focus of research.
A term originally introduced in Europe is medical informatics, which is broader than
medical computing (it includes such topics as medical statistics, record keeping, and the
22 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
study of the nature of medical information itself) and deemphasizes the computer while
focusing instead on the nature of the field to which computations are applied. Because
the term informatics became widely accepted in the United States only during the 1990s,
medical information science had often been used instead in this country; this term, how-
ever, may be confused with library science, and it does not capture the broader implica-
tions of the European term. As a result, the name medical informatics appeared by 2000
to have become the preferred term, even in the United States, although some people dis-
like the use of what they consider to be an awkward neologism. Indeed, this is the name
of the field that we used in the first two editions of this textbook, and it is still heavily
used in professional and academic settings. However, especially since the rise of bioin-
formatics, many observers have expressed concern that the adjective “medical” is too
focused on physicians and fails to appreciate the relevance of this discipline to other
health and life science professionals, although most people in the field do not intend
that the word “medical” be viewed as being specifically physician-oriented or even ill-
ness-oriented. Thus, the term health informatics, or health care informatics, has gained
some popularity, even though it has the disadvantage of tending to exclude applications
to biology (Chapter 22) and, as we will argue shortly, it tends to focus the field’s name
on an application domain (public health and prevention) rather than the basic discipline
and its broad range of applicability.
In the late 1990s, the director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Harold
Varmus, appointed an advisory group called the Working Group on Biomedical
Computing. In June 1999, the group provided a report6 recommending that the NIH
undertake an initiative called the Biomedical Information Science and Technology
Initiative (BISTI). With the subsequent creation of another NIH organization called the
Bioinformatics Working Group, the visibility of informatics applications in biology was
greatly enhanced. Today bioinformatics is a major area of activity at the NIH7 and in
many universities and biotechnology companies around the world. The explosive
growth of this field, however, has added to the confusion regarding the naming con-
ventions we have been discussing. In addition, the relationship between medical infor-
matics and bioinformatics became unclear. As a result, in an effort to be more inclusive
and to embrace the biological applications with which many medical informatics groups
had already been involved, the name medical informatics has gradually given way to bio-
medical informatics. Several academic groups have already changed their names, and a
major medical informatics journal (Computers and Biomedical Research) was reborn as
The Journal of Biomedical Informatics.
Despite these concerns, we believe that the broad range of issues in biomedical
information management does require an appropriate name and, beginning with this
edition, we use the term biomedical informatics for this purpose throughout this book.
It is becoming the most widely accepted term and should be viewed as encompassing
broadly all areas of application in health, clinical practice, and biomedical research.
When we speak specifically about computers and their use within biomedical informatics
Emergence of a Discipline 23
6 Available at http://www.nih.gov/about/director/060399.html
7 See http://www.bisti.nih.gov/
activities, we use the terms biomedical computer science (for the methodologic issues)
or biomedical computing (to describe the activity itself). Note, however, that biomedical
informatics has many other component sciences in addition to computer science. These
include the decision sciences, statistics, cognitive science, information science, and even
management sciences. We return to this point shortly when we discuss the basic versus
applied nature of the field when it is viewed as a basic research discipline.
Although labels such as these are arbitrary, they are by no means insignificant. In the
case of new fields of endeavor or branches of science, they are important both in des-
ignating the field and in defining or restricting its contents. The most distinctive feature
of the modern computer is the generality of its application. The nearly unlimited
range of computer uses complicates the business of naming the field. As a result, the
nature of computer science is perhaps better illustrated by examples than by attempts at
formal definition. Much of this book presents examples that do just this.
Definition: In summary, we define biomedical informatics as the scientific field that
deals with biomedical information, data, and knowledge—their storage, retrieval, and opti-
mal use for problem solving and decision making. It accordingly touches on all basic and
applied fields in biomedical science and is closely tied to modern information technolo-
gies, notably in the areas of computing and communication (biomedical computer sci-
ence). The emergence of biomedical informatics as a new discipline is due in large part
to rapid advances in computing and communications technology, to an increasing
awareness that the knowledge base of biomedicine is essentially unmanageable by tra-
ditional paper-based methods, and to a growing conviction that the process of informed
decision making is as important to modern biomedicine as is the collection of facts on
which clinical decisions or research plans are made.
1.2.2 Historical Perspective
The modern digital computer grew out of developments in the United States and
abroad during World War II, and general-purpose computers began to appear in the
marketplace by the mid-1950s (Figure 1.11). Speculation about what might be done
with such machines (if they should ever become reliable) had, however, begun much ear-
lier. Scholars at least as far back as the Middle Ages often had raised the question of
whether human reasoning might be explained in terms of formal or algorithmic
processes.8 Gottfried Wilhelm von Leibnitz, a seventeenth-century German philosopher
and mathematician, tried to develop a calculus that could be used to simulate human
reasoning. The notion of a “logic engine” was subsequently worked out by Charles
Babbage in the mid nineteenth century.
The first practical application of automatic computing relevant to medicine was
Herman Hollerith’s development of a punched-card data-processing system for the
1890 U.S. census (Figure 1.12). His methods were soon adapted to epidemiologic and
public health surveys, initiating the era of electromechanical punched-card data-
processing technology, which matured and was widely adopted during the 1920s and
24 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
8 An algorithm is a well-defined procedure or sequence of steps for solving a problem.
1930s. These techniques were the precursors of the stored program and wholly elec-
tronic digital computers, which began to appear in the late 1940s (Collen, 1995).
One early activity in biomedical computing was the attempt to construct systems
that would assist a physician in decision making (see Chapter 20). Not all biomedical-
Emergence of a Discipline 25
Figure 1.11. The ENIAC. Early computers, such as the ENIAC, were the precursors of today’s
personal computers (PCs) and handheld calculators. (Photograph courtesy of Unisys
Corporation.)
Figure 1.12. Tabulating machines. The Hollerith Tabulating Machine was an early data-process-
ing system that performed automatic computation using punched cards. (Photograph courtesy of
the Library of Congress.)
computing programs pursued this course, however. Many of the early ones instead
investigated the notion of a total hospital information system (HIS; see Chapter 13).
These projects were perhaps less ambitious in that they were more concerned with prac-
tical applications in the short term; the difficulties they encountered, however, were still
formidable. The earliest work on HISs in the United States was probably that associated
with the MEDINET project at General Electric, followed by work at Bolt, Beranek,
Newman in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and then at the Massachusetts General
Hospital (MGH) in Boston. A number of hospital application programs were devel-
oped at MGH by Barnett and his associates over three decades beginning in the early
1960s. Work on similar systems was undertaken by Warner at Latter Day Saints (LDS)
Hospital in Salt Lake City, Utah, by Collen at Kaiser Permanente in Oakland,
California, by Wiederhold at Stanford University in Stanford, California, and by
scientists at Lockheed in Sunnyvale, California.9
The course of HIS applications bifurcated in the 1970s. One approach was based on
the concept of an integrated or monolithic design in which a single, large, time-shared
computer would be used to support an entire collection of applications. An alternative
was a distributed design that favored the separate implementation of specific applica-
tions on smaller individual computers—minicomputers—thereby permitting the inde-
pendent evolution of systems in the respective application areas. A common assumption
was the existence of a single shared database of patient information. The multimachine
model was not practical, however, until network technologies permitted rapid and
reliable communication among distributed and (sometimes) heterogeneous types of
machines. Such distributed HISs began to appear in the 1980s (Simborg et al., 1983).
Biomedical-computing activity broadened in scope and accelerated with the appear-
ance of the minicomputer in the early 1970s. These machines made it possible for indi-
vidual departments or small organizational units to acquire their own dedicated
computers and to develop their own application systems (Figure 1.13). In tandem with
the introduction of general-purpose software tools that provided standardized facilities
to individuals with limited computer training (such as the UNIX operating system and
programming environment), the minicomputer put more computing power in the hands
of more biomedical investigators than did any other single development until the intro-
duction of the microprocessor, a central processing unit (CPU) contained on one or a
few chips (Figure 1.14).
Everything changed radically in the late 1970s and early 1980s, when the micro-
processor and the personal computer (PC) or microcomputer became available. Not only
could hospital departments afford minicomputers but now individuals also could afford
microcomputers. This change enormously broadened the base of computing in our soci-
ety and gave rise to a new software industry. The first articles on computers in medicine
had appeared in clinical journals in the late 1950s, but it was not until the late 1970s that
the first advertisements dealing with computers and aimed at physicians began to
appear (Figure 1.15). Within a few years, a wide range of computer-based information
26 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
9 The latter system was subsequently taken over and further developed by the Technicon Corporation (sub-
sequently TDS Healthcare Systems Corporation). Until recently, the system continued to be part of the suite
of products available from Eclipsys, Inc.
management tools were available as commercial products; their descriptions began to
appear in journals alongside the traditional advertisements for drugs and other medical
products. Today individual physicians find it practical to employ PCs in a variety of set-
tings, including for applications in patient care or clinical investigation.
The stage is now set with a wide range of hardware of various sizes, types, prices,
and capabilities, all of which will continue to evolve in the decades ahead. The trend—
reductions in size and cost of computers with simultaneous increases in power (Figure
1.16)—shows no sign of slowing, although scientists are beginning to foresee the
ultimate physical limitations to the miniaturization of computer circuits.
Emergence of a Discipline 27
Figure 1.13. Departmental system. Hospital departments, such as the clinical laboratory, were
able to implement their own custom-tailored systems when affordable minicomputers became
available. Today, these departments often use microcomputers to support administrative and clin-
ical functions. (Photograph courtesy of Hewlett-Packard Company.)
Progress in biomedical-computing research will continue to be tied to the availability
of funding from either government or commercial sources. Because most biomedical-
computing research is exploratory and is far from ready for commercial application, the
federal government has played a key role in funding the work of the last four decades,
mainly through the NIH and the Agency for Health Care Research and Quality
(AHRQ). The National Library of Medicine (NLM) has assumed a primary role for
biomedical informatics, especially with support for basic research in the field (Figure
1.17). As increasing numbers of applications prove to be cost-effective (see Chapters 6
and 23), it is likely that more development work will shift to industrial settings and that
university programs will focus increasingly on fundamental research problems viewed as
too speculative for short-term commercialization.
28 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Figure 1.14. Miniature computer. The microprocessor, or “computer on a chip,” revolutionized
the computer industry in the 1970s. By installing chips in small boxes and connecting them to a
computer terminal, engineers produced the personal computer (PC)—an innovation that made it
possible for individual users to purchase their own systems.
1.2.3 Relationship to Biomedical Science and Medical
Practice
The exciting accomplishments of biomedical informatics, and the implied potential for
future benefits to medicine, must be viewed in the context of our society and of the
existing health care system. As early as 1970, an eminent clinician suggested that com-
puters might in time have a revolutionary influence on medical care, on medical educa-
tion, and even on the selection criteria for health science trainees (Schwartz, 1970). The
subsequent enormous growth in computing activity has been met with some trepidation
by health professionals. They ask where it will all end. Will health workers gradually
be replaced by computers? Will nurses and physicians need to be highly trained in
Emergence of a Discipline 29
Figure 1.15. Medical advertising. An early advertisement for a portable computer terminal that
appeared in general medical journals in the late 1970s. The development of compact, inexpensive
peripheral devices and personal computers (PCs) inspired future experiments in marketing
directly to clinicians. (Reprinted by permission of copyright holder Texas Instruments
Incorporated © 1985.)
Figure 1.16. Moore’s Law. Former Intel chairman Gordon Moore is credited with popularizing
the “law” that the size and cost of microprocessor chips will half every 18 months while they dou-
ble in computing power. This graph shows the exponential growth in the number of transistors
that can be integrated on a single microprocessor by two of the major chip manufacturers.
(Source: San Jose Mercury News, December 1997.)
Figure 1.17. The National Library of Medicine (NLM). The NLM, on the campus of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH) in Bethesda, Maryland, is the principal biomedical library
for the nation (see Chapter 15). It is also a major source of support for research in biomedical
informatics. (Photograph courtesy of the National Library of Medicine.)
computer science before they can practice their professions effectively? Will both
patients and health workers eventually revolt rather than accept a trend toward automa-
tion that they believe may threaten the traditional humanistic values in health care deliv-
ery (see Chapter 10) (Shortliffe, 1993)? Will clinicians be viewed as outmoded and
backward if they do not turn to computational tools for assistance with information
management and decision making (Figure 1.18)?
Emergence of a Discipline 31
Figure 1.18. Doctor of the future. By the early 1980s, advertisements in medical journals began
to use computer equipment as props. The suggestion in this photograph seems to be that an 
up-to-date physician feels comfortable using computer-based tools in his practice. (Photograph
courtesy of ICI Pharma, Division of ICI Americas, Inc.)
Biomedical informatics is intrinsically entwined with the substance of biomedical sci-
ence. It determines and analyzes the structure of biomedical information and knowl-
edge, whereas biomedical science is constrained by that structure. Biomedical
informatics melds the study of biomedical computer science with analyses of biomed-
ical information and knowledge, thereby addressing specifically the interface between
computer science and biomedical science. To illustrate what we mean by the “structural”
features of medical information and knowledge, we can contrast the properties of the
information and knowledge typical of such fields as physics or engineering with the
properties of those typical of biomedicine (see Section 1.3).
Biomedical informatics is perhaps best viewed as a basic biomedical science, with a
wide variety of potential areas of application (Figure 1.19). The analogy with other
basic sciences is that biomedical informatics uses the results of past experience to under-
stand, structure, and encode objective and subjective biomedical findings and thus to
make them suitable for processing. This approach supports the integration of the find-
ings and their analyses. In turn, the selective distribution of newly created knowledge
can aid patient care, health planning, and basic biomedical research.
Biomedical computing is, by its nature, an experimental science. An experimental sci-
ence is characterized by posing questions, designing experiments, performing analyses,
and using the information gained to design new experiments. One goal is simply to
search for new knowledge, called basic research. A second goal is to use this knowledge
32 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Basic research Biomedical informatics methods,
techniques, and theories
Bioinformatics Imaging
informatics
Clinical
informatics
Public health
informaticsApplied research
Figure 1.19. Biomedical informatics as basic science. We view the term biomedical informatics as
referring to the basic science discipline in which the development and evaluation of new methods
and theories are a primary focus of activity. These core concepts and methods in turn have broad
applicability in the health and biomedical sciences. The informatics subfields indicated by the
names across the bottom of this figure are accordingly best viewed as application domains for a
common set of concepts and techniques from the field of biomedical informatics. Note that work
in biomedical informatics is motivated totally by the application domains that the field is intended
to serve (thus the two-headed arrows in the diagram). Therefore the basic research activities in the
field generally result from the identification of a problem in the real world of health or biomedi-
cine for which an informatics solution is sought (see text).
for practical ends, called applications research. There is a continuity between these two
endeavors (see Figure 1.19). In biomedical informatics, there is an especially tight cou-
pling between the application areas, broad categories of which are indicated at the bot-
tom of Figure 1.19, and the identification of basic research tasks that characterize the
scientific underpinnings of the field. Research, however, has shown that there can be a
very long period of time between the development of new concepts and methods in
basic research and their eventual application in the biomedical world (Balas and Boren,
2000). Furthermore (see Figure 1.20), many discoveries are discarded along the way,
leaving only a small percentage of basic research discoveries that have a practical influ-
ence on the health and care of patients.
Work in biomedical informatics is inherently motivated by problems encountered in
a set of applied domains in biomedicine. The first of these historically has been clinical
care (including medicine, nursing, dentistry, and veterinary care), an area of activity
that demands patient-oriented informatics applications. We refer to this area as clinical
informatics.
Closely tied to clinical informatics is public health informatics (Figure 1.19), where
similar methods are generalized for application to populations of patients rather than
to single individuals (see Chapter 15). Thus clinical informatics and public health
Emergence of a Discipline 33
Negative results: 18%
Negative results: 46%
Dickersin, 1987
Koren, 1989
Lack of numbers: 35%
Balas, 1995
Inconsistent indexing: 50%
Poynard, 1985
Original research (100%)
Submission
Acceptance
Publication
Bibliographic
databases
variable
0.5 year
0.6 year
0.3 year
5.8 years
6.0 − 13.0 year
Reviews,
guidelines,
textbook
Implementation
(14%)
Balas, 2000
Antman, 1992
Poyer, 1982
Kumar, 1992
Kumar, 1992
Figure 1.20. Phases in the transfer of research into clinical practice. A synthesis of studies focus-
ing on various phases of this transfer has indicated that it takes an average of 17 years to make
innovation part of routine care (Balas and Boren, 2000). Pioneering institutions often apply inno-
vations much sooner, sometimes within a few weeks, but nationwide introduction is usually slow.
National utilization rates of specific, well-substantiated procedures also suggests a delay of two
decades in reaching the majority of eligible patients. (Courtesy of Dr. Andrew Balas).
informatics share many of the same methods and techniques. Two other large areas of
application overlap in some ways with clinical informatics and public health informat-
ics. These include imaging informatics (and the set of issues developed around both radi-
ology and other image management and image analysis domains such as pathology,
dermatology, and molecular visualization—see Chapters 9 and 18). Finally, there is the
burgeoning area of bioinformatics, which at the molecular and cellular levels is offering
challenges that draw on many of the same informatics methods as well (see Chapter 22).
As shown in Figure 1.21, there is a spectrum as one moves from left to right across
these application domains. In bioinformatics, workers deal with molecular and cellular
processes in the application of informatics methods. At the next level, workers focus on
tissues and organs, which tend to be the emphasis of imaging informatics work (also
called structural informatics at some institutions). Progressing to clinical informatics, the
focus is on individual patients, and finally to public health, where researchers address
problems of populations and of society. Biomedical informatics has important contri-
butions to make across that entire spectrum.
In general, biomedical informatics researchers derive their inspiration from one of the
application areas, identifying fundamental methodologic issues that need to be
addressed and testing them in system prototypes or, for more mature methods, in actual
systems that are used in clinical or biomedical research settings. One important impli-
cation of this viewpoint is that the core discipline is identical, regardless of the area of
application that a given individual is motivated to address. This argues for unified bio-
medical informatics educational programs, ones that bring together students with a
wide variety of applications interests. Elective courses and internships in areas of spe-
cific interest are of course important complements to the core exposures that students
34 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Basic research
Applied research
Biomedical informatics methods,
techniques, and theories
Bioinformatics
Imaging
informatics
Clinical
informatics
Public health
informatics
Molecular and
cellular
processes
Tissues and
organs
Individuals
(patients)
Populations
and society
Figure 1.21. Breadth of the biomedical informatics field. The relationship between biomedical
informatics as a core scientific discipline and its diverse array of application domains that span
biological science, imaging, clinical practice, public health, and others not illustrated (see text).
should receive, but, given the need for teamwork and understanding in the field, it
would be counterproductive and wasteful to separate trainees based on the application
areas that may interest them.10
The scientific contributions of biomedical informatics also can be appreciated
through its potential for benefiting the education of health professionals. For example,
in the education of medical students, the various cognitive activities of physicians tra-
ditionally have tended to be considered separately and in isolation—they have been
largely treated as though they are independent and distinct modules of performance.
One activity attracting increasing interest is that of formal medical decision making (see
Chapter 3). The specific content of this area remains to be defined completely, but the
discipline’s dependence on formal methods and its use of knowledge and information
reveal that it is one aspect of biomedical informatics.
A particular topic in the study of medical decision making is diagnosis, which is often
conceived and taught as though it were a free-standing and independent activity.
Medical students may thus be led to view diagnosis as a process that physicians carry
out in isolation before choosing therapy for a patient or proceeding to other modular
tasks. A number of studies have shown that this model is oversimplified and that such
a decomposition of cognitive tasks may be quite misleading (Elstein et al., 1978; Patel
and Groen, 1986). Physicians seem to deal with several tasks at the same time. Although
a diagnosis may be one of the first things physicians think about when they see a new
patient, patient assessment (diagnosis, management, analysis of treatment results, mon-
itoring of disease progression, etc.) is a process that never really terminates. A physician
must be flexible and open-minded. It is generally appropriate to alter the original diag-
nosis if it turns out that treatment based on it is unsuccessful or if new information
weakens the evidence supporting the diagnosis or suggests a second and concurrent
disorder. Chapter 4 discusses these issues in greater detail.
When we speak of making a diagnosis, choosing a treatment, managing therapy,
making decisions, monitoring a patient, or preventing disease, we are using labels for
different aspects of medical care, an entity that has overall unity. The fabric of medical
care is a continuum in which these elements are tightly interwoven. Regardless of
whether we view computer and information science as a profession, a technology, or a
science, there is no doubt about its importance to biomedicine. We can assume com-
puters will be used increasingly in clinical practice, biomedical research, and health
science education.
1.2.4 Relationship to Computer Science
During its evolution as an academic entity in universities, computer science followed an
unsettled course as involved faculty attempted to identify key topics in the field and to
Emergence of a Discipline 35
10 The biomedical informatics training program at Columbia University, for example, was designed with this
perspective in mind. Students with interests in clinical, imaging, public health, and biologic applications are
trained together and are required to learn something about each of the other application areas. Details of the
curriculum can be found at http://www.dbmi.columbia.edu/educ/curriculum/curriculum.html (see also
Shortliffe and Johnson, 2002).
find the discipline’s organizational place. Many computer science programs were located
in departments of electrical engineering, because major concerns of their researchers
were computer architecture and design and the development of practical hardware com-
ponents. At the same time, computer scientists were interested in programming lan-
guages and software, undertakings not particularly characteristic of engineering.
Furthermore, their work with algorithm design, computability theory,11 and other
theoretical topics seemed more related to mathematics.
Biomedical informatics draws from all of these activities—development of hard-
ware, software, and computer science theory. Biomedical computing generally has not
had a large enough market to influence the course of major hardware developments;
i.e., computers have not been developed specifically for biomedical applications. Not
till the early 1960s (when health-computing experts occasionally talked about and,
in a few instances, developed special medical terminals) have people assumed that 
biomedical-computing applications would use hardware other than that designed for
general use.
The question of whether biomedical applications would require specialized program-
ming languages might have been answered affirmatively in the 1970s by anyone exam-
ining the MGH Utility Multi-Programming System, known as the MUMPS language
(Greenes et al., 1970, Bowie and Barnett, 1976), which was specially developed for use
in medical applications. For several years, MUMPS was the most widely used language
for medical record processing. Under its new name, M, it is still in widespread use. New
implementations have been developed for each generation of computers. M, however,
like any programming language, is not equally useful for all computing tasks. In addi-
tion, the software requirements of medicine are better understood and no longer appear
to be unique; rather, they are specific to the kind of task. A program for scientific com-
putation looks pretty much the same whether it is designed for chemical engineering or
for pharmacokinetic calculations.
How, then, does biomedical informatics differ from biomedical computer science? Is
the new discipline simply the study of computer science with a “biomedical flavor”? If
you return to the definition of biomedical informatics that we provided in Section 1.2.1,
and then refer to Figure 1.19, we believe you will begin to see why biomedical infor-
matics is more than simply the biomedical application of computer science. The issues
that it addresses not only have broad relevance to health, medicine, and biology, but the
underlying sciences on which biomedical informatics professionals draw are inherently
interdisciplinary as well. Thus, for example, successful biomedical informatics research
will often draw on, and contribute to, computer science, but it may also be closely
related to the decision sciences (probability theory, decision analysis, or the psychology
of human problem solving), cognitive science, information sciences, or the management
sciences (Figure 1.22). Furthermore, a biomedical informatics researcher will be tightly
linked to some underlying problem from the real world of health or biomedicine. As
36 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
11 Many interesting problems cannot be computed in a finite time and require heuristics. Computability
theory is the foundation for assessing the feasibility and cost of computation to provide the complete and
correct results to a formally stated problem.
Figure 1.22 illustrates, for example, a biomedical informatics basic researcher or doc-
toral student will accordingly be motivated by one of the application areas, such as
those shown at the bottom of Figures 1.19 and 1.21, but a dissertation worthy of a
Ph.D. in the field will usually be identified by a generalizable scientific result that also
contributes to one of the component disciplines (Figure 1.22) and on which other
scientists can build in the future.
1.2.5 Relationship to Biomedical Engineering
If biomedical informatics is a young discipline, by contrast biomedical engineering is a
well-established one. Many engineering and medical schools have formal academic pro-
grams in the latter subject, often with departmental status and full-time faculty. How
does biomedical informatics relate to biomedical engineering, especially in an era when
engineering and computer science are increasingly intertwined?
Biomedical engineering departments emerged 35 to 45 years ago, when technology
began to play an increasingly prominent role in medical practice. The emphasis in such
departments has tended to be research on, and development of, instrumentation (e.g.,
Emergence of a Discipline 37
Contribute to...
Biomedical informatics methods,
techniques, and theories
Draw upon...
Computer
science
Decision
science
Cognitive
science
Information
sciences
Management
sciences
Other
component
sciences
Contributes to...
Biomedical
domain
Draws upon...
Applied
informatics
Figure 1.22. Component sciences in biomedical informatics. An informatics application area is
motivated by the needs of its associated biomedical domain, to which it attempts to contribute
solutions to problems. Thus any applied informatics work draws upon a biomedical domain for
its inspiration, and in turn often leads to the delineation of basic research challenges in biomed-
ical informatics that must be tackled if the applied biomedical domain is ultimately to benefit. At
the methodologic level, biomedical informatics draws on, and contributes to, a wide variety of
component disciplines, of which computer science is only one. As Figures 1.19 and 1.21 show
explicitly, biomedical informatics is inherently multidisciplinary, both in its areas of application
and in the component sciences on which it draws.
as discussed in Chapters 17 and 18, advanced monitoring systems, specialized trans-
ducers for clinical or laboratory use, and image-enhancement techniques for use in radi-
ology), with an orientation toward the development of medical devices, prostheses,12
and specialized research tools (Figure 1.23). In recent years, computing techniques have
been used both in the design and building of medical devices and in the medical devices
themselves. For example, the “smart” devices increasingly found in most specialties are
all dependent on microprocessor technology. Intensive care monitors that generate
blood pressure records while calculating mean values and hourly summaries are exam-
ples of such “intelligent” devices.
The overlap between biomedical engineering and biomedical informatics suggests
that it would be unwise for us to draw compulsively strict boundaries between the two
fields. There are ample opportunities for interaction, and there are chapters in this book
that clearly overlap with biomedical engineering topics—e.g., Chapter 17 on patient-
monitoring systems and Chapter 18 on radiology systems. Even where they meet, how-
ever, the fields have differences in emphasis that can help you to understand their
different evolutionary histories. In biomedical engineering, the emphasis is on medical
devices; in biomedical informatics, the emphasis is on biomedical information and
38 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
Figure 1.23. Advanced imaging device. Computed tomography (CT) scanners and other imaging
devices used in radiology are of interest to both medical computer scientists and biomedical engi-
neers. (Photograph courtesy of Janice Anne Rohn.)
12 Devices that replace body parts—e.g., artificial hips or hearts.
knowledge and on their management with the use of computers. In both fields, the
computer is secondary, although both use computing technology. The emphasis in this
book is on the informatics end of the spectrum of biomedical computer science, so we
shall not spend much time examining biomedical engineering topics.
1.3 The Nature of Medical Information
From the previous discussion, you might conclude that biomedical applications do not
raise any unique problems or concerns. On the contrary, the biomedical environment
raises several issues that, in interesting ways, are quite distinct from those encountered in
most other domains of computer application. Clinical information seems to be systemat-
ically different from the information used in physics, engineering, or even clinical chem-
istry (which more closely resembles chemical applications generally than it does medical
ones). Aspects of biomedical information include an essence of uncertainty—we can
never know all about a physiological process, and this results in inevitable variability
among individuals. These differences raise special problems. It is partly for this reason that
some investigators suggest that biomedical computer science differs from conventional
computer science in fundamental ways. We shall explore these differences only briefly
here; for details, you can consult Blois’ book on this subject (see Suggested Readings).
Let us examine an instance of what we will call a low-level (or readily formalized) sci-
ence. Physics is a natural starting point; in any discussion of the hierarchical relation-
ships among the sciences (from the fourth-century BC Greek philosopher Aristotle to
the twentieth-century U.S. librarian Melvil Dewey), physics will be placed near the bot-
tom. Physics characteristically has a certain kind of simplicity, or generality. The con-
cepts and descriptions of the objects and processes of physics, however, are necessarily
used in all applied fields, including medicine. The laws of physics and the descriptions
of certain kinds of physical processes are essential in representing or explaining func-
tions that we regard as medical in nature. We need to know something about molecular
physics, for example, to understand why water is such a good solvent; to explain how
nutrient molecules are metabolized, we talk about the role of electron-transfer reactions.
Applying a computer (or any formal computation) to a physical problem in a medical
context is no different from doing so in a physics laboratory or for an engineering appli-
cation. The use of computers in various low-level processes (such as those of physics or
chemistry) is similar and is independent of the application. If we are talking about the
solvent properties of water, it makes no difference whether we happen to be working in
geology, engineering, or medicine. Such low-level processes of physics are particularly
receptive to mathematical treatment, so using computers for these applications requires
only conventional numerical programming.
In biomedicine, however, there are other higher-level processes carried out in more
complex objects such as organisms (one type of which is patients). Many of the impor-
tant informational processes are of this kind. When we discuss, describe, or record the
properties or behavior of human beings, we are using the descriptions of very high-level
objects, the behavior of whom has no counterpart in physics or in engineering. The per-
son using computers to analyze the descriptions of these high-level objects and
processes encounters serious difficulties (Blois, 1984).
Emergence of a Discipline 39
One might object to this line of argument by remarking that, after all, computers are
used routinely in commercial applications in which human beings and situations con-
cerning them are involved and that relevant computations are carried out successfully.
The explanation is that, in these commercial applications, the descriptions of human
beings and their activities have been so highly abstracted that the events or processes
have been reduced to low-level objects. In biomedicine, abstractions carried to this
degree would be worthless from either a clinical or research perspective.
For example, one instance of a human being in the banking business is the customer,
who may deposit, borrow, withdraw, or invest money. To describe commercial activities
such as these, we need only a few properties; the customer can remain an abstract entity.
In clinical medicine, however, we could not begin to deal with a patient represented with
such skimpy abstractions. We must be prepared to analyze most of the complex behav-
iors that human beings display and to describe patients as completely as possible. We
must deal with the rich descriptions occurring at high levels in the hierarchy, and we may
be hard pressed to encode and process this information using the tools of mathematics
and computer science that work so well at low levels. In light of these remarks, the gen-
eral enterprise known as artificial intelligence (AI) can be aptly described as the appli-
cation of computer science to high-level, real-world problems.
Biomedical informatics thus includes computer applications that range from process-
ing of very low-level descriptions, which are little different from their counterparts in
physics, chemistry, or engineering, to processing of extremely high-level ones, which are
completely and systematically different. When we study human beings in their entirety
(including such aspects as human cognition, self-consciousness, intentionality, and
behavior), we must use these high-level descriptions. We will find that they raise com-
plex issues to which conventional logic and mathematics are less readily applicable. In
general, the attributes of low-level objects appear sharp, crisp, and unambiguous (e.g.,
“length,” “mass”), whereas those of high-level ones tend to be soft, fuzzy, and inexact
(e.g., “unpleasant scent,” “good”).
Just as we need to develop different methods to describe high-level objects, the infer-
ence methods we use with such objects may differ from those we use with low-level ones.
In formal logic, we begin with the assumption that a given proposition must be either
true or false. This feature is essential because logic is concerned with the preservation of
truth value under various formal transformations. It is difficult or impossible, however,
to assume that all propositions have truth values when we deal with the many high-level
descriptions in medicine or, indeed, in everyday situations. Such questions as “Was
Woodrow Wilson a good president?” cannot be answered with a “yes” or “no” (unless
we limit the question to specific criteria for determining the goodness of presidents).
Many common questions in biomedicine have the same property.
1.4 Integrating Biomedical Computing and Medical Practice
It should be clear from the previous discussion that biomedical informatics is a remark-
ably broad and complex topic. We have argued that information management is intrin-
sic to medical practice and that interest in using computers to aid in information
management has grown over the last four decades. In this chapter and throughout the
40 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
book, we emphasize the myriad ways in which computers are used in biomedicine to
ease the burdens of information processing and the means by which new technology
promises to change the delivery of health care. The rate at, and degree to, which such
changes are realized will be determined in part by external forces that influence the costs
of developing and implementing biomedical applications and the ability of clinicians,
patients, and the health care system to accrue the potential benefits.
We can summarize several global forces that are affecting biomedical computing and
that will determine the extent to which computers are assimilated into medical practice:
(1) new developments in computer hardware and software; (2) a gradual increase in the
number of professionals who have been trained in both clinical medicine and biomed-
ical informatics; and (3) ongoing changes in health care financing designed to control
the rate of growth of medical expenditures (Chapter 23). We touched on the first of
these factors in Section 1.2.2, when we described the historical development of bio-
medical computing and the trend from mainframe computers to microcomputers and
PCs. The future view outlined in Section 1.1 similarly builds on the influence that the
Internet has provided throughout society during the last decade. The new hardware
technologies have made powerful computers inexpensive and thus available to hospitals,
to departments within hospitals, and even to individual physicians. The broad selection
of computers of all sizes, prices, and capabilities makes computer applications both
attractive and accessible. Technological advances in information storage devices are
facilitating the inexpensive storage of large amounts of data, thus improving the feasi-
bility of data-intensive applications, such as the all-digital radiology department dis-
cussed in Chapter 18. Standardization of hardware and advances in network technology
are making it easier to share data and to integrate related information management
functions within a hospital or other health care organization.
Computers are increasingly prevalent in all aspects of our lives, whether as an ATM,
as the microprocessor in a microwave oven, or as a word processor. Physicians trained
in recent years may have used computer programs to learn diagnostic techniques or to
manage the therapy of simulated patients. They may have learned to use a computer to
search the medical literature, either directly or with the assistance of a specially trained
librarian. Simple exposure to computers does not, however, guarantee an eagerness to
embrace the machine. Medical personnel will be unwilling to use computer-based sys-
tems that are poorly designed, confusing, unduly time-consuming, or lacking in clear
benefit (see Chapters 4 and 6).
The second factor is the increase in the number of professionals who are being trained
to understand the biomedical issues as well as the technical and engineering ones.
Computer scientists who understand biomedicine are better able to design systems
responsive to actual needs. Health professionals who receive formal training in biomed-
ical informatics are likely to build systems using well-established techniques while avoid-
ing the past mistakes of other developers. As more professionals are trained in the
special aspects of both fields, and as the programs they develop are introduced, health
care professionals are more likely to have useful and usable systems available when they
turn to the computer for help with information management tasks.
The third factor affecting the integration of computing technologies into health care
settings is managed care and the increasing pressure to control medical spending
Emergence of a Discipline 41
(Chapter 23). The escalating tendency to apply technology to all patient care tasks is a
frequently cited phenomenon in modern medical practice. Mere physical findings no
longer are considered adequate for making diagnoses and planning treatments. In fact,
medical students who are taught by more experienced physicians to find subtle diag-
nostic signs by examining various parts of the body nonetheless often choose to bypass
or deemphasize physical examinations in favor of ordering one test after another.
Sometimes, they do so without paying sufficient attention to the ensuing cost. Some new
technologies replace less expensive, but technologically inferior, tests. In such cases, the
use of the more expensive approach is generally justified. Occasionally, computer-
related technologies have allowed us to perform tasks that previously were not possible.
For example, the scans produced with computed tomography or magnetic resonance
imaging (see Chapter 18) have allowed physicians to visualize cross-sectional slices of
the body for the first time, and medical instruments in intensive care units perform con-
tinuous monitoring of patients’ body functions that previously could be checked only
episodically (see Chapter 17).
Yet the development of expensive new technologies, and the belief that more tech-
nology is better, helped to fuel the rapidly escalating health care costs of the 1970s and
1980s, leading to the introduction of managed care and capitation in recent years.
Chapter 23 discusses the mechanisms that opened the door to rapid growth in health
expenses and the changes in financing and delivery that were designed to curb spending
in the new era of cost consciousness. Integrated computer systems potentially provide
the means to capture data for detailed cost accounting, to analyze the relationship of
costs of care to the benefits of that care, to evaluate the quality of care provided, and
to identify areas of inefficiency. Systems that improve the quality of care while reducing
the cost of providing that care clearly will be favored. The effect of cost containment
pressures on technologies that increase the cost of care while improving the quality are
less clear. Medical technologies, including computers, will need to improve the delivery
of medical care while either reducing costs or providing benefits that clearly exceed their
costs.
Improvements in hardware and software make computers more suitable for biomed-
ical applications. Designers of medical systems must, however, address satisfactorily
many logistical and engineering questions before computers can be fully integrated into
medical practice. For example, are computer terminals conveniently located? Could
handheld devices effectively replace the tethered terminals and workstations of the past?
Can users complete their tasks without excessive delays? Is the system reliable enough
to avoid loss of data? Can users interact easily and intuitively with the computer? Are
patient data secure and appropriately protected from prying eyes? In addition, cost
control pressures produce a growing reluctance to embrace expensive technologies that
add to the high cost of health care. The net effect of these opposing trends will in large
part determine the degree to which computers are integrated into the health care
environment.
In summary, rapid advances in computer hardware and software, coupled with an
increasing computer literacy of health care professionals and researchers, favor the
implementation of effective computer applications in medical practice and life sciences
research. Furthermore, in the increasingly competitive health care industry, providers
42 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
have a greater need for the information management capabilities supplied by computer
systems. The challenge is to demonstrate the financial and clinical advantages of these
systems.
Suggested Readings
Altman R.B. (1997). Informatics in the care of patients: Ten notable challenges. Western Journal
of Medicine, 166(6):118–122.
This thoughtful article was written to introduce the concepts of medical informatics to clinicians
while explaining a major set of challenges that help to define the goals and research programs for
the field.
Blois M.S. (1984). Information and Medicine: The Nature of Medical Descriptions. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
The author analyzes the structure of medical knowledge in terms of a hierarchical model of infor-
mation. He explores the ideas of high- and low-level sciences and suggests that the nature of med-
ical descriptions accounts for difficulties in applying computing technology to medicine.
Collen M.F. (1995). A History of Medical Informatics in the United States: 1950 to 1990.
Bethesda, MD: American Medical Informatics Association, Hartman Publishing.
This comprehensive book traces the history of the field of medical informatics and identifies the
origins of the discipline’s name (which first appeared in the English-language literature in 1974).
Degoulet P., Phister B., Fieschi, M. (1997). Introduction to Clinical Informatics. New York:
Springer-Verlag.
This introductory volume provides a broad view of medical informatics and carries the concepts
forward with an emphasis on clinical applications.
Elstein A.S., Shulman L.S., Sprafka S.A. (1978). Medical Problem Solving: An Analysis of Clinical
Reasoning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
This classic collection of papers describes detailed studies that have illuminated several aspects of
the ways in which expert and novice physicians solve medical problems.
Friedman CP, Altman RB, Kohane IS, McCormick KA, Miller PL, Ozbolt JG, Shortliffe EH,
Stormo GD, Szczepaniak MC, Tuck D, Williamson J (2004). Training the next generation of
informaticians: The impact of BISTI and bioinformatics. Journal of American Medical
Informatics Association, 11:167–172.
This important analysis addresses the changing nature of biomedical informatics due to the
revolution in bioinformatics and computational biology. Implications for training, as well as
organization of academic groups and curriculum development, are discussed.
Institute of Medicine (1991 [revised 1997]). The Computer-Based Patient Record: An Essential
Technology for Health Care, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Institute of Medicine (2002). Fostering Rapid Advances in Health Care: Learning from System
Demonstrations, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (1997). For The Record: Protecting Electronic Health Information,
Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
National Research Council (2000). Networking Health: Prescriptions for the Internet,
(Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
This set of four reports from branches of the National Academies of Science have had a major
influence on health information technology education and policy over the last 15 years.
Emergence of a Discipline 43
Institute of Medicine 2000). To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System, Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Institute of Medicine (2001). Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health Systems for the 21st
Century, Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Institute of Medicine (2004). Patient Safety: Achieving a New Standard for Care, Washington,
DC: National Academy Press.
This series of three reports from the Institute of Medicine have outlined the crucial link between
heightened use of information technology and the enhancement of quality and reduction in
errors in practice. Major programs in patient safety have resulted from these reports, and they
have provided motivation for a heightened interest in health care information technology among
policy makers, provider organizations, and even patients.
Panel on Transforming Health Care (2001). Transforming Health Care Through Information
Technology (President’s Information Technology Advisory Committee (PITAC), Report to the
President), Washington, DC: National Coordinating Office for IT Research and Development,
http://www.nitrd.gov/pubs/pitac/pitac-hc-9feb01.pdf
Panel on Transforming Health Care (2004). Revolutionizing Health Care Through Information
Technology (PITAC, Report to the President), Washington, DC: National Coordinating Office for
IT Research and Development, http://www.nitrd.gov/pitac/reports/20040721_hit_report.pdf
These two reports from a Presidential advisory committee provide a provocative view of the
future of information technology in health care, making policy recommendations that have
guided the White House and Congress in their recent legislative and program announcements.
Shortliffe E. (1993). Doctors, patients, and computers: Will information technology dehumanize
health care delivery? Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 137(3):390–398.
In this paper, the author examines the frequently expressed concern that the introduction of com-
puting technology into health care settings will disrupt the development of rapport between cli-
nicians and patients and thereby dehumanize the therapeutic process. He argues, rather, that
computers may have precisely the opposite effect on the relationship between clinicians and their
patients.
van Bemmel J.H., Musen, M.A. (1997). Handbook of Medical Informatics. Heidelberg, Germany:
Springer-Verlag.
This volume provides a comprehensive overview of the field of medical informatics and is an
excellent starting reference point for many of the topics in the field.
Questions for Discussion
1. How do you interpret the phrase “logical behavior”? Do computers behave logically?
Do people behave logically? Explain your answers.
2. What do you think it means to say that a computer program is “effective”? Make a
list of a dozen computer applications with which you are familiar. List the applica-
tions in decreasing order of effectiveness, as you have explained this concept. Then,
for each application, indicate your estimate of how well human beings perform the
same tasks (this will require that you determine what it means for a human being to
be effective). Do you discern any pattern? If so, how do you interpret it?
3. Discuss three society-wide factors that will determine the extent to which computers
are assimilated into medical practice.
44 E. H. Shortliffe and M. S. Blois
4. Reread the future vision presented in Section 1.1. Describe the characteristics of an
integrated environment for managing medical information. Discuss two ways in
which such a system could change medical practice.
5. Do you believe that improving the technical quality of health care entails the risk of
dehumanization? If so, is it worth the risk? Explain your reasoning.
Emergence of a Discipline 45

