B
BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES
At some time during the course of any bioinformatics pro-
ject, a researcher must go to a database that houses bio-
logical data. Whether it is a local database that records
internal data from that laboratory’s experiments or a
public database accessed through the Internet, such as
NCBI’s GenBank (1) or EBI’s EMBL (2), researchers use
biological databases for multiple reasons.
One of the founding reasons for the fields of bioinfor-
matics and computational biology was the need for manage-
ment of biological data. In the past several decades,
biological disciplines, including molecular biology and bio-
chemistry, have generated massive amounts of data that
are difficult to organize for efficient search, query, and
analysis. If we trace the histories of both database devel-
opment and the development of biochemical databases, we
see that the biochemical community was quick to embrace
databases. For example, E. F. Codd’s seminal paper, ‘‘A
Relational Model of Data for Large Shared Data Banks’’ (3),
published in 1970 is heralded as the beginning of the
relational database, whereas the first version of the Protein
Data Bank (PDB) was established at Brookhaven National
Laboratories in 1972 (4).
Since then, especially after the launching of the human
genome sequencing project in 1990, biological databases
have proliferated, most embracing the World Wide Web
technologies that became available in the 1990s. Now there
are hundreds of biological databases, with significant
research efforts in both the biological as well as the data-
base communities for managing these data. There are
conferences and publications solely dedicated to the topic.
For example, Oxford University Press dedicates the first
issue of its journal Nucleic Acids Research (which is freely
available) every year specifically to biological databases.
The database issue is supplemented by an online collection
of databases that listed 858 databases in 14 categories in
2006 (5), including both new and updated ones.
Biological database research now encompasses many
topics, such as biological data management, curation, qual-
ity, integration, and mining (6). Biological databases can be
classified in many different ways, from the topic they cover,
to how heavily annotated they are or which annotation
method they employ, to how highly integrated the database
is with other databases. Popularly, the first two categories
of classification are used most frequently. For example,
there are archival nucleic acid data repositories [GenBank,
the EMBL Data Library, and the DNA Databank of Japan
(7)] as well as protein sequence motif/domain databases,
like PROSITE (8), that are derived from primary source
data.
Modern biological databases comprise not only data, but
also sophisticated query facilities and bioinformatic data
analysis tools; hence, the term ‘‘bioinformatic databases’’ is
often used. This article presents information on some pop-
ular bioinformatic databases available online, including
sequence, phylogenetic, structure and pathway, and micro-
array databases. It highlights features of these databases,
discussing their unique characteristics, and focusing on
types of data stored and query facilities available in the
databases. The article concludes by summarizing impor-
tant research and development challenges for these data-
bases, namely knowledge discovery, large-scale knowledge
integration, and data provenance problems. For further
information about these databases and access to all hyper-
links presented in this article, please visit http://
www.csam.montclair.edu/~herbert/bioDatabases.html.
SEQUENCE DATABASES
Genome and protein sequence databases represent the
most widely used and some of the best established biological
databases. These databases serve as repositories for wet-
lab results and the primary source for experimental results.
Table 1 summarizes these data repositories and gives their
respective URLs.
GenBank, EMBL, and the DNA Databank of Japan
The most widely used biological data bank resource on the
World Wide Web is the genomic information stored in
the U.S.’s National Institutes of Health’s GenBank, the
European Bioinformatics Institutes’ EMBL, and Japan’s
National Institute of Genetics DNA Databank of Japan (1,
2, 7). Each of these three databases was developed sepa-
rately, with GenBank and EMBL launching in 1980 (4).
Their collaboration started soon after their development,
and DDBJ joined the collaboration shortly after its creation
in 1986. The three databases, under the direction of the
International Nucleotide Sequence Database Collabora-
tion (INSDC), gather, maintain, and share mainly nucleo-
tide data, each catering to the needs of the region in which it
is located (4).
The Ensembl Genome Database
The Ensembl database is a repository of stable, automati-
cally annotated human genome sequences. It is available
either as an interactive website or downloadable as flat
files. Ensembl annotates and predicts new genes, with
annotation from the InterPro (9) protein family databases
and with additional annotations from databases of genetic
disease [OMIM (10)], expression [SAGE (11,12)] and gene
family (13). As Ensembl endeavors to be both portable and
freely available, software available at Ensembl is based on
relational database models (14).
GeneDB Database
GeneDB (15) is a genome database for prokaryotic and
eukaryotic organisms. It currently contains data for 37
genomes generated from the Pathogen Sequencing Unit
(PSU) at the Welcome Trust Sanger Institute. The GeneDB
1
Wiley Encyclopedia of Computer Science and Engineering, edited by Benjamin Wah.
Copyright # 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
database has four key functionalities. First, the database
stores and frequently updates sequences and annotations.
Second, GeneDB provides a user interface, which can be
used for access, visualization, searching, and downloading
of the data. Third, the database architecture allows inte-
gration of different biological datasets with the sequences.
Finally, GeneDB facilitates querying and comparisons
between species by using structured vocabularies (15).
The Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR)
TAIR (16) is a comprehensive genome database that allows
for information retrieval and data analysis pertaining to
Arabidopsis thaliana (a small annual plant belonging to
the mustard family). Arabidopsis thaliana has been of
great interest to the biological community and is one of
the few plants whose genome is completely sequenced (16).
Due to the complexity of many plant genomes, Arabidopsis
thaliana serves as a model for plant genome investigations.
The database has been designed to be simple, portable, and
efficient. One innovate aspect of the TAIR website is
MapViewer (http://www.arabidopsis.org/servlets/mapper).
MapViewer is an integrated visualization tool for viewing
genetic, physical, and sequence maps for each Arabidopsis
chromosome. Each component of the map contains a hyper-
link to an output page from the database that displays all
the information related to this component (16).
SGD: Saccharomyces Genome Database
The Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD) (17) provides
information for the complete Saccharomyces cerevisiae
(baker’s and brewer’s yeast) genomic sequence, along
with its genes, gene products, and related literature. The
database contains several types of data, including DNA
sequence, gene-encoded proteins, and the structures and
biological functions of any known gene products. It also
allows full-text searches of articles concerning Saccharo-
myces cerevisiae. The SGD database is not a primary
sequence repository (17), but a collection of DNA and
protein sequences from existing databases [GenBank (1),
EMBL (2), DDBJ (7), PIR (18), and Swiss-Prot (19)]. It
organizes the sequences into datasets to make the data
more useful and easily accessible.
dbEST Database
dbEST (20) is a division of GenBank that contains sequence
data and other information on short, ‘‘single-pass’’ cDNA
sequences, or Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs), generated
from randomly selected library clones (http://www.ncbi.
nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/). dbEST contains approximately
36,843,572 entries from a broad spectrum of organisms.
Access to dbEST can be obtained through the Web, either
from NCBI by anonymous ftp or through Entrez (21). The
dbEST nucleotide sequences can be searched using the
BLAST sequence search program at the NCBI website.
In addition, TBLASTN, a program that takes a query amino
acid sequence and compares it with six-frame translations
of dbEST DNA sequences can also be useful for finding
novel coding sequences. EST sequences are available in the
FASTA format from the ‘‘/repository/dbEST’’ directory at
ftp.ncbi.nih.gov.
The Protein Information Resource
The Protein Information Resource (PIR) is an integrated
public bioinformatics resource that supports genomic and
proteomic research and scientific studies. PIR has provided
many protein databases and analysis tools to the scientific
community, including the PIR-International Protein
Sequence Database (PSD) of functionally annotated pro-
tein sequences. The PIR-PSD, originally created as the
Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure edited by Mar-
garet Dayhoff, contained protein sequences that were
highly annotated with functional, structural, biblio-
graphic, and sequence data (5,18). PIR-PSD is now merged
with UniProt Consortium databases (22). PIR offers the
Table 1. Summary of Genome and Protein Sequence Databases
Database URL Feature
GenBank http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ NIH’s archival genetic sequence database
EMBL http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl/ EBI’s archival genetic sequence database
DDBJ http://www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp/ NIG’s archival genetic sequence database
Ensembl http://www.ensembl.org/ Database that maintains automatic annotation
on selected eukaryotic genomes
GeneDB http://www.cebitec.uni-bielefeld.de/
groups/brf/software/gendb_info/
Database that maintains genomic information
about specific species related to pathogens
TAIR http://www.arabidopsis.org/ Database that maintains genomic information
about Arabidopsis thaliana
SGD http://www.yeastgenome.org/ A repository for baker’s yeast genome and biological data
dbEST http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/dbEST/ Division of GenBank that contains expression tag
sequence data
Protein Information
Resource (PIR)
http://pir.georgetown.edu/ Repository for nonredundant protein sequences and
functional information
Swiss-Prot/TrEMBL http://www.expasy.org/sprot/ Repository for nonredundant protein sequences and
functional information
UniProt http://www.pir.uniprot.org/ Central repository for PIR, Swiss-Prot, and TrEMBL
2 BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES
PIRSF protein classification system (23) that classifies
proteins, based on full-length sequence similarities and
their domain architectures, to reflect their evolutionary
relationships. PIR also provides the iProClass database
that integrates over 90 databases to create value-added
views for protein data (24). In addition, PIR supports a
literature mining resource, iProLINK (25), which provides
multiple annotated literature datasets to facilitate text
mining research in the areas of literature-based database
curation, named entity recognition, and protein ontology
development.
The Swiss-Prot Database
Swiss-Prot (19) is a protein sequence and knowledge data-
base and serves as a hub for biomolecular information
archived in 66 databases (2). It is well known for its minimal
redundancy, high quality of annotation, use of standar-
dized nomenclature, and links to specialized databases. Its
format is very similar to that of the EMBL Nucleotide
Sequence Database (2). As Swiss-Prot is a protein sequence
database, its repository contains the amino acid sequence,
the protein name and description, taxonomic data, and
citation information. If additional information is provided
with the data, such as protein structures, diseases asso-
ciated with the protein or splice isoforms, Swiss-Prot pro-
vides a table where these data can be stored. Swiss-Prot
also combines all information retrieved from the publica-
tions reporting new sequence data, review articles, and
comments from enlisted external experts.
TrEMBL: A Supplement to Swiss-Prot
Due to the large number of sequences generated by differ-
ent genome projects, the Swiss-Prot database faces several
challenges related to the processing time required for man-
ual annotation. For this reason, the European Bioinfor-
matics Institute, collaborating with Swiss-Prot, introduced
another database, TrEMBL (translation of EMBL nucleo-
tide sequence database). This database consists of compu-
ter-annotated entries derived from the translation of all
coding sequences in the nucleotide databases. This data-
base is divided into two sections: SP-TrEMBL contains
sequences that will eventually be transferred to Swiss-
Prot and REM-TrEMBL contains those that will not go
into Swiss-Prot, including patent application sequences,
fragments of less than eight amino acids, and sequences
that have proven not to code for a real protein (19, 26, 27).
UniProt
With protein information spread over multiple data repo-
sitories, the efforts from PIR, SIB’s Swiss-Prot and EBI’s
TrEMBL were combined to develop the UniProt Consor-
tium Database to centralize protein resources (22). UniProt
is organized into three layers. The UniProt Archive (Uni-
Parc) stores the stable, nonredundant, corpus of publicly
available protein sequence data. The UniProt Knowledge-
base (UniProtKB) consists of accurate protein sequences
with functional annotation. Finally, the UniProt Reference
Cluster (UniRef) datasets provide nonredundant reference
clusters based primarily on UniProtKB. UniProt also offers
users multiple tools, including searches against the indi-
vidual contributing databases, BLAST and multiple
sequence alignment, proteomic tools, and bibliographic
searches (22).
PHYLOGENETIC DATABASES
With all of the knowledge accumulating in the genomic and
proteomic databases, there is a great need for understand-
ing how all these types of data relate to each other. As all
biological things have come about through the evolutionary
process, the patterns, functions, and processes that they
possess are best analyzed in terms of their phylogenetic
histories. The same gene can evolve a different timing of its
expression, a different tissue where it is expressed, or even
gain a whole new function along one phylogenetic branch as
compared with another. These changes along a branch
affect the biology of all descendant species, thereby leaving
phylogenetic patterns in everything we see. A detailed
mapping between biological data and phylogenetic his-
tories must be accomplished so that the full potential of
the data accumulation activities can be realized. Otherwise
it will be impossible to understand why certain drugs work
in some species but not others, or how we can design
therapies against evolving disease agents such as HIV
and influenza.
The need to query data using sets of evolutionary
related taxa, rather than on single species, has brought
up the need to create databases that can serve as reposi-
tories of phylogenetic trees, generated by a variety of
methods. Phylogeny and phylogenetic trees give a picture
of the evolutionary history among species, individuals, or
genes. Therefore, there are at least two distinct goals of a
phylogenetic database: archival storage and analysis (28).
Table 2 summarizes these repositories.
Many of the aforementioned data repositories offer func-
tionalities for browsing phylogenetic and taxonomic infor-
mation. NCBI offers users the Taxonomy Databases (1, 13),
which organize the data maintained in its repositories
from the species perspective and allows the user to
hierarchically browse data with respect to a Tree of Life
organization. NEWT is a taxonomy database (http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/newt/) that connects UniProtKB data to
the NCBI taxonomy data. For every species, NEWT pro-
vides information about the taxon’s scientific name, com-
mon name and synonym(s), lineage, number of UniProtKB
protein entries in the given taxon, and links to each entry.
Tree of Life
The Tree of Life (29) is a phylogenetic repository that aims
to provide users with information from a whole-species
point of view. The Tree of Life allows users to search for
pages about specific species through conventional keyword
search mechanisms. Most interestingly, a user can also
navigate through the ‘‘tree of life’’ using hierarchical
browsing starting at the root organism, popularly referred
to as ‘‘Life,’’ and traverse the tree until a species of interest
is reached. The species web page contains information
gathered and edited by recognized experts about the species
BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES 3
as well as peer-reviewed resources accessible through
hyperlinks (29).
TreeFam
TreeFam is a database of phylogenetic trees of animal gene
families. The goal of TreeFam is to develop a curated
database that provides accurate information about ortho-
log and paralog assignments and evolutionary histories of
various gene families (30). To create and curate the trees
and families, TreeFam has gathered sequence data from
several protein repositories. It contains protein sequences
for human (Homo sapiens), mouse (Mus musculus), rat
(Rattus norvegicus), chicken (Gallus gallus), pufferfish
(Takifugu rubripes), zebrafish (Danio rerio), and fruitfly
(Drosophila melanogaster), which were retrieved from
Ensembl (14), WormBase (31), SGD (17), GeneDB (15),
and TIGR (32). The protein sequences in TreeFam are
grouped into families of genes that descended from a single
gene in the last common ancestor of all animals, or that first
appeared in animals. From the above sources, families and
trees are automatically generated and then manually
curated based on expert review. To manage these data,
TreeFam is divided into two parts. TreeFAM-B consists of
the automatically generated trees. It obtains clusters from
the PhIGs (33) database and uses BLAST (34), MUSCLE
(35), and HMMER (36) and neighbor-joining algorithms
(37) to generate the trees. TreeFAM-A contains the manu-
ally curated trees, which exploit algorithms similar to the
DLI algorithm (DLI: H. Li, unpublished data) and the SDI
algorithm (38). TreeFAM contains 11,646 families includ-
ing about 690 families that have curated phylogenetic
trees. Therefore, as more trees get curated, the Tree-
Fam-A database increases, whereas TreeFam-B decreases
in size.
TreeBASE
TreeBASE (39) was developed to help harness the explo-
sively high growth in the number of published phylogenetic
trees. It is a relational database and contains phylogenetic
trees and the data underlying those trees. TreeBASE is
available at http://www.treebase.org and allows the user to
search the database according to different keywords and to
see graphical representations of the trees. The user can also
access information such as data matrices, bibliographic
information, taxonomic names, character states, algo-
rithms used, and analyses performed. Phylogenetic trees
are submitted to TreeBASE by the authors of the papers
that describe the trees. For data to be accepted by Tree-
BASE, the corresponding paper must pass the journal’s
peer review process (39).
SYSTERS Database
SYSTERS is a protein clustering database based on
sequence similarity (40). It can be accessed at http://SYS-
TERS.molgen.mpg.de/. SYSTERS contains 185,000 dis-
joint protein families gathered from existing sequence
repositories: Swiss-Prot (19), TrEMBL (19) and complete
genomes: Ensembl (14), The Arabidopsis Information
Resource (16), SGD (17), and GeneDB (15). Two innovative
features of this repository are the SYSTERS Table and
SYSTERS Tree. The SYSTERS Table for a family cluster
contains a variety of information, most notably accession
numbers as well as accession numbers for a variety of
external databases [IMB (41), MSD (42), ENZYME (43),
INTERPRO (9), PROSITE (8), GO (44)]. There can be
several redundant entries in the table for one protein
sequence. As SYSTERS data rely on external protein data-
bases, there is always an entry name (protein name) and an
accession number for each entry but there may not be a
gene name. For each family cluster that consists of more
than two nonredundant entries, a phylogenetic tree is
available. The phylogenetic trees are constructed using
the UPGMA (45) method. No more than 200 entries are
displayed in a tree; the selection process when a cluster
contains more than 200 entries is not clear.
PANDIT (Protein and Associated Nucleotide
Domains with Inferred Trees)
PANDIT is a nonredundant repository of multiple sequence
alignments and phylogenetic trees. It is available at http://
www.ebi.ac.uk/goldman-srv/pandit. The database consists
of three portions: protein domain sequence alignments
from Pfam Database (46), alignments of nucleotide
sequences derived from EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Data-
base (2), and phylogenetic trees inferred from each align-
ment. Currently PANDIT contains 7738 families of
homologous protein sequences with corresponding DNA
sequences and phylogenetic trees. All alignments are based
Table 2. Summary of Phylogenetic Data Repositories
Database URL Feature
NCBI Taxonomy
Database
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
entrez/query.fcgi?db=Taxonomy
Whole-species view of genomic and
proteomic data stored in GenBank
Tree of Life http://tolweb.org/tree/ Species-centric hierarchical browsing database
modeling the evolutionary relationships
between species
TreeFam http://www.treefam.org/ Repository for phylogenetic trees based on animal genomes
TreeBASE http://www.treebase.org/treebase/ Archival peer-reviewed phylogenetic tree repository
SYSTERS http://systers.molgen.mpg.de/ Protein cluster repository with significant phylogenetic
functionalities
PANDIT http://www.ebi.ac.uk/goldman-srv/pandit/ Protein domains repository with inferred phylogenetic trees
4 BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES
on Pfam-A (47) seed alignments, which are manually
curated and, therefore, make PANDIT data high quality
and comparable with alignments used to study evolution.
Each family contains three alignments: PANDIT-aa con-
tains the exact Pfam-A seed protein sequence alignment;
and PANDIT-dna contains the DNA sequences encoding
the protein sequences in PANDIT-aa that could be recov-
ered; and PANDIT-aa-restricted contains only those pro-
tein sequences for which a DNA sequence has been
recovered. The DNA sequences have been retrieved using
cross-references to the EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Data-
base from the Swiss-Prot (19) and TrEMBL (19) databases.
To ensure accuracy, PANDIT performs a translation of the
cross-referenced DNA sequences back to the corresponding
protein sequences.
PANDIT database is intended for studying the molecu-
lar evolution of protein families. Therefore, phylogenetic
trees have been constructed for families of more than two
sequences. For each family, five different methods for tree
estimation have been used to produce candidate trees.
These methods include neighbor-joining (37), BioNJ (48),
Weighbor (49), FastME (50), and PHYML (51). Neighbor-
joining, BioNJ and Weighbor are methods used to produce
phylogenetic tree estimates from a pairwise distance
matrix. FastME uses a minimum evolution criterion with
local tree-rearrangements to estimate a tree, and Phyml
uses maximum likelihood with local tree searching. At the
end, the likelihood of each tree from the candidate set is
computed and the tree with the highest likelihood is added
to the database.
STRUCTURE AND PATHWAY DATABASES
Knowledge of protein structures and of molecular interac-
tions is key to understanding protein functions and com-
plex regulatory mechanisms underlying many biological
processes. However, computationally, these datasets are
highly complex. The most popular ways to model these
datasets are through text, graphs, or images. Text data
tend not to have the descriptive power needed to fully model
this type of data. Graphical and the image data require
complex algorithms that are computationally expensive
and not reliably accurate. Therefore, structural and path-
way databases become an interesting niche from both the
biological and the computational perspectives. Table 3
lists several prominent databases in this field.
The Protein Data Bank
The Protein Data Bank (PDB) is an archive of structural
data of biological macromolecules. PDB is maintained by
the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics
(RCSB). It allows the user to view data both in plain text
and through a molecular viewer using Jmol. A key goal of
the PDB is to make the data as uniform as possible while
improving data accessibility and providing advanced
querying options (52, 53).
To have complete information regarding the features of
macromolecular structures, PDB allows a wide spectrum of
queries through data integration. PDB collects and inte-
grates external data from scientists’ deposition, Gene
Ontology (GO) (54), Enzyme Commission (55), KEGG Path-
ways (56), and NCBI resources (57). PDB realizes data
integration through data loaders written in Java, which
extract information from existing databases based on com-
mon identification numbers. PDB also allows data extrac-
tion at query run time, which means implemented Web
services extract information as the query is executing.
The Nucleic Acid Database
Nucleic Acid Database, also curated by RCSB and similar
to the PDB and the Cambridge Structural Database (58), is
a repository for nucleic acid structures. It gives users access
to tools for extracting information from nucleic acid struc-
tures and distributes data and software. The data are
stored in a relational database that contains tables of
primary and derivative information. The primary informa-
tion includes atomic coordinates, bibliographic references,
crystal data, data collection, and other structural descrip-
tions. The derivative information is calculated from the
primary information and includes chemical bond lengths,
and angles, virtual bond lengths, and other measures
according to various algorithms (59, 60). The experimental
data in the NDB database have been collected from pub-
lished literature, as well as from one of the standard
crystallographic archive file types (60, 61) and other
sources. Primary information has been encoded in ASCII
format file (62). Several programs have been developed to
convert between different file formats (60, 63, 64, 65).
The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes
The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)
(56) is the primary resource for the Japanese GenomeNet
service that attempts to define the relationships between
Table 3. Summary of Structural and Pathway Databases
Database URL Feature
The Protein Data Bank (PDB) http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/ Protein structure repository that provides
tools for analyzing these structures
The Nucleic Acid Database (NDB) http://ndbserver.rutgers.edu/ Database housing nucleic acid structural information
The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes (KEGG)
http://www.genome.jp/kegg/ Collection of databases integrating pathway,
genomic, proteomic, and ligand data
The BioCyc Database Collection http://www.biocyc.org/ Collection of over 200 pathway and genomic databases
BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES 5
the functional meanings and utilities of the cell or the
organism and its genome information. KEGG contains
three databases: PATHWAY, GENES, and LIGAND. The
PATHWAY database stores computerized knowledge on
molecular interaction networks. The GENES database
contains data concerning sequences of genes and proteins
generated by the genome projects. The LIGAND database
holds information about the chemical compounds and che-
mical reactions that are relevant to cellular processes.
KEGG computerizes the data and knowledge as graph
information. The KEGG/PATHWAY database contains
reference diagrams for molecular pathways and complexes
involving various cellular processes, which can readily be
integrated with genomic information (66). It stores data
objects called generalized protein interaction networks
(67, 68). The PATHWAY database is composed of four
levels that can be accessed through the Web browser.
The top two levels contain information about metabolism,
genetic information processing, environmental informa-
tion processing, cellular processes, and human diseases.
The others relate to the pathway diagram and the ortholog
group table, which is a collection of genes and proteins.
The BioCyc Database Collection
The BioCyc Database Collection (69) is a compilation of
pathway and genome information for different organisms.
Based on the number of reviews and updates, BioCyc
databases are organized into several tiers. Tier 1 consists
of three databases, EcoCyc (70), which describes Escher-
ichia coliK-12; MetaCyc (71), which describes pathways for
more than 300 organisms; and the BioCyc Open Com-
pounds Database (69), which contains a collection of che-
mical compound data from BioCyc databases. Tier 2
contains 12 databases computationally generated by the
Pathologic program. These databases have been updated
and manually curated to varying degrees. Tier 3 is com-
posed of 191 databases computationally generated by the
Pathologic program with no review and updating (69).
The BioCyc website allows scientists to perform certain
operations, e.g., to visualize individual metabolic path-
ways, to view the complete metabolic map of an organism,
and to analyze, metabolomics data using the Omics Viewer.
The website also provides a spectrum of browsing capabil-
ities such as moving from a display of an enzyme to a display
of a reaction that the enzyme catalyzes or to the gene that
encodes the enzyme (69).
MICROARRAY AND BOUTIQUE BIOINFORMATIC
DATABASES
Both microarray databases and boutique databases offer
interesting perspectives on biological data. The microarray
databases allow users to retrieve and interact with data
from microarray experiments. Boutique databases offer
users specialty services concerning a particular aspect of
biological data. This section reviews such databases and
synopsizes these reviews in Table 4.
The Stanford Microarray Database
The Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) (72) allows
researchers to retrieve, analyze, and visualize gene expres-
sion data from microarray experiments. The repository also
contains literature data and integrates multiple related
resources, including SGD (17), YPD and WormPD (73),
UniGene (74), dbEST (20), and Swiss-Prot (19).
Due to the large number of experiments and datasets,
SMD uses comprehensive interfaces allowing users to effi-
ciently query the database. For each experiment, the data-
base stores the name of the researcher, the source organism
of the microarray probe sequences, along with a category
and subcategory that describe the biological view of the
experiment. The user can create a query using any of these
criteria to narrow down the number of experiments.
The Yale Microarray Database
The Yale Microarray Database (YMD) (75) is another repo-
sitory for gene expression data. It is Web-accessible and
enables users to perform several operations, e.g., tracking
DNA samples between source plates and arrays and finding
common genes/clones across different microarray plat-
forms. Moreover, it allows the user to access the image
file server, to enter data, and to get integrated data through
linkage of gene expression data to annotation databases for
functional analysis (75). YMD provides several means of
querying the database. The website contains a query cri-
teria interface (75), which allows the user to perform com-
mon queries. The interface also enables the user to choose
the format of the output, e.g., which columns to be included
and the type of output display (HTML, EXCEL, TEXT, or
CLUSTER). Finally, the query output can also be dynami-
cally linked to external annotation databases such as DRA-
GON (76).
Table 4. Summary of Microarray and Boutique Databases
Database URL Feature
The Stanford Microarray
Database
http://genome-www5.stanford.edu/ Repository for raw and normalized
microarray data
The Yale Microarray
Database
http://www.med.yale.edu/microarray/ Repository for raw and normalized
microarray data
The Stem Cell Database http://stemcell.princeton.edu/ Database for human and mice stem cell data
The BrainML Data Server http://www.neurodatabase.org, Databases containing information necessary
for understanding brain processes
6 BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES
The Stem Cell Database
The Stem Cell Database (SCDb) (77), supported by Prince-
ton University and the University of Pennsylvania, is a
unique repository that contains information about hema-
topoietic stem cells from mice and humans. It is closely
associated with the Stromal Cell Database (http://stromal-
cell.princeton.edu/), also supported by Princeton Univer-
sity and the University of Pennsylvania. Data for this
repository are obtained from various peer-reviewed
sources, publications, and libraries. Users can query on
various aspects of the data, including gene name and other
annotations, as well as sequence data (77).
The BrainML Data Server
The BrainML Data Server is a repository containing data
that pertain to the understanding of neural coding, infor-
mation transmission, and brain processes and provides a
venue for sharing neuro-physiological data. It acquires,
organizes, annotates, archives, delivers, and displays
single- and multi-unit neuronal data from mammalian
cerebral cortex (78). Users can obtain the actual datasets,
provided by several laboratories, all in common format and
annotated compatibly. The Web interface provides a tool
called QueryTool that allows the user to search by meta-
data terms submitted by the researchers. Another Tool,
Virtual Scilloscope Java Tool, displays time-series and
histogram datasets dynamically. The datasets can also
be downloaded for analysis.
RESEARCH CHALLENGES AND ISSUES
Although extensive efforts have been made to catalog and
store biological and chemical data, there is still a great
amount of work to be done. Scientists are figuratively
drowning in data. Therefore, there is a strong need for
computational tools that allow scientists to slice through
the mounds of data to pinpoint information needed for
experiments. Moreover, with research methodologies chan-
ging from library-based to Web-based, new methods for
maintaining the quality of the data are needed. Mainte-
nance and updates on bioinformatic databases require not
only automatic tools but in most cases also in the curation
process. This process involves manual checks from biolo-
gists to ensure that data are valid and accurate before
integrating this data into the database. There are two
major research challenges in the area of bioinformatic
databases: (1) development of software tools that are reli-
able, scalable, downloadable, platform-independent, user-
friendly, high performance, and open source for discover-
ing, extracting, and delivering knowledge from large
amounts of text and biomedical data; and (2) development
of large-scale ontology-assisted knowledge integration
systems. The two issues also give rise to others, such as
how we can maintain the quality (79) and the proper
provenance of biological data when it is heavily integrated.
Some work has been done toward the first issue, as dis-
cussed in Ref. 80.
Knowledge Discovery from Data (KDD)
The KDD process, in its most fundamental form, is to
extract interesting, nontrivial, implicit, previously
unknown, and potentially useful information from data.
When applied to bioinformatic databases, KDD refers to
diverse activities, including bioinformatic data cleaning
and preprocessing, pattern and motif discovery, classifica-
tion and clustering, biological network modeling, and bio-
informatic data visualization, to name a few. An annual
KDD Cup is organized as the Data Mining and Knowledge
Discovery competition by the ACM Special Interest Group
(81, 82). Various KDD tools have been developed to analyze
DNA and protein sequences, whole genomes, phylogeny
and evolutionary trees, macromolecule structures, and
biological pathways. However, many of these tools suffer
from inefficiency, low accuracy, and unsatisfactory perfor-
mance due to factors, including experimental noise,
unknown model complexity, visualization difficulties
with very high-dimensional data, and the lack of sufficient
samples for computational validation. Another problem is
that some KDD tools are platform dependent and their
availability is limited.
One emerging trend in KDD is to apply machine learn-
ing, natural language processing, and statistical techni-
ques to text and biomedical literature mining. The goal is to
establish associations between biological objects and pub-
lications from literature databases such as MEDLINE, for
example, finding all related literature studying the same
proteins from different aspects. It has been shown that
incorporating information obtained from biomedical litera-
ture mining into sequence alignment tools such as BLAST
can increase the accuracy of alignment results. This shows
an example of combining KDD methods with traditional
sequence analysis tools to improve their performance.
However, these KDD methods are not yet fully reliable,
scalable, or user-friendly, and many of the methods still
need to be improved.
Large-Scale Knowledge Integration (LKI)
LKI of heterogeneous, distributed bioinformatic data is
supposed to offer users a seamless view of knowledge.
However, with a few exceptions, many current bioinfor-
matic systems use hyperlink navigation techniques to inte-
grate World Wide Web repositories. These techniques
result in semantically meaningless integrations. Often,
websites are not maintained, datasets are poorly curated,
or in some cases, the integration has been done improperly.
With these concerns, efforts based on current biological
data integration that create advanced tools to help deliver
knowledge to the bioinformatics community fail or become
dataset dependent.
A major research challenge in bioinformatics is inte-
grating and representing knowledge effectively. The infor-
matics community has effectively integrated and visualized
data. However, research must be taken to the next phase
where knowledge integration and knowledge management
becomes a key interest. The informatics community must
BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES 7
work with the biomedical community from the ground up.
Effective, structured knowledge bases need to be created
that are also relatively easy to use. The computer science
community is starting to address this challenge with pro-
jects in the areas of the Semantic Web and semantic inte-
gration. The bioinformatics community has started to
create such knowledge bases with projects like the Gene
Ontology (GO) and Stanford’s biomedical ontology (http://
bioontology.org/) (more are listed under the Open Biological
Ontology, http://obo.sourceforge.net/). Ontologies and
meta-data are only the beginning. It is well known in the
computer science community that meta-data management
can be a tricky, complicated process. Attempting this in the
biomedical realm is downright difficult. Researchers cur-
rently must wield complicated ontologies to classify even
more complex data. Extensive research is needed into how
to develop better ontologies as well as to manipulate them
more effectively.
Ontology also assumes that there is a general consensus
within the bioinformatics field as to the format and struc-
ture of the data, with mechanisms for minimizing syno-
nyms and homonyms. This is not true for many types of
data. For example, many plant species have binomial
names identical to animal species. Many genes have
been given different names when found in one species or
one tissue as compared with another. In almost every area
of medicine as well as biology, researchers can identify
contentious nomenclature issues. This standardized nam-
ing problem has serious consequences.
KDD and LKI are not separate; rather, they interact
with each other closely. For example, as mentioned, one
area of KDD is extracting knowledge from peer-reviewed
journal articles for clinical use. However, due to the variety
of ways to specify biological objects such as species, reg-
ulatory pathways, and gene names, KDD tools have diffi-
culty extracting knowledge from these articles. These
articles often represent a majority of data the scientific
community have concerning the various biological objects.
Due to the lack of standardized representations, one can
only employ information retrieval algorithms and give the
user a confidence level to the knowledge extracted. Great
amounts of knowledge are lost because we cannot exploit a
standardized knowledge base while examining peer-
reviewed literature. As another example, the GO contains
a graph structure that illustrates the relationship among
molecular functions attributed to genes. If this structure
can be combined with KDD processes such as clustering
and classification algorithms, one can produce more biolo-
gically meaningful clusters or classification outcomes.
These examples illustrate the importance of combining
KDD and LKI, which is a challenging problem in the field.
Data Provenance
As demonstrated by the above databases as well as the
previous issues, there are large quantities of data inter-
changing between tens if not hundreds of databases reg-
ularly. Furthermore, scientists are revolutionizing how
research is done by relying more and more on the biological
databases and less and less on original journal articles.
Thus, the issue of preserving how the data are obtained
becomes a paramount concern (83). The field of data pro-
venance investigates how to maintain meta-data describ-
ing the history of a data item within the database. With
databases cross-listing each other’s entries, and with data
mining and knowledge discovery algorithms generating
new information based on data published in these data-
bases, the issue of data provenance becomes more and more
significant.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. D. A. Benson, I. Karsch-Mizrachi, D. J. Lipman, J. Ostell, B. A.
Rapp, D. L. Wheeler, GenBank, Nuc. Acids Res., 28: 15–18,
2000.
2. G. Cochrane, P. Aldebert, N. Althorpe, M. Andersson, W.
Baker, A. Baldwin, et al., EMBL Nucleotide Sequence Data-
base: developments in 2005, Nuc. Acids Res., 34(1): D10–D15,
2006.
3. E. F. Codd, A relational model of data for large shared data
banks, CACM, 13(6): 377–387, 1970.
4. A. M. Lesk, Database Annotation in Molecular Biology. West
Sussex, England: John Wiley & Sons, 2005.
5. M. Y. Galperin, The molecular biology database collection:
2006 update, Nuc. Acids Res., 34: D3–D5, 2006.
6. J. T. L. Wang, C. H. Wu, and P. P. Wang, Computational
Biology and Genome Informatics, Singapore: World Scientific
Publishing, 2003.
7. K. Okubo, H. Sugawara, T. Gojobori, and Y. Tateno, DDBJ in
preparation for overview of research activities behind data
submissions Nuc. Acids Res., 34(1): D6–D9, 2006.
8. N. Hulo, A. Bairoch, V. Bulliard, L. Cerutti, E. DeCastro, P. S.
Langendijk-Genevaux, M. Pagni, C. J. A. Sigrist. The PRO-
SITE database. Nuc. Acids Res., 34(1): D227–D230, 2006.
9. N. J. Mulder, R. Apweiler, T. K. Attwood, A. Bairoch, A. Bate-
man, D. Binns, et al., InterPro, progress and status in 2005.
Nuc. Acids Res., 33: D201–205, 2006.
10. S. E. Antonarakis and V. A. McKusick, OMIM passes the 1,000-
disease-gene mark, Nature Genet., 25: 11, 2000.
11. V. E. Velculescu, L. Zhang, B. Vogelstein, and K. W. Kinzler,
Serial analysis of gene expression.Science,270, 484–487, 1995.
12. D. L. Wheeler, D. M. Church, A. E. Lash, D. D. Leipe, T. L.
Madden, J. U. Pontius, G. D. Schuler, L. M. Schriml, T. A.
Tatusova, L. Wagner, and B. A. Rapp, Database resources of
the National Center for Biotechnology Information,Nuc. Acids
Res., 29: 11–16, 2001, Updated article: Nuc. Acids Res., 30:
13–16, 2002.
13. A. J. Enright, I. Iliopoulos, N. C. Kyrpides, and C. A. Ouzounis,
Protein interaction maps for complete genomes based on gene
fusion events, Nature, 402, 86–90, 1999.
14. T. Hubbard, D. Barker, E. Birney, G. Cameron, Y. Chen, L.
Clark, et al., The Ensembl genome database project.Nuc.Acids
Res., 30, 38–41, 2002.
15. C. Hertz-Fowler, C. S. Peacock, V. Wood, M. Aslett, A. Kerhor-
nou, P. Mooney, et al., GeneDB: A resource for prokaryotic and
eukaryotic organisms, Nuc. Acids Res., 32: D339–D343, 2004.
16. D. W. Meinke, J. M. Cherry, C. Dean, S. D. Rounsley, and M.
Koornneef, Arabidopsis thaliana: A model plant for genome
analysis, Science, 282: 679–682, 1998.
17. J. M. Cherry, C. Adler, C. Ball, S. A. Chervitz, S. S. Dwight, E.
T. Hester, Y. Jia, G. Juvik, T. Roe, M. Schroeder, S. Weng, and
D. Botstein, SGD: Saccharomyces Genome Database, Nuc.
Acids Res., 26: 73–79, 1998.
8 BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES
18. C. H. Wu, L. S. Yeh, H. Huang, L. Arminski, J. Castro-Alvear,
Y. Chen, Z. Z. Hu, R. S. Ledley, P. Kourtesis, B. E. Suzek, C. R.
Vinayaka, J. Zhang, W. C. Barker, The protein information
resource, Nuc. Acids Res., 31: 345–347, 2003.
19. C. O’Donovan, M. J. Martin, A. Gattiker, E. Gasteiger, A.
Bairoch, and R. Apweiler, High-quality protein knowledge
resource: SWISSPROT and TrEMBL. Brief. Bioinform., 3:
275–284, 2002.
20. M. S. Boguski, T. M. Lowe, and C. M. Tolstoshev, dbEST —
database for expressed sequence tags, Nature Genet., 4: 332–
333, 1993.
21. G. D. Schuler, J. A. Epstein, H. Ohkawa, and J. A. Kans,
Entrez: Molecular biology database and retrieval system,
Methods Enzymol., 266: 141–162, 1996.
22. C. H. Wu, R. Apweiler, A. Bairoch, D. A. Natale, W. C. Barker,
B. Boeckmann, et al., The Universal Protein Resource (Uni-
Prot): AN expanding universe of protein information. Nuc.
Acids Res., 34(1): D187–191, 2006.
23. C. H. Wu, A. Nikolskaya, H. Huang, L. S. Yeh, D. A. Natale, C.
R. Vinayaka, et al., PIRSF: Family classification system at the
Protein Information Resource. Nuc. Acids Res., 32: D112–114,
2004.
24. C. H. Wu, H. Huang, A. Nikolskaya, Z. Z. Hu, and W. C. Barker,
The iProClass integrated database for protein functional ana-
lysis. Comput Biol Chem., 28: 87–96, 2004.
25. Z. Z. Hu, I. Mani, V. Hermoso, H. Liu, C. H. Wu, iProLINK: An
integrated protein resource for literature mining. Comput Biol
Chem., 28: 409–416, 2004.
26. E. Gasteiger, E. Jung, and A. Bairoch, SWISS-PROT: Connect-
ing biomolecular knowledge via a protein database, Curr.
Issues Mol. Biol., 3: 47–55, 2001.
27. T. Etzold, and P. Argos, SRS—an indexing and retrieval tool for
flat file data libraries. Comput. Appl. Biosci., 9: 49–57, 2003.
28. J. T. L. Wang, M. J. Zaki, H. T. T. Toivonen, and D. Shasha
(eds), Data mining in Bioinformatics, London, UK: Springer,
2005.
29. D. R. Maddison, and K.-S. Schulz (eds.). The Tree of Life Web
Project. Available: http://tolweb.org. Last accessed July 26,
2006.
30. W. M. Fitch, Distinguishing homologous from analogous pro-
teins, Syst. Zool., 19: 99–113, 1970.
31. N. Chen, T. W. Harris, I. Antoshechkin, C. Bastiani, T. Bieri, D.
Blasiar, et al., WormBase: A comprehensive data resource for
Caenorhabditis biology and genomics, Nuc. Acids Res., 33:
D383–D389, 2005.
32. B. J. Haas, J. R. Wortaman, C. M. Ronning, L. I. Hannick, R. K.
Smith Jr., et al., Complete reannotation of the Arabidopsis
genome: Methods, tools, protocols and the final release. BMC
Biol., 3:7, 2005.
33. P. Dehal, and J. L. Boore, Two rounds of whole genome dupli-
cation in the ancestral vertebrate, PLoS Biol., 3: e314, 2005.
34. S. F. Altschul, T. L. Madden, A. A. Schaffer, J. Zhang, Z. Zhang,
W. Miller, and D. J. Lipman, Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST:
A new generation of protein database search programs, Nuc.
Acids Res., 25: 3389–3402, 1997.
35. R. C. Edgar, MUSCLE: A multiple sequence alignment method
with reduced time and space complexity,BMCBioinformatics,
5:113, 2004.
36. S. R. Eddy, Profile hidden Markov models. Bioinformatics, 14:
755–763, 1998.
37. N. Saitou and M. Nei, The neighbor-joining method: a new
method for reconstructing phylogenetic trees, Mol. Biol. Evol.,
4: 406–425, 1987.
38. C. M. Zmasek and S. R. Eddy, A simple algorithm to infer gene
duplication and speciation events on a gene tree. Bioinfor-
matics, 17: 821–828, 2001.
39. M. J. Sanderson, M. J. Donoghue, W. H. Piel, and T. Eriksson,
TreeBASE: A prototype database of phylogenetic analyses and
an interactive tool for browsing the phylogeny of life, Am. J.
Bot., 81(6): 163 1994.
40. T. Meinel, A. Krause, H. Luz, M. Vingron, and E. Staub, The
SYSTERS Protein Family Database in 2005. Nuc. Acids Res.,
33: D226–D229, 2005.
41. J. Reichert, J. Suhnel, The IMB jena image library of biological
macromolecules: 2002 update, Nuc. Acids Res., 30: 253–254,
2002.
42. H. Boutzelakis, D. Dimitropoulos, J. Fillon, A. Golovin,
K. Henrick, A. Hussain, et al., E-MSD: The Eurepoean Bioin-
formatics Institute Macromolecular Structure Database. Nuc.
Acids Res., 31: 458–462, 2003.
43. A. Bairoch, The ENZYME database in 2000. Nuc. Acids Res.,
28: 304–305, 2000.
44. M. Ashburner, C. A. Ball, J. A. Blake, D. Botstein, H. Butler,
J. M. Cherry, et al., Gene ontology: Tool for the unification of
biology, The Gene Ontology Consortium, Nature Genetics, 25:
25–29, 2000.
45. R. C. Dubes and A. K. Jain. Algorithms for Clustering Data,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1988.
46. A. Bateman, E. Birney, L. Cerruti, R. Durbin, L. Etwiller, S. R.
Eddy, S. Griffiths-Jones, K. L. Howe, M. Marshall, E. L. L.
Sonnhammer, The Pfam protein families database, Nuc. Acids
Res., 30: 276–280, 2002.
47. E. L. L. Sonnhammer, S. R. Eddy, and R. Durbin, Pfam: A
comprehensive database of protein domain families based on
seed alignments, Proteins: Struct. Funct. Gene., 28: 405–420,
1998.
48. O. Gascuel, BIONJ: An improved version of the NJ algorithm
based on a simple model of sequence data, Mol. Biol. Evol., 14:
685–695, 1997.
49. W. J. Bruno, N. D. Socci, and A. L. Halpern, Weighted neighbor
joining: A likelihood-based approach to distance-based phylo-
geny reconstruction, Mol. Biol. Evol., 17: 189–197, 2000.
50. R. Desper and O. Gascuel, Fast and accurate phylogeny recon-
struction algorithms based on the minimum-evolution princi-
ple, J. Comput. Biol., 9: 687–705, 2002.
51. S. Guindon and O. Gascuel, A simple, fast and accurate method
to estimate large phylogenies by maximum-likelihood, Syst.
Biol., 52: 696–704, 2003.
52. T. N. Bhat, P. Bourne, Z. Feng, G. Gilliland, S. Jain, V.
Ravichandran, et al., The PDB data uniformity project. Nuc.
Acids Res., 29, 214–218, 2001.
53. N. Deshpande, K. J. Addess, W. F. Bluhm, J. C. Merino-Ott, W.
Townsend-Merino, Q. Zhang, et al., The RCSB Protein Data
Bank: A redesigned query system and relational database
based on the mmCIF schema, Nuc. Acids Res., 33: D233–
D237, 2005.
54. The Gene Ontology Consortium, Gene Ontology: Tool for the
unification of biology, Nature Genetics, 25: 25–29, 2000.
55. G. P. Moss (2006, March 16). Enzyme Nomenclature: Recom-
mendations of the Nomenclature Committee of the Interna-
tional Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology on the
Nomenclature and Classification of Enzymes by the Reactions
they Catalyse, Available: http://www.chem.qmul.ac.uk/iubmb/
enzyme/. Accessed: July 27, 2006.
56. M. Kanehisa and S. Goto, KEGG: Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes
and Genomes, Nuc. Acids Res., 28: 27–30, 2000.
BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES 9
57. D. L. Wheeler, D. M. Church, R. Edgar, S. Federhen, W.
Helmberg, T. L. Madden, et al., Database resources of the
National Center for Biotechnology Information: update, Nuc.
Acids Res., 32: D35–D40, 2004.
58. F. H. Allen, S. Bellard, M. D. Brice, B. A. Cartwright, A.
Doubleday, H. Higgs, et al., The Cambridge crystallographic
data centre: Computer-based search, retrieval, analysis and
display of information. Acta Cryst., 35: 2331–2339, 1979.
59. M. S. Babcock and W. K. Olson, A new program for the analysis
of nucleic acid structure: implications for nucleic acid structure
interpretation, Computation of Biomolecular Structures:
Achievements, Problems, and Perspectives, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 1992.
60. K. Grzeskowiak, K. Yanagi, G. G. Prive, and R. E. Dickerson,
The structure of B-helical C-G-A-T-C-G-A-T-C-G, and compar-
ison with C-C-A-A-C-G-T-T-G-G: the effect ofbase pair rever-
sal. J. Bio. Chem., 266: 8861–8883, 1991.
61. R. Lavery and H. Sklenar, The definition of generalized heli-
coidal parameters and of axis curvature for irregular nucleic
acids, J. Biomol. Struct. Dynam.6: 63–91, 655–667, 1988.
62. H. M. Berman, A. Gelbin, J. Westbrook, and T. Demeny. The
Nucleic Acid Database File Format. New Brunswick, NJ: Rut-
gers University, 1991.
63. S.-H Hsieh. Ndbfilter. A Suite of Translator Programs for
Nucleic Acid Database Crystallographic Archive File Format.
New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University, 1992.
64. J. Westbrook, T. Demeny, and S.-H. Hsieh. Ndbquery. A Sim-
plifiedUser Interface to theNucleicAcidDatabase. New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University, 1992.
65. A. R. Srinivasan and W. K. Olson, Yeast tRNAPhC conforma-
tion wheels: A novel probe of the monoclinic and orthorhombic
models. Nuc. Acid Res., 8: 2307–2329, 1980.
66. M. Kanehisa, S. Goto, S. Kawashima, and A. Nakaya, The
KEGG databases at GenomeNet. Nuc. Acid Res., 30: 42–46,
2002.
67. M. Kanehisa, Post-genome Informatics. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press, 2000.
68. M. Kanehisa, Pathway databases and higher order function.
Adv. Protein Chem., 54: 381–408, 2000.
69. P.D. Karp, C. A. Ouzounis, C. Moore-Kochlacs, L. Goldovsky, P.
Kaipa, D. Ahren, S. Tsoka, N. Darzentas, V. Kunin, and N.
Lopez-Bigas, Expansion of the BioCyc collection of pathway/
genome databases to 160 genomes, Nuc. Acids Res., 19: 6083–
6089, 2005.
70. R. Caspi, H. Foerster, C. A. Fulcher, R. Hopkinson, J. Ingra-
ham, P. Kaipa, M. Krummenacker, S. Paley, J. Pick, S. Y. R., C.
Tissier, P. Zhang and P. D. Karp, MetaCyc: A multiorganism
database of metabolic pathways and enzymes,Nuc. Acids Res.,
34: D511–D516, 2006.
71. P. Romero, J. Wagg, M. L. Green, D. Kaiser, M. Krumme-
nacker, and P. D. Karp, Computational prediction of human
metabolic pathways from the complete human genome, Gen-
ome Biology, 6: 1–17, 2004.
72. C. A. Ball, I. A. Awad, J. Demeter, J. Gollub, J. M. Hebert, T.
Hernandez-Boussard, H. Jin, J. C. Matese, M. Nitzberg, F.
Wymore, Z. K. Zachariah, P. O. Brown, G. Sherlock, The
Stanford Microarray Database accommodates additional
microarray platforms and data formats, Nuc. Acids Res, 33:
D580–582, 2005.
73. M. C. Costanzo, J. D. Hogan, M. E. Cusick, B. P. Davis, A. M.
Fancher, P. E. Hodges, et al., The Yeast Proteome Database
(YPD) and Caenorhabditis elegans Proteome Database
(WormPD): Comprehensive resources for the organization
and comparison of model organism protein information. Nuc.
Acids Res., 28: 73–76, 2000.
74. G.D. Schuler, Pieces of the puzzle: Expressed sequence tags and
the catalog of human genes, J. Mol. Med., 75: 694–698, 1997.
75. K. H. Cheung, K. White, J. Hager, M. Gerstein, V. Reinke, K.
Nelson, et al., YMD: A microarray database for large-scale gene
expression analysis.Proc. of the AmericanMedical Informatics
Association 2002 Annual Symposium, San Antonio, Texas,
November 9–11, 2002, pp. 140–144.
76. C. M. Bouton and J. Pevsner, DRAGON: Database Referencing
of Array Genes Online. Bioinformatics, 16(11): 1038–1039,
2000.
77. I. R. Lemischka, K. A. Moore, and C. Stoeckert. (2005) SCDb:
The Stem Cell Database, Available: http://stemcell.princeton.
edu/. Accessed: July 28, 2006.
78. D. Gardner, M. Abato, K. H. Knuth, R. DeBellis, and S. M Erde,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences. 356: 1229–1247, 2001.
79. K. G. Herbert, N. H. Gehani, W. H. Piel, J. T. L. Wang, and C. H.
Wu, BIO-AJAX: An Extensible Framework for Biological Data
Cleaning, ACM SIGMOD Record, 33: 51–57, 2004.
80. G. Chang, M. Haley, J. A. M. McHugh, J. T. L. Wang, Mining
the World Wide Web, Norwell, MA: 2001.
81. H. Shatkay, N. Chen, and D. Blostein, Integrating image data
into biomedical text categorization. Bioinformatics, 22(14):
446–453, 2006.
82. A. S. Yeh, L. Hirschman, and A. A. Morgan, Evaluation of text
data mining fordatabasecuration: lessons learned fromtheKDD
Challenge Cup. Bioinformatics, 19 (Suppl 1): i331–339, 2003.
83. P. Buneman, A. Chapman, and J. Cheney, Provenance Man-
agement in Curated Databases, Proc. of ACM SIGMOD Inter-
national Conference on Management of Data, Chicago, Illinois
June 26–29, 2006.
KATHERINE G. HERBERT
Montclair State University
Montclair, New Jersey
JUNILDA SPIROLLARI
JASON T. L. WANG
New Jersey Institute of
Technology
Newark, New Jersey
WILLIAM H. PIEL
Peabody Museum of Natural
History, Yale University
New Haven, Connecticut
JOHN WESTBROOK
Protein Data Bank and Rutgers,
The State University of New
Jersey
Piscataway, New Jersey
WINONA C. BARKER
ZHANG-ZHI HU
CATHY H. WU
Protein Information Resource
and Georgetown University
Medical Center
Washington, D.C.
10 BIOINFORMATIC DATABASES

