Review Paper
83Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
Review
What is bioinformatics? An
introduction and overview
N.M. Luscombe,
D. Greenbaum,
M. Gerstein
Department of Molecular Biophysics
and Biochemistry
Yale University
New Haven, USA
Introduction
Biological data are being produced
at a phenomenal rate [1]. For
example as of August 2000, the
GenBank repository of nucleic acid
sequences contained 8,214,000
entries [2] and the SWISS-PROT
database of protein sequences
contained 88,166 [3]. On average,
these databases are doubling in
size every 15 months [2]. In addition,
since the publication of the H.
influenzae genome [4], complete
sequences for over 40 organisms
have been released, ranging from
450 genes to over 100,000. Add to
this the data from the myriad of
related projects that study gene
expression, determine the protein
structures encoded by the genes,
and detail how these products inter-
act with one another, and we can
begin to imagine the enormous
quantity and variety of information
that is being produced.
As a result of this surge in data,
computers have become indispensable
to biological research. Such an approach
is ideal because of the ease with which
computers can handle large quantities
of data and probe the complex dynam-
ics observed in nature. Bioinformatics,
the subject of the current review, is
often defined as the application of
computational techniques to understand
and organise the information associated
with biological macromolecules. This
uexpected union between the two
subjects is largely attributed to the fact
Abstract: A flood of data means that many of the challenges in biology are now challenges
in computing. Bioinformatics, the application of computational techniques to analyse the
information associated with biomolecules on a large-scale, has now firmly established
itself as a discipline in molecular biology, and encompasses a wide range of subject areas
from structural biology, genomics to gene expression studies.
In this review we provide an introduction and overview of the current state of the field.
We discuss the main principles that underpin bioinformatics analyses, look at the types
of biological information and databases that are commonly used, and finally examine
some of the studies that are being conducted, particularly with reference to transcription
regulatory systems.
(Molecular) bio – informatics: bioinformatics is conceptualising biology in
terms of molecules (in the sense of physical chemistry) and applying
"informatics techniques" (derived from disciplines such as applied maths,
computer science and statistics) to understand and organise the information
associated with these molecules, on a large scale . In short, bioinformatics
is a management information system for molecular biology and has many
practical applications.
Bioinformatics - a definition1
1 As submitted to the Oxford English Dictionary
that life itself is an information
technology; an organism’s physiology
is largely determined by its genes, which
at its most basic can be viewed as
digital information. At the same time,
there have been major advances in the
technologies that supply the initial data;
Anthony Kerlavage of Celera recently
cited that an experimental laboratory
can produce over 100 gigabytes of
data a day with ease [5]. This incredible
processing power has been matched
by developments in computer technol-
ogy; the most important areas of
84
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
improvements have been in the CPU,
disk storage and Internet, allowing
faster computations, better data stor-
age and revolutionalised the methods
for accessing and exchanging data.
Aims of bioinformatics
The aims of bioinformatics are three-
fold. First, at its simplest bioinformatics
organises data in a way that allows
researchers to access existing infor-
mation and to submit new entries as
they are produced, eg the Protein Data
Bank for 3D macromolecular struc-
tures [6,7]. While data-curation is an
essential task, the information stored
in these databases is essentially use-
less until analysed. Thus the purpose of
bioinformatics extends much further.
The second aim is to develop tools and
resources that aid in the analysis of
data. For example, having sequenced a
particular protein, it is of interest to
compare it with previously characte-
rised sequences. This needs more than
just a simple text-based search and
programs such as FASTA [8] and
PSI-BLAST [9] must consider what
comprises a biologically significant
match. Development of such resources
dictates expertise in computational
theory as well as a thorough under-
standing of biology. The third aim is to
use these tools to analyse the data and
interpret the results in a biologically
meaningful manner. Traditionally,
biological studies examined individual
systems in detail, and frequently
compared them with a few that are
related. In bioinformatics, we can now
conduct global analyses of all the
available data with the aim of un-
covering common principles that apply
across many systems and highlight
novel features.
In this review, we provide an intro-
duction to bioinformatics. We focus on
the first and third aims just described,
with particular reference to the key-
words underlined in the definition: infor-
mation,informatics, organisation,
understanding , large-scale  and
practical applications . Specifically, we
discuss the range of data that are
currently being examined, the databases
into which they are organised, the types
of analyses that are being conducted
using transcription regulatory systems
as an example, and finally some of the
major practical applications of
bioinformatics.
“…the INFORMATION
associated with these
molecules…”
Table 1 lists the types of data that are
analysed in bioinformatics and the range
of topics that we consider to fall within
the field. Here we take a broad view and
include subjects that may not normally
be listed. We also give approximate
values describing the sizes of data being
discussed.
We start with an overview of the
sources of information: these may
be divided into raw DNA sequences,
protein sequences, macromolecular
structures, genome sequences, and
other whole genome data. Raw DNA
sequences are strings of the four base-
letters comprising genes, each typically
1,000 bases long. The GenBank
repository of nucleic acid sequences
currently holds a total of 9.5 billion
bases in 8.2 million entries (all database
figures as of August 2000). At the next
level are protein sequences comprising
strings of 20 amino acid-letters. At
present there are about 300,000 known
protein sequences, with a typical
Data source Data size Bioinformatics topics
Raw DNA sequence
Protein sequence
Macromolecular
structure
Genomes
Gene expression
8.2 million sequences
(9.5 billion bases)
300,000 sequences
(~300 amino acids
each)
13,000 structures
(~1,000 atomic
coordinates each)
40 complete genomes
(1.6 million –
3 billion bases each)
largest: ~20 time
point measurements
for ~6,000 genes
Separating coding and non-coding regions
Identification of introns and exons
Gene product prediction
Forensic analysis
Sequence comparison algorithms
Multiple sequence alignments algorithms
Identification of conserved sequence motifs
Secondary, tertiary structure prediction
3D structural alignment algorithms
Protein geometry measurements
Surface and volume shape calculations
Intermolecular interactions
Molecular simulations
(force-field calculations,
molecular movements,
docking predictions)
Characterisation of repeats
Structural assignments to genes
Phylogenetic analysis
Genomic-scale censuses
(characterisation of protein content, metabolic pathways)
Linkage analysis relating specific genes to diseases
Correlating expression patterns
Mapping expression data to sequence, structural and
biochemical data
Other data
Literature
Metabolic pathways
11 million citations Digital libraries for automated bibliographical searches
Knowledge databases of data from literature
Pathway simulations
Table 1. Sources of data used in bioinformatics, the quantity of each type of data that is currently
(August 2000) available, and bioinformatics subject areas that utilise this data.
Review Paper
85Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
bacterial protein containing approxi-
mately 300 amino acids. Macromo-
lecular structural data represents a
more complex form of information.
There are currently 13,000 entries in
the Protein Data Bank, PDB, most
of which are protein structures. A
typical PDB file for a medium-sized
protein contains the xyz coordinates
of approximately 2,000 atoms.
Scientific euphoria has recently
centred on whole genome sequencing.
As with the raw DNA sequences,
genomes consist of strings of base-
letters, ranging from 1.6 million bases
in Haemophilus influenzae to 3 billion
in humans. An important aspect of
complete genomes is the distinction
between coding regions and non-
coding regions –'junk' repetitive
sequences making up the bulk of base
sequences especially in eukaryotes.
We can now measure expression levels
of almost every gene in a given cell
on a whole-genome level although
public availability of such data is still
limited. Expression level measurements
are made under different environmental
conditions, different stages of the cell
cycle and different cell types in multi-
cellular organisms. Currently the largest
dataset for yeast has made approxi-
mately 20 time-point measurements
for 6,000 genes [10]. Other genomic-
scale data include biochemical informa-
tion on metabolic pathways, regulatory
networks, protein-protein interaction
data from two-hybrid experiments,
and systematic knockouts of individ-
ual genes to test the viability of an
organism.
What is apparent from this list is the
diversity in the size and complexity of
different datasets. There are invariably
more sequence-based data than struc-
tural data because of the relative ease
with which they can be produced. This
is partly related to the greater complex-
ity and information-content of individual
structures compared to individual
sequences. While more biological infor-
mation can be derived from a single
structure than a protein sequence, the
lack of depth in the latter is remedied
by analysing larger quantities of data.
“… ORGANISE the informa-
tion on a LARGE SCALE …”
Redundancy and multiplicity of data
A concept that underpins most
research methods in bioinformatics is
that much of this data can be grouped
together based on biologically meaning-
ful similarities. For example, sequence
segments are often repeated at
different positions of genomic DNA
[11]. Genes can be clustered into those
with particular functions (eg enzymatic
actions) or according to the metabolic
pathway to which they belong [12],
although here, single genes may actually
possess several functions [13]. Going
further, distinct proteins frequently
have comparable sequences – orga-
nisms often have multiple copies of a
particular gene through duplication
while different species have equivalent
or similar proteins that were inherited
when they diverged from each other in
evolution. At a structural level, we
predict there to be a finite number of
different tertiary structures – estimates
range between 1,000 and 10,000 folds
[14,15] – and proteins adopt equivalent
structures even when they differ
greatly in sequence [16]. As a result,
although the number of structures in
the PDB has increased exponentially,
the rate of discovery of novel folds has
actually decreased.
There are common terms to describe
the relationship between pairs of
proteins or the genes from which they
are derived: analogous proteins have
related folds, but unrelated sequences,
while homologous proteins are both
sequentially and structurally similar.
The two categories can sometimes be
difficult to distinguish especially if the
relationship between the two proteins
is remote [17, 18]. Among homologues,
it is useful to distinguish between
orthologues, proteins in different
species that have evolved from a
common ancestral gene, and
paralogues, proteins that are related by
gene duplication within a genome [19].
Normally, orthologues retain the same
function while paralogues evolve
distinct, but related functions [20].
An important concept that arises
from these observations is that of a
finite “parts list” for different organisms
[21,22]: an inventory of proteins
contained within an organism, arranged
according to different properties such
as gene sequence, protein fold or
function. Taking protein folds as an
example, we mentioned that with a
few exceptions, the tertiary structures
of proteins adopt one of a limited
repertoire of folds. As the number of
different fold families is considerably
smaller than the number of gene
families, categorising the proteins by
fold provides a substantial simplifi-
cation of the contents of a genome.
Similar simplifications can be
provided by other attributes such as
protein function. As such, we expect
this notion of a finite parts list to become
increasingly common in the future
genomic analyses.
Clearly, an essential aspect of mana-
ging this large volume of data lies in
developing methods for assessing
similarities between different biomole-
cules and identifying those that are
related. Below, we discuss the major
databases that provide access to the
primary sources of information, and
also introduce some secondary data-
bases that systematically group the
data (Table 2). These classifications
ease comparisons between genomes
and their products, allowing the identi-
fication of common themes between
those that are related and highlighting
features that are unique to some.
86
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
Protein sequence databases
Protein sequence databases are
categorised as primary, composite or
secondary. Primary databases contain
over 300,000 protein sequences and
function as a repository for the raw
data. Some more common repositories,
such as SWISS-PROT [3] and PIR-
International [23], annotate the
sequences as well as describe the
proteins’ functions, its domain structure
and post-translational modifications.
Composite databases such as OWL
[24] and the NRDB [25] compile and
filter sequence data from different
primary databases to produce com-
bined non-redundant sets that are more
complete than the individual databases
and also include protein sequence data
from the translated coding regions in
DNA sequence databases (see
below). Secondary databases contain
information derived from protein
sequences and help the user determine
whether a new sequence belongs to a
known protein family. One of the most
popular is PROSITE [26], a database
of short sequence patterns and profiles
that characterise biologically significant
sites in proteins. PRINTS [27] expands
on this concept and provides a
compendium of protein fingerprints –
groups of conserved motifs that
characterise a protein family. Motifs
are usually separated along a protein
sequence, but may be contiguous in
3D-space when the protein is folded.
By using multiple motifs, fingerprints
can encode protein folds and
functionalities more flexibly than
PROSITE. Finally, Pfam [28] contains
a large collection of multiple sequence
alignments and profile Hidden Markov
Models covering many common protein
domains. Pfam-A comprises accurate
manually compiled alignments while
Pfam-B is an automated clustering of
the whole SWISS-PROT database.
These different secondary databases
have recently been incorporated into a
single resource named InterPro [29].
Structural databases
Next we look at databases of macro-
molecular structures. The Protein Data
Bank, PDB [6,7], provides a primary
archive of all 3D structures for
macromolecules such as proteins,
RNA, DNA and various complexes.
Most of the ~13,000 structures (August
2000) are solved by x-ray crystallo-
graphy and NMR, but some theoretical
models are also included. As the infor-
mation provided in individual PDB
entries can be difficult to extract,
PDBsum [30] provides a separate Web
page for every structure in the PDB
displaying detailed structural analyses,
schematic diagrams and data on inter-
actions between different molecules in
a given entry. Three major databases
classify proteins by structure in order
to identify structural and evolutionary
relationships: CATH [31], SCOP [32],
and FSSP databases [33]. All
comprise hierarchical structural
taxonomy where groups of proteins
increase in similarity at lower levels
of the classification tree. In addition,
numerous databases focus on particular
types of macromolecules. These
include the Nucleic Acids Database,
NDB [34], for structures related to
nucleic acids, the HIV protease
database [35] for HIV-1, HIV-2 and
SIV protease structures and their
complexes, and ReLiBase [36] for
receptor-ligand complexes.
Database URL
Protein sequence
(primary)
SWISS-PROT
PIR-International
Protein sequence (composite)
OWL
NRDB
Protein sequence (secondary)
PROSITE
PRINTS
Pfam
Macromolecular
structures
Protein Data Bank (PDB)
Nucleic Acids Database (NDB)
HIV Protease Database
ReLiBase
PDBsum
CATH
SCOP
FSSP
Nucleotide sequences
GenBank
EMBL
DDBJ
Genome sequences
Entrez genomes
GeneCensus
COGs
Integrated databases
InterPro
Sequence retrieval system (SRS)
Entrez
www.expasy.ch/sprot/sprot-top.html
www.mips.biochem.mpg.de/proj/protseqdb
www.bioinf.man.ac.uk/dbbrowser/OWL
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=Protein
www.expasy.ch/prosite
www.bioinf.man.ac.uk/dbbrowser/PRINTS/PRINTS.html
www.sanger.ac.uk/Pfam/
www.rcsb.org/pdb
ndbserver.rutgers.edu/
www.ncifcrf.gov/CRYS/HIVdb/NEW_DATABASE
www2.ebi.ac.uk:8081/home.html
www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/pdbsum
www.biochem.ucl.ac.uk/bsm/cath
scop.mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk/scop
www2.embl-ebi.ac.uk/dali/fssp
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Genbank
www.ebi.ac.uk/embl
www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=Genome
bioinfo.mbb.yale.edu/genome
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG
www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro
www.expasy.ch/srs5
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Entrez
Table 2. List of URLs for the databases that are cited in the review.
Review Paper
87Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
Nucleotide and Genome
sequences
As described previously, the biggest
excitement currently lies with the
availability of complete genome
sequences for different organisms. The
GenBank [2], EMBL [37] and DDBJ
[38] databases contain DNA sequen-
ces for individual genes that encode
protein and RNA products. Much like
the composite protein sequence
database, the Entrez nucleotide
database [39] compiles sequence data
from these primary databases.
As whole-genome sequencing is
often conducted through international
collaborations, individual genomes are
published at different sites. The Entrez
genome database [40] brings together
all complete and partial genomes in a
single location and currently represents
over 1,000 organisms (August 2000).
In addition to providing the raw
nucleotide sequence, information is
presented at several levels of detail
including: a list of completed genomes,
all chromosomes in an organism,
detailed views of single chromosomes
marking coding and non-coding regions,
and single genes. At each level there
are graphical presentations, pre-
computed analyses and links to other
sections of Entrez. For example,
annotations for single genes include
the translated protein sequence,
sequence alignments with similar genes
in other genomes and summaries of
the experimentally characterised or
predicted function. GeneCensus [41]
also provides an entry point for genome
analysis with an interactive whole-
genome comparison from an evolution-
ary perspective. The database allows
building of phylogenetic trees based on
different criteria such as ribosomal
RNA or protein fold occurrence. The
site also enables multiple genome
comparisons, analysis of single
genomes and retrieval of information
for individual genes. The COGs data-
base [20] classifies proteins encoded
in 21 completed genomes on the basis
of sequence similarity. Members of
the same Cluster of Orthologous Group,
COG, are expected to have the same
3D domain architecture and often, simi-
lar functions. The most straightforward
application of the database is to predict
the function of uncharacterised proteins
through their homology to characterised
proteins, and also to identify phylo-
genetic patterns of protein occurrence
– for example, whether a given COG
is represented across most or all
organisms or in just a few closely
related species.
Gene expression data
A most recent source of genomic-
scale data has been from expression
experiments, which quantify the
expression levels of individual genes.
These experiments measure the
amount of mRNA or protein products
that are produced by the cell. For the
former, there are three main
technologies: the cDNA microarray
[42-44], Affymatrix GeneChip [45] and
SAGE methods [46]. The first method
measures relative levels of mRNA
abundance between different samples,
while the last two measure absolute
levels. Most of the effort in gene
expression analysis has concentrated
on the yeast and human genomes and
as yet, there is no central repository for
this data. For yeast, the Young [10],
Church [47] and Samson datasets [48]
use the GeneChip method, while the
Stanford cell cycle [49], diauxic shift
[50] and deletion mutant datasets [51]
use the microarray. Most measure
mRNA levels throughout the whole
yeast cell cycle, although some focus
on a particular stage in the cycle. For
humans, the main application has been
to understand expression in tumour
and cancer cells. The Molecular
Portraits of Breast Tumours [52],
Lymphoma and Leukaemia Molecular
Profiling [53] projects provide data
from microarray experiments on
human cancer cells.
The technologies for measuring
protein abundance are currently limited
to 2D gel electrophoresis followed by
mass spectrometry [54]. As gels can
only routinely resolve about 1,000
proteins [55], only the most abundant
can be visualised. At present, data
from these experiments are only
available from the literature [56,57].
Data integration
The most profitable research in
bioinformatics often results from
integrating multiple sources of data
[58]. For instance, the 3D coordinates
of a protein are more useful if combined
with data about the protein’s function,
occurrence in different genomes, and
interactions with other molecules. In
this way, individual pieces of infor-
mation are put in context with respect
to other data. Unfortunately, it is not
always straightforward to access and
cross-reference these sources of infor-
mation because of differences in
nomenclature and file formats.
At a basic level, this problem is
frequently addressed by providing
external links to other databases, for
example in PDBsum, web-pages for
individual structures direct the user
towards corresponding entries in the
PDB, NDB, CATH, SCOP and
SWISS-PROT. At a more advanced
level, there have been efforts to
integrate access across several data
sources. One is the Sequence Retrieval
System, SRS [59], which allows flat-
file databases to be indexed to each
other; this allows the user to retrieve,
link and access entries from nucleic
acid, protein sequence, protein motif,
protein structure and bibliographic
databases. Another is the Entrez facility
[39], which provides similar gateways
to DNA and protein sequences,
genome mapping data, 3D macromo-
lecular structures and the PubMed
bibliographic database [60]. A search
for a particular gene in either database
will allow smooth transitions to the
88
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
genome it comes from, the protein
sequence it encodes, its structure,
bibliographic reference and equivalent
entries for all related genes.
“…UNDERSTAND and
organise the information…”
Having examined the data, we can
discuss the types of analyses that are
conducted. As shown in Table 1, the
broad subject areas in bioinformatics
can be separated according to the sources
of information that are used in the studies.
For raw DNA sequences, investigations
involve separating coding and non-coding
regions, and identification of introns,
exons and promoter regions for annotating
genomic DNA [61,62]. For protein se-
quences, analyses include developing
algorithms for sequence comparisons
[63], methods for producing multiple
sequence alignments [64], and searching
for functional domains from conserved
sequence motifs in such alignments.
Investigations of structural data include
prediction of secondary and tertiary pro-
tein structures, producing methods for
3D structural alignments [65,66], exami-
ning protein geometries using distance
and angular measurements, calculations
of surface and volume shapes and ana-
lysis of protein interactions with other
subunits, DNA, RNA and smaller mole-
cules. These studies have lead to molecu-
lar simulation topics in which structural
data are used to calculate the energetics
involved in stabilising macromolecular
structures, simulating movements within
macromolecules, and computing the
energies involved in molecular docking.
The increasing availability of annotated
genomic sequences has resulted in the
introduction of computational genomics
and proteomics – large-scale analyses
of complete genomes and the proteins
that they encode. Research includes
characterisation of protein content and
metabolic pathways between different
genomes, identification of interacting
proteins, assignment and prediction of
gene products, and large-scale analyses
of gene expression levels. Some of these
research topics will be demonstrated in
our example analysis of transcription
regulatory systems.
Other subject areas we have included
in Table 1 are development of digital
libraries for automated bibliographical
searches, knowledge bases of biological
information from the literature, DNA
analysis methods in forensics, prediction
of nucleic acid structures, metabolic
pathway simulations, and linkage analysis
– linking specific genes to different
disease traits.
In addition to finding relationships
between different proteins, much of
bioinformatics involves the analysis of
one type of data to infer and understand
the observations for another type of
data. An example is the use of sequence
and structural data to predict the
secondary and tertiary structures of new
protein sequences [67]. These methods,
especially the former, are often based on
statistical rules derived from structures,
such as the propensity for certain amino
acid sequences to produce different
secondary structural elements. Another
example is the use of structural data to
understand a protein’s function; here
studies have investigated the relationship
different protein folds and their functions
[68,69] and analysed similarities between
different binding sites in the absence of
homology [70]. Combined with similarity
measurements, these studies provide us
with an understanding of how much
biological information can be accurately
transferred between homologous
proteins [71].
The bioinformatics spectrum
Figure 1 summarises the main points
we raised in our discussions of
organising  and understanding
biological data – the development of
bioinformatics techniques has allowed
an expansion of biological analysis in
two dimension, depth and breadth. The
first is represented by the vertical axis in
the figure and outlines a possible approach
to the rational drug design process. The
aim is to take a single protein and follow
through an analysis that maximises our
understanding of the protein it encodes.
Starting with a gene sequence, we can
determine the protein sequence with
strong certainty. From there, prediction
algorithms can be used to calculate the
structure adopted by the protein.
Geometry calculations can define the
shape of the protein’s surface and
molecular simulations can determine the
force fields surrounding the molecule.
Finally, using docking algorithms, one
could identify or design ligands that may
bind the protein, paving the way for
designing a drug that specifically alters
the protein’s function. In practise, the
intermediate steps are still difficult to
achieve accurately, and they are best
combined with experimental methods to
obtain some of the data, for example
characterising the structure of the protein
of interest.
The aims of the second dimension, the
breadth in biological analysis, is to
compare a gene with others. Initially,
simple algorithms can be used to com-
pare the sequences and structures of a
pair of related proteins. With a larger
number of proteins, improved algorithms
can be used to produce multiple align-
ments, and extract sequence patterns or
structural templates that define a family
of proteins. Using this data, it is also
possible to construct phylogenetic trees
to trace the evolutionary path of proteins.
Finally, with even more data, the infor-
mation must be stored in large-scale
databases. Comparisons become more
complex, requiring multiple scoring
schemes, and we are able to conduct
genomic scale censuses that provide
comprehensive statistical accounts of
protein features, such as the abundance
of particular structures or functions in
different genomes. It also allows us to
build phylogenetic trees that trace the
evolution of whole organisms.
Review Paper
89Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
Fig. 1. Paradigm shifts during the past couple of decades have taken much of biology away from the laboratory bench and have allowed the
integration of other scientific disciplines, specifically computing. The result is an expansion of biological research in breadth and depth. The
vertical axis demonstrates how bioinformatics can aid rational drug design with minimal work in the wet lab. Starting with a single gene sequence,
we can determine with strong certainty, the protein sequence. From there, we can determine the structure using structure prediction techniques.
With geometry calculations, we can further resolve the protein’s surface and through molecular simulation determine the force fields surrounding
the molecule. Finally docking algorithms can provide predictions of the ligands that will bind on the protein surface, thus paving the way for
the design of a drug specific to that molecule. The horizontal axis shows how the influx of biological data and advances in computer technology
have broadened the scope of biology. Initially with a pair of proteins, we can make comparisons between the between sequences and structures
of evolutionary related proteins. With more data, algorithms for multiple alignments of several proteins become necessary. Using multiple
sequences, we can also create phylogenetic trees to trace the evolutionary development of the proteins in question. Finally, with the deluge
of data we currently face, we need to construct large databases to store, view and deconstruct the information. Alignments now become more
complex, requiring sophisticated scoring schemes and there is enough data to compile a genome census – a genomic equivalent of a population
census – providing comprehensive statistical accounting of protein features in genomes.
90
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
“… applying INFORMATICS
TECHNIQUES…”
The distinct subject areas we
mention require different types of
informatics techniques. Briefly, for data
organisation, the first biological
databases were simple flat files.
However with the increasing amount
of information, relational database
methods with Web-page interfaces
have become increasingly popular. In
sequence analysis, techniques include
string comparison methods such as
text search and 1-dimensional align-
ment algorithms. Motif and pattern
identification for multiple sequences
depend on machine learning, clustering
and data-mining techniques. 3D
structural analysis techniques include
Euclidean geometry calculations
combined with basic application of
physical chemistry, graphical repre-
sentations of surfaces and volumes,
and structural comparison and 3D
matching methods. For molecular
simulations, Newtonian mechanics,
quantum mechanics, molecular me-
chanics and electrostatic calculations
are applied. In many of these areas,
the computational methods must be
combined with good statistical analyses
in order to provide an objective measure
for the significance of the results.
Transcription regulation – a case
study in bioinformatics
DNA-binding proteins have a central
role in all aspects of genetic activity
within an organism, participating in
processes such as transcription, packa-
ging, rearrangement, replication and
repair. In this section, we focus on the
studies that have contributed to our
understanding of transcription regula-
tion in different organisms. Through
this example, we demonstrate how
bioinformatics has been used to increase
our knowledge of biological systems
and also illustrate the practical
applications of the different subject
areas that were briefly outlined earlier.
We start by considering structural
analyses of how DNA-binding proteins
recognise particular base sequences.
Later, we review several genomic
studies that have characterised the
nature of transcription factors in
different organisms, and the methods
that have been used to identify regula-
tory binding sites in the upstream
regions. Finally, we provide an overview
of gene expression analyses that have
been recently conducted and suggest
future uses of transcription regulatory
analyses to rationalise the observations
made in gene expression experiments.
All the results that we describe have
been found through computational
studies.
Structural studies
As of August 2000, there were 379
structures of protein-DNA complexes
in the PDB. Analyses of these
structures have provided valuable
insight into the stereochemical
principles of binding, including how
particular base sequences are
recognized and how the DNA structure
is quite often modified on binding.
A structural taxonomy of DNA-
binding proteins, similar to that
presented in SCOP and CATH, was
first proposed by Harrison [72] and
periodically updated to accommodate
new structures as they are solved [73].
The classification consists of a two-
tier system: the first level collects
proteins into eight groups that share
gross structural features for DNA-
binding, and the second comprises 54
families of proteins that are structurally
homologous to each other. Assembly
of such a system simplifies the
comparison of different binding
methods; it highlights the diversity of
protein-DNA complex geometries
found in nature, but also underlines the
importance of interactions between α-
helices and the DNA major groove,
the main mode of binding in over half
the protein families. While the number
of structures represented in the PDB
does not necessarily reflect the relative
importance of the different proteins in
the cell, it is clear that helix-turn-helix,
zinc-coordinating and leucine zipper
motifs are used repeatedly. This
provides compact frameworks that
present the α-helix on the surfaces of
structurally diverse proteins. At a gross
level, it is possible to highlight the
differences between transcription
factor domains that “just” bind DNA
and those involved in catalysis [74].
Although there are exceptions, the
former typically approach the DNA
from a single face and slot into the
grooves to interact with base edges.
The latter commonly envelope the
substrate, using complex networks of
secondary structures and loops.
Focusing on proteins with α-helices,
the structures show many variations,
both in amino acid sequences and
detailed geometry. They have clearly
evolved independently in accordance
with the requirements of the context in
which they are found. While achieving
a close fit between the α-helix and
major groove, there is enough flexibility
to allow both the protein and DNA to
adopt distinct conformations. However,
several studies that analysed the binding
geometries of α-helices demonstrated
that most adopt fairly uniform confor-
mations regardless of protein family.
They are commonly inserted in the
major groove sideways, with their
lengthwise axis roughly parallel to the
slope outlined by the DNA backbone.
Most start with the N-terminus in the
groove and extend out, completing two
to three turns within contacting distance
of the nucleic acid [75,76].
Given the similar binding orientations,
it is surprising to find that the interactions
between each amino acid position along
the α-helices and nucleotides on the
DNA vary considerably between
different protein families. However,
by classifying the amino acids according
Review Paper
91Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
to the sizes of their side chains, we are
able to rationalise the different
interactions patterns. The rules of
interactions are based on the simple
premise that for a given residue position
on α-helices in similar conformations,
small amino acids interact with
nucleotides that are close in distance
and large amino acids with those that
are further [76,77]. Equivalent studies
for binding by other structural motifs,
like β-hairpins, have also been
conducted [78]. When considering
these interactions, it is important to
remember that different regions of the
protein surface also provide interfaces
with the DNA.
This brings us to look at the atomic
level interactions between individual
amino acid-base pairs. Such analyses
are based on the premise that a
significant proportion of specific DNA-
binding could be rationalised by a
universal code of recognition between
amino acids and bases, ie whether
certain protein residues preferably
interact with particular nucleotides
regardless of the type of protein-DNA
complex [79].  Studies have considered
hydrogen bonds, van der Waals contacts
and water-mediated bonds [80-82].
Results showed that about 2/3 of all
interactions are with the DNA
backbone and that their main role is
one of sequence-independent stabilisa-
tion. In contrast, interactions with bases
display some strong preferences,
including the interactions of arginine or
lysine with guanine, asparagine or
glutamine with adenine and threonine
with thymine. Such preferences were
explained through examination of the
stereochemistry of the amino acid side
chains and base edges. Also highlighted
were more complex types of inter-
actions where single amino acids
contact more than one base-step
simultaneously, thus recognising a short
DNA sequence. These results
suggested that universal specificity,
one that is observed across all protein-
DNA complexes, indeed exists.
However, many interactions that are
normally considered to be non-specific,
such as those with the DNA backbone,
can also provide specificity depending
on the context in which they are made.
Armed with an understanding of
protein structure, DNA-binding motifs
and side chain stereochemistry, a major
application has been the prediction of
binding either by proteins known to
contain a particular motif, or those with
structures solved in the uncomplexed
form. Most common are predictions
for α-helix-major groove interactions
– given the amino acid sequence, what
DNA sequence would it recognise
[77,83]. In a different approach,
molecular simulation techniques have
been used to dock whole proteins and
DNAs on the basis of force-field
calculations around the two molecules
[84,85].
The reason that both methods have
only been met with limited success is
because even for apparently simple
cases like α-helix-binding, there are
many other factors that must be
considered. Comparisons between
bound and unbound nucleic acid
structures show that DNA-bending is
a common feature of complexes formed
with transcription factors [74, 86]. This
and other factors such as electrostatic
and cation-mediated interactions assist
indirect recognition of the nucleotide
sequence, although they are not well
understood yet. Therefore, it is now
clear that detailed rules for specific
DNA-binding will be family specific,
but with underlying trends such as the
arginine-guanine interactions.
Genomic studies
Due to the wealth of biochemical
data that are available, genomic studies
in bioinformatics have concentrated
on model organisms, and the analysis
of regulatory systems has been no
exception. Identification of transcription
factors in genomes invariably depends
on similarity search strategies, which
assume a functional and evolutionary
relationship between homologous
proteins. In E. coli, studies have so far
estimated a total of 300 to 500
transcription regulators [87] and
PEDANT [88], a database of auto-
matically assigned gene functions,
shows that typically 2-3% of
prokaryotic and 6-7% of eukaryotic
genomes comprise DNA-binding
proteins. As assignments were only
complete for 40-60% of genomes as of
August 2000, these figures most likely
underestimate the actual number.
Nonetheless, they already represent a
large quantity of proteins and it is clear
that there are more transcription
regulators in eukaryotes than other
species. This is unsurprising, consider-
ing the organisms have developed a
relatively sophisticated transcription
mechanism.
From the conclusions of the structural
studies, the best strategy for charac-
terising DNA-binding of the putative
transcription factors in each genome is
to group them by homology and analyse
the individual families. Such classifi-
cations are provided in the secondary
sequence databases described earlier
and also those that specialise in
regulatory proteins such as RegulonDB
[89] and TRANSFAC [90]. Of even
greater use is the provision of structural
assignments to the proteins; given a
transcription factor, it is helpful to know
the structural motif that it uses for
binding, therefore providing us with a
better understanding of how it recog-
nises the target sequence. Structural
genomics through bioinformatics
assigns structures to the protein
products of genomes by demonstrating
similarity to proteins of known structure
[91]. These studies have shown that
prokaryotic transcription factors most
frequently contain helix-turn-helix
motifs [87,92] and eukaryotic factors
contain homeodomain type helix-turn-
92
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
helix, zinc finger or leucine zipper motifs.
From the protein classifications in each
genome, it is clear that different types
of regulatory proteins differ in abun-
dance and families significantly differ
in size. A study by Huynen and van
Nimwegen [93] has shown that mem-
bers of a single family have similar
functions, but as the requirements of
this function vary over time, so does
the presence of each gene family in the
genome.
Most recently, using a combination
of sequence and structural data, we
examined the conservation of amino
acid sequences between related DNA-
binding proteins, and the effect that
mutations have on DNA sequence
recognition. The structural families
described above were expanded to
include proteins that are related by
sequence similarity, but whose
structures remain unsolved. Again,
members of the same family are
homologous, and probably derive from
a common ancestor.
Amino acid conservations were
calculated for the multiple sequence
alignments of each family [94].
Generally, alignment positions that
interact with the DNA are better
conserved than the rest of the protein
surface, although the detailed patterns
of conservation are quite complex.
Residues that contact the DNA back-
bone are highly conserved in all protein
families, providing a set of stabilising
interactions that are common to all
homologous proteins. The conservation
of alignment positions that contact
bases, and recognise the DNA se-
quence, are more complex and could
be rationalised by defining a 3-class
model for DNA-binding. First, protein
families that bind non-specifically
usually contain several conserved base-
contacting residues; without exception,
interactions are made in the minor
groove where there is little discrim-
ination between base types. The
contacts are commonly used to stabilise
deformations in the nucleic acid
structure, particularly in widening the
DNA minor groove. The second class
comprise families whose members all
target the same nucleotide sequence;
here, base-contacting positions are
absolutely or highly conserved allowing
related proteins to target the same
sequence.
The third, and most interesting, class
comprises families in which binding
is also specific but different members
bind distinct base sequences. Here
protein residues undergo frequent
mutations, and family members can
be divided into subfamilies according
to the amino acid sequences at base-
contacting positions; those in the
same subfamily are predicted to bind
the same DNA sequence and those
of different subfamilies to bind
distinct sequences. On the whole,
the subfamilies corresponded well
with the proteins’ functions and
members of the same subfamilies were
found to regulate similar transcription
pathways. The combined analysis of
sequence and structural data described
by this study provided an insight into
how homologous DNA-binding
scaffolds achieve different specificities
by altering their amino acid sequences.
In doing so, proteins evolved distinct
functions, therefore allowing structur-
ally related transcription factors to
regulate expression of different genes.
Therefore, the relative abundance of
transcription regulatory families in a
genome depends, not only on the
importance of a particular protein
function, but also in the adaptability
of the DNA-binding motifs to
recognise distinct nucleotide
sequences. This, in turn, appears to
be best accommodated by simple
binding motifs, such as the zinc fingers.
Given the knowledge of the tran-
scription regulators that are contained
in each organism, and an understanding
of how they recognise DNA
sequences, it is of interest to search for
their potential binding sites within
genome sequences [95]. For
prokaryotes, most analyses have
involved compiling data on experi-
mentally known binding sites for
particular proteins and building a
consensus sequence that incorporates
any variations in nucleotides. Additional
sites are found by conducting word-
matching searches over the entire
genome and scoring candidate sites by
similarity [96-99]. Unsurprisingly, most
of the predicted sites are found in non-
coding regions of the DNA [96] and
the results of the studies are often
presented in databases such as
RegulonDB [89]. The consensus
search approach is often complemented
by comparative genomic studies
searching upstream regions of
orthologous genes in closely related
organisms. Through such an approach,
it was found that at least 27% of
known E. coli DNA-regulatory motifs
are conserved in one or more distantly
related bacteria [100].
The detection of regulatory sites in
eukaryotes poses a more difficult
problem because consensus sequences
tend to be much shorter, variable, and
dispersed over very large distances.
However, initial studies in S.
cerevisiae provided an interesting
observation for the GATA protein in
nitrogen metabolism regulation.
While the 5 base-pair GATA
consensus sequence is found almost
everywhere in the genome, a single
isolated binding site is insufficient to
exert the regulatory function [101].
Therefore specificity of GATA activity
comes from the repetition of the
consensus sequence within the
upstream regions of controlled genes
in multiple copies. An initial study has
used this observation to predict new
regulatory sites by searching for over-
represented oligonucleotides in non-
coding regions of yeast and worm
genomes [102,103].
Review Paper
93Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
Having detected the regulatory
binding sites, there is the problem of
defining the genes that are actually
regulated, commonly termed regulons.
Generally, binding sites are assumed to
be located directly upstream of the
regulons; however there are different
problems associated with this assump-
tion depending on the organism. For
prokaryotes, it is complicated by the
presence of operons; it is difficult to
locate the regulated gene within an
operon since it can lie several genes
downstream of the regulatory se-
quence. It is often difficult to predict
the organisation of operons [104],
especially to define the gene that is
found at the head, and there is often a
lack of long-range conservation in gene
order between related organisms [105].
The problem in eukaryotes is even
more severe; regulatory sites often act
in both directions, binding sites are
usually distant from regulons because
of large intergenic regions, and
transcription regulation is usually a
result of combined action by multiple
transcription factors in a combinatorial
manner.
Despite these problems, these
studies have succeeded in confirming
the transcription regulatory pathways
of well-characterised systems such as
the heat shock response system [99].
In addition, it is feasible to experi-
mentally verify any predictions, most
notably using gene expression data.
Gene expression studies
Many expression studies have so
far focused on devising methods to
cluster genes by similarities in
expression profiles. This is in order to
determine the proteins that are
expressed together under different
cellular conditions. Briefly, the most
common methods are hierarchical
clustering, self-organising maps, and
K-means clustering. Hierarchical
methods originally derived from
algorithms to construct phylogenetic
trees, and group genes in a “bottom-
up” fashion; genes with the most similar
expression profiles are clustered first,
and those with more diverse profiles
are included iteratively [106-108]. In
contrast, the self-organising map [109,
110] and K-means methods [111]
employ a “top-down” approach in which
the user pre-defines the number of
clusters for the dataset. The clusters
are initially assigned randomly, and the
genes are regrouped iteratively until
they are optimally clustered.
Given these methods, it is of interest
to relate the expression data to other
attributes such as structure, function
and subcellular localisation of each
gene product. Mapping these properties
provides an insight into the
characteristics of proteins that are
expressed together, and also suggest
some interesting conclusions about the
overall biochemistry of the cell. In
yeast, shorter proteins tend to be more
highly expressed than longer proteins,
probably because of the relative ease
with which they are produced [112].
Looking at the amino acid content,
highly expressed genes are generally
enriched in alanine and glycine, and
depleted in asparagine; these are
thought to reflect the requirements of
amino acid usage in the organism, where
synthesis of alanine and glycine are
energetically less expensive than
asparagine. Turning to protein
structure, expression levels of the TIM
barrel and NTP hydrolase folds are
highest, while those for the leucine
zipper, zinc finger and transmembrane
helix-containing folds are lowest. This
relates to the functions associated with
these folds; the former are commonly
involved in metabolic pathways and
the latter in signalling or transport
processes [113]. This is also reflected
in the relationship with subcellular
localisations of proteins, where
expression of cytoplasmic proteins is
high, but nuclear and membrane
proteins tend to be low [114,115].
More complex relationships have
also been assessed. Conventional
wisdom is that gene products that
interact with each other are more likely
to have similar expression profiles than
if they do not [116,117]. However, a
recent study showed that this relation-
ship is not so simple [118]. While
expression profiles are similar for gene
products that are permanently associ-
ated, for example in the large ribosomal
subunit, profiles differ significantly for
products that are only associated
transiently, including those belonging
to the same metabolic pathway.
As described below, one of the main
driving forces behind expression
analysis has been to analyse cancerous
cell lines [119]. In general, it has been
shown that different cell lines (eg
epithelial and ovarian cells) can be
distinguished on the basis of their
expression profiles, and that these
profiles are maintained when cells are
transferred from an in vivo to an in
vitro environment [120]. The basis for
their physiological differences were
apparent in the expression of specific
genes; for example, expression levels
of gene products necessary for
progression through the cell cycle,
especially ribosomal genes, correlated
well with variations in cell proliferation
rate. Comparative analysis can be
extended to tumour cells, in which the
underlying causes of cancer can be
uncovered by pinpointing areas of
biological variations compared to
normal cells. For example in breast
cancer, genes related to cell prolifera-
tion and the IFN-regulated signal
transduction pathway were found to
be upregulated [52,121]. One of the
difficulties in cancer treatment has
been to target specific therapies to
pathogenetically distinct tumour types,
in order to maximise efficacy and
minimise toxicity. Thus, improvements
in cancer classifications have been
central to advances in cancer treat-
ment. Although the distinction between
94
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
different forms of cancer – for example
subclasses of acute leukaemia – has
been well established, it is still not
possible to establish a clinical diagnosis
on the basis of a single test.  In a recent
study, acute myeloid leukaemia and
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia were
successfully distinguished based on the
expression profiles of these cells [53].
As the approach does not require prior
biological knowledge of the diseases, it
may provide a generic strategy for
classifying all types of cancer.
Clearly, an essential aspect of
understanding expression data lies in
understanding the basis of transcription
regulation. However, analysis in this area
is still limited to preliminary analyses of
expression levels in yeast mutants lacking
key components of the transcription
initiation complex [10,122].
“… many PRACTICAL
APPLICATIONS…”
Here, we describe some of the major
uses of bioinformatics.
Finding Homologues
As described earlier, one of the
driving forces behind bioinformatics is
the search for similarities between
different biomolecules. Apart from
enabling systematic organisation of
data, identification of protein homol-
ogues has some direct practical uses.
The most obvious is transferring infor-
mation between related proteins. For
example, given a poorly characterised
protein, it is possible to search for
homologues that are better understood
and with caution, apply some of the
knowledge of the latter to the former.
Specifically with structural data,
theoretical models of proteins are
usually based on experimentally solved
structures of close homologues [123].
Similar techniques are used in fold
recognition in which tertiary structure
predictions depend on finding structures
of remote homologues and checking
whether the prediction is energetically
viable [124]. Where biochemical or
structural data are lacking, studies could
be made in low-level organisms like
yeast and the results applied to
homologues in higher-level organisms
such as humans, where experiments
are more demanding.
An equivalent approach is also
employed in genomics. Homologue-
finding is extensively used to confirm
coding regions in newly sequenced
genomes and functional data is fre-
quently transferred to annotate individ-
ual genes. On a larger scale, it also
simplifies the problem of understanding
complex genomes by analysing simple
organisms first and then applying the
same principles to more complicated
ones – this is one reason why early
structural genomics projects focused
on Mycoplasma genitalium [91].
Ironically, the same idea can be
applied in reverse. Potential drug
targets are quickly discovered by
checking whether homologues of
essential microbial proteins are missing
in humans. On a smaller scale, structural
differences between similar proteins
may be harnessed to design drug
molecules that specifically bind to one
structure but not another.
Rational Drug Design
One of the earliest medical applica-
tions of bioinformatics has been in
aiding rational drug design. Figure 2
outlines the commonly cited approach,
taking the MLH1 gene product as an
example drug target. MLH1 is a human
gene encoding a mismatch repair
protein (mmr) situated on the short
arm of chromosome 3 [125]. Through
linkage analysis and its similarity to
mmr genes in mice, the gene has
been implicated in nonpolyposis colo-
rectal cancer [126]. Given the nucle-
otide sequence, the probable amino
acid sequence of the encoded protein
can be determined using translation
software. Sequence search techniques
can then be used to find homologues in
model organisms, and based on
sequence similarity, it is possible to
model the structure of the human
protein on experimentally characterised
structures. Finally, docking algorithms
could design molecules that could bind
the model structure, leading the way
for biochemical assays to test their
biological activity on the actual protein.
Large-scale censuses
Although databases can efficiently
store all the information related to
genomes, structures and expression
datasets, it is useful to condense all this
information into understandable trends
and facts that users can readily under-
stand. Broad generalisations help
identify interesting subject areas for
further detailed analysis, and place
new observations in a proper context.
This enables one to see whether they
are unusual in any way.
Through these large-scale
censuses, one can address a number
of evolutionary, biochemical and
biophysical questions. For example,
are specific protein folds associated
with certain phylogenetic groups?
How common are different folds
within particular organisms? And to
what degree are folds shared between
related organisms? Does this extent of
sharing parallel measures of
relatedness derived from traditional
evolutionary trees? Initial studies show
that the frequency of folds differs
greatly between organisms and that
the sharing of folds between organisms
does in fact follow traditional
phylogenetic classifications [21,41].
We can also integrate data on protein
functions; given that the particular
protein folds are often related to specific
biochemical functions [68, 69], these
findings highlight the diversity of
metabolic pathways in different
organisms [20,105].
Review Paper
95Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
Fig.2. Above is a schematic outlining how scientists can use bioinformatics to aid rational drug discovery. MLH1 is a human gene encoding a mismatch
repair protein (mmr) situated on the short arm of chromosome 3. Through linkage analysis and its similarity to mmr genes in mice, the gene has been
implicated in nonpolyposis colorectal cancer. Given the nucleotide sequence, the probable amino acid sequence of the encoded protein can be
determined using translation software. Sequence search techniques can be used to find homologues in model organisms, and based on sequence
similarity, it is possible to model the structure of the human protein on experimentally characterised structures. Finally, docking algorithms could
design molecules that could bind the model structure, leading the way for biochemical assays to test their biological activity on the actual protein.
As we discussed earlier, one of the
most exciting new sources of genomic
information is the expression data.
Combining expression information with
structural and functional classifications
of proteins we can ask whether the
high occurrence of a protein fold in a
genome is indicative of high expression
levels [112]. Further genomic scale data
that we can consider in large-scale
surveys include the subcellular
localisations of proteins and their inter-
actions with each other [127-129]. In
conjunction with structural data, we can
then begin to compile a map of all protein-
protein interactions in an organism.
Further applications in medical
sciences
Most recent applications in the
medical sciences have centred on
gene expression analysis [130]. This
usually involves compiling expression
data for cells affected by different
diseases [131], eg cancer [53,132,
133] and ateriosclerosis [134], and
comparing the measurements against
normal expression levels. Identifi-
cation of genes that are expressed
differently in affected cells provides
a basis for explaining the causes of
illnesses and highlights potential drug
targets. Using the process described
96
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
in Figure 2, one would design
compounds that bind the expressed
protein, or perhaps more importantly,
the transcription regulator has caused
the change in expression levels. Given
a lead compound, microarray experi-
ments can then be used to evaluate
responses to pharmacological inter-
vention, [135,136] and also provide
early tests to detect or predict the
toxicity of trial drugs.
Further advances in bioinformatics
combined with experimental genomics
for individuals are predicted to
revolutionalise the future of healthcare.
A typical scenario for a patient may
start with post-natal genotyping to
assess susceptibility or immunity from
specific diseases and pathogens. With
this information, a unique combination
of vaccines could be prescribed, mini-
mising the healthcare costs of unneces-
sary treatments and anticipating the
onslaught of diseases later in life.
Regular lifetime screenings could lead
to guidance for nutrition intake and
early detections of any illnesses [137].
In addition, drug-based treatments
could be tailored specifically to the
patient and disease, thus providing the
most effective course of medication
with minimal side-effects [138]. Given
the present rate of development, such
a scenario in healthcare appears to be
possible in the not too distant future.
Conclusions
With the current deluge of data,
computational methods have become
indispensable to biological investiga-
tions. Originally developed for the
analysis of biological sequences, bioin-
formatics now encompasses a wide
range of subject areas including struc-
tural biology, genomics and gene ex-
pression studies. In this review, we
provided an introduction and overview
of  the current state of field. In
particular, we discussed the types of
biological information and databases
that are commonly used, examined
some of the studies that are being
conducted – with reference to trans-
cription regulatory systems – and finally
looked at several practical applications
of the field.
Two principal approaches underpin
all studies in bioinformatics. First is
that of comparing and grouping the
data according to biologically meaning-
ful similarities and second, that of
analysing one type of data to infer and
understand the observations for another
type of data. These approaches are
reflected in the main aims of the field,
which are to understand and organise
the information associated with biolo-
gical molecules on a large scale. As a
result, bioinformatics has not only
provided greater depth to biological
investigations, but added the dimension
of breadth as well. In this way, we are
able to examine individual systems in
detail and also compare them with
those that are related in order to
uncover common principles that apply
across many systems and highlight
unusual features that are unique to
some.
Acknowledgements
We thank Patrick McGarvey for comments
on the manuscript.
References
1. Reichhardt T. It’s sink or swim as a tidal
wave of data approaches. Nature
1999;399(6736):517-20.
2. Benson DA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Lipman
DJ, Ostell J, Rapp BA, Wheeler DL.
GenBank. Nucleic Acids Res 2000;28
(1):15-8.
3. Bairoch A, Apweiler R. The SWISS-PROT
protein sequence database and its
supplement TrEMBL in 2000. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000;28(1):45-8.
4. Fleischmann RD, Adams MD, White O,
Clayton RA, Kirkness EF, Kerlavage AR,
et al. Whole-genome random sequencing
and assembly of Haemophilus influenzae
Rd. Science 1995;269 (5223):496-512.
5. Drowning in data. The Economist 26 June
1999.
6. Bernstein FC, Koetzle TF, Williams GJ,
Meyer EF, Jr., Brice MD, Rodgers JR, et al.
The Protein Data Bank. A computer-based
archival file for macromolecular structures.
Eur J Biochem 1977;80(2):319-24.
7. Berman HM, Westbrook J, Feng Z, Gilliland
G, Bhat TN, Weissig H, et al. The Protein
Data Bank. Nucleic Acids Res
2000;28(1):235-42.
8. Pearson WR, Lipman DJ. Improved tools
for biological sequence comparison. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1988;85(8):2444-2448.
9. Altschul SF, Madden TL, Schaffer AA,
Zhang J, Zhang Z, Miller W, et al. Gapped
BLAST and PSI-BLAST: a new generation
of protein database search programs. Nucleic
Acids Res. 1997;25(17):3389-3402.
10. Holstege FC JE, Wyrick JJ, Lee TI,
Hengartner CJ, Green MR, Golub TR,
Lander ES, Young RA. Dissecting the
regulatory circuitry of a eukaryotic genome.
Cell 1998;95(5):717-728.
11. Pedersendagger AG, Jensendagger LJ,
Brunak S, Staerfeldt HH, Ussery DW. A
DNA structural atlas for Escherichia coli. J
Mol Biol 2000;299(4):907-930.
12. Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: kyoto
encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000;28(1):27-30.
13. Jeffery CJ. Moonlighting proteins. TIBS
1999;24(1):8-11.
14. Chothia C. Proteins. One thousand families
for the molecular biologist [news]. Nature
1992;357(6379):543-4.
15. Orengo CA, Jones DT, Thornton JM.
Protein superfamilies and domain
superfolds. Nature 1994;372(6507):631-4.
16. Lesk AM, Chothia C. How different amino
acid sequences determine similar protein
structures: the structure and evolutionary
dynamics of the globins. J Mol Biol
1980;136(3):225-70.
17. Russell RB, Saqi MA, Sayle RA, Bates PA,
Sternberg MJ. Recognition of analogous
and homologous protein folds: analysis of
sequence and structure conservation. J Mol
Biol 1997;269(3):423-39.
18. Russell RB, Saqi MA, Bates PA, Sayle RA,
Sternberg MJ. Recognition of analogous
and homologous protein folds—assessment
of prediction success and associated
alignment accuracy using empirical
substitution matrices. Protein Eng
1998;11(1):1-9.
19. Fitch WM. Distinguishing homologous
from analogous proteins. Syst Zool
1970;19:99-110.
20. Tatusov RL, Koonin EV, Lipman DJ. A
genomic perspective on protein families.
Science 1997;278(5338):631-7.
21. Gerstein M, Hegyi H. Comparing genomes
in terms of protein structure: surveys of a
finite parts list. FEMS Microbiol Rev
1998;22(4):277-304.
22. Skolnick J, Fetrow JS. From genes to protein
Review Paper
97Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
structure and function: novel applications
of computational approaches in the genomic
era. TIBtech 2000;18:34-39.
23. McGarvey PB, Huang H, Barker WC,
Orcutt BC, Garavelli JS, Srinivasarao GY,
et al. PIR: a new resource for bioinformatics.
Bioinformatics 2000;16(3):290-291.
24. Bleasby AJ, Akrigg D, Attwood TK.
OWL—a non-redundant composite protein
sequence database. Nucleic Acids Res
1994;22(17):3574-3577.
25. Bleasby AJ, Wootton JC. Construction of
validated, non-redundant composite protein
sequence databases. Protein Eng
1990;3(3):153-159.
26. Hofmann K, Bucher P, Falquet L, Bairoch A.
The PROSITE database, its status in 1999.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999;27(1):215-219.
27. Attwood TK, Croning MD, Flower DR,
Lewis AP, Mabey JE, Scordis P, et al.
PRINTS-S: the database formerly known
as PRINTS. Nucleic Acids Res
2000;28(1):225-227.
28. Bateman A, Birney E, Durbin R, Eddy SR,
Howe KL, Sonnhammer EL. The Pfam
protein families database. Nucleic Acids
Res 2000;28(1):263-266.
29. Attwood TK, Flower DR, Lewis AP,
Mabey JE, Morgan SR, Scordis P, et al.
PRINTS prepares for the new millennium.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999;27(1):220-225.
30. Laskowski RA, Hutchinson EG, Michie
AD, Wallace AC, Jones ML, Thornton
JM. PDBsum: a Web-based database of
summaries and analyses of all PDB
structures. TIBS 1997;22(12):488-490.
31. Pearl FM, Lee D, Bray JE, Sillitoe I, Todd
AE, Harrison AP, et al. Assigning genomic
sequences to CATH. Nucleic Acids Res
2000;28(1):277-282.
32. Lo Conte L, Ailey B, Hubbard TJ, Brenner
SE, Murzin AG, Chothia C. SCOP: a
structural classification of proteins database.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000;28(1):257-259.
33. Holm L, Sander C. Touring protein fold
space with Dali/FSSP. Nucleic Acids Res
1998;26(1):316-319.
34. Berman HM, Olson WK, Beveridge DL,
Westbrook J, Gelbin A, Demeny T, et al.
The Nucleic Acid Database. A
comprehensive relational database of three-
dimensional structures of nucleic acids.
Biophys J 1992;63(3):751-759.
35. Vondrasek J, Wlodawer A. Database of
HIV proteinase structures. TIBS
1997;22(5):183.
36. Hendlich M. Databases for protein-ligand
complexes. Acta Cryst D 1998;54(1):1178-
1182.
37. Baker W, van den Broek A, Camon E,
Hingamp P, Sterk P, Stoesser G, et al. The
EMBL nucleotide sequence database.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000;28(1):19-23.
38. Okayama T, Tamura T, Gojobori T, Tateno
Y, Ikeo K, Miyazaki S, et al. Formal design
and implementation of an improved DDBJ
DNA database with a new schema and
object-oriented library. Bioinformatics
1998;14(6):472-8.
39. Schuler GD, Epstein JA, Ohkawa H, Kans
JA. Entrez: molecular biology database and
retrieval system. Methods Enzymol
1996;266:141-62.
40. Tatusova TA, Karsch-Mizrachi I, Ostell
JA. Complete genomes in WWW Entrez:
data representation and analysis.
Bioinformatics 1999;15(7-8):536-43.
41. Lin J, Gerstein M. Whole-genome trees
based on the occurrence of folds and
orthologs: implications for comparing
genomes on different levels. Genome Res
2000;10(6):808-18.
42. Eisen MB, Brown PO. DNA arrays for
analysis of gene expression. Methods
Enzymol 1999;303:179-205.
43. Cheung VG, Morley M, Aguilar F, Massimi
A, Kucherlapati R, Childs G. Making and
reading microarrays. Nat Genet 1999;21(1
Suppl):15-9.
44. Duggan DJ, Bittner M, Chen Y, Meltzer P,
Trent JM. Expression profiling using cDNA
microarrays. Nat Genet 1999;21(1
Suppl):10-4.
45. Lipshutz RJ FS, Gingeras TR, Lockhart
DJ. High density synthetic oligonucleotide
arrays. Nat Gen 1999;21(1):20-24.
46. Velculescu VE ZL, Zhou, W Traverso, G   St
Croix, B  Vogelstein B, Kinzler KW. Serial
Analysis of Gene Expression Detailed
Protocol. 1999.
47. Roth FP HJ, Estep PW, Church GM.
Finding DNA regulatory motifs within
unaligned noncoding sequences clustered
by whole-genome mRNA quantitation. Nat
Biotechnol 1998;16(10):939-45.
48. Jelinsky SA, Samson LD. Global response
of Saccharomyces cerevisiae to an alkylating
agent. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96(4):1486-91.
49. Cho RJ, Campbell MJ, Winzeler EA,
Steinmetz L, Conway A, Wodicka L, et al.
A genome-wide transcriptional analysis of
the mitotic cell cycle. Mol Cell
1998;2(1):65-73.
50. DeRisi JL, Iyer VR, Brown PO. Exploring
the metabolic and genetic control of gene
expression on a genomic scale. Science
1997;278(5338):680-6.
51. Winzeler EA, Shoemaker DD, Astromoff A,
Liang H, Anderson K, Andre B, et al.
Functional characterization of the S. cerevisiae
genome by gene deletion and parallel analysis.
Science 1999;285(5429):901-6.
52. Perou CM, Sorlie T, Eisen MB, van de Rijn
M, Jeffrey SS, Rees CA, et al. Molecular
portraits of human breast tumours. Nature
2000;406(6797):747-52.
53. Golub TR, Slonim DK, Tamayo P, Huard
C, Gaasenbeek M, Mesirov JP, et al.
Molecular classification of cancer: class
discovery and class prediction by gene
expression monitoring. Science 1999;286
(5439):531-7.
54. Celis JE, Gromov P. 2D protein
electrophoresis: can it be perfected? Curr
Opin Biotechnol 1999;10(1):16-21.
55. Pandey A, Mann M. Proteomics to study
genes and genomes. Nature 2000;405
(6788):837-46.
56. Futcher B, Latter GI, Monardo P,
McLaughlin CS, Garrels JI. A sampling of
the yeast proteome. Mol Cell Biol
1999;19(11):7357-68.
57. Gygi SP, Rist B, Gerber SA, Turecek F,
Gelb MH, Aebersold R. Quantitative
analysis of complex protein mixtures using
isotope-coded affinity tags. Nat Biotechnol
1999;17(10):994-9.
58. Gerstein M. Integrative database analysis
in structural genomics. Nature Struct Biol
2000;7:960-3.
59. Etzold T, Ulyanov A, Argos P. SRS:
information retrieval system for molecular
biology data banks. Methods Enzymol
1996;266:114-28.
60. Wade K. Searching Entrez PubMed and
uncover on the internet [news]. Aviat Space
Environ Med 2000;71(5):559.
61. Zhang MQ. Promoter analysis of co-
regulated genes in the yeast genome.
Comput Chem 1999;23(3-4):233-50.
62. Boguski MS. Biosequence exegesis. Science
1999;286(5439):453-5.
63. Miller C, Gurd J, Brass A. A RAPID
algorithm for sequence database
comparisons: application to the
identification of vector contamination in
the EMBL databases. Bioinformatics
1999;15(2):111-21.
64. Gonnet GH, Korostensky C, Benner S.
Evaluation measures of multiple sequence
alignments [In Process Citation]. J Comput
Biol 2000;7(1-2):261-76.
65. Orengo CA, Taylor WR. SSAP: sequential
structure alignment program for protein
structure comparison. Methods Enzymol
1996;266:617-35.
66. Orengo CA. CORA—topological
fingerprints for protein structural families.
Protein Sci 1999;8(4):699-715.
67. Russell RB, Sternberg MJ. Structure
prediction. How good are we? Curr Biol
1995;5(5):488-90.
68. Martin AC, Orengo CA, Hutchinson EG,
Jones S, Karmirantzou M, Laskowski RA,
et al. Protein folds and functions. Structure
1998;6(7):875-84.
69. Hegyi H, Gerstein M. The relationship
between protein structure and function: a
98
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
comprehensive survey with application to
the yeast genome. J Mol Biol 1999;288(1):
147-64.
70. Russell RB, Sasieni PD, Sternberg MJE.
Supersites within superfolds. Binding site
similarity in the absence of homology. J
Mol Biol 1998;282(4):903-18.
71. Wilson CA, Kreychman J, Gerstein M.
Assessing annotation transfer for genomics:
quantifying the relations between protein
sequence, structure and function through
traditional and probabilistic scores. J Mol
Biol 2000;297(1):233-49.
72. Harrison SC. A structural taxonomy of
DNA-binding domains. Nature
1991;353(6346):715-9.
73. Luscombe NM, Austin SE, Berman HM,
Thornton JM. An overview of the structures
of protein-DNA complexes. Genome
Biology 2000;1(1):1-37.
74. Jones S, van Heyningen P, Berman HM,
Thornton JM. Protein-DNA interactions:
A structural analysis. J Mol Biol
1999;287(5):877-96.
75. Suzuki M, Gerstein M. Binding geometry
of alpha-helices that recognize DNA.
Proteins 1995;23(4):525-35.
76. Luscombe NM, Thornton JM. Protein-
DNA interactions: a 3D analysis of alpha-
helix-binding in the major groove.
Manuscript in preparation.
77. Suzuki M, Brenner SE, Gerstein M, Yagi N.
DNA recognition code of transcription
factors. Protein Eng 1995;8(4):319-28.
78. Suzuki M. DNA recognition by a beta-
sheet. Protein Eng 1995;8(1):1-4.
79. Seeman NC, Rosenberg JM, Rich A.
Sequence specific recognition of double
helical nucleic acids by proteins. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1976;73:804-808.
80. Suzuki M. A framework for the DNA-
protein recognition code of the probe helix
in transcription factors: the chemical and
stereochemical rules [see comments].
Structure 1994;2(4):317-26.
81. Mandel-Gutfreund Y, Schueler O, Margalit
H. Comprehensive analysis of hydrogen
bonds in regulatory protein DNA-
complexes: in search of common principles.
J Mol Biol 1995;253(2):370-82.
82. Luscombe NM, Laskowski RA, Thornton
JM. Protein-DNA interactions: a 3D
analysis of amino acid-base interactions.
Manuscript in preparation.
83. Mandel-Gutfreund Y, Margalit H, Jernigan
RL, Zhurkin VB. A role for CH...O
interactions in protein-DNA recognition. J
Mol Biol 1998;277(5):1129-40.
84. Sternberg MJ, Gabb HA, Jackson RM.
Predictive docking of protein-protein and
protein-DNA complexes. Curr Opin Struct
Biol 1998;8(2):250-6.
85. Aloy P, Moont G, Gabb HA, Querol E,
Aviles FX, Sternberg MJ. Modelling
repressor proteins docking to DNA.
Proteins 1998;33(4):535-49.
86. Dickerson RE. DNA bending: the prevalence
of kinkiness and the virtues of normality.
Nucleic Acids Res 1998;26(8):1906-26.
87. Perez-Rueda E, Collado-Vides J. The
repertoire of DNA-binding transcriptional
regulators in Escherichia coli K-12. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000;28(8):1838-47.
88. Mewes HW, Frishman D, Gruber C, Geier
B, Haase D, Kaps A, et al. MIPS: a database
for genomes and protein sequences. Nucleic
Acids Res 2000;28(1):37-40.
89. Salgado H, Santos-Zavaleta A, Gama-
Castro S, Millan-Zarate D, Blattner FR,
Collado-Vides J. RegulonDB (version 3.0):
transcriptional regulation and operon
organization in Escherichia coli K-12.
Nucleic Acids Res 2000;28(1):65-7.
90. Wingender E, Chen X, Hehl R, Karas H,
Liebich I, Matys V, et al. TRANSFAC: an
integrated system for gene expression
regulation. Nucleic Acids Res
2000;28(1):316-9.
91. Teichmann SA, Chothia C, Gerstein M.
Advances in structural genomics. Curr Opin
Struct Biol 1999;9(3):390-9.
92. Aravind L, Koonin EV. DNA-binding
proteins and evolution of transcription
regulation in the archaea. Nucleic Acids Res
1999;27(23):4658-70.
93. Huynen MA, van Nimwegen E. The
frequency distribution of gene family sizes
in complete genomes. Mol Biol Evol
1998;15(5):583-9.
94. Luscombe NM, Thornton JM. Protein-
DNA interactions: an analysis of amino
acid conservation and the effect on binding
specificity. Manuscript in preparation.
95. Gelfand MS. Prediction of function in DNA
sequence analysis. J Comp Biol 1995;1:87-
115.
96. Robison K, McGuire AM, Church GM. A
comprehensive library of DNA-binding site
matrices for 55 proteins applied to the
complete Escherichia coli K-12 genome. J
Mol Biol 1998;284(2):241-54.
97. Thieffry D, Salgado H, Huerta AM, Collado-
Vides J. Prediction of transcriptional
regulatory sites in the complete genome
sequence of Escherichia coli K-12.
Bioinformatics 1998;14(5):391-400.
98. Mironov AA, Koonin EV, Roytberg MA,
Gelfand MS. Computer analysis of
transcription regulatory patterns in
completely sequenced bacterial genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res 1999;27(14):2981-9.
99. Gelfand MS, Koonin EV, Mironov AA.
Prediction of transcription regulatory sites
in Archaea by a comparative genomic
approach. Nucleic Acids Res 2000;28(3):
695-705.
100. McGuire AM, Hughes JD, Church GM.
Conservation of DNA regulatory motifs
and discovery of new motifs in microbial
genomes [In Process Citation]. Genome
Res 2000;10(6):744-57.
101. Bysani N, Daugherty JR, Cooper TG.
Saturation mutagenesis of the UASNTR
(GATAA) responsible for nitrogen
catabolite repression-sensitive
transcriptional activation of the allantoin
pathway genes in Saccharomyces
cerevisiae. J Bacteriol 1991;173
(16):4977-82.
102. Clarke ND, Berg JM. Zinc fingers in
Caenorhabditis elegans: finding families
and probing pathways. Science
1998;282(5396):2018-22.
103. van Helden J, Andre B, Collado-Vides J.
Extracting regulatory sites from the
upstream  region of yeast genes by
computational analysis of oligonucleotide
frequencies. J Mol Biol 1998;281(5):827-42.
104. Salgado H, Moreno-Hagelsieb G, Smith
TF, Collado-Vides J. Operons in
Escherichia coli: genomic analyses and
predictions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
2000;97(12):6652-7.
105. Tatusov RL, Mushegian AR, Bork P,
Brown NP, Hayes WS, Borodovsky M, et
al. Metabolism and evolution of Haemophilus
influenzae deduced from a whole- genome
comparison with Escherichia coli. Curr
Biol 1996;6(3):279-91.
106. Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein
D. Cluster analysis and display of genome-
wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 1998;95(25):14863-8.
107. Wen X, Fuhrman S, Michaels GS, Carr
DB, Smith S, Barker JL, et al. Large-scale
temporal gene expression mapping of
central nervous system development. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1998;95(1):334-9.
108. Alon U, Barkai N, Notterman DA, Gish K,
Ybarra S, Mack D, et al. Broad patterns of
gene expression revealed by clustering
analysis of tumor and normal colon tissues
probed by oligonucleotide arrays. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 1999;96(12):6745-50.
109. Tamayo P, Slonim D, Mesirov J, Zhu Q,
Kitareewan S, Dmitrovsky E, et al.
Interpreting patterns of gene expression
with self-organizing maps: methods and
application to hematopoietic differentia-
tion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96(6):2907-12.
110. Toronen P, Kolehmainen M, Wong G,
Castren E. Analysis of gene expression
data using self-organizing maps. FEBS
Lett 1999;451(2):142-6.
111. Tavazoie S, Hughes JD, Campbell MJ,
Cho RJ, Church GM. Systematic deter-
mination of genetic network architecture.
Nat Genet 1999;22(3):281-5.
Review Paper
99Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001
112. Jansen R, Gerstein M. Analysis of the
yeast transcriptome with structural and
functional categories: characterizing
highly expressed proteins. Nucleic Acids
Res 2000;28(6):1481-8.
113. Gerstein M, Jansen R. The current
excitment in bioinformatics, analysis of
whole-genome expression data: how does
it relate to protein structure and function.
Current Opinion in Structural Biology
2000;10:574-84.
114. Drawid A, Gerstein M. A Bayesian
System Integrating Expression Data with
Sequence Patterns for Localizing Proteins:
Comprehensive Application to the Yeast
Genome. J Mol Biol 2000;301:1059-75.
115. Drawid A, Jansen R, Gerstein M. Genom-
wide analysis relating expression level
with protein subcellular localisation.
TIGS 2000;16:426-30.
116. Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Ng HL, Rice
DW, Yeates TO, Eisenberg D. Detecting
protein function and protein-protein
interactions from genome sequences.
Science 1999;285(5428):751-3.
117. Eisenberg D, Marcotte EM, Xenarios I,
Yeates TO. Protein function in the post-
genomic era. Nature 2000;405
(6788):823-6.
118. Jansen R, Greenbaum D, Gerstein M.
Relating whole-genome expression data
with protein-protein interactions.
Manuscript in preparation.
119. Marx J. Medicine. DNA arrays reveal
cancer in its many forms. Science
2000;289(5485):1670-2.
120. Ross DT, Scherf U, Eisen MB, Perou
CM, Rees C, Spellman P, et al. Systematic
variation in gene expression patterns in
human cancer cell lines. Nat Genet
2000;24(3):227-35.
121. Perou CM, Jeffrey SS, van de Rijn M,
Rees CA, Eisen MB, Ross DT, et al.
Distinctive gene expression patterns in
human mammary epithelial cells and
breast cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
1999;96(16):9212-7.
122. Livesey FJ, Furukawa T, Steffen MA,
Church GM, Cepko CL. Microarray
analysis of the transcriptional network
controlled by the photoreceptor
homeobox gene Crx. Curr Biol
2000;10(6):301-10.
123. Sali A, Blundell TL. Comparative protein
modelling by satisfaction of spatial
restraints. J Mol Biol 1993;234(3):779-
815.
124. Jones DT, Taylor WR, Thornton JM. A
new approach to protein fold recognition.
Nature 1992;358(6381):86-9.
125. Kok K, Naylor SL, Buys CH. Deletions
of the short arm of chromosome 3 in solid
tumors and the search for suppressor
genes. Adv Cancer Res 1997;71:27-92.
126. Syngal S, Fox EA, Eng C, Kolodner RD,
Garber JE. Sensitivity and specificity of
clinical criteria for hereditary non-
polyposis colorectal cancer associated
mutations in MSH2 and MLH1. J Med
Gen 2000;37(9):641-645.
127. Uetz P, Giot L, Cagney G, Mansfield
TA, Judson RS, Knight JR, et al. A
comprehensive analysis of protein-protein
interactions in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Nature 2000;403(6770):623-7.
128. Ross-Macdonald P, Sheehan A, Friddle
C, Roeder GS, Snyder M. Transposon
mutagenesis for the analysis of protein
production, function, and localization.
Methods Enzymol 1999;303:512-32.
129. Mewes HW, Heumann K, Kaps A, Mayer
K, Pfeiffer F, Stocker S, et al. MIPS: a
database for genomes and protein
sequences. Nucleic Acids Res
1999;27(1):44-8.
130. Murray-Rust P. Bioinformatics and drug
discovery. Curr Opin Biotechnol
1994;5(6):648-53.
131. Friend SH. How DNA microarrays and
expression profiling will affect clinical
practice. BMJ 1999;319(7220):1306-7.
132. Tamayo P SD, Mesirov J, Zhu Q,
Kitareewan S, Dmitrovsky E, Lander ES,
Golub TR. Interpreting patterns of gene
expression with self-organizing maps:
methods and application to
hematopoietic differentiation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 1999;96(6):2907-12.
133. Perou CM JS, van de Rijn M, Rees CA,
Eisen MB, Ross DT, Pergamenschikov
A, Williams CF, Zhu SX, Lee JC, Lashkari
D, Shalon D, Brown PO, Botstein D.
Distinctive gene expression patterns in
human mammary epithelial cells and
breast cancers. Proc Natl Acad Sci
1999;96(16):9212-7.
134. Hiltunen MO, Niemi M, Yla-Herttuala S.
Functional genomics and DNA array
techniques in atherosclerosis research.
Curr Opin Lipidol 1999;10(6):515-9.
135. Colantuoni C, Purcell AE, Bouton CM,
Pevsner J. High throughput analysis of
gene expression in the human brain. J
Neurosci Res 2000;59(1):1-10.
136. Debouck C, Metcalf B. The impact of
genomics on drug discovery. Annu Rev
Pharmacol Toxicol 2000;40:193-207.
137. Sander C. Genomic medicine and the
future of health care. Science 2000;287
(5460):1977-8.
138. Ohlstein EH, Ruffolo RR, Jr., Elliott JD.
Drug discovery in the next millennium.
Annu Rev Pharmacol Toxicol
2000;40:177-91.
Address of the authors:
Nicholas M. Luscombe, Dov Greenbaum,
Mark Gerstein*
Department of Molecular Biophysics and
Biochemistry
Yale University
266 Whitney Avenue
PO Box 208 114
New Haven CT 06520-8114, USA
mark.gerstein@yale.edu
*corresponding author
100
 Review Paper
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2001

