Genome sequencing in microfabricated
high-density picolitre reactors
Marcel Margulies1*, Michael Egholm1*, William E. Altman1, Said Attiya1, Joel S. Bader1, Lisa A. Bemben1,
Jan Berka1, Michael S. Braverman1, Yi-Ju Chen1, Zhoutao Chen1, Scott B. Dewell1, Lei Du1, Joseph M. Fierro1,
Xavier V. Gomes1, Brian C. Godwin1, Wen He1, Scott Helgesen1, Chun He Ho1, Gerard P. Irzyk1,
Szilveszter C. Jando1, Maria L. I. Alenquer1, Thomas P. Jarvie1, Kshama B. Jirage1, Jong-Bum Kim1,
James R. Knight1, Janna R. Lanza1, John H. Leamon1, Steven M. Lefkowitz1, Ming Lei1, Jing Li1, Kenton L. Lohman1,
Hong Lu1, Vinod B. Makhijani1, Keith E. McDade1, Michael P. McKenna1, Eugene W. Myers2,
Elizabeth Nickerson1, John R. Nobile1, Ramona Plant1, Bernard P. Puc1, Michael T. Ronan1, George T. Roth1,
Gary J. Sarkis1, Jan Fredrik Simons1, John W. Simpson1, Maithreyan Srinivasan1, Karrie R. Tartaro1,
Alexander Tomasz3, Kari A. Vogt1, Greg A. Volkmer1, Shally H. Wang1, Yong Wang1, Michael P. Weiner4,
Pengguang Yu1, Richard F. Begley1 & Jonathan M. Rothberg1
The proliferation of large-scale DNA-sequencing projects in recent years has driven a search for alternative methods to
reduce time and cost. Here we describe a scalable, highly parallel sequencing system with raw throughput significantly
greater than that of state-of-the-art capillary electrophoresis instruments. The apparatus uses a novel fibre-optic slide of
individual wells and is able to sequence 25 million bases, at 99% or better accuracy, in one four-hour run. To achieve an
approximately 100-fold increase in throughput over current Sanger sequencing technology, we have developed an
emulsion method for DNA amplification and an instrument for sequencing by synthesis using a pyrosequencing protocol
optimized for solid support and picolitre-scale volumes. Here we show the utility, throughput, accuracy and robustness
of this system by shotgun sequencing and de novo assembly of the Mycoplasma genitalium genome with 96% coverage
at 99.96% accuracy in one run of the machine.
DNA sequencing has markedly changed the nature of biomedical
research and medicine. Reductions in the cost, complexity and time
required to sequence large amounts of DNA, including improve-
ments in the ability to sequence bacterial and eukaryotic genomes,
will have significant scientific, economic and cultural impact. Large-
scale sequencing projects, including whole-genome sequencing, have
usually required the cloning of DNA fragments into bacterial vectors,
amplification and purification of individual templates, followed by
Sanger sequencing1 using fluorescent chain-terminating nucleotide
analogues2 and either slab gel or capillary electrophoresis. Current
estimates put the cost of sequencing a human genome between $10
million and $25 million3. Alternative sequencing methods have been
described4–8; however, no technology has displaced the use of
bacterial vectors and Sanger sequencing as the main generators of
sequence information.
Here we describe an integrated systemwhose throughput routinely
enables applications requiring millions of bases of sequence infor-
mation, including whole-genome sequencing. Our focus has been on
the co-development of an emulsion-based method9–11 to isolate and
amplify DNA fragments in vitro, and of a fabricated substrate and
instrument that performs pyrophosphate-based sequencing (pyro-
sequencing5,12) in picolitre-sized wells.
In a typical run we generate over 25 million bases with a Phred
quality score of 20 or better (predicted to have an accuracy of 99% or
higher). Although this Phred 20 quality throughput is significantly
higher than that of Sanger sequencing by capillary electrophoresis, it
is currently at the cost of substantially shorter reads and lower
average individual read accuracy. Sanger-based capillary electrophor-
esis sequencing systems produce up to 700 bases of sequence
information from each of 96 DNA templates at an average read
accuracy of 99.4% in 1 h, or 67,000 bases per hour, with substantially
all of the bases having Phred 20 or better quality23. We further
characterize the performance of the system and demonstrate that it
is possible to assemble bacterial genomes de novo from relatively
short reads by sequencing a known bacterial genome, Mycoplasma
genitalium (580,069 bases), and comparing our shotgun sequencing
and de novo assembly with the results originally obtained for this
genome13. The results of shotgun sequencing and de novo assembly of
a larger bacterial genome, that of Streptococcus pneumoniae14
(2.1megabases (Mb)), are presented in Supplementary Table 4.
Emulsion-based sample preparation
We generate random libraries of DNA fragments by shearing an
entire genome and isolating single DNA molecules by limiting
dilution (Supplementary Methods). Specifically, we randomly frag-
ment the entire genome, add specialized common adapters to the
fragments, capture the individual fragments on their own beads and,
within the droplets of an emulsion, clonally amplify the individual
fragment (Fig. 1a, b). Unlike in current sequencing technology, our
approach does not require subcloning in bacteria or the handling of
ARTICLES
1454 Life Sciences Corp., 20 Commercial Street, Branford, Connecticut 06405, USA. 2University of California, Berkeley, California 94720, USA. 3Laboratory of Microbiology,
The Rockefeller University, New York, New York 10021, USA. 4The Rothberg Institute for Childhood Diseases, 530 Whitfield Street, Guilford, Connecticut 06437, USA.
*These authors contributed equally to this work.
doi:10.1038/nature03959
1
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 
individual clones; the templates are handled in bulk within the
emulsions9–11.
Sequencing in fabricated picolitre-sized reaction vessels
We perform sequencing by synthesis simultaneously in open wells of
a fibre-optic slide using a modified pyrosequencing protocol that is
designed to take advantage of the small scale of the wells. The fibre-
optic slides are manufactured by slicing of a fibre-optic block that is
obtained by repeated drawing and fusing of optic fibres. At each
iteration, the diameters of the individual fibres decrease as they are
hexagonally packed into bundles of increasing cross-sectional sizes.
Each fibre-optic core is 44 mm in diameter and surrounded by
2–3 mm of cladding; etching of each core creates reaction wells
approximately 55 mm in depth with a centre-to-centre distance of
50 mm (Fig. 1c), resulting in a calculated well size of 75 pl and a well
density of 480wellsmm22. The slide, containing approximately 1.6
million wells15, is loaded with beads and mounted in a flow chamber
designed to create a 300-mm high channel, above the well openings,
through which the sequencing reagents flow (Fig. 2a, b). The
unetched base of the slide is in optical contact with a second fibre-
optic imaging bundle bonded to a charge-coupled device (CCD)
sensor, allowing the capture of emitted photons from the bottom of
each individual well (Fig. 2c; see also Supplementary Methods).
We developed a three-bead system, and optimized the components
to achieve high efficiency on solid support. The combination of
picolitre-sized wells, enzyme loading uniformity allowed by the small
beads and enhanced solid support chemistry enabled us to develop a
method that extends the useful read length of sequencing-by-syn-
thesis to 100 bases (Supplementary Methods).
In the flow chamber cyclically delivered reagents flow perpendi-
cularly to the wells. This configuration allows simultaneous exten-
sion reactions on template-carrying beads within the open wells and
relies on convective and diffusive transport to control the addition or
removal of reagents and by-products. The timescale for diffusion into
and out of the wells is on the order of 10 s in the current configuration
and is dependent on well depth and flow channel height. The
timescales for the signal-generating enzymatic reactions are on the
order of 0.02–1.5 s (Supplementary Methods). The current reaction
is dominated by mass transport effects, and improvements based on
faster delivery of reagents are possible. Well depth was selected on the
basis of a number of competing requirements: (1) wells need to be
deep enough for theDNA-carrying beads to remain in the wells in the
presence of convective transport past the wells; (2) they must be
sufficiently deep to provide adequate isolation against diffusion of
by-products from a well in which incorporation is taking place to a
well where no incorporation is occurring; and (3) they must be
shallow enough to allow rapid diffusion of nucleotides into the wells
and rapid washing out of remaining nucleotides at the end of each
flow cycle to enable high sequencing throughput and reduced reagent
use. After the flow of each nucleotide, a wash containing apyrase is
used to ensure that nucleotides do not remain in any well before the
next nucleotide being introduced.
Base calling of individual reads
Nucleotide incorporation is detected by the associated release of
inorganic pyrophosphate and the generation of photons5,12. Wells
containing template-carrying beads are identified by detecting a
known four-nucleotide ‘key’ sequence at the beginning of the read
Figure 1 | Sample preparation. a, Genomic DNA is isolated, fragmented,
ligated to adapters and separated into single strands (top left). Fragments are
bound to beads under conditions that favour one fragment per bead, the
beads are captured in the droplets of a PCR-reaction-mixture-in-oil
emulsion and PCR amplification occurs within each droplet, resulting in
beads each carrying tenmillion copies of a uniqueDNA template (top right).
The emulsion is broken, the DNA strands are denatured, and beads carrying
single-stranded DNA clones are deposited into wells of a fibre-optic slide
(bottom right). Smaller beads carrying immobilized enzymes required for
pyrophosphate sequencing are deposited into each well (bottom left).
b, Microscope photograph of emulsion showing droplets containing a bead
and empty droplets. The thin arrow points to a 28-mm bead; the thick arrow
points to an approximately 100-mm droplet. c, Scanning electron
micrograph of a portion of a fibre-optic slide, showing fibre-optic cladding
and wells before bead deposition.
Figure 2 | Sequencing instrument. The sequencing instrument consists of
the following major subsystems: a fluidic assembly (a), a flow chamber that
includes the well-containing fibre-optic slide (b), a CCD camera-based
imaging assembly (c), and a computer that provides the necessary user
interface and instrument control.
ARTICLES NATURE
2
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 
(Supplementary Methods). Raw signals are background-subtracted,
normalized and corrected. The normalized signal intensity at each
nucleotide flow, for a particular well, indicates the number of
nucleotides, if any, that were incorporated. This linearity in signal
is preserved to at least homopolymers of length eight (Supplemen-
tary Fig. 6). In sequencing by synthesis a very small number of
templates on each bead lose synchronism (that is, either get ahead of,
or fall behind, all other templates in sequence16). The effect is
primarily due to leftover nucleotides in a well (creating ‘carry
forward’) or to incomplete extension. Typically, we observe a carry
forward rate of 1–2% and an incomplete extension rate of 0.1–0.3%.
Correction of these shifts is essential because the loss of synchronism
is a cumulative effect that degrades the quality of sequencing at
longer read lengths.We have developed algorithms, based on detailed
models of the underlying physical phenomena, that allow us to
determine, and correct for, the amounts of carry forward and
incomplete extension occurring in individual wells (Supplementary
Methods). Figure 3 shows the processed result, a 113-bases-long read
generated in the M. genitalium run discussed below. To assess
sequencing performance and the effectiveness of the correction
algorithms, independently of artefacts introduced during the emul-
sion-based sample preparation, we created test fragments with
difficult-to-sequence stretches of identical bases of increasing length
(homopolymers) (Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Fig.
4). Using these test fragments, we have verified that at the individual
read level we achieve base call accuracy of approximately 99.4%, at
read lengths in excess of 100 bases (Table 1).
High-quality reads and consensus accuracy
Before base calling or aligning reads, we select high-quality reads
without relying on a priori knowledge of the genome or template
being sequenced (Supplementary Methods). This selection is based
on the observation that poor-quality reads have a high proportion of
signals that do not allow a clear distinction between a flow during
which no nucleotide was incorporated and a flow during which one
or more nucleotide was incorporated. When base calling individual
reads, errors can occur because of signals that have ambiguous values
(Supplementary Fig. 5). To improve the usability of our reads, we also
developed a metric that allows us to estimate ab initio the quality (or
probability of correct base call) of each base of a read, analogous to
the Phred score17 used by current Sanger sequencers (Supplementary
Methods and Supplementary Fig. 8).
Higher quality sequence can be achieved by taking advantage of
the high over sampling that our system affords and building a
consensus sequence. Sequences are aligned to one another using
the signal strengths at each nucleotide flow, rather than individual
base calls, to determine optimal alignment (Supplementary
Methods). The corresponding signals are then averaged, after
which base calling is performed. This approach greatly improves
the accuracy of the sequence (Supplementary Fig. 7) and provides an
estimate of the quality of the consensus base. We refer to that quality
measure as the Z-score—it is a measure of the spread of signals in all
the reads at one location and the distance between the average signal
and the closest base-calling threshold value. In both re-sequencing
and de novo sequencing, as the minimum Z-score is raised the
consensus accuracy increases, while coverage decreases; approxi-
mately half of the excluded bases, as the Z-score is increased, belong
to homopolymers of length four and larger. Sanger sequencers
usually require a depth of coverage at any base of three or more in
order to achieve a consensus accuracy of 99.99%. To achieve a
minimum of threefold coverage of 95% of the unique portions of a
typical genome requires approximately seven- to eightfold over
sampling. Owing to our higher error rate, we have observed that
comparable consensus accuracies, over a similar fraction of a gen-
ome, are achieved with a depth of coverage of four or more, requiring
approximately ten to twelve times over sampling.
Mycoplasma genitalium
Mycoplasma genomic DNA was fragmented and prepared into a
sequencing library as described above. (This was accomplished by a
single individual in 4 h.) After emulsion polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and bead deposition onto a 60 £ 60mm2 fibre-optic slide, a
process which took one individual 6 h, 42 cycles of four nucleotides
were flowed through the sequencing system in an automated 4-h run
of the instrument. The results are summarized in Table 2. In order to
measure the quality of individual reads, we aligned each high quality
read to the reference genome at 70% stringency using flow-space
mapping and criteria similar to those used previously in assessing the
accuracy of other base callers17. When assessing sequencing quality,
only reads that mapped to unique locations in the reference genome
were included. Because this process excludes repeat regions (parts of
the genome for which corresponding flowgrams are 70% similar to
one another), the selected reads did not cover the genome comple-
tely. Figure 4a illustrates the distribution of read lengths for this run.
The average read length was 110 bases, the resulting over sample 40-
fold, and 84,011 reads (27.4%) were perfect. Figure 4b summarizes
the average error as a function of base position. Coverage of non-
repeat regions was consistent with the sample preparation and
emulsion not being biased (Supplementary Fig. 8). At the individual
read level, we observe an insertion and deletion error rate of
approximately 3.3%; substitution errors have a much lower rate,
on the order of 0.5%. When using these reads without any Z-score
restriction, we covered 99.94% of the genome in ten contiguous
regions with a consensus accuracy of 99.97%. The error rate in
homopolymers is significantly reduced in the consensus sequence
(Supplementary Fig. 7). Of the bases not covered by this consensus
Figure 3 | Flowgram of a 113-bases read from an M. genitalium
run. Nucleotides are flowed in the order T, A, C, G. The sequence is shown
above the flowgram. The signal value intervals corresponding to the various
homopolymers are indicated on the right. The first four bases (in red, above
the flowgram) constitute the ‘key’ sequence, used to identify wells containing
a DNA-carrying bead.
Table 1 | Summary of sequencing statistics for test fragments
Size of fibre-optic slide 60 £ 60mm2
Run time/number of cycles 243min/42
Test fragment reads 497,893
Average read length (bases) 108
Number of bases in test fragments 53,705,267
Bases with a Phred score of 20 and above 47,181,792
Individual read insertion error rate 0.44%
Individual read deletion error rate 0.15%
Individual read substitution error rate 0.004%
All errors 0.60%
NATURE ARTICLES
3
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 
sequence (366 bases), all belonged to excluded repeat regions. Setting
a minimum Z-score equal to 4, coverage was reduced to 98.1% of the
genome, while consensus accuracy increased to 99.996%. We further
demonstrated the reproducibility of the system by repeating the
whole-genome sequencing of M. genitalium an additional eight
times, achieving a 40-fold coverage of the genome in each of the
eight separate instrument runs (Supplementary Table 3).
We assembled the M. genitalium reads from a single run into 25
contigs with an average length of 22.4 kb. One of these contigs was
misassembled due to a collapsed tandem repeat region of 60 bases,
and was corrected by hand. The original sequencing ofM. genitalium
resulted in 28 contigs before directed sequencing used for finishing
the sequence13. Our assembly covered 96.54% of the genome and
attained a consensus accuracy of 99.96%. Non-resolvable repeat
regions amount to 3% of the genome: we therefore covered 99.5%
of the unique portions of the genome. Sixteen of the breaks between
contigs were due to non-resolvable repeat regions, two were due to
missed overlapping reads (our read filter and trimmer are not perfect
and the algorithms we use to perform the pattern matching of
flowgrams occasionally miss valid overlaps) and the remainder to
thin read coverage. Setting a minimum Z-score of 4, coverage was
reduced to 95.27% of the genome (98.2% of the resolvable part of the
genome) with the consensus accuracy increasing to 99.994%.
Discussion
We have demonstrated the simultaneous acquisition of hundreds of
thousands of sequence reads, 80–120 bases long, at 96% average
accuracy in a single run of the instrument using a newly developed in
vitro sample preparation methodology and sequencing technology.
With Phred 20 as a cutoff, we show that our instrument is able to
produce over 47 million bases from test fragments and 25 million
bases from genomic libraries. We used test fragments to de-couple
our sample preparation methodology from our sequencing technol-
ogy. The decrease in single-read accuracy from 99.4% for test
fragments to 96% for genomic libraries is primarily due to a lack
of clonality in a fraction of the genomic templates in the emulsion,
and is not an inherent limitation of the sequencing technology. Most
of the remaining errors result from a broadening of signal distri-
butions, particularly for large homopolymers (seven or more),
leading to ambiguous base calls. Recent work on the sequencing
chemistry and algorithms that correct for crosstalk between wells
suggests that the signal distributions will narrow, with an attendant
reduction in errors and increase in read lengths. In preliminary
experiments with genomic libraries that also include improvements
in the emulsion protocol, we are able to achieve, using 84 cycles, read
lengths of 200 bases with accuracies similar to those demonstrated
here for 100 bases. On occasion, at 168 cycles, we have generated
individual reads that are 100% accurate over greater then 400 bases.
UsingM. genitalium we demonstrate that short fragments a priori
do not prohibit the de novo assembly of bacterial genomes. In fact, the
larger over sampling afforded by the throughput of our system
resulted in a draft sequence having fewer contigs than with Sanger
reads, with substantially less effort. By taking advantage of the over
sampling, consensus accuracies greater then 99.96% were achieved
for this genome. Further quality filtering of the assembly results in
the selection of a consensus sequence with accuracy exceeding
99.99% while incurring only a minor loss of genome coverage.
Comparable results were seen when we shotgun sequenced and de
novo assembled the 2.1-Mb genome of Streptococcus pneumoniae14
(Supplementary Table 4). The de novo assembly of genomes more
complex than bacteria, including mammalian genomes, may require
the development of methods similar to those developed for Sanger
sequencing, to prepare and sequence paired end libraries that can
span repeats in these genome. To facilitate the use of paired end
libraries we have developed methods to sequence, in an individual
well, from both ends of genomic template, and plan to add paired end
read capabilities to our assembler (Supplementary Methods).
Future increases in throughput, and a concomitant reduction in
cost per base, may come from the continued miniaturization of the
fibre-optic reactors, allowing more sequence to be produced per unit
area—a scaling characteristic similar to that which enabled the
Table 2 | Summary statistics for M. genitalium
Sequencing summary
Number of instrument runs 1
Size of fibre-optic slide 60 £ 60mm2
Run time/number of cycles 243min/42
High quality reads 306,178
Average read length (bases) 110
Number of bases in high quality reads 33,655,553
Bases with a Phred score of 20 and above 26,753,540
Re-sequencing
Reads mapped to single locations 238,066
Number of bases in mapped reads 27,687,747
Individual read insertion error rate 1.67%
Individual read deletion error rate 1.60%
Individual read substitution error rate 0.68%
Re-sequencing consensus
Average over sampling £ 40
Coverage, all (Z $ 4) 99.9% (98.2%)
Consensus accuracy, all (Z $ 4) 99.97% (99.996%)
Consensus insertion error rate, all (Z $ 4) 0.02% (0.003%)
Consensus deletion error rate, all (Z $ 4) 0.01% (0.002%)
Consensus substitution error rate, all (Z $ 4) 0.001% (0.0003%)
Number of contigs 10
De novo assembly
Coverage, all (Z $ 4) 96.54% (95.27%)
Consensus accuracy, all (Z $ 4) 99.96% (99.994%)
Number of contigs 25
Average contig size (kb) 22.4
The individual read error rates are referenced to the total number of bases in mapped reads.
Figure 4 | M. genitalium data. a, Read length distribution for the 306,178
high-quality reads of the M. genitalium sequencing run. This distribution
reflects the base composition of individual sequencing templates. b, Average
read accuracy, at the single read level, as a function of base position for the
238,066 mapped reads of the same run.
ARTICLES NATURE
4
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 
prediction of significant improvements in the integrated circuit at the
start of its development cycle18.
METHODS
Emulsion-based clonal amplification. The simultaneous amplification of frag-
ments is achieved by isolating individual DNA-carrying beads in separate,100-
mm aqueous droplets (on the order of 2 £ 106ml21) made through the creation
of a PCR-reaction-mixture-in-oil emulsion. (Fig. 1b; see also Supplementary
Methods). The droplets act as separate microreactors in which parallel DNA
amplifications are performed, yielding approximately 107 copies of a template
per bead; 800ml of emulsion containing 1.5 million beads are prepared in a
standard 2-ml tube. Each emulsion is aliquoted into eight PCR tubes for
amplification. After PCR, the emulsion is broken to release the beads, which
include beads with amplified, immobilized DNA template and empty beads
(Supplementary Methods). We then enrich for template-carrying beads (Sup-
plementary Methods). Typically, about 30% of the beads will have DNA,
producing 450,000 template-carrying beads per emulsion reaction. The number
of emulsions prepared depends on the size of the genome and the expected
number of runs required to achieve adequate over sampling. The 580-kb M.
genitalium genome, sequenced on one 60 £ 60mm2 fibre-optic slide, required
1.6ml of emulsion. A human genome, over sampled ten times, would require
approximately 3,000ml of emulsion.
Bead loading into picolitre wells. The enriched template-carrying beads are
deposited by centrifugation into openwells (Fig. 1c), arranged along one face of a
60 £ 60mm2 fibre-optic slide. The beads (diameter,28 mm) are sized to ensure
that no more than one bead fits in most wells (we observed that 2–5% of filled
wells contain more than one bead). Loading 450,000 beads (from one emulsion
preparation) onto each half of a 60 £ 60mm2 plate was experimentally found to
limit bead occupancy to approximately 35% of all wells, thereby reducing
chemical and optical crosstalk between wells. A mixture of smaller beads that
carry immobilized ATP sulphurylase and luciferase necessary to generate light
from free pyrophosphate are also loaded into the wells to create the individual
sequencing reactors (Supplementary Methods).
Image capture. A bead carrying 10 million copies of a template yields
approximately 10,000 photons at the CCD sensor, per incorporated nucleotide.
The generated light is transmitted through the base of the fibre-optic slide and
detected by a large format CCD (4,095 £ 4,096 pixels). The images are processed
to yield sequence information simultaneously for all wells containing template-
carrying beads. The imaging system was designed to accommodate a large
number of small wells and the large number of optical signals being generated
from individual wells during each nucleotide flow. Once mounted, the fibre-
optic slide’s position does not shift; this makes it possible for the image analysis
software to determine the location of each well (whether or not it contains a
DNA-carrying bead), based on light generation during the flow of a pyropho-
sphate solution, which precedes each sequencing run. A single well is imaged by
approximately nine 15 mm pixels. For each nucleotide flow, the light intensities
collected by the pixels covering a particular well are summed to generate a signal
for that particular well at that particular nucleotide flow. Each image captured by
the CCD produces 32 megabytes of data. In order to perform all of the necessary
signal processing in real time, the control computer is fitted with an accessory
board (Supplementary Methods), hosting a 6 million gate Field Programmable
Gate Array (FPGA)19,20.
De novo shotgun sequence assembler. A de novo flow-space assembler was
developed to capture all of the information contained in the original flow-based
signal trace. It also addresses the fact that existing assemblers are not optimized
for 80–120-bases reads, particularly with respect tomemory management due to
the increased number of sequencing reads needed to achieve equivalent genome
coverage. (A completely random genome covered with 100-bases reads requires
approximately 50%more reads to yield the same number of contiguous regions
(contigs) as achieved with 700-bases reads, assuming the need for a 30-bases
overlap between reads21.) This assembler consists of a series of modules: the
Overlapper, which finds and creates overlaps between reads; the Unitigger, which
constructs larger contigs of overlapping sequence reads; and the Multialigner,
which generates consensus calls and quality scores for the bases within each
contig (SupplementaryMethods). (The names of the softwaremodules are based
on those performing related functions in other assemblers developed pre-
viously22.)
Received 6 May; accepted 10 June 2005.
Published online 31 July 2005.
1. Sanger, F., Nicklen, S. & Coulson, A. R. DNA sequencing with chain-terminating
inhibitors. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 74, 5463–-5467 (1977).
2. Prober, J. M. et al. A system for rapid DNA sequencing with fluorescent chain-
terminating dideoxynucleotides. Science 238, 336–-341 (1987).
3. NIH News Release. NHGRI seeks next generation of sequencing technologies.
14 October 2004 khttp://www.genome.gov/12513210l.
4. Nyren, P., Pettersson, B. & Uhlen, M. Solid phase DNA minisequencing by an
enzymatic luminometric inorganic pyrophosphate detection assay. Anal.
Biochem. 208, 171–-175 (1993).
5. Ronaghi, M. et al. Real-time DNA sequencing using detection of pyrophosphate
release. Anal. Biochem. 242, 84–-89 (1996).
6. Jacobson, K. B. et al. Applications of mass spectrometry to DNA sequencing.
GATA 8, 223–-229 (1991).
7. Bains, W. & Smith, G. C. A novel method for nucleic acid sequence
determination. J. Theor. Biol. 135, 303–-307 (1988).
8. Jett, J. H. et al. High-speed DNA sequencing: an approach based upon
fluorescence detection of single molecules. Biomol. Struct. Dynam. 7, 301–-309
(1989).
9. Tawfik, D. S. & Griffiths, A. D. Man-made cell-like compartments for molecular
evolution. Nature Biotechnol. 16, 652–-656 (1998).
10. Ghadessy, F. J., Ong, J. L. & Holliger, P. Directed evolution of polymerase
function by compartmentalized self-replication. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 98,
4552–-4557 (2001).
11. Dressman, D., Yan, H., Traverso, G., Kinzler, K. W. & Vogelstein, B.
Transforming single DNA molecules into fluorescent magnetic particles for
detection and enumeration of genetic variations. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 100,
8817–-8822 (2003).
12. Ronaghi, M., Uhlen, M. & Nyren, P. A sequencing method based on real-time
pyrophosphate. Science 281, 363–-365 (1998).
13. Fraser, C. M. et al. The minimal gene complement of Mycoplasma genitalium.
Science 270, 397–-403 (1995).
14. Tettelin, H. et al. Complete genome sequence of a virulent isolate of
Streptococcus pneumoniae. Science 293, 498–-506 (2001).
15. Leamon, J. H. et al. A massively parallel PicoTiterPlate based platform for
discrete picoliter-scale polymerase chain reactions. Electrophoresis 24,
3769–-3777 (2003).
16. Ronaghi, M. Pyrosequencing sheds light on DNA sequencing. Genome Res. 11,
3–-11 (2001).
17. Ewing, B., Hillier, L., Wendl, M. C. & Green, P. Base-calling of automated
sequencer traces using phred. I. Accuracy assessment. Genome Res. 8, 175–-185
(1998).
18. Moore, G. E. Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Electronics
38(8) (1965).
19. Mehta, K., Rajesh, V. A. & Veeraswamy, S. FPGA implementation of VXIbus
interface hardware. Biomed. Sci. Instrum. 29, 507–-513 (1993).
20. Fagin, B., Watt, J. G. & Gross, R. A special-purpose processor for gene
sequence analysis. Comput. Appl. Biosci. 9, 221–-226 (1993).
21. Lander, E. S. & Waterman, M. S. Genomic mapping by fingerprinting random
clones: a mathematical analysis. Genomics 2, 231–-239 (1988).
22. Myers, E. W. Toward simplifying and accurately formulating fragment
assembly. J Comput. Biol. 2, 275–-290 (1995).
23. Ogawa, T. et al. Increased Productivity For Core Labs Using One Polymer and One
Array Length for Multiple Applications. Poster P108-T. ABRF ’05: Biomolecular
Technologies: Discovery to Hypotheses (Savannah, Georgia, 5–-8 February
2005); also available as Applied Biosystems 3730x/DNA Analyzer
Specification Sheet (2004).
Supplementary Information is linked to the online version of the paper at
www.nature.com/nature.
Acknowledgements We acknowledge P. Dacey and the support of the
Operations groups of 454 Life Sciences. This research was supported in part by
the US Department of Health and Human Services under NIH grants.
Author Information Sequences for M. genitalium and S. pneumoniae are
deposited at DDBJ/EMBL/GenBank under accession numbers AAGX01000000
and AAGY01000000, respectively. Reprints and permissions information is
available at npg.nature.com/reprintsandpermissions. The authors declare
competing financial interests: details accompany the paper on
www.nature.com/nature. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to J.M.R. (jrothberg@454.com).
NATURE ARTICLES
5
© 2005 Nature Publishing Group 
 

