Over the past four years, there has been a fundamental 
shift away from the application of automated Sanger 
sequencing for genome analysis. Prior to this depar-
ture, the automated Sanger method had dominated the 
industry for almost two decades and led to a number of 
monumental accomplishments, including the comple-
tion of the only finished-grade human genome sequence1. 
Despite many technical improvements during this era, 
the limitations of automated Sanger sequencing showed 
a need for new and improved technologies for sequenc-
ing large numbers of human genomes. Recent efforts 
have been directed towards the development of new 
methods, leaving Sanger sequencing with fewer reported 
advances. As such, automated Sanger sequencing is not 
covered here, and interested readers are directed to 
previous articles2,3.
The automated Sanger method is considered as 
a ‘first-generation’ technology, and newer methods 
are referred to as next-generation sequencing (NGS). 
These newer technologies constitute various strategies 
that rely on a combination of template preparation, 
sequencing and imaging, and genome alignment and 
assembly methods. The arrival of NGS technologies in 
the marketplace has changed the way we think about 
scientific approaches in basic, applied and clinical 
research. In some respects, the potential of NGS is akin 
to the early days of PCR, with one’s imagination being 
the primary limitation to its use. The major advance 
offered by NGS is the ability to produce an enormous 
volume of data cheaply — in some cases in excess of 
one billion short reads per instrument run. This feature 
expands the realm of experimentation beyond just 
determining the order of bases. For example, in 
gene-expression studies microarrays are now being 
replaced by seq-based methods, which can identify and 
quantify rare transcripts without prior knowledge of a 
particular gene and can provide information regarding 
alternative splicing and sequence variation in identified 
genes4,5. The ability to sequence the whole genome of 
many related organisms has allowed large-scale com-
parative and evolutionary studies to be performed that 
were unimaginable just a few years ago. The broadest 
application of NGS may be the resequencing of human 
genomes to enhance our understanding of how genetic 
differences affect health and disease. The variety of 
NGS features makes it likely that multiple platforms 
will coexist in the marketplace, with some having clear 
advantages for particular applications over others.
This Review focuses on commercially available tech-
nologies from Roche/454, Illumina/Solexa, Life/APG 
and Helicos BioSciences, the Polonator instrument and 
the near-term technology of Pacific Biosciences, who 
aim to bring their sequencing device to the market in 
2010. Nanopore sequencing is not covered, although 
interested readers are directed to an article by Branton 
and colleagues6, who describe the advances and remain-
ing challenges for this technology. Here, I present a tech-
nical review of template preparation, sequencing and 
imaging, genome alignment and assembly, and current 
NGS platform performance to provide guidance on how 
these technologies work and how they may be applied 
to important biological questions. I highlight the appli-
cations of human genome resequencing using targeted 
and whole-genome approaches, and discuss the progress 
*Human Genome Sequencing 
Center and Department of 
Molecular & Human 
Genetics, Baylor College of 
Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, 
N1409, Houston, Texas 
77030, USA.
‡LaserGen, Inc., 8052 El Rio 
Street, Houston, Texas 
77054, USA.
e‑mail: mmetzker@bcm.edu
doi:10.1038/nrg2626
Published online  
8 December 2009
Automated Sanger 
sequencing
This process involves a mixture 
of techniques: bacterial 
cloning or PCR; template 
purification; labelling of DNA 
fragments using the chain 
termination method with 
energy transfer, dye-labelled 
dideoxynucleotides and a 
DNA polymerase; capillary 
electrophoresis; and 
fluorescence detection that 
provides four-colour plots to 
reveal the DNA sequence.
Sequencing technologies —  
the next generation
Michael L. Metzker*‡
Abstract | Demand has never been greater for revolutionary technologies that deliver 
fast, inexpensive and accurate genome information. This challenge has catalysed the 
development of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies. The inexpensive 
production of large volumes of sequence data is the primary advantage over conventional 
methods. Here, I present a technical review of template preparation, sequencing and 
imaging, genome alignment and assembly approaches, and recent advances in current 
and near-term commercially available NGS instruments. I also outline the broad range of 
applications for NGS technologies, in addition to providing guidelines for platform 
selection to address biological questions of interest.
 a p p l i c at i o n s  o f  n e x t- g e n e r at i o n  s e q u e n c i n g
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 31
Finished grade
A quality measure for a 
sequenced genome. A 
finished-grade genome, 
commonly referred to as a 
‘finished genome’, is of higher 
quality than a draft-grade 
genome, with more base 
coverage and fewer errors and 
gaps (for example, the human 
genome reference contains 
2.85 Gb, covers 99% of the 
genome with 341 gaps, and 
has an error rate of 1 in every 
100,000 bp).
Template
This recombinant DNA 
molecule is made up of a 
known region, usually a vector 
or adaptor sequence to which 
a universal primer can bind, 
and the target sequence, which 
is typically an unknown portion 
to be sequenced.
Seq-based methods
Assays that use 
next-generation sequencing 
technologies. They include 
methods for determining the 
sequence content and 
abundance of mRNAs, 
non-coding RNAs and small 
RNAs (collectively called 
RNA–seq) and methods for 
measuring genome-wide 
profiles of immunoprecipitated 
DNA–protein complexes 
(ChIP–seq), methylation  
sites (methyl–seq) and  
DNase I hypersensitivity  
sites (DNase–seq).
Polonator
This Review mostly describes 
technology platforms that are 
associated with a respective 
company, but the Polonator 
G.007 instrument, which is 
manufactured and distributed 
by Danaher Motions (a Dover 
Company), is an open source 
platform with freely available 
software and protocols. Users 
manufacture their own reagents 
based on published reports or 
by collaborating with George 
Church and colleagues or other 
technology developers.
Fragment templates
A fragment library is prepared 
by randomly shearing genomic 
DNA into small sizes of <1kb, 
and requires less DNA than 
would be needed for a 
mate-pair library.
and limitations of these methods, as well as upcoming 
advances and the impact they are expected to have over 
the next few years.
next-generation sequencing technologies
Sequencing technologies include a number of methods 
that are grouped broadly as template preparation, 
sequencing and imaging, and data analysis. The unique 
combination of specific protocols distinguishes one 
technology from another and determines the type of 
data produced from each platform. These differences 
in data output present challenges when comparing plat-
forms based on data quality and cost. Although qual-
ity scores and accuracy estimates are provided by each 
manufacturer, there is no consensus that a ‘quality base’ 
from one platform is equivalent to that from another 
platform. various sequencing metrics are discussed later 
in the article.
In the following sections, stages of template prepara-
tion and sequencing and imaging are discussed as they 
apply to existing and near-term commercial platforms. 
There are two methods used in preparing templates 
for NGS reactions: clonally amplified templates origi-
nating from single DNA molecules, and single DNA-
molecule templates. The term sequencing by synthesis, 
which is used to describe numerous DNA polymer-
ase-dependent methods in the literature, is not used 
in this article because it fails to delineate the different 
mechanisms involved in sequencing2,7. Instead, these 
methods are classified as cyclic reversible termination 
(CRT), single-nucleotide addition (SNA) and real-time 
sequencing. Sequencing by ligation (SBL), an approach 
in which DNA polymerase is replaced by DNA ligase, 
is also described. Imaging methods coupled with these 
sequencing strategies range from measuring biolumines-
cent signals to four-colour imaging of single molecular 
events. The voluminous data produced by these NGS 
platforms place substantial demands on informa-
tion technology in terms of data storage, tracking and 
quality control (see Ref. 8 for details).
template preparation
The need for robust methods that produce a representative, 
non-biased source of nucleic acid material from the 
genome under investigation cannot be overemphasized. 
Current methods generally involve randomly breaking 
genomic DNA into smaller sizes from which either frag-
ment templates or mate-pair templates are created. A com-
mon theme among NGS technologies is that the template 
is attached or immobilized to a solid surface or support. 
The immobilization of spatially separated template sites 
allows thousands to billions of sequencing reactions to 
be performed simultaneously.
Clonally amplified templates. most imaging systems have 
not been designed to detect single fluorescent events, so 
amplified templates are required. The two most common 
methods are emulsion PCR (emPCR)9 and solid-phase 
amplification10. emPCR is used to prepare sequencing 
templates in a cell-free system, which has the advantage 
of avoiding the arbitrary loss of genomic sequences — a 
problem that is inherent in bacterial cloning methods. A 
library of fragment or mate-pair targets is created, and 
adaptors containing universal priming sites are ligated to 
the target ends, allowing complex genomes to be ampli-
fied with common PCR primers. After ligation, the 
DNA is separated into single strands and captured onto 
beads under conditions that favour one DNA molecule 
per bead (fIG. 1a). After the successful amplification and 
enrichment of emPCR beads, millions can be immobi-
lized in a polyacrylamide gel on a standard microscope 
slide (Polonator)11, chemically crosslinked to an amino-
coated glass surface (Life/APG; Polonator)12 or deposited 
into individual PicoTiterPlate (PTP) wells (Roche/454)13 
in which the NGS chemistry can be performed.
Solid-phase amplification can also be used to produce 
randomly distributed, clonally amplified clusters from 
fragment or mate-pair templates on a glass slide (fIG. 1b). 
High-density forward and reverse primers are covalently 
attached to the slide, and the ratio of the primers to the 
template on the support defines the surface density of 
the amplified clusters. Solid-phase amplification can 
produce 100–200 million spatially separated template 
clusters (Illumina/Solexa), providing free ends to which 
a universal sequencing primer can be hybridized to 
initiate the NGS reaction.
Single-molecule templates. Although clonally amplified 
methods offer certain advantages over bacterial cloning, 
some of the protocols are cumbersome to implement 
and require a large amount of genomic DNA material 
(3–20 μg). The preparation of single-molecule tem-
plates is more straightforward and requires less start-
ing material (<1 μg). more importantly, these methods 
do not require PCR, which creates mutations in clon-
ally amplified templates that masquerade as sequence 
variants. AT-rich and GC-rich target sequences may 
also show amplification bias in product yield, which 
results in their underrepresentation in genome align-
ments and assemblies. Quantitative applications, such as 
RNA–seq5, perform more effectively with non-amplified 
template sources, which do not alter the representational 
abundance of mRNA molecules.
Before the NGS reaction is carried out, single- 
molecule templates are usually immobilized on solid sup-
ports using one of at least three different approaches. In 
the first approach, spatially distributed individual primer 
molecules are covalently attached to the solid support14. 
The template, which is prepared by randomly fragment-
ing the starting material into small sizes (for example, 
~200–250 bp) and adding common adaptors to the frag-
ment ends, is then hybridized to the immobilized primer 
(fIG. 1c). In the second approach, spatially distributed sin-
gle-molecule templates are covalently attached to the solid 
support14 by priming and extending single-stranded, sin-
gle-molecule templates from immobilized primers (fIG. 1c). 
A common primer is then hybridized to the template 
(fIG. 1d). In either approach, DNA polymerase can bind 
to the immobilized primed template configuration to 
initiate the NGS reaction. Both of the above approaches 
are used by Helicos BioSciences. In a third approach, 
spatially distributed single polymerase molecules 
R E V I E W S
32 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
Nature Reviews | Genetics
PCR 
amplification
Template 
dissociation
Break
emulsion
Sample preparation
DNA (5 µg)
Template 
dNTPs
and 
polymerase
Cluster 
growth
100–200 million molecular clusters
Bridge amplification
a  Roche/454, Life/APG, Polonator
Billions of primed, single-molecule templates
b  Illumina/Solexa c  Helicos BioSciences: one-pass sequencing
d  Helicos BioSciences: two-pass sequencing e  Pacific Biosciences, Life/Visigen, LI-COR Biosciences
100–200 million beads
Primer, template, 
dNTPs and polymerase
Chemically cross-
linked to a glass slide
Thousands of primed, single-molecule templatesBillions of primed, single-molecule templates
Emulsion PCR
One DNA molecule per bead. Clonal amplification to thousands of copies occurs in microreactors in an emulsion
Solid-phase amplification 
One DNA molecule per cluster
Single molecule: primer immobilized
Single molecule: template immobilized Single molecule: polymerase immobilized
Figure 1 | template immobilization strategies. In emulsion PCR (emPCR) (a), a reaction mixture consisting of  
an oil–aqueous emulsion is created to encapsulate bead–DNA complexes into single aqueous droplets. PCR 
amplification is performed within these droplets to create beads containing several thousand copies of the same 
template sequence. EmPCR beads can be chemically attached to a glass slide or deposited into PicoTiterPlate  
wells (fIG. 3c). Solid-phase amplification (b) is composed of two basic steps: initial priming and extending of the 
single-stranded, single-molecule template, and bridge amplification of the immobilized template with immediately 
adjacent primers to form clusters. Three approaches are shown for immobilizing single-molecule templates to a solid 
support: immobilization by a primer (c); immobilization by a template (d); and immobilization of a polymerase (e).  
dNTP, 2′-deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate.
Mate-pair templates
A genomic library is prepared 
by circularizing sheared DNA 
that has been selected for a 
given size, such as 2 kb, 
therefore bringing the ends 
that were previously distant 
from one another into close 
proximity. Cutting these circles 
into linear DNA fragments 
creates mate-pair templates.
are attached to the solid support15, to which a primed 
template molecule is bound (fIG. 1e). This approach is 
used by Pacific Biosciences15 and is described in patents 
from Life/visiGen16 and LI-COR Biosciences17. Larger 
DNA molecules (up to tens of thousands of base pairs) 
can be used with this technique and, unlike the first two 
approaches, the third approach can be used with real-time 
methods, resulting in potentially longer read lengths.
sequencing and imaging
There are fundamental differences in sequencing 
clonally amplified and single-molecule templates. Clonal 
amplification results in a population of identical tem-
plates, each of which has undergone the sequencing 
reaction. upon imaging, the observed signal is a con-
sensus of the nucleotides or probes added to the iden-
tical templates for a given cycle. This places a greater 
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 33
Dephasing
This occurs with step-wise 
addition methods when 
growing primers move out of 
synchronicity for any given 
cycle. Lagging strands (for 
example, n – 1 from the 
expected cycle) result from 
incomplete extension, and 
leading strands (for example, 
n + 1) result from the addition 
of multiple nucleotides or 
probes in a population of 
identical templates.
Dark nucleotides or probes
A nucleotide or probe that 
does not contain a fluorescent 
label. It can be generated from 
its cleavage and carry-over 
from the previous cycle or be 
hydrolysed in situ from its 
dye-labelled counterpart in  
the current cycle.
Total internal reflection 
fluorescence
A total internal reflection 
fluorescence imaging device 
produces an evanescent  
wave — that is, a near-field 
stationary excitation wave with 
an intensity that decreases 
exponentially away from the 
surface. This wave propagates 
across a boundary surface, 
such as a glass slide, resulting 
in the excitation of fluorescent 
molecules near (<200 nm) or 
at the surface and the 
subsequent collection of their 
emission signals by a detector.
Libraries of mutant DNA 
polymerases
Large numbers of genetically 
engineered DNA polymerases 
can be created by either 
site-directed or random 
mutagenesis, which leads  
to one or more amino acid 
substitutions, insertions and/or 
deletions in the polymerase. 
The goal of this approach is  
to incorporate modified 
nucleotides more efficiently 
during the sequencing reaction.
Consensus reads
These are only useful for 
single-molecule techniques and 
are produced by sequencing 
the same template molecule 
more than once. The data are 
then aligned to produce a 
‘consensus read’, reducing 
stochastic errors that may 
occur in a given sequence read.
demand on the efficiency of the addition process, and 
incomplete extension of the template ensemble results 
in lagging-strand dephasing. The addition of multiple 
nucleotides or probes can also occur in a given cycle, 
resulting in leading-strand dephasing. Signal dephas-
ing increases fluorescence noise, causing base-calling 
errors and shorter reads18. Because dephasing is not an 
issue with single-molecule templates, the requirement 
for cycle efficiency is relaxed. Single molecules, however, 
are susceptible to multiple nucleotide or probe additions 
in any given cycle. Here, deletion errors will occur owing 
to quenching effects between adjacent dye molecules or 
no signal will be detected because of the incorporation 
of dark nucleotides or probes. In the following sections, 
sequencing and imaging strategies that use both clonally 
amplified and single-molecule templates are discussed.
Cyclic reversible termination. As the name implies, CRT 
uses reversible terminators in a cyclic method that com-
prises nucleotide incorporation, fluorescence imaging 
and cleavage2. In the first step, a DNA polymerase, bound 
to the primed template, adds or incorporates just one flu-
orescently modified nucleotide (BOX 1), which represents 
the complement of the template base. The termination of 
DNA synthesis after the addition of a single nucleotide is 
an important feature of CRT. Following incorporation, 
the remaining unincorporated nucleotides are washed 
away. Imaging is then performed to determine the iden-
tity of the incorporated nucleotide. This is followed by 
a cleavage step, which removes the terminating/inhibit-
ing group and the fluorescent dye. Additional washing 
is performed before starting the next incorporation step. 
fIG. 2a depicts a four-colour CRT cycle used by Illumina/
Solexa, and fIG. 2c illustrates a one-colour CRT cycle 
used by Helicos BioSciences.
The key to the CRT method is the reversible ter-
minator, of which there are two types: 3′ blocked and 
3′ unblocked (BOX 1). The use of a dideoxynucleotide, 
which acts as a chain terminator in Sanger sequenc-
ing, provided the basis for the initial development 
of reversible blocking groups attached to the 3′ end of 
nucleotides19,20. Blocking groups, such as 3′-O-allyl-
2′-deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs)21 and 
3′-O-azidomethyl-dNTPs22, have been successfully used 
in CRT. 3′-blocked terminators require the cleavage of 
two chemical bonds to remove the fluorophore from the 
nucleobase and restore the 3′-OH group.
Currently, the Illumina/Solexa Genome Analyzer 
(GA)23 dominates the NGS market. It uses the clonally 
amplified template method illustrated in fIG. 1b, coupled 
with the four-colour CRT method illustrated in fIG. 2a. 
The four colours are detected by total internal reflection 
fluorescence (TIRF) imaging using two lasers, the output 
of which is depicted in fIG. 2b. The slide is partitioned 
into eight channels, which allows independent sam-
ples to be run simultaneously. TABLe 1 shows the cur-
rent sequencing statistics of the Illumina/Solexa GAII 
platform operating at the Baylor College of medicine 
Human Genome Sequencing Center (BCm-HGSC; 
D. muzny, personal communication). Substitutions are 
the most common error type, with a higher portion of 
errors occurring when the previous incorporated 
nucleotide is a ‘G’ base24. Genome analysis of Illumina/
Solexa data has revealed an underrepresentation of 
AT-rich24–26 and GC-rich regions25,26, which is probably 
due to amplification bias during template preparation25. 
Sequence variants are called by aligning reads to a refer-
ence genome using bioinformatics tools such as mAQ27 
or eLAND23. Bentley and colleagues reported high con-
cordance (>99.5%) of single-nucleotide variant (SNv)28 
calls with standard genotyping arrays using both align-
ment tools, and a false-positive rate of 2.5% with novel 
SNvs23. Other reports have described a higher false- 
positive rate associated with novel SNv detection using these 
alignment tools29,30.
The difficulty involved in identifying a modified 
enzyme that efficiently incorporates 3′-blocked termi-
nators — a process that entails screening large libraries 
of mutant DNA polymerases — has spurred the develop-
ment of 3′-unblocked reversible terminators. LaserGen, 
Inc. was the first group to show that a small terminating 
group attached to the base of a 3′-unblocked nucleotide 
can act as an effective reversible terminator and be effi-
ciently incorporated by wild-type DNA polymerases31. 
This led to the development of Lightning Terminators32 
(BOX 1). Helicos BioSciences has reported the develop-
ment of virtual Terminators, which are 3′-unblocked 
terminators with a second nucleoside analogue that 
acts as an inhibitor33. The challenge for 3′-unblocked 
terminators is creating the appropriate modifications 
to the terminating (Lightning Terminators)32 or inhib-
iting (virtual Terminators)33 groups so that DNA syn-
thesis is terminated after a single base addition. This 
is important because an unblocked 3′-OH group is the 
natural substrate for incorporating the next incoming 
nucleotide. Cleavage of only a single bond is required 
to remove both the terminating or inhibiting group and 
the fluorophore group from the nucleobase, which is a 
more efficient strategy than 3′-blocked terminators for 
restoring the nucleotide for the next CRT cycle.
Helicos BioSciences was the first group to commer-
cialize a single-molecule sequencer, the HeliScope, which 
was based on the work of Quake and colleagues34. The 
HeliScope uses the single-molecule template methods 
shown in fIG. 1c and fIG. 1d coupled with the one-colour 
(Cy5 dye) CRT method shown in fIG. 2c. Incorporation 
of a nucleotide results in a fluorescent signal. The 
HeliScope also uses TIRF to image the Cy5 dye34, the 
imaging output of which is shown in fIG. 2d. Harris and 
colleagues14 used Cy5-12ss-dNTPs, which are earlier ver-
sions of their virtual Terminators that lack the inhibiting 
group, and reported that deletion errors in homopoly-
meric repeat regions were the most common error type 
(~5% frequency) when using the primer-immobilized 
strategy shown in fIG. 1c. This is likely to be related 
to the incorporation of two or more Cy5-12ss-dNTPs 
in a given cycle. These errors can be greatly reduced 
with two-pass sequencing, which provides ~25-base 
consensus reads using the template-immobilized strat-
egy shown in fIG. 1d. At the 2009 Advances in Genome 
Biology and Technology (AGBT) meeting, the Helicos 
group reported their recent progress in sequencing the 
R E V I E W S
34 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
Box 1 | Modified nucleotides used in next-generation sequencing methods
At the core of most 
next-generation sequencing 
(NGS) methods is the use of 
dye-labelled modified nucleotides. Ideally, these nucleotides are 
incorporated specifically, cleaved efficiently during or following 
fluorescence imaging, and extended as modified or natural bases 
in ensuing cycles. In the figure, red chemical structures denote 
terminating functional groups, except in the Helicos BioSciences 
structure, which is characterized by an inhibitory function33. 
Arrows indicate the site of cleavage separating the fluorophore 
from the nucleotide, and the blue chemical structures denote 
residual linker structures or molecular scars that are attached to 
the base and accumulate with subsequent cycles. DNA synthesis 
is terminated by reversible terminators following the 
incorporation of one modified nucleotide by DNA polymerase. 
Two types of reversible terminators have been described: 
3′-blocked terminators, which contain a cleavable group 
attached to the 3′-oxygen of the 2′-deoxyribose sugar, and 
3′-unblocked terminators.
Several blocking groups have been described  
(see the figure, part a), including 3′-O-allyl19,21,101  
(Ju & colleagues, who exclusively licensed their 
technology to Intelligent Bio-Systems) and 3′-O-
azidomethyl22,23,101 (Illumina/Solexa). The blocking 
group attached to the 3′ end causes a bias against 
incorporation with DNA polymerase. Mutagenesis of DNA polymerase is required to facilitate 
the incorporation of 3′-blocked terminators.
3′-unblocked reversible terminators (part b) show more favourable enzymatic incorporation 
and, in some cases, can be incorporated as well as a natural nucleotide using wild-type DNA 
polymerases31. Other groups, including Church and colleagues102 and Turcatti and colleagues103, 
have described 3′-unblocked terminators that rely on steric hindrance of the bulky dye group to 
inhibit incorporation after the addition of the first nucleotide.
With real-time nucleotides (part c), the fluorophore is attached to the terminal phosphate 
group (Life/VisiGen16 and Pacific Biosciences15) rather than the nucleobase, which also reduces 
bias against incorporation with DNA polymerase. In addition to labelling the terminal phosphate 
group, LI-COR Biosciences’ nucleotides attach a quencher molecule to the base17. Gamma- 
labelled 2′-deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs) were first described in 1979 by Yarbrough 
et al.104, and more recently, Kumar et al. described their terminally labelled polyphosphate 
nucleotides105. With the exception of LI-COR Biosciences’ nucleotides, which leave the quencher 
group attached, natural bases are incorporated into the growing primer strand.
Nature Reviews | Genetics
O
O
O
N
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
HO
O–O –O O–O O
O
O
O
HN
N
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
HO
O–O –O O–O O
O
OH
O
HN
N
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
HO
O–O –O O–O O
O
OH
O
HN
N
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
HO
O–O –O O–O O
O
OH
O
HN
N
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
H
N
O–O –O O–O O
O
OH
O
HN
N
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
O
O–O –O O–O O
O
OH
O
HN
N
O
O
P
O
P
O
P
H
N
O–O –O O–O O
NH
O
O
HN
O
N3
Fluor
NHO
O
O
O
NH
N3
O
O
Fluor Fluor
Fluor
Quchr
Fluor
Fluor
O
NO2
H
N
O
N
H
S
S
O HN O
NH
O
O
OHO
HN N
O
O
P
HO O–
O
N
H
O
Fluor
S
S
N
H
O
H
N
O
5
P
O
P
O
P
O
–O O–O O–O O
NH
O
Phospholinked nucleotides
(Pacific Biosciences)
Virtual Terminator
(Helicos BioSciences)
Life/VisiGen
Lightning Terminator
(LaserGen, Inc.)
LI-COR Biosciences
c   Real-time nucleotides
b  3′-unblocked reversible terminatorsa  3′-blocked reversible terminators
HN Illumina/Solexa
HN
Ju et al.
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 35
Nature Reviews | Genetics
C
C C
C
Each cycle, 
add a 
different
dye-labelled 
dNTP
G
C
T
A
G
G
G
G
A
G
C T
A
F
C
C
C
C
GC
G
GC
G
GC
G
a  Illumina/Solexa — Reversible terminators
Incorporate 
all four 
nucleotides, 
each label 
with a 
different dye
Repeat cycles Repeat cycles
TGC
TGC
TGC
G CA
TGC
G CA
TGC
G CA
TGC
F
F
F F
FF
F
F F F F F F
F
F F
F
FF
F
F
F
F F
F
F
F
F
F
F
FF
F F F
Cleave dye
and terminating
groups, wash
Cleave dye
and inhibiting
groups, cap,
wash
Wash, four-
colour imaging
Wash, one-
colour imaging
C
G
A
T
T A G
C T A G
CTAGTG
c  Helicos BioSciences — Reversible terminators
b
Incorporate 
single, 
dye-labelled 
nucleotides
C
d
Bottom:
Top:
CATCGTTop:
Bottom: CCCCCC
CAGCTA
Figure 2 | Four-colour and one-colour cyclic reversible termination methods. a | The four-colour cyclic reversible 
termination (CRT) method uses Illumina/Solexa’s 3′-O-azidomethyl reversible terminator chemistry23,101 (BOX 1) using 
solid-phase-amplified template clusters (fIG. 1b, shown as single templates for illustrative purposes). Following 
imaging, a cleavage step removes the fluorescent dyes and regenerates the 3′-OH group using the reducing agent 
tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP)23. b | The four-colour images highlight the sequencing data from two clonally 
amplified templates. c | Unlike Illumina/Solexa’s terminators, the Helicos Virtual Terminators33 are labelled with the 
same dye and dispensed individually in a predetermined order, analogous to a single-nucleotide addition method. 
Following total internal reflection fluorescence imaging, a cleavage step removes the fluorescent dye and inhibitory 
groups using TCEP to permit the addition of the next Cy5-2′-deoxyribonucleoside triphosphate (dNTP) analogue. The 
free sulphhydryl groups are then capped with iodoacetamide before the next nucleotide addition33 (step not shown). 
d | The one-colour images highlight the sequencing data from two single-molecule templates.One-base-encoded probe
An oligonucleotide sequence in 
which one interrogation base is 
associated with a particular  
dye (for example, A in the first 
position corresponds to a green 
dye). An example of a one-base 
degenerate probe set is 
‘1-probes’, which indicates  
that the first nucleotide is the 
interrogation base. The 
remaining bases consist of 
either degenerate (four possible 
bases) or universal bases.
Caenorhabditis elegans genome. From a single HeliScope 
run using only 7 of the instrument’s 50 channels, approx-
imately 2.8 Gb of high-quality data were generated in 
8 days from >25-base consensus reads with 0, 1 or 2 
errors. Greater than 99% coverage of the genome was 
reported, and for regions that showed >5-fold coverage, 
the consensus accuracy was 99.999% (j. w. efcavitch, 
personal communication).
Sequencing by ligation. SBL is another cyclic method 
that differs from CRT in its use of DNA ligase35 and 
either one-base-encoded probes or two-base-encoded 
probes. In its simplest form, a fluorescently labelled 
probe hybridizes to its complementary sequence adja-
cent to the primed template. DNA ligase is then added 
to join the dye-labelled probe to the primer. Non-ligated 
probes are washed away, followed by fluorescence 
R E V I E W S
36 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
Table 1 | comparison of next-generation sequencing platforms
Platform Library/
template 
preparation
nGs 
chemistry
Read 
length 
(bases)
Run 
time 
(days)
Gb 
per 
run
Machine 
cost 
(Us$)
Pros cons Biological 
applications
Refs
Roche/454’s 
GS FLX 
Titanium
Frag, MP/
emPCR
PS 330* 0.35 0.45 500,000 Longer reads 
improve 
mapping in 
repetitive 
regions; fast 
run times
High reagent 
cost; high 
error rates  
in homo- 
polymer 
repeats
Bacterial and insect 
genome de novo 
assemblies; medium 
scale (<3 Mb) exome 
capture; 16S in 
metagenomics
D. Muzny, 
pers. 
comm.
Illumina/ 
Solexa’s GA
II
Frag, MP/
solid-phase
RTs 75 or 
100
4‡, 9§ 18‡, 
35§
540,000 Currently the 
most widely 
used platform 
in the field
Low 
multiplexing 
capability of 
samples
Variant discovery 
by whole-genome 
resequencing or 
whole-exome capture; 
gene discovery in 
metagenomics
D. Muzny, 
pers. 
comm.
Life/APG’s 
SOLiD 3
Frag, MP/
emPCR
Cleavable 
probe SBL 
50 7‡, 14§ 30‡, 
50§
595,000 Two-base 
encoding 
provides 
inherent error 
correction
Long run 
times
Variant discovery 
by whole-genome 
resequencing or 
whole-exome capture; 
gene discovery in 
metagenomics
D. Muzny, 
pers. 
comm.
Polonator 
G.007
MP only/
emPCR
Non- 
cleavable 
probe SBL 
26 5§ 12§ 170,000 Least 
expensive 
platform; 
open source 
to adapt 
alternative 
NGS 
chemistries
Users are 
required to 
maintain 
and quality 
control 
reagents; 
shortest NGS 
read lengths
Bacterial genome 
resequencing for 
variant discovery
J. 
Edwards, 
pers. 
comm.
Helicos 
BioSciences 
HeliScope
Frag, MP/
single 
molecule
RTs 32* 8‡ 37‡ 999,000 Non-bias 
representation 
of templates 
for genome 
and seq-based 
applications
High error 
rates 
compared 
with other 
reversible 
terminator 
chemistries
Seq-based methods 91
Pacific 
Biosciences 
(target 
release: 
2010)
Frag only/
single 
molecule
Real-time 964* N/A N/A N/A Has the 
greatest 
potential 
for reads 
exceeding 
1 kb
Highest 
error rates 
compared 
with other 
NGS 
chemistries
Full-length 
transcriptome 
sequencing; 
complements other 
resequencing efforts 
in discovering large 
structural variants and 
haplotype blocks
S. Turner, 
pers. 
comm.
*Average read-lengths. ‡Fragment run. §Mate-pair run. Frag, fragment; GA, Genome Analyzer; GS, Genome Sequencer; MP, mate-pair; N/A, not available;  
NGS, next-generation sequencing; PS, pyrosequencing; RT, reversible terminator; SBL, sequencing by ligation; SOLiD, support oligonucleotide ligation detection.
Two-base-encoded probe
An oligonucleotide sequence 
in which two interrogation 
bases are associated with a 
particular dye (for example, 
AA, CC, GG and TT are coded 
with a blue dye). ‘1,2-probes’ 
indicates that the first and 
second nucleotides are the 
interrogation bases. The 
remaining bases consist  
of either degenerate or 
universal bases.
imaging to determine the identity of the ligated probe36. 
The cycle can be repeated either by using cleavable 
probes to remove the fluorescent dye and regenerate 
a 5′-PO4 group for subsequent ligation cycles (fIG. 3a) 
or by removing and hybridizing a new primer to the 
template (not shown in the figure).
Shendure and colleagues11 used the SBL method to 
sequence the Escherichia coli mG1655 genome. mate-
pair templates were prepared with four priming sites 
(named A1 to A4) and were amplified by emPCR (fIG. 1a). 
A number of one-base-encoded probes, 1-probes to 
7-probes, were used. In the first SBL cycle, the A1 primer 
was annealed to the template, followed by the hybridiza-
tion and ligation of 1-probes, four-colour imaging and 
removal of the entire primer–probe strand from the 
solid-phase-bound template. The SBL cycle was then 
repeated with the A1 primer but using 2-probes, and 
then with the A1 primer but using 3-probes, and so 
on. The other three primers, A2, A3 and A4, were then 
cycled in an analogous manner to yield six (A2 and A4) 
and seven (A1 and A3) base reads (albeit discontiguous) 
from each genomic end, making a total of 26 base reads 
per mate-pair template. From two instrument runs, the 
authors reported the production of approximately 48 
million high-quality bases, which mapped to about 70% 
of the E. coli genome11. This SBL method is being used 
on the Polonator instrument.
Life/APG has commercialized their SBL platform 
called support oligonucleotide ligation detection 
(SOLiD)37. The method uses two-base-encoded probes, 
which has the primary advantage of improved accuracy 
in colour calling and SNv calling, the latter of which 
requires an adjacent valid colour change. Colour space 
is a unique feature of the SOLiD system. A primer is 
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 37
Nature Reviews | Genetics
ATP
Light and oxyluciferin
C
C
C
C
C C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
Flow of single dNTP type across PTP wells
Luciferin
PPi
APS
Polymerase
dNTP
A GCT
5-mer
4-mer
3-mer
2-mer
1-mer
6-mer
0
2
1
3
4
5
6
7
A
C
G
T
A C G T
1s
t 
ba
se
Two-base encoding: each target 
nucleotide is interrogated twice
Template 
sequence2nd base
SNP
3′
Cleavage agent
P
3′
3′
3′
–1Universal seq 
primer (n –  1)
21 3 4 5 6 7… (n cycles)
GC
CG
CA
GT
TT
AA
GT
CA
CT
GA
TT
AA
AT
TA
AA CT GC TG AT CC CG
T GA CG AC TA GG GC
AT
TA
Reset primer (n – 1), repeat ligation cycles 
Reset primer three more times
1 base shift
3′
3′
P1 adapter
POH
+ Ligase
Universal seq primer (n) AT
TA
1,2-probes
xynnnzzz3′ 5′
xynnnzzz3′ 5′
xynnnzzz3′ 5′
xynnnzzz3′ 5′
Primer round 2
Ligation cycleRepeat ligation cycles
Interrogation bases
Degenerate bases
Universal bases
Target sequence
Excite
Fluorescence, 
four-colour imaging
Primer round 1
Alignment of colour-space reads to 
colour-space reference genome TCAGGTTTTTTAACAATCAACTTTTTGGATTAAAATGTAGATAACTG
CATAAATTAATAACATCACATTAGTCTGATCAGTGAATTTAT
b d Flowgram
TCGGATTCAGCCTGCTGCTCTATCA
A
AT
CG
GC
TA
AC
CA
GT
TG
AA
CC
GG
TT
GA
TC
AG
CT
x, y
n
z
1–2 million template beads loaded into PTP wells
Sulphurylase
Luciferase
Roche/454 — PyrosequencingLife/APG — Sequencing by ligation
ca
Figure 3 | next-generation sequencing technologies that use emulsion 
PcR. a | A four-colour sequencing by ligation method using Life/APG’s 
support oligonucleotide ligation detection (SOLiD) platform is shown. 
Upon the annealing of a universal primer, a library of 1,2-probes is added. 
Unlike polymerization, the ligation of a probe to the primer can be 
performed bi-directionally from either its 5′-PO
4
 or 3′-OH end. Appropriate 
conditions enable the selective hybridization and ligation of probes to 
complementary positions. Following four-colour imaging, the ligated 
1,2-probes are chemically cleaved with silver ions to generate a 5′-PO
4
 
group. The SOLiD cycle is repeated nine more times. The extended primer 
is then stripped and four more ligation rounds are performed, each with 
ten ligation cycles. The 1,2-probes are designed to interrogate the first (x) 
and second (y) positions adjacent to the hybridized primer, such that the 
16 dinucleotides are encoded by four dyes (coloured stars). The probes also 
contain inosine bases (z) to reduce the complexity of the 1,2-probe library 
and a phosphorothiolate linkage between the fifth and six nucleotides of 
the probe sequence, which is cleaved with silver ions106. Other cleavable 
probe designs include RNA nucleotides107,108 and internucleosidic 
phosphoramidates107, which are cleaved by ribonucleases and acid, 
respectively. b | A two-base encoding scheme in which four dinucleotide 
sequences are associated with one colour (for example, AA, CC, GG and TT 
are coded with a blue dye). Each template base is interrogated twice and 
compiled into a string of colour-space data bits. The colour-space reads are 
aligned to a colour-space reference sequence to decode the DNA 
sequence. c | Pyrosequencing using Roche/454’s Titanium platform. 
Following loading of the DNA-amplified beads into individual PicoTiterPlate 
(PTP) wells, additional beads, coupled with sulphurylase and luciferase, are 
added. In this example, a single type of 2′-deoxyribonucleoside 
triphosphate (dNTP) — cytosine — is shown flowing across the PTP wells. 
The fibre-optic slide is mounted in a flow chamber, enabling the delivery of 
sequencing reagents to the bead-packed wells. The underneath of the 
fibre-optic slide is directly attached to a high-resolution charge-coupled 
device (CCD) camera, which allows detection of the light generated from 
each PTP well undergoing the pyrosequencing reaction. d | The light 
generated by the enzymatic cascade is recorded as a series of peaks called 
a flowgram. PP
i
, inorganic pyrophosphate.
R E V I E W S
38 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
Adjacent valid colour
A nucleotide substitution will 
have two colour calls, one from 
the 5′ position and one  
from the 3′ position of the 
dinucleotide sequence. When 
compared with a reference 
genome, base substitution in 
the target sequence is encoded 
by two specific, adjacent 
colours. In figure 3b, the 
sequence ‘CCT’ is encoded  
as blue-yellow (‘CC’ = blue; 
‘CT’ = yellow), but substituting 
the middle ‘C’ for ‘A’ would 
result in two colour changes to 
green-red. Any other colour 
sequence can be discarded as 
an error.
Colour space
With two-base-encoded 
probes, the fluorescent signal 
or colour obtained during 
imaging is associated with four 
dinucleotide sequences having 
a 5′- and 3′-base. Colour space 
is the sequence of overlapping 
dinucleotides that codes four 
simultaneous nucleotide 
sequences. Alignment with a 
reference genome is the most 
accurate method for translating 
colour space into a single 
nucleotide sequence.
Zero-mode waveguide 
detectors
This nanostructure device  
is 100 nm in diameter, which is 
smaller than the 532 nm and 
643 nm laser wavelengths used 
in the Pacific Biosciences 
platform. Light cannot 
propagate through these  
small waveguides, hence the 
term zero-mode. These 
aluminium-clad waveguides 
are designed to produce an 
evanescent wave (see the ‘total 
internal reflection fluorescence’ 
glossary term) that substantially 
reduces the observation  
volume at the surface of the 
polymerase reaction down to 
the zeptolitre range (10–21 l). 
This provides an advantage for 
the polymerization reaction, 
which can be performed at 
higher dye-labelled nucleotide 
concentrations.
hybridized to templates amplified by emPCR (fIG. 1a). 
The SOLiD cycle of 1,2-probe hybridization and liga-
tion, imaging, and probe cleavage is repeated ten times 
to yield ten colour calls spaced in five-base intervals 
(fIG. 3a). The extended primer is then stripped from the 
solid-phase-bound templates. A second ligation round 
is performed with an ‘n – 1’ primer, which resets the 
interrogation bases and the corresponding ten colour 
calls one position to the left. Ten ligation cycles ensue, 
followed by three more rounds of ligation cycles. Colour 
calls from the five ligation rounds are then ordered into 
a linear sequence (that is, the colour space) and aligned 
to a reference genome to decode the DNA sequence 
(fIG. 3b). SOLiD uses two slides per run; each can be 
partitioned into four or eight regions called spots. 
TABLe 1 depicts the current sequencing statistics of 
the Life/APG platform operating at the BCm-HGSC 
(D. muzny, personal communication). Substitutions are 
the most common error type. Similar to the genome 
analysis of Illumina/Solexa reads, SOLiD data have also 
revealed an underrepresentation of AT-rich and GC-rich 
regions26. Shen and colleagues38 recently showed that 
mAQ alignment of SOLiD data may be undercalling 
true variants.
Single-nucleotide addition:  pyrosequencing. 
Pyrosequencing is a non-electrophoretic, biolumines-
cence method that measures the release of inorganic 
pyrophosphate by proportionally converting it into 
visible light using a series of enzymatic reactions39,40 
(fIG. 3c). unlike other sequencing approaches that use 
modified nucleotides to terminate DNA synthesis, the 
pyrosequencing method manipulates DNA polymerase 
by the single addition of a dNTP in limiting amounts. 
upon incorporation of the complementary dNTP, DNA 
polymerase extends the primer and pauses. DNA syn-
thesis is reinitiated following the addition of the next 
complementary dNTP in the dispensing cycle. The 
order and intensity of the light peaks are recorded 
as flowgrams, which reveal the underlying DNA 
sequence (fIG. 3d).
margulies and colleagues41 described the first NGS 
platform to integrate pyrosequencing using their PTP 
device. Commercialized by Roche/454, the instrument 
uses DNA templates prepared by emPCR (fIG. 1a), with 
1–2 million beads deposited into PTP wells. Roche/454 
recently released a titanium-coated PTP design, which 
substantially increases read length and improves data 
quality by reducing crosstalk between adjacent wells 
containing single clonally amplified beads (T. Harkins, 
personal communication). Smaller beads, which have 
sulphurylase and luciferase attached to them to facilitate 
light production, are loaded into wells surrounding the 
template beads. Individual dNTPs are then streamed 
across the wells and dispensed in a predetermined 
sequential order. The bioluminescence is imaged with 
a charge-coupled device (CCD) camera (fIG. 3c). TABLe 1 
shows the current sequencing statistics of the Roche/454 
platform operating at the BCm-HGSC (D. muzny, per-
sonal communication). unlike platforms that produce 
shorter read lengths, the Roche/454 platform does not 
require the run time to be doubled for the sequencing 
of mate-pair templates. For homopolymeric repeats of 
up to six nucleotides, the number of dNTPs added is 
directly proportional to the light signal. Insertions are 
the most common error type, followed by deletions.
Real-time sequencing. The next technology method 
to hit the commercial sector is likely to be real-time 
sequencing, and Pacific Biosciences is currently lead-
ing this effort15. unlike reversible terminators, real-time 
nucleotides do not halt the process of DNA synthesis. 
Simply put, the method of real-time sequencing involves 
imaging the continuous incorporation of dye-labelled 
nucleotides during DNA synthesis42. with the Pacific 
Biosciences platform, single DNA polymerase mol-
ecules are attached to the bottom surface of individual 
zero-mode waveguide detectors (Zmw detectors)43 (fIG. 4a) 
that can obtain sequence information while phos-
pholinked nucleotides (BOX 1) are being incorporated 
into the growing primer strand15 (fIG. 4b).
Other approaches have been proposed to enhance 
signal-to-noise measurements in real-time sequencing 
using more conventional detection schemes. For exam-
ple, Life/visiGen has engineered DNA polymerases 
with an attached fluorescent dye that, upon incor-
poration of their γ-labelled nucleotides, produce 
an enhanced signal by fluorescence resonance energy 
transfer16. LI-COR Biosciences, whose technology was 
acquired by Pacific Biosciences, has been developing 
dye-quencher nucleotides (BOX 1), which in their native 
state produce low signals owing to the presence of a 
quencher group attached to the base. The release and 
diffusion of the dye-labelled pyrophosphate analogue 
away from the immobilized DNA polymerase produces a 
fluorescent signal17.
Pacific Biosciences used the highly processive, strand-
displacing φ29 DNA polymerase because it efficiently 
incorporates phospholinked nucleotides and enables the 
resequencing of closed circular templates15. To assess 
the accuracy of this method, a four-colour sequencing 
experiment was conducted using a known 150 bp linear 
template. Base calls from the real-time reads were deter-
mined from their corresponding fluorescence pulses 
(fIG. 4b). when the reads were compared to a known 
sequence, 27 errors consisting of deletions, insertions 
and mismatches were identified, corresponding to a 
read accuracy of approximately 83% (131/158). Factors 
that led to sequencing errors included extremely short 
interphase intervals between two incorporation events, 
and the binding and release of nucleotides in the active 
site before incorporation into the primer strand. Given 
that most errors appear as stochastic events, the authors 
showed that repeated sequencing of the same template 
molecule 15 times or more could improve the consen-
sus read accuracy to >99%15. At the 2009 AGBT meeting, 
Pacific Biosciences reported improvements to their plat-
form; when it was used to sequence the E. coli genome 
at 38-fold base coverage, 99.3% genome coverage was 
obtained. The consensus accuracy reached was >99.999% 
for the entire genome, with read lengths averaging 
964 bases (S. Turner, personal communication).
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 39
100 nm
Glass
Nature Reviews | Genetics
In
te
ns
ity
Epifluorescence detection
Fluorescence pulse
Limit of detection zone
Time
G A T C
Phospholinked hexaphosphate nucleotides
Pacific Biosciences — Real-time sequencing
b
a
Figure 4 | Real-time sequencing. Pacific Biosciences’ four-colour real-time sequencing method is shown.  
a | The zero-mode waveguide (ZMW) design reduces the observation volume, therefore reducing the number of stray 
fluorescently labelled molecules that enter the detection layer for a given period. These ZMW detectors address  
the dilemma that DNA polymerases perform optimally when fluorescently labelled nucleotides are present in the 
micromolar concentration range, whereas most single-molecule detection methods perform optimally when 
fluorescent species are in the pico- to nanomolar concentration range42. b | The residence time of phospholinked 
nucleotides in the active site is governed by the rate of catalysis and is usually on the millisecond scale. This 
corresponds to a recorded fluorescence pulse, because only the bound, dye-labelled nucleotide occupies the ZMW 
detection zone on this timescale. The released, dye-labelled pentaphosphate by-product quickly diffuses away, 
dropping the fluorescence signal to background levels. Translocation of the template marks the interphase period 
before binding and incorporation of the next incoming phospholinked nucleotide.
Fluorescence resonance 
energy transfer
This is generally a system that 
consists of two fluorescent 
dyes, one being a donor dye  
(a bluer fluorophore) and  
the other an acceptor dye  
(a redder fluorophore). When 
the two dye molecules are 
brought into close proximity 
(usually ≤30 nm), the energy 
from the excited donor dye is 
transferred to the acceptor 
dye, increasing its emission 
intensity signal.
Structural variants
All sequence variants other 
than single-nucleotide 
variants, including block 
substitutions, insertions or 
deletions, inversions, 
segmental duplications and 
copy-number differences.
genome alignment and assembly
After NGS reads have been generated, they are aligned to 
a known reference sequence or assembled de novo8,44,45. 
The decision to use either strategy is based on the 
intended biological application as well as cost, effort and 
time considerations. For example, identifying and cata-
loguing genetic variation in multiple strains of highly 
related genomes, such as those found in specific species 
of bacteria46–51, C. elegans25,30,38 and Arabidopsis thal-
iana52, can be accomplished by aligning NGS reads to 
their reference genomes. This approach is substantially 
cheaper and faster than Sanger sequencing. SNvs can be 
readily identified, although in many cases, validation of 
these findings is required.
There are limitations to the alignment approach, such 
as placing reads within repetitive regions in the reference 
genome or in corresponding regions that may not exist 
in the reference genome28; the latter situation may result 
from gaps in the reference genome or the presence of 
structural variants (Svs) in the genome being analysed. 
mate-pair reads can resolve the correct genome assign-
ment for some repetitive regions as long as one read in 
the pair is unique to the genome. A study by egholm, 
Snyder and colleagues53 showed that Roche/454 read data 
(averaging 258 bases), derived from 3-kb sized mate-pair 
genomic libraries, could capture a larger fraction of 
Svs in the human genome, although this approach 
still identified fewer Svs than traditional fosmid-end 
sequencing approaches54.
De novo assemblies have been reported for bacte-
rial genomes and mammalian bacterial artificial chro-
mosomes55–59, but substantial challenges exist for their 
application to human genomes. A reasonable strategy for 
improving the quality of the alignment or assembly has 
been to increase the read coverage. An article by Frazer 
and colleagues26 challenges this approach by reporting 
systematic variability in local sequence coverage that 
was specific to different human genomic regions for the 
Roche/454, Illumina/Solexa and Life/APG platforms 
(other commercially available platforms were not evalu-
ated). Because each NGS platform examined produced a 
uniquely reproducible pattern of variable sequence cov-
erage, the mixing of different NGS read types in the align-
ment or assembly may remedy this shortcoming. Recently 
it was reported that mixing Roche/454 and Illumina/
Solexa read data resulted in improved de novo assem-
blies of microbial genomes compared with assemblies 
based on data from either platform alone60,61.
R E V I E W S
40 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
1000 Genomes Project
A project aimed at discovering 
rare sequence variants with 
minor allele frequencies of 1% 
in normal genomes derived 
from HapMap samples.
The Exome Project
A project aimed at developing 
and validating cost-effective, 
high-throughput technologies 
for resequencing all of the 
protein-coding regions of the 
human genome.
Metagenomics
The study of communities of 
mixed microbial genomes that 
reside in animals, plants and 
environmental niches. Samples 
are collected and analysed 
without the need to culture 
isolated microbes in the 
laboratory. The Human 
Microbiome Project aims to 
characterize a reference set  
of microbial genomes from 
different habitats within the 
human body, including nasal, 
oral, skin, gastrointestinal and 
urogenital regions, and to 
determine how changes in the 
human microbiome affect 
health and disease.
genome enrichment
Despite the substantial cost reductions associated with 
NGS technologies in comparison with the automated 
Sanger method62, whole-genome sequencing is still an 
expensive endeavour (see below). An interim solution 
to this problem may be to use NGS platforms to target 
specific regions of interest. This strategy can be used to 
examine all of the exons in the genome, specific gene 
families that constitute known drug targets or megabase-
size regions that are implicated in disease63 or pharma-
cogenetics effects64 through genome-wide association 
studies. The concept of targeting specific regions of the 
genome is well established, with PCR being the most 
widely used method, albeit on a small scale. PCR coupled 
with Sanger sequencing is suitably matched for analysing 
a handful of candidate genes65, but coupling PCR with 
high-throughput NGS platforms for targeting strategies 
is not practical, as sample preparation would require 
handling tens of thousands of primers individually or 
in large multiplex groups to meet the needs of a single 
instrument run. A recent article by Frazer and colleagues 
in collaboration with RainDance Technologies reported 
the simultaneous amplification of 3,976 products using 
microdroplet PCR technology66. Here, a microfluidic 
device creates aqueous picolitre-volume droplets of for-
ward- and reverse-targeting primers in an oil solution. 
The primer droplets that are targeted to different regions 
of the genome merge with separate picolitre droplets 
that contain fragmented genomic DNA and associated 
PCR reagents, and these mixed droplets are thermal 
cycled in a single tube (fIG. 5a). The authors reported an 
84% capture efficiency with 90% of the targeted bases 
showing uniform coverage using the microdroplet 
PCR method sequenced with either the Roche/454 or 
Illumina/Solexa platform66.
Custom-designed oligonucleotide microarrays and 
solution-based hybridization strategies have also been 
used for targeting regions of interest. For example, Roche/
NimbleGen67 oligonucleotide microarrays have been 
designed to provide complementary sequences for solid-
phase hybridization to enrich for exons68,69 or contiguous 
stretches of genomic regions68,70 (fIG. 5b). The BCm-
HGSC68 and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory69 groups 
reported capture efficiencies of 65–77% (Roche/454 
platform) and 53% (Illumina/Solexa platform), respec-
tively, with targeted exons being covered by at least one 
NGS read. Recently, the BCm-HGSC group reported 
>90% capture efficiency with at least 10× base cover-
age (Roche/454 and Life/APG platforms) by chip opti-
mization that decreases the number of probes in higher 
coverage regions while increasing those in low coverage 
regions (R. A. Gibbs, personal communication).
Other groups have captured specific genomic regions 
by using solution-based hybridization methods, such as 
molecular inversion probes (mIPs)71–73 and biotinylated 
RNA capture sequences74 (fIG. 5c). Shendure, Church and 
colleagues71 were the first group to use mIPs in exon 
targeting by designing specific oligonucleotide ends 
that flank the exons of interest. However, in duplicate 
experiments only 20% of the targets were captured and 
even fewer exon regions (11%) were found in both data 
sets (Illumina/Solexa platform)71. mindrinos, Davis and 
colleagues72 recently described several technical 
improvements that increased the efficiency of mIP cap-
ture to >90%, with approximately 70% of targets falling 
within a 10-fold range in 485 exons. Shendure and col-
leagues73 have also described improvements that ena-
bled them to capture 91% of their initial 55,000 targets 
(Illumina/Solexa platform). An alternative method has 
been reported by Nusbaum and colleagues74, who created 
biotinylated RNA capture sequences that are hybrid-
ized to genomic targets and subsequently enriched with 
streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (Illumina/Solexa 
platform) (fIG. 5c). This group estimated a capture effi-
ciency of 60% for exons and 80% for genomic regions. 
The 1000 Genomes Project and The exome Project have 
adopted microarray-based and solution-based strate-
gies that use Roche/454, Illumina/Solexa and Life/APG 
platforms to target regions of interest.
Although any of the NGS platforms can perform the 
sequencing phase of targeted capture, some may be better 
suited than others (TABLe 1). Initial reports raised concerns 
as to the readiness of targeted capture for routine use75,76 
owing to the high degree of variability in coverage and 
representation, the capturing of off-target fragments, the 
requirement for microgram quantities of starting mate-
rial and the high cost for microarrays, but improvements 
are being made to address these limitations76.
next-generation sequencing applications
The production of large numbers of low-cost reads 
makes the NGS platforms described above useful for 
many applications. These include variant discovery 
by resequencing targeted regions of interest or whole 
genomes, de novo assemblies of bacterial and lower 
eukaryotic genomes, cataloguing the transcriptomes of 
cells, tissues and organisms (RNA–seq)5, genome-wide 
profiling of epigenetic marks and chromatin structure 
using other seq-based methods (ChIP–seq, methyl–
seq and DNase–seq)4, and species classification and/
or gene discovery by metagenomics studies77. with this 
many applications, which platform is best suited for a 
given biological experiment? For example, the Illumina/
Solexa and Life/APG platforms are well suited for vari-
ant discovery by resequencing human genomes because 
gigantic volumes of high-quality bases are produced 
per run (TABLe 1). Furthermore, the Helicos BioSciences 
platform is well suited for applications that demand 
quantitative information in RNA–seq78 or direct RNA 
sequencing, as it sequences RNA templates directly 
without the need to convert them into cDNAs79. TABLe 1 
provides an overview of NGS technologies, instrument 
performance and cost, pros and cons, and recommen-
dations for biological applications; however, the rapid 
pace of technological advances in the field could change 
this information in the near future. Readers are directed 
to several excellent reviews on RNA–seq5, ChIP–seq80 
and metagenomics77.
In the following section, I highlight recent advances in 
sequencing personal genomes using NGS, as demand 
in this area is driving rapid technological developments 
and competitive pricing.
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 41
Nature Reviews | Genetics
ss-probes
MIP
Biotinylated RNA-based approachMIP-based approach
Cut 
probes 
Elute and PCR 100-mers 200-mers
Biotin–UTP 
transcription
Extend and 
ligate 
Isolate
Target 
gDNA
NimbleGen arrays, >60-mers
Shear and ligate
adaptors
Hybridize and wash 
unbound fragments away
Shear and 
ligate adaptors
Affinity enrichment 
Solution hybridization 
T7 T7
Agilent arrays Genomic 
DNA 
b  Solid-phase capture
c  Solution-phase capturea  Microdroplet PCR
Forward- and 
reverse-targeting 
primer droplets
Genomic DNA and 
associated PCR 
reagent droplets
Microfluidic
chip
Microdroplet PCR 
in a single tube
Merging area
PCR or RCA 
Elute and PCRElute and PCR
Figure 5 | targeted capture scheme. a | A microfluidic nozzle creates aqueous droplets (8 pl) of forward- and 
reverse-targeting primers in oil (not shown), which are dispensed into a channel in a microfluidic chip. Fragmented 
genomic DNA and associated PCR reagents are separately dispensed as aqueous microdroplets (14 pl) and paired 
together with the primer droplets at a 1/1 ratio. Paired droplets pass through a merging area for coalescence into 
PCR-competent microdroplets, which are collected into a single tube for thermal cycling. b | Solid-phase capture 
methods ligate adaptor sequences to fragmented genomic DNA before microarray hybridization. Following stringent 
washing to remove non-selected genomic fragments, the enriched targets are eluted, PCR amplified and sequenced. 
Adaptor sequences can also be designed specifically for a given next-generation sequencing platform, which 
eliminates the PCR step. c | Solution-phase methods use custom-designed microarrays from Agilent Technologies to 
synthesize long, target-specific oligonucleotides, which are cleaved as a pool of probes from the support and eluted 
into a single tube. In the molecular inversion probe (MIP)-based approach, single-stranded probes (ss-probes) are 
hybridized to their corresponding templates. DNA polymerase extends the 3′-end of the probes across the exon 
region, and a ligation step creates closed circular DNAs. The biotinylated RNA-based approach introduces a T7 
promoter sequence, which allows the incorporation of biotin-labelled uridine-5′-triphosphate (UTP) into the probe 
sequence by in vitro transcription. Following solution hybridization with genomic targets, the RNA–DNA hybrids are 
enriched by their binding to streptavidin-coated magnetic beads. RCA, rolling circle amplification.
R E V I E W S
42 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
The first group to apply NGS to whole human 
genomes was Roche/454 in collaboration with Gibbs 
and colleagues at the BCm-HGSC, who reported the 
diploid genome of james D. watson82 (TABLe 2). when 
the watson genome was compared with the reference 
genome, roughly 3.3 million SNvs were identified, but 
far fewer Svs were found than in the study by venter 
and colleagues. This is important because undiscov-
ered Svs could account for a substantial fraction of 
the total number of sequence variants, many of which 
could be potentially causative in disease83–86. within 
the past year, five additional human genomes have 
been described23,87–91, one of which was sequenced on 
two different NGS platforms (TABLe 2). As with the 
watson genome, far fewer Svs were reported than in 
the study by venter and colleagues.
Table 2 | sequencing statistics on personal genome projects
Personal 
Genome
Platform Genomic 
template 
libraries
no. of 
reads 
(millions)
Read 
length 
(bases)
Base 
coverage 
(fold)
Assembly Genome 
coverage 
(%)*
snVs in 
millions 
(alignment 
tool)
no. of 
runs
estimated 
cost 
(Us$)
J. Craig 
Venter
Automated 
Sanger
MP from  
BACs, fosmids  
& plasmids
31.9 800 7.5 De novo N/A 3.21 >340,000 70,000,000
James D. 
Watson
Roche/454 Frag: 500 bp 93.2‡ 250§ 7.4 Aligned* 95|| 3.32 (BLAT) 234 1,000,000¶
Yoruban 
male 
(NA18507)
Illumina/ 
Solexa
93% MP: 200 bp 3,410‡ 35 40.6 Aligned* 99.9 3.83 (MAQ) 40 250,000¶
7% MP: 1.8 kb 271 35 4.14 (ELAND)
Han 
Chinese 
male
Illumina/ 
Solexa
66% Frag: 
150–250 bp
1,921‡ 35 36 Aligned* 99.9 3.07 (SOAP) 35 500,000¶
34% MP: 135 bp  
& 440 bp
1,029 35
Korean 
male (AK1)
Illumina/ 
Solexa
21% Frag: 130 bp & 
440 bp
393‡ 36 27.8 Aligned* 99.8 3.45 (GSNAP) 30 200,000¶
79% MP: 130 bp, 
390 bp & 2.7 kb
1,156 36, 88, 
106
Korean 
male (SJK)
Illumina/ 
Solexa
MP: 100 bp,  
200 bp & 300 bp
1,647‡ 35, 74 29.0 Aligned* 99.9 3.44 (MAQ) 15 250,000¶,#
Yoruban 
male 
(NA18507)
Life/APG 9% Frag: 
100–500 bp
211‡ 50 17.9 Aligned* 98.6 3.87 
(Corona-lite)
9.5 60,000¶,**
91% MP: 
600–3,500 bp
2,075‡ 25, 50
Stephen R. 
Quake
Helicos 
BioSciences
Frag: 100–500 bp 2,725‡ 32§ 28 Aligned* 90 2.81 
(IndexDP)
4 48,000¶
AML 
female
Illumina/ 
Solexa
Frag: 150–200 bp‡‡ 2,730‡,‡‡ 32 32.7 Aligned* 91 3.81‡‡ (MAQ) 98 1,600,000||||
Frag: 150–200 bp§§ 1,081‡,§§ 35 13.9 83 2.92§§ (MAQ) 34
AML male Illumina/ 
Solexa
MP: 200–250 bp‡‡ 1,620‡,‡‡ 35 23.3 Aligned* 98.5 3.46‡‡ (MAQ) 16.5 500,000||||
MP: 200–250 bp§§ 1,351‡,§§ 50 21.3 97.4 3.45§§ (MAQ) 13.1
James R. 
Lupski 
CMT male
Life/APG 16% Frag: 
100–500 bp
238‡ 35 29.6 Aligned* 99.8 3.42 
(Corona-lite)
3 75,000¶,¶¶
84% MP: 
600–3,500 bp
1,211‡ 25, 50
*A minimum of one read aligning to the National Center for Biotechnology Information build 36 reference genome. ‡Mappable reads for aligned assemblies.  
§Average read-length. ||D. Wheeler, personal communication. ¶Reagent cost only. #S.-M. Ahn, personal communication. **K. McKernan, personal 
communication. ‡‡Tumour sample. §§Normal sample. ||||Tumour & normal samples: reagent, instrument, labour, bioinformatics and data storage cost, E. Mardis, 
personal communication. ¶¶R. Gibbs, personal communication. AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; BAC, bacterial artificial chromosome;  
CMT, Charcot–Marie–Tooth disease; Frag, fragment; MP, mate-pair; N/A, not available; SNV, single-nucleotide variant.
Personal genomes. Human genome studies aim to 
catalogue SNvs and Svs and their association to pheno-
typic differences, with the eventual goal of personalized 
genomics for medical purposes. In 2004, the International 
Human Genome Sequencing Consortium published 
the first, and still only, finished-grade human reference 
genome (currently National Center for Biotechnology 
Information (NCBI) build 36)1. Its cost was estimated 
at uS$300 million. In October 2007, venter and col-
leagues81 described the genome sequence of j. Craig 
venter using a whole-genome shotgun approach cou-
pled with automated Sanger sequencing (TABLe 2). when 
the venter genome was compared with the reference 
genome, 3.2 million SNvs were identified. In addition, 
there were over 900,000 Svs, which altogether accounted 
for more variant bases than the SNvs.
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 43
Personal genomics is also being applied to the study 
of disease. For example, mardis and colleagues29,92 have 
reported the sequencing of two acute myeloid leukaemia 
cancer genomes using the Illumina/Solexa platform, and 
both studies identified somatic mutations that may be 
associated with the disease. Gibbs and colleagues have 
recently described the elucidation of both allelic vari-
ants in a family with a recessive form of Charcot–marie–
Tooth disease using the Life/APG platform93 (TABLe 2).
Several projects aimed at sequencing more individu-
als, including The Cancer Genome Atlas94 and the 1000 
Genomes Project, are also using the Illumina/Solexa 
and Life/454 platforms to sequence whole genomes. 
Complete Genomics (see below) recently described the 
first genome sequence from a Caucasian male (PGP1) 
enrolled in the Personal Genome Project. These projects 
should lead to a substantial increase in the number of 
personal genomes sequenced in the near future.
In comparison with automated Sanger sequencing, 
NGS platforms have dramatically increased through-
put and substantially lowered expenditure, with several 
groups reporting reagent costs of below uS$100,000 
(TABLe 2). However, there is variability among and within 
NGS platforms in terms of template size and construct, 
read-length, throughput, and base and genome coverage 
(TABLe 2), and such variability makes it difficult to assess 
the quality (that is, the base accuracy, genome coverage 
and genome continuity) of genomes based on cost con-
siderations. In june 2009, Illumina announced a personal 
genome sequencing service that provides 30-fold base 
coverage for the price of uS$48,000. Complete Genomics 
offers a similar service with 40-fold coverage priced at 
uS$5,000, based on a business model that is reliant on 
huge customer volume. Recently, Drmanac, Ballinger 
and colleagues sequenced the whole genomes of three 
individuals, including PGP1, using a modified non- 
cleavable probe SBL method known as combinatorial 
probe anchor ligation (cPAL). The number of SNvs iden-
tified was consistent with those reported in TABLe 1 for 
other genomes, and the group reported an amortized 
cost of uS$4,400 in reagents95. Although impressive, it is 
unclear whether this price will be sustainable as a retail 
service96 or whether the Illumina or Complete Genomics 
business models will see long-term profits. Achieving 
these cost advantages may also come with a substan-
tial trade-off, namely the production of lower quality 
genomes that inadequately capture the extent of Svs83–86. 
Closing the gap between $10,000 and $1,000 will be the 
greatest challenge for current technology developers, and 
the $1,000 genome might result from as-yet-undeveloped 
innovations. A timetable for the $1,000 draft genome is 
difficult to predict, and even more uncertain is the delivery 
of a high-quality, finished-grade personal genome.
closing remarks
Since 2004, the National Human Genome Research 
Institute has awarded more than $100 million for the 
development of NGS technologies62, and these awards 
have facilitated much of the progress in NGS to date, as 
well as several commercial developments. many com-
panies, including IBm, Oxford Nanopore Technologies, 
Intelligent Bio-Systems, LaserGen, Inc. and NABsys, 
have NGS technologies at various stages of development 
and commercialization.
The production of billions of NGS reads has also chal-
lenged the infrastructure of existing information technol-
ogy systems in terms of data transfer, storage and quality 
control, computational analysis to align or assembly read 
data, and laboratory information management systems 
for sample tracking and process management. Advances 
in bioinformatics are ongoing, and improvements are 
needed if these systems are to keep pace with the con-
tinuing developments in NGS technologies. It is possible 
that the costs associated with downstream data handling 
and analysis could match or surpass the data-production 
costs described in this Review.
NGS technologies have an impressive range of appli-
cations, and more are being developed. In addition to 
the applications described above, NGS technologies are 
being used to characterize the evolutionary relationships 
of ancient genomes97,98 and to elucidate the role of non-
coding RNAs in health and disease99,100. In the not too 
distant future, it is foreseeable that NGS technologies 
could be used to obtain high-quality sequence data from 
a genome isolated from a single cell, which would be a 
substantial breakthrough, particularly for cancer genom-
ics. For this to occur, advances will be needed in tech-
niques for efficiently isolating intact long DNA molecules 
and in NGS methods for accurately reading the sequence 
content of these molecules. The field of NGS develop-
ment and applications is a fast-moving area of research, 
which makes this an exciting time for genomic studies.
1. International Human Genome Consortium. Finishing 
the euchromatic sequence of the human genome. 
Nature 431, 931–945 (2004).
2. Metzker, M. L. Emerging technologies in DNA 
sequencing. Genome Res. 15, 1767–1776  
(2005).
3. Hutchison, C. A. III. DNA sequencing: bench to 
bedside and beyond. Nucleic Acids Res. 35,  
6227–6237 (2007).
4. Wold, B. & Myers, R. M. Sequence census methods 
for functional genomics. Nature Methods 5, 19–21 
(2008).
5. Wang, Z., Gerstein, M. & Snyder, M. RNA-Seq:  
a revolutionary tool for transcriptomics. Nature Rev. 
Genet. 10, 57–63 (2009).
The Review provides a comprehensive overview of 
recent advances and challenges in techniques that 
are used in transcriptome profiling methods that 
use NGS technologies (RNA–seq).
6. Branton, D. et al. The potential and challenges  
of nanopore sequencing. Nature Biotech. 26,  
1146–1153 (2008).
An excellent review of the current state of 
nanopore sequencing that highlights recent 
accomplishments and remaining challenges in  
the field.
7. Fan, J.-B., Chee, M. S. & Gunderson, K. L.  
Highly parallel genomic assays. Nature Rev. Genet. 7, 
632–644 (2006).
8. Pop, M. & Salzberg, S. L. Bioinformatics challenges  
of new sequencing technology. Trends Genet. 24, 
142–149 (2008).
9. Dressman, D., Yan, H., Traverso, G., Kinzler, K. W. & 
Vogelstein, B. Transforming single DNA  
molecules into fluorescent magnetic particles  
for detection and enumeration of genetic variations. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 8817–8822  
(2003).
10. Fedurco, M., Romieu, A., Williams, S., Lawrence, I. & 
Turcatti, G. BTA, a novel reagent for DNA attachment on 
glass and efficient generation of solid-phase amplified 
DNA colonies. Nucleic Acids Res. 34, e22 (2006).
11. Shendure, J. et al. Accurate multiplex polony 
sequencing of an evolved bacterial genome. Science 
309, 1728–1732 (2005).
This paper describes the development of the 
non-cleavable SBL method and shows its 
feasibility by sequencing the E. coli genome.  
The prototype described led to the development  
of the Polonator instrument.
12. Kim, J. B. et al. Polony multiplex analysis of gene 
expression (PMAGE) in mouse hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. Science 316, 1481–1484 (2007).
13. Leamon, J. H. A massively parallel PicoTiterPlate 
based platform for discrete picoliter-scale 
polymerase chain reactions. Electrophoresis 24, 
3769–3777 (2003).
The Cancer Genome Atlas
A project aimed at discovering 
single-nucleotide variants  
and structural variants that  
are associated with major  
cancers, such as brain cancer 
(glioblastoma multiforme), lung 
cancer (squamous carcinoma) 
and ovarian cancer (serous 
cystadenocarcinoma).
Personal Genome Project
A project aimed at providing 
open access to human genome 
sequences from volunteers  
and to develop tools for 
interpreting this information 
and correlating it with related 
personal medical information.
R E V I E W S
44 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics
14. Harris, T. D. et al. Single-molecule DNA sequencing of 
a viral genome. Science 320, 106–109 (2008).
Developers from Helicos BioSciences and 
colleagues describe the development of the first 
single-molecule sequencing method using reversible 
terminators and demonstrate the technology by 
sequencing the M13 genome.
15. Eid, J. et al. Real-time DNA sequencing from single 
polymerase molecules. Science 323, 133–138 (2009).
The authors describe the development of a 
real-time sequencing method using their ZMW 
detection system and demonstrate its feasibility by 
sequencing synthetic templates.
16. Hardin, S., Gao, X., Briggs, J., Willson, R. & Tu, S.-C. 
Methods for real-time single molecule sequence 
determination. US Patent 7,329,492 (2000).
17. Williams, J. G. K. System and methods for nucleic acid 
sequencing of single molecules by polymerase 
synthesis. US Patent 6,255,083 (1998).
18. Erlich, Y., Mitra, P. P., delaBastide, M., McCombie, W. R. 
& Hannon, G. J. Alta-Cyclic: a self-optimizing base 
caller for next-generation sequencing. Nature 
Methods 5, 679–682 (2008).
19. Metzker, M. L. et al. Termination of DNA synthesis by 
novel 3′-modified deoxyribonucleoside triphosphates. 
Nucleic Acids Res. 22, 4259–4267 (1994).
20. Canard, B. & Sarfati, R. DNA polymerase fluorescent 
substrates with reversible 3′-tags. Gene 148, 1–6 
(1994).
21. Ju, J. et al. Four-color DNA sequencing by synthesis 
using cleavable fluorescent nucleotide reversible 
terminators. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 103,  
19635–19640 (2006).
22. Guo, J. et al. Four-color DNA sequencing with 
3′-O-modified nucleotide reversible terminators and 
chemically cleavable fluorescent dideoxynucleotides. 
Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 9145–9150 (2008).
23. Bentley, D. R. et al. Accurate whole human genome 
sequencing using reversible terminator chemistry. 
Nature 456, 53–59 (2008).
Developers from Illumina/Solexa and colleagues 
report details on their reversible terminator 
platform and demonstrate the technology by 
sequencing a flow-sorted X chromosome and the 
genome from a Yoruban male.
24. Dohm, J. C., Lottaz, C., Borodina, T. & Himmelbauer, H. 
Substantial biases in ultra-short read data sets from 
high-throughput DNA sequencing. Nucleic Acids Res. 
36, e105 (2008).
25. Hillier, L. W. et al. Whole-genome sequencing and 
variant discovery in C. elegans. Nature Methods 5, 
183–188 (2008).
26. Harismendy, O. et al. Evaluation of next generation 
sequencing platforms for population targeted 
sequencing studies. Genome Biol. 10, R32 (2009).
27. Li, H., Ruan, J. & Durbin, R. Mapping short DNA 
sequencing reads and calling variants using mapping 
quality scores. Genome Res. 18, 1851–1858 (2008).
28. Frazer, K. A., Murray, S. S., Schork, N. J. & Topol, E. J. 
Human genetic variation and its contribution to 
complex traits. Nature Rev. Genet. 10, 241–251 
(2009).
29. Ley, T. J. et al. DNA sequencing of a cytogenetically 
normal acute myeloid leukaemia genome. Nature 
456, 66–72 (2008).
30. Sarin, S., Prabhu, S., O’Meara, M. M., Pe’er, I. & 
Hobert, O. Caenorhabditis elegans mutant allele 
identification by whole-genome sequencing. Nature 
Methods 5, 865–867 (2008).
31. Wu, W. et al. Termination of DNA synthesis by 
N6-alkylated, not 3′-O-alkylated, photocleavable 
2′-deoxyadenosine triphosphates. Nucleic Acid Res. 
35, 6339–6349 (2007).
32. Wu, W., Litosh, V. A., Stupi, B. P. & Metzker, M. L. 
Photocleavable labeled nucleotides and nucleosides 
and methods for their use in DNA sequencing. US 
Patent Application 11/567,189 (2009).
33. Bowers, J. et al. Virtual terminator nucleotides for 
next-generation DNA sequencing. Nature Methods 6, 
593–595 (2009).
34. Braslavsky, I., Hebert, B., Kartalov, E. & Quake, S. R. 
Sequence information can be obtained from single 
DNA molecules. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 
3960–3964 (2003).
35. Tomkinson, A. E., Vijayakumar, S., Pascal, J. M. & 
Ellenberger, T. DNA ligases: structure, reaction 
mechanism, and function. Chem. Rev. 106, 687–699 
(2006).
36. Landegren, U., Kaiser, R., Sanders, J. & Hood, L. A 
ligase-mediated gene detection technique. Science 
241, 1077–1080 (1988).
37. Valouev, A. et al. A high-resolution, nucleosome 
position map of C. elegans reveals a lack of universal 
sequence-dictated positioning. Genome Res. 18, 
1051–1063 (2008).
This paper describes Life/APG’s SBL method,  
which uses cleavable two-base-encoded probes on  
the SOLiD platform. The authors demonstrate the 
technology through the application of genome-wide 
nucleosome mapping in C. elegans.
38. Shen, Y., Sarin, S., Liu, Y., Hobert, O. & Pe’er, I. 
Comparing platforms for C. elegans mutant 
identification using high-throughput whole-genome 
sequencing. PLoS ONE 3, e4012 (2008).
39. Ronaghi, M., Uhlén, M. & Nyrén, P. A sequencing 
method based on real-time pyrophosphate. Science 
281, 363–365 (1998).
40. Ronaghi, M., Karamohamed, S., Pettersson, B.,  
Uhlén, M. & Nyrén, P. Real-time DNA sequencing 
using detection of pyrophosphate release. Anal. 
Biochem. 242, 84–89 (1996).
41. Margulies, M. et al. Genome sequencing in 
microfabricated high-density picolitre reactors. Nature 
437, 376–380 (2005).
The authors describe the development of the first 
NGS technology using the pyrosequencing method 
and demonstrate its feasibility through the 
sequencing and de novo assembly of the 
Mycoplasma genitalium genome.
42. Metzker, M. L. Sequencing in real time. Nature 
Biotech. 27, 150–151 (2009).
43. Levene, M. J. et al. Zero-mode waveguides for single-
molecule analysis at high concentrations. Science 
299, 682–686 (2003).
44. Trapnell, C. & Salzberg, S. L. How to map billions  
of short reads onto genomes. Nature Biotech. 27, 
455–457 (2009).
45. Chaisson, M. J., Brinza, D. & Pevzner, P. A.  
De novo fragment assembly with short mate-paired 
reads: does the read length matter? Genome Res. 19, 
336–346 (2009).
46. Hofreuter, D. et al. Unique features of a highly 
pathogenic Campylobacter jejuni strain. Infect. 
Immun. 74, 4694–4707 (2006).
47. Holt, K. E. et al. High-throughput sequencing 
provides insights into genome variation and 
evolution in Salmonella Typhi. Nature Genet. 40, 
987–993 (2008).
48. Srivatsan, A. et al. High-precision, whole-genome 
sequencing of laboratory strains facilitates genetic 
studies. PLoS Genet. 4, e1000139 (2008).
49. Suchland, R. J. et al. Identification of concomitant 
infection with Chlamydia trachomatis IncA-negative 
mutant and wild-type strains by genomic, 
transcriptional, and biological characterizations. 
Infect. Immun. 76, 5438–5446 (2008).
50. Nusbaum, C. et al. Sensitive, specific polymorphism 
discovery in bacteria using massively parallel 
sequencing. Nature Methods 6, 67–69 (2009).
51. Moran, N. A., McLaughlin, H. J. & Sorek, R.  
The dynamics and time scale of ongoing genomic 
erosion in symbiotic bacteria. Science 323,  
379–382 (2009).
52. Ossowski, S. et al. Sequencing of natural strains  
of Arabidopsis thaliana with short reads. Genome Res. 
18, 2024–2033 (2008).
53. Korbel, J. O. et al. Paired-end mapping reveals 
extensive structural variation in the human genome. 
Science 318, 420–426 (2007).
54. Kidd, J. M. et al. Mapping and sequencing of 
structural variation from eight human genomes. 
Nature 453, 56–64 (2008).
55. Warren, R. L., Sutton, G. G., Jones, S. J. M. &  
Holt, R. A. Assembling millions of short DNA 
sequences using SSAKE. Bioinformatics 23, 500–501 
(2007).
56. Chaisson, M. J. & Pevzner, P. A. Short read fragment 
assembly of bacterial genomes. Genome Res. 18, 
324–330 (2008).
57. Hernandez, D., François, P., Farinelli, L., Østerås, M. & 
Schrenzel, J. De novo bacterial genome sequencing: 
millions of very short reads assembled on a desktop 
computer. Genome Res. 18, 802–809 (2008).
58. Butler, J. et al. ALLPATHS: de novo assembly of  
whole-genome shotgun microreads. Genome Res. 18, 
810–820 (2008).
59. Zerbino, D. R. & Birney, E. Velvet: algorithms for 
de novo short read assembly using de Bruijn graphs. 
Genome Res. 18, 821–829 (2008).
60. Aury, J.-M. et al. High quality draft sequences for 
prokaryotic genomes using a mix of new sequencing 
technologies. BMC Genomics 9, 603 (2008).
61. Reinhardt, J. A. et al. De novo assembly using  
low-coverage short read sequence data from the rice 
pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv. oryzae. Genome 
Res. 19, 294–305 (2009).
62. Schloss, J. A. How to get genomes at one  
ten-thousandth the cost. Nature Biotech. 26,  
1113–1115 (2008).
63. Altshuler, D., Daly, M. J. & Lander, E. S.  
Genetic mapping in human disease. Science 322, 
881–888 (2008).
64. Wang, L. & Weinshilboum, R. M. Pharmacogenomics: 
candidate gene identification, functional validation 
and mechanisms. Hum. Mol. Genet. 17, R174–R179 
(2008).
65. Haaland, W. C. et al. A–β– subtype of ketosis-prone 
diabetes is not predominantly a monogenic diabetic 
syndrome. Diabetes Care 32, 873–877 (2009).
66. Tewhey, R. et al. Microdroplet-based PCR enrichment 
for large-scale targeted sequencing. Nature Biotech. 
27, 1025–1031 (2009).
67. Singh-Gasson, S. et al. Maskless fabrication of  
light-directed oligonucleotide microarrays using  
a digital micromirror array. Nature Biotech. 17,  
974–978 (1999).
68. Albert, T. J. et al. Direct selection of human genomic 
loci by microarray hybridization. Nature Methods 4, 
903–905 (2007).
69. Hodges, E. et al. Genome-wide in situ exon capture  
for selective resequencing. Nature Genet. 39,  
1522–1527 (2007).
70. Okou, D. T. et al. Microarray-based genomic selection 
for high-throughput resequencing. Nature Methods 4, 
907–909 (2007).
71. Porreca, G. J. et al. Multiplex amplification of large 
sets of human exons. Nature Methods 4, 931–936 
(2007).
72. Krishnakumar, S. et al. A comprehensive assay  
for targeted multiplex amplification of human  
DNA sequences. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci. USA 105, 
9296–9301 (2008).
73. Turner, E. H., Lee, C., Ng, S. B., Nickerson, D. A. & 
Shendure, J. Massively parallel exon capture and 
library-free resequencing across 16 genomes. Nature 
Methods 6, 315–316 (2009).
74. Gnirke, A. et al. Solution hybrid selection with ultra-
long oligonucleotides for massively parallel targeted 
sequencing. Nature Biotech. 27, 182–189 (2009).
75. Olson, M. Enrichment of super-sized resequencing 
targets from the human genome. Nature Methods 4, 
891–892 (2007).
76. Garber, K. Fixing the front end. Nature Biotech. 26, 
1101–1104 (2008).
77. Petrosino, J. F., Highlander, S., Luna, R. A., Gibbs, R. A. 
& Versalovic, J. Metagenomic pyrosequencing and 
microbial identification. Clin. Chem. 55, 856–866 
(2009).
These authors describe the current state of 
metagenomics research and highlight the use of the 
Roche/454 platform for microbial identification 
through 16S ribosomal DNA phylogenetic analysis; 
other NGS platforms may be better suited for gene 
discovery efforts (see Table 2).
78. Lipson, D. et al. Quantification of the yeast 
transcriptome by single-molecule sequencing. Nature 
Biotech. 27, 652–658 (2009).
79. Ozsolak, F. et al. Direct RNA sequencing. Nature 461, 
814–818 (2009).
80. Park, P. J. ChIP–seq: advantages and challenges  
of a maturing technology. Nature Rev. Genet. 10, 
669–680 (2009).
The article provides a comprehensive review of 
recent technological advances and challenges in 
genome-wide profiling of DNA-binding proteins, 
histone modifications and nucleosomes using NGS 
technologies (ChIP–seq).
81. Levy, S. et al. The diploid genome sequence of an 
individual human. PLoS Biol. 5, e254 (2007).
82. Wheeler, D. A. et al. The complete genome of an 
individual by massively parallel DNA sequencing. 
Nature 452, 872–876 (2008).
83. Iafrate, A. J. et al. Detection of large-scale variation in 
the human genome. Nature Genet. 36, 949–951 
(2004).
84. Sebat, J. et al. Large-scale copy number 
polymorphism in the human genome. Science 305, 
525–528 (2004).
85. Tuzun, E. et al. Fine-scale structural variation of the 
human genome. Nature Genet. 37, 727–732 (2005).
86. Stranger, B. E. et al. Relative impact of nucleotide and 
copy number variation on gene expression 
phenotypes. Science 315, 848–853 (2007).
R E V I E W S
NATuRe RevIewS | Genetics  vOLume 11 | jANuARy 2010 | 45
87. Wang, J. et al. The diploid genome sequence of an 
Asian individual. Nature 456, 60–65 (2008).
88. Kim, J. I. et al. A highly annotated whole-genome 
sequence of a Korean individual. Nature 460,  
1011–1015 (2009).
89. Ahn, S. M. et al. The first Korean genome sequence 
and analysis: full genome sequencing for a socio-ethnic 
group. Genome Res. 19, 1622–1629 (2009).
90. McKernan, K. J. et al. Sequence and structural 
variation in a human genome uncovered by short-
read, massively parallel ligation sequencing using two-
base encoding. Genome Res. 19, 1527–1541 (2009).
91. Pushkarev, D., Neff, N. F. & Quake, S. R.  
Single-molecule sequencing of an individual human 
genome. Nature Biotech. 27, 847–850 (2009).
92. Mardis, E. R. et al. Recurring mutations found by 
sequencing an acute myeloid leukemia genome. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 361, 1058–1066 (2009).
93. Lupski, J. R. et al. Complete genome sequencing 
identifies recessive alleles in SH3TC2 causing a CMT1 
neuropathy. N. Engl. J. Med. (in the press).
94. Collins, F. S. & Barker, A. D. Mapping the cancer 
genome. Sci. Am. 296, 50–57 (2007).
95. Drmanac, R. et al. Human genome sequencing using 
unchained base reads on self-assembling DNA 
nanoarrays. Science 5 Nov 2009 (doi:10.1126/
science.1181498).
96. Sanderson, K. Personal genomes: standard and pores. 
Nature 456, 23–25 (2008).
97. Green, R. E. et al. Analysis of one million base pairs of 
Neanderthal DNA. Nature 444, 330–336 (2006).
98. Briggs, A. W. et al. Targeted retrieval and analysis  
of five Neandertal mtDNA genomes. Science 325, 
318–321 (2009).
99. Ponting, C. P., Oliver, P. L. & Reik, W. Evolution and 
functions of long noncoding RNAs. Cell 136, 629–641 
(2009).
100. Carthew, R. W. & Sontheimer, E. J. Origins and 
mechanisms of miRNAs and siRNAs. Cell 136,  
642–655 (2009).
101. Barnes, C., Balasubramanian, S., Liu, X.,  
Swerdlow, H. & Milton, J. Labelled nucleotides.  
US Patent 7,057,026 (2002).
102. Mitra, R. D., Shendure, J., Olejnik, J., 
Edyta-Krzymanska-Olejnik & Church, G. M. 
Fluorescent in situ sequencing on polymerase 
colonies. Anal. Biochem. 320, 55–65 (2003).
103. Turcatti, G., Romieu, A., Fedurco, M. &  
Tairi, A.-P. A new class of cleavable fluorescent 
nucleotides: synthesis and optimization as  
reversible terminators for DNA sequencing  
by synthesis. Nucleic Acids Res. 36, e25  
(2008).
104. Yarbrough, L. R., Schlageck, J. G. & Baughman, M. 
Synthesis and properties of fluorescent  
nucleotide substrates for DNA-dependent RNA 
polymerases. J. Biol. Chem. 254, 12069–12073 
(1979).
105. Kumar, S. et al. Terminal phosphate labeled 
nucleotides: synthesis, applications, and linker  
effect on incorporation by DNA polymerases. 
Nucleosides Nucleotides Nucleic Acids 24,  
401–408 (2005).
106. McKernan, K., Blanchard, A., Kotler, L. &  
Costa, G. Reagents, methods, and libraries for  
bead-based sequencing. US Patent Application 
11/345,979 (2005).
107. Macevicz, S. C. DNA sequencing by parallel 
oligonucleotide extensions. US Patent 5,969,119 
(1995).
108. Mir, K. U., Qi, H., Salata, O. & Scozzafava, G. 
Sequencing by cyclic ligation and cleavage (CycLiC) 
directly on a microarray captured template. Nucleic 
Acids Res. 37, e5 (2009).
Acknowledgements
I am extremely grateful to S.-M. Ahn, J. Edwards, 
J. W. Efcavitch, R. A. Gibbs, T. Harkin, E. Mardis, K. McKernan, 
D. Muzny, S. Turner and D. Wheeler for providing current 
performance data for the NGS platforms, and to the National 
Human Genome Research Institute for their support from 
grants R01 HG003573, R41 HG003072, R41 HG003265 
and R21 HG002443.
Competing interests statement
The author declares competing financial interests: see Web 
version for details.
furtHer inforMation
Michael L. Metzker’s homepage:  
http://www.bcm.edu/genetics/?pmid=10947
1000 Genomes Project: http://www.1000genomes.org
Advances in Genome Biology and Technology meeting: 
http://www.agbt.org
The Cancer Genome Atlas: http://cancergenome.nih.gov
The Exome Project:  
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/resources/exome.htm
Human Microbiome Project:  
http://nihroadmap.nih.gov/hmp
National Human Genome Research Institute:  
http://www.genome.gov
National Human Genome Research Institute — Fruitfly 
Genome Sequencing: http://www.genome.gov/11008080
Nature Reviews Genetics poster ‘Sequencing technologies 
— the next generation’: http://www.nature.com/nrg/
posters/sequencing/index.html
Personal Genome Project:  
http://www.personalgenomes.org
ALL Links ARe ActiVe in the onLine PdF
R E V I E W S
46 | jANuARy 2010 | vOLume 11  www.nature.com/reviews/genetics

