An index to quantify an individual’s scientific
research output
J. E. Hirsch*
Department of Physics, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0319
Communicated by Manuel Cardona, Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research, Stuttgart, Germany, September 1, 2005 (received for review
August 15, 2005)
I propose the index h, defined as the number of papers with
citation number >h, as a useful index to characterize the scientific
output of a researcher.
citations  impact  unbiased
For the few scientists who earn a Nobel prize, the impact andrelevance of their research is unquestionable. Among the rest
of us, how does one quantify the cumulative impact and rele-
vance of an individual’s scientific research output? In a world of
limited resources, such quantification (even if potentially dis-
tasteful) is often needed for evaluation and comparison purposes
(e.g., for university faculty recruitment and advancement, award
of grants, etc.).
The publication record of an individual and the citation record
clearly are data that contain useful information. That informa-
tion includes the number (Np) of papers published over n years,
the number of citations (Nc
j ) for each paper (j), the journals
where the papers were published, their impact parameter, etc.
This large amount of information will be evaluated with different
criteria by different people. Here, I would like to propose a single
number, the ‘‘h index,’’ as a particularly simple and useful way to
characterize the scientific output of a researcher.
A scientist has index h if h of his or her Np papers have at least
h citations each and the other (Np  h) papers have h citations
each.
The research reported here concentrated on physicists; how-
ever, I suggest that the h index should be useful for other
scientific disciplines as well. (At the end of the paper I discuss
some observations for the h index in biological sciences.) The
highest h among physicists appears to be E. Witten’s h, which is
110. That is, Witten has written 110 papers with at least 110
citations each. That gives a lower bound on the total number of
citations to Witten’s papers at h2  12,100. Of course, the total
number of citations (Nc,tot) will usually be much larger than h2,
because h2 both underestimates the total number of citations of
the h most-cited papers and ignores the papers with h citations.
The relation between Nc,tot and h will depend on the detailed
form of the particular distribution (1), and it is useful to define
the proportionality constant a as
Nc,tot  ah2 . [1]
I find empirically that a ranges between 3 and 5.
Other prominent physicists with high hs are A. J. Heeger
(h  107), M. L. Cohen (h  94), A. C. Gossard (h  94), P. W.
Anderson (h  91), S. Weinberg (h  88), M. E. Fisher (h 
88), M. Cardona (h  86), P. G. deGennes (h  79), J. N.
Bahcall (h  77), Z. Fisk (h  75), D. J. Scalapino (h  75),
G. Parisi (h  73), S. G. Louie (h  70), R. Jackiw (h  69),
F. Wilczek (h  68), C. Vafa (h  66), M. B. Maple (h  66),
D. J. Gross (h  66), M. S. Dresselhaus (h  62), and S. W.
Hawking (h  62). I argue that h is preferable to other
single-number criteria commonly used to evaluate scientific
output of a researcher, as follows:
(i) Total number of papers (Np). Advantage: measures pro-
ductivity. Disadvantage: does not measure importance or
impact of papers.
(ii) Total number of citations (Nc,tot). Advantage: measures
total impact. Disadvantage: hard to find and may be inflated
by a small number of ‘‘big hits,’’ which may not be repre-
sentative of the individual if he or she is a coauthor with
many others on those papers. In such cases, the relation in
Eq. 1 will imply a very atypical value of a, 5. Another
disadvantage is that Nc,tot gives undue weight to highly cited
review articles versus original research contributions.
(iii) Citations per paper (i.e., ratio of Nc,tot to Np). Advantage:
allows comparison of scientists of different ages. Disadvan-
tage: hard to find, rewards low productivity, and penalizes
high productivity.
(iv) Number of ‘‘significant papers,’’ defined as the number of
papers with y citations (for example, y  50). Advantage:
eliminates the disadvantages of criteria i, ii, and iii and gives
an idea of broad and sustained impact. Disadvantage: y is
arbitrary and will randomly favor or disfavor individuals,
and y needs to be adjusted for different levels of seniority.
(v) Number of citations to each of the q most-cited papers (for
example, q  5). Advantage: overcomes many of the
disadvantages of the criteria above. Disadvantage: It is not
a single number, making it more difficult to obtain and
compare. Also, q is arbitrary and will randomly favor and
disfavor individuals.
Instead, the proposed h index measures the broad impact of an
individual’s work, avoids all of the disadvantages of the criteria
listed above, usually can be found very easily by ordering papers
by ‘‘times cited’’ in the Thomson ISI Web of Science database
(http:isiknowledge.com),† and gives a ballpark estimate of the
total number of citations (Eq. 1).
Thus, I argue that two individuals with similar hs are compa-
rable in terms of their overall scientific impact, even if their total
number of papers or their total number of citations is very
different. Conversely, comparing two individuals (of the same
scientific age) with a similar number of total papers or of total
citation count and very different h values, the one with the higher
h is likely to be the more accomplished scientist.
For a given individual, one expects that h should increase
approximately linearly with time. In the simplest possible model,
assume that the researcher publishes p papers per year and that
each published paper earns c new citations per year every
subsequent year. The total number of citations after n  1 years
is then
Nc,tot  
j1
n
pcj 
pcnn  1
2
. [2]
*E-mail: jhirsch@ucsd.edu.
†Of course, the database used must be complete enough to cover the full period spanned
by the individual’s publications.
© 2005 by The National Academy of Sciences of the USA
www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0507655102 PNAS  November 15, 2005  vol. 102  no. 46  16569–16572
PH
YS
IC
S
Assuming all papers up to year y contribute to the index h, we
have
n  yc  h [3a]
py  h. [3b]
The left side of Eq. 3a is the number of citations to the most
recent of the papers contributing to h; the left side of Eq. 3b is
the total number of papers contributing to h. Hence, from Eq. 3,
h 
c
1  cp n. [4]
The total number of citations (for not-too-small n) is then
approximately
Nc,tot 
1  cp2
2cp h
2 [5]
of the form Eq. 1. The coefficient a depends on the number of
papers and the number of citations per paper earned per year as
given by Eq. 5. As stated earlier, we find empirically that a  3–5
is a typical value. The linear relation
h  mn [6]
should hold quite generally for scientists who produce papers of
similar quality at a steady rate over the course of their careers;
of course, m will vary widely among different researchers. In the
simple linear model, m is related to c and p as given by Eq. 4.
Quite generally, the slope of h versus n, the parameter m, should
provide a useful yardstick to compare scientists of different
seniority.
In the linear model, the minimum value of a in Eq. 1 is a 
2, for the case c  p, where the papers with h citations and
those with h citations contribute equally to the total Nc,tot. The
value of a will be larger for both c  p and c  p. For c  p, most
contributions to the total number of citations arise from the
‘‘highly cited papers’’ (the h papers that have Nc  h), whereas
for c  p, it is the sparsely cited papers (the Np  h papers that
have h citations each) that give the largest contribution to Nc,tot.
We find that the first situation holds in the vast majority of, if not
all, cases. For the linear model defined in this example, a  4
corresponds to cp  5.83 (the other value that yields a  4,
cp  0.17, is unrealistic).
The linear model defined above corresponds to the distribution
Ncy  N0  N0h  1y, [7]
where Nc(y) is the number of citations to the yth paper (ordered
from most cited to least cited) and N0 is the number of citations
of the most highly cited paper (N0  cn in the example above).
The total number of papers ym is given by Nc(ym)  0; hence,
ym 
N0h
N0  h
. [8]
We can write N0 and ym in terms of a defined in Eq. 1 as
N0  ha  a2  2a	 [9a]
ym  ha  a2  2a	. [9b]
For a  2, N0  ym  2h. For larger a, the upper sign in Eq. 9
corresponds to the case where the highly cited papers dominate
(the more realistic case), and the lower sign corresponds to the
case where the less frequently cited papers dominate the total
citation count.
In a more realistic model, Nc(y) will not be a linear function
of y. Note that a  2 can safely be assumed to be a lower bound
quite generally, because a smaller value of a would require the
second derivative 2Ncy2 to be negative over large regions of
y, which is not realistic. The total number of citations is given by
the area under the Nc(y) curve that passes through the point
Nc(h)  h. In the linear model, the lowest a  2 corresponds to
the line of slope 1, as shown in Fig. 1.
A more realistic model would be a stretched exponential of the
form
Ncy  N0e
y
y0
. [10]
Note that for   1, N	c(y)  0 for all y; hence, a  2 is true. We
can write the distribution in terms of h and a as
Ncy 
a
	I
he yh	 [11]
with I() the integral
I  

0


dzez [12]
and 	 determined by the equation
	e	 
a
I
. [13]
The maximally cited paper has citations
N0 
a
	I
h, [14]
and the total number of papers (with at least one citation) is
determined by N(ym)  1 as
ym  h1  	lnh1/. [15]
A given researcher’s distribution can be modeled by choosing
the most appropriate  and a for that case. For example, for  
1, if a  3, 	  0.661, N0  4.54h, and ym  h[1  .66lnh]. With
a  4, 	  0.4644, N0  8.61h, and ym  h[1  0.46ln(h)]. For
Fig. 1. Schematic curve of number of citations versus paper number, with
papers numbered in order of decreasing citations. The intersection of the 45°
line with the curve gives h. The total number of citations is the area under the
curve. Assuming the second derivative is nonnegative everywhere, the mini-
mum area is given by the distribution indicated by the dotted line, yielding a 
2 in Eq. 1.
16570  www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0507655102 Hirsch
  0.5, the lowest possible value of a is 3.70; for that case, N0 
7.4h and ym  h[1  0.5ln(h)]2. Larger a values will increase N0
and reduce ym. For   23, the smallest possible a is a  3.24,
for which case N0  4.5h and ym  h[1  0.66ln(h)]3/2.
The linear relation between h and n (Eq. 6) will of course
break down when the researcher slows down in paper production
or stops publishing altogether. There is a time lag between the
two events. In the linear model, assuming the researcher stops
publishing after nstop years, h continues to increase at the same
rate for a time
nlag 
h
c

1
1  cp nstop [16]
and then stays constant, because now all published papers
contribute to h. In a more realistic model, h will smoothly level
off as n increases rather than with a discontinuous change in
slope. Still, quite generally, the time lag will be larger for
scientists who have published for many years, as Eq. 16 indicates.
Furthermore, in reality, of course, not all papers will
eventually contribute to h. Some papers with low citations will
never contribute to a researcher’s h, especially if written late
in the career, when h is already appreciable. As discussed by
Redner (3), most papers earn their citations over a limited
period of popularity and then they are no longer cited. Hence,
it will be the case that papers that contributed to a researcher’s
h early in his or her career will no longer contribute to h later
in the individual’s career. Nevertheless, it is of course always
true that h cannot decrease with time. The paper or papers that
at any given time have exactly h citations are at risk of being
eliminated from the individual’s h count as they are super-
seded by other papers that are being cited at a higher rate. It
is also possible that papers ‘‘drop out’’ and then later come
back into the h count, as would occur for the kind of papers
termed ‘‘sleeping beauties’’ (4).
For the individual researchers mentioned earlier, I find n
from the time elapsed since their first published paper till the
present and find the following values for the slope m defined
in Eq. 6: Witten, m  3.89; Heeger, m  2.38; Cohen, m  2.24;
Gossard, m  2.09; Anderson, m  1.88; Weinberg, m  1.76;
Fisher, m  1.91; Cardona, m  1.87; deGennes, m  1.75;
Bahcall, m  1.75; Fisk, m  2.14; Scalapino, m  1.88; Parisi,
m  2.15; Louie, m  2.33; Jackiw, m  1.92; Wilczek, m 
2.19; Vafa, m  3.30; Maple, m  1.94; Gross, m  1.69;
Dresselhaus, m  1.41; and Hawking, m  1.59. From inspec-
tion of the citation records of many physicists, I conclude the
following:
(i) A value of m  1 (i.e., an h index of 20 after 20 years of
scientific activity), characterizes a successful scientist.
(ii) A value of m  2 (i.e., an h index of 40 after 20 years of
scientific activity), characterizes outstanding scientists,
likely to be found only at the top universities or major
research laboratories.
(iii) A value of m  3 or higher (i.e., an h index of 60 after
20 years, or 90 after 30 years), characterizes truly unique
individuals.
The m parameter ceases to be useful if a scientist does not
maintain his or her level of productivity, whereas the h param-
eter remains useful as a measure of cumulative achievement that
may continue to increase over time even long after the scientist
has stopped publishing.
Based on typical h and m values found, I suggest (with large
error bars) that for faculty at major research universities, h  12
might be a typical value for advancement to tenure (associate
professor) and that h  18 might be a typical value for advance-
ment to full professor. Fellowship in the American Physical
Society might occur typically for h  15–20. Membership in the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
may typically be associated with h  45 and higher, except in
exceptional circumstances. Note that these estimates correspond
roughly to the typical number of years of sustained research
production assuming an m  1 value; the time scales of course
will be shorter for scientists with higher m values. Note that the
time estimates are taken from the publication of the first paper,
which typically occurs some years before the Ph.D. is earned.
There are, however, a number of caveats that should be kept
in mind. Obviously, a single number can never give more than a
rough approximation to an individual’s multifaceted profile, and
many other factors should be considered in combination in
evaluating an individual. Furthermore, the fact that there can
always be exceptions to rules should be kept in mind, especially
in life-changing decisions such as the granting or denying of
tenure. There will be differences in typical h values in different
fields, determined in part by the average number of references
in a paper in the field, the average number of papers produced
by each scientist in the field, and the size (number of scientists)
of the field (although, to a first approximation in a larger field,
there are more scientists to share a larger number of citations,
so typical h values should not necessarily be larger). Scientists
working in nonmainstream areas will not achieve the same very
high h values as the top echelon of those working in highly topical
areas. Although I argue that a high h is a reliable indicator of high
accomplishment, the converse is not necessarily always true.
There is considerable variation in the skewness of citation
distributions even within a given subfield, and for an author with
a relatively low h that has a few seminal papers with extraordi-
narily high citation counts, the h index will not fully reflect that
scientist’s accomplishments. Conversely, a scientist with a high h
achieved mostly through papers with many coauthors would be
treated overly kindly by his or her h. Subfields with typically large
collaborations (e.g., high-energy experiment) will exhibit larger
h values, and I suggest that in cases of large differences in the
number of coauthors, it may be useful in comparing different
individuals to normalize h by a factor that reflects the average
number of coauthors. For determining the scientific ‘‘age’’ in the
computation of m, the very first paper may sometimes not be the
appropriate starting point if it represents a relatively minor early
contribution well before sustained productivity ensued.
Finally, in any measure of citations, ideally one would like to
eliminate the self-citations. Although self-citations can obviously
increase a scientist’s h, their effect on h is much smaller than on
the total citation count. First, all self-citations to papers with h
citations are irrelevant, as are the self-citations to papers with
many more than h citations. To correct h for self-citations, one
would consider the papers with number of citations just h and
count the number of self-citations in each. If a paper with h  n
citations has n self-citations, it would be dropped from the h
count, and h would drop by 1. Usually, this procedure would
involve very few if any papers. As the other face of this coin,
scientists intent in increasing their h index by self-citations would
naturally target those papers with citations just h.
As an interesting sample population, I computed h and m for
the physicists who obtained Nobel prizes in the last 20 years (for
calculating m, I used the latter of the first published paper year
or 1955, the first year in the ISI database). However, the set was
further restricted by including only the names that uniquely
identified the scientist in the ISI citation index, which restricted
our set to 76% of the total. It is, however, still an unbiased
estimator, because the commonality of the name should be
uncorrelated with h and m. h indices range from 22 to 79, and
m indices range from 0.47 to 2.19. Averages and standard
deviations are h  41, 
h  15 and m  1.14, 
m  0.47. The
distribution of h indices is shown in Fig. 2; the median is at hm 
Hirsch PNAS  November 15, 2005  vol. 102  no. 46  16571
PH
YS
IC
S
35, lower than the mean due to the tail for high h values. It is
interesting that Nobel prize winners have substantial h indices
(84% had an h of at least 30), indicating that Nobel prizes do not
originate in one stroke of luck but in a body of scientific work.
Notably, the values of m found are often not high compared with
other successful scientists (49% of our sample had m  1), clearly
because Nobel prizes are often awarded long after the period of
maximum productivity of the researchers.
As another example, among newly elected members of the
National Academy of Sciences in physics and astronomy in 2005,
I find h  44, 
h  14, highest h  71, lowest h  20, and
median hm  46. Among the total membership in the National
Academy of Sciences in physics, the subgroup of last names
starting with ‘‘A’’ and ‘‘B’’ has h  38, 
h  10, and hm  37.
These examples further indicate that the index h is a stable and
consistent estimator of scientific achievement.
An intriguing idea is the extension of the h-index concept to
groups of individuals.‡ The SPIRES high-energy physics litera-
ture database (www.slac.stanford.eduspireshep) recently im-
plemented the h index in their citation summaries, and it also
allows the computation of h for groups of scientists. The overall
h index of a group will generally be larger than that of each of
the members of the group but smaller than the sum of the
individual h indices, because some of the papers that contribute
to each individual’s h will no longer contribute to the group’s h.
For example, the overall h index of the condensed matter group
at the University of California at San Diego physics department
is h  118, of which the largest individual contribution is 25; the
highest individual h is 66, and the sum of individual hs is 300.
The contribution of each individual to the group’s h is not
necessarily proportional to the individual’s h, and the highest
contributor to the group’s h will not necessarily be the individual
with highest h. In fact, in principle (although rarely in practice),
the lowest-h individual in a group could be the largest contrib-
utor to the group’s h. For a prospective graduate student
considering different graduate programs, a ranking of groups or
departments in his or her chosen area according to their overall
h index would likely be of interest, and for administrators
concerned with these issues, the ranking of their departments or
entire institution according to the overall h could also be of
interest.
To conclude, I discuss some observations in the fields of
biological and biomedical sciences. From the list compiled by
Christopher King of Thomson ISI of the most highly cited
scientists in the period 1983–2002 (5), I found the h indices for
the top 10 on that list, all in the life sciences, which are, in order
of decreasing h: S. H. Snyder, h  191; D. Baltimore, h  160;
R. C. Gallo, h  154; P. Chambon, h  153; B. Vogelstein, h 
151; S. Moncada, h  143; C. A. Dinarello, h  138; T.
Kishimoto, h  134; R. Evans, h  127; and A. Ullrich, h  120.
It can be seen that, not surprisingly, all of these highly cited
researchers also have high h indices and that high h indices in the
life sciences are much higher than in physics. Among 36 new
inductees in the National Academy of Sciences in biological and
biomedical sciences in 2005, I find h  57, 
h  22, highest h 
135, lowest h  18, and median hm  57. These latter results
confirm that h indices in biological sciences tend to be higher
than in physics; however, they also indicate that the difference
appears to be much higher at the high end than on average.
Clearly, more research in understanding similarities and differ-
ences of h index distributions in different fields of science would
be of interest.
In summary, I have proposed an easily computable index, h,
which gives an estimate of the importance, significance, and
broad impact of a scientist’s cumulative research contributions.
I suggest that this index may provide a useful yardstick with
which to compare, in an unbiased way, different individuals
competing for the same resource when an important evaluation
criterion is scientific achievement.
I am grateful to many colleagues in the University of California at San
Diego Condensed Matter group and especially Ivan Schuller for stim-
ulating discussions on these topics and encouragement to publish these
ideas. I also thank the many readers who wrote with interesting com-
ments since this paper was first posted at arXiv.org (6); the referees who
made constructive suggestions, all of which led to improvements in the
paper; and Travis Brooks and the SPIRES database administration for
rapidly implementing the h index in their database.
1. Laherrere, J. & Sornette, D. (1998) Eur. Phys. J. E Soft Matter B2,
525–539.
2. Redner, S. (1998) Eur. Phys. J. E Soft Matter B4, 131–134.
3. Redner, S. (2005) Phys. Today 58, 49–54.
4. van Raan, A. F. J. (2004) Scientometrics 59, 467–472.
5. King, C. (2003) Sci. Watch 14, no. 5, 1.
6. Hirsch, J. E. (2005) arXiv.org E-Print Archive (Aug. 3, 2005). Available at
http:arxiv.orgabsphysics0508025.
‡This was first introduced in the SPIRES database.
Fig. 2. Histogram giving the number of Nobel prize recipients in physics in
the last 20 years versus their h index. The peak is at the h index between 35
and 39.
16572  www.pnas.orgcgidoi10.1073pnas.0507655102 Hirsch

