Unsupervised Learning via Total Correlation Explanation
Greg Ver Steeg
University of Southern California
Information Sciences Institute
gregv@isi.edu
Abstract
Learning by children and animals occurs effortlessly
and largely without obvious supervision. Successes
in automating supervised learning have not trans-
lated to the more ambiguous realm of unsupervised
learning where goals and labels are not provided.
Barlow (1961) suggested that the signal that brains
leverage for unsupervised learning is dependence,
or redundancy, in the sensory environment. Depen-
dence can be characterized using the information-
theoretic multivariate mutual information measure
called total correlation. The principle of Total Cor-
relation Ex-planation (CorEx) is to learn represen-
tations of data that “explain” as much dependence
in the data as possible. We review some manifesta-
tions of this principle along with successes in unsu-
pervised learning problems across diverse domains
including human behavior, biology, and language.
1 Introduction
The brain is an information-processing chunk of meat with
some amazing properties. Linsker, inventor of the InfoMax
principle, made a statement thirty years ago that still rings true
today, with some caveats.
A young animal or child perceives and identifies fea-
tures in its environment in an apparently effortless
way. No presently known algorithms even approach
this flexible, general-purpose perceptual capability.
Discovering the principles that may underlie percep-
tual processing is important both for neuroscience
and for the development of synthetic perceptual sys-
tems. [Linsker, 1988]
Perception problems like visual object recognition that were
once the exclusive domain of humans are now routinely car-
ried out by computers. Surprisingly, this success did not come
from profound understanding of the information processing
principles in the brain, but more from brute force scaling
of deep supervised optimization algorithms trained on large,
labeled image datasets [Bengio et al., 2013]. On the other
hand, supervised deep learners are not as flexible or general
purpose as Linsker envisioned because they rely heavily on
the availability and quality of the training labels. Moreover,
the resulting representations can be brittle and hard to inter-
pret [Szegedy et al., 2014]. Reducing the reliance on labels
would greatly broaden the scope of these methods.
Unfortunately, successes in supervised learning have not
translated to unsupervised learning [Bengio et al., 2012]. The
inherent ambiguity and open-ended nature of the unsupervised
problem makes it difficult to brute force a solution [Minsky,
1961]. Learning principles that are general and flexible enough
to apply across diverse domains, like human cognition, are
needed. Barlow (1961) posited that the signal that the brain
leverages for effective learning in the absence of direct supervi-
sion are redundancies or dependencies observed in the sensory
environment. Investigating how the brain uses this redundancy
has motivated several influential ideas [Barlow et al., 1989;
Simoncelli and Olshausen, 2001].
This paper describes an information-theoretic approach
to formalizing Barlow’s idea called Total Cor-relation Ex-
planation (CorEx). CorEx constructs a hierarchy of latent
factors that progressively explain more dependencies in the
observations as measured by multivariate information, also
called total correlation. “Explanation” here is meant in the
statistical sense that conditioned on the latent factors, Y , the
observed random variables X1, . . . , Xn will be statistically
independent. While some learning approaches will learn to
memorize even random, independent noise, from the CorEx
perspective a lack of relationships in the data implies that there
is nothing to learn. We will review the CorEx principle in the
context of related information-theoretic methods then demon-
strate its power and versatility on a wide range of unsupervised
learning problems from human behavior to biology.
2 Information Principles for Learning
Claude Shannon launched the field of information theory with
a seminal paper in 1948. Consider a random variable, X ,
that can take values like x with probability p(X = x) (a
coin flip, for example). Shannon defined the entropy of this
random variable as H(X) ≡
〈
− log p(x)
〉
where brackets
indicate expectation values over random variables. Shannon
showed that this is the unique measure (up to scaling) that
satisfies reasonable axioms and bounds the best rate of lossless
compression. For a deeper intuition, see [DeDeo, 2015].
Given two random variables, X1 and X2, the mutual infor-
mation is just the difference between the sum of individual
entropies and the entropy of the variables considered jointly
ar
X
iv
:1
70
6.
08
98
4v
1 
 [
st
at
.M
L
] 
 2
7 
Ju
n 
20
17
as a single system,
I(X1;X2) ≡ H(X1) +H(X2)−H(X1, X2).
Shannon demonstrated that this quantity bounds the number
of messages that can be reliably sent over a noisy channel.
The definition of mutual information between two parties
can be generalized easily to n parties. We refer to this gen-
eralization as TC for total correlation following its historical
introduction [Watanabe, 1960].
TC(X1, . . . , Xn) ≡
n∑
i=1
H(Xi)−H(X1, . . . , Xn)
= DKL
(
p(x1, . . . , xn)‖
n∏
i=1
p(xi)
)
.
In the following, we will often shorten X ≡ X1, . . . , Xn. We
also wrote TC in terms of KL-divergence, DKL. TC(X) = 0
if and only if all the Xi are independent. We can define
conditional TC as TC(X|Y ) = DKL(p(x|y)‖
∏
i p(xi|y))
and this quantity will be zero if and only if Xi are independent
conditioned on Y .
Although Shannon gave a general yet precise definition of
information, he warned that using everyday words for termi-
nology can be misleading [Shannon, 1956]. If we consider
building a representation of observations, X , as Y = f(X), it
seems quite intuitive to maximize the “information” that Y has
about X by maximizing mutual information, I(X;Y ). Indeed,
this is the substance of the InfoMax principle [Linsker, 1988;
Bell and Sejnowski, 1995]. But the information is maximized
if we simply memorize the data. Typically, InfoMax is in-
voked to maximize mutual information under some simplicity
constraints. Still, it seems counter-intuitive that adding more
resources should degrade learning performance. This phe-
nomenon has been observed using InfoMax for clustering:
more data leads to worse clustering [Ver Steeg et al., 2014].
An opposite point of view is taken in the information bot-
tleneck [Tishby et al., 2000]. In that case, I(X;Y ) is actually
minimized under the intuition that we should compress X as
much as possible. A trade-off is formulated that we should
compress Y while maintaining information about some labels,
Z. While this approach is natural, it requires labeled data.
Unsupervised approaches have also been motivated from
the point of view that the brain has to compress information.
In particular, Barlow points out that in a compressed represen-
tation neurons should fire independently [Barlow et al., 1989]
(since correlations signal redundancy). In this spirit, indepen-
dent component analysis (ICA) seeks to minimize TC(Y ),
where Y is a representation of the inputs, X [Hyvärinen and
Oja, 2000]. Other work suggests that efficient coding of infor-
mation in the brain should additionally require that the firing
of individual neurons be sparse [Simoncelli and Olshausen,
2001]. While ICA has led to many useful results, the CorEx
principle suggests a modification with several benefits.
These learning principles are summarized in Table 1. While
this list may look old-fashioned to some readers, these ideas
are regularly invoked in modern papers on deep learning [Vin-
cent et al., 2008; Dinh et al., 2014; Tishby and Zaslavsky,
2015; Kolchinsky et al., 2017; Achille and Soatto, 2016;
Table 1: Comparison of information principles for learning.
Method Objective
InfoMax maxY I(Y ;X)
Info bottleneck minY I(Y ;X)− βI(Y ;Z)
ICA minY TC(Y )
Common information minY TC(X|Y )
CorEx (1 layer) minY TC(X|Y ) + TC(Y )
(1 layer, alternate form) minY
∑
j I(Yj ;X)−
∑
i I(Xi;Y )
Chen et al., 2016b]. For brevity, other notable ideas have
been omitted in this discussion including learning based
on “coarse-graining” observations [Goerg and Shalizi, 2012;
Wolpert et al., 2014], Jaynes’ maximum entropy princi-
ple [Jaynes, 2003], integrated information theory [Oizumi et
al., 2014], and common information [Ver Steeg et al., 2017].
2.1 Total Correlation Explanation
One drawback of InfoMax, ICA, and others is that they are
intrinsically shallow. For example, a transformation into inde-
pendent components using ICA does not provide intermediate
representations. Even if intermediate steps are used to get the
independent components, there is no reason for these terms
to be meaningful since they are not represented in the objec-
tive. It would be nice to have a hierarchy of abstraction where
lower layers capture local relationships and higher layers re-
flect more global relationships.
One Layer We will begin with a shallow formulation of
CorEx, to see how it compares to other learning principles,
then we will show that it has a natural hierarchical exten-
sion. Assume that each factor, Yj , (also called neurons or
hidden units) is a function of the data, X , Yj = fj(X). More
generally, it could be drawn from a probabilistic function,
Yj ∼ p(Yj |X). The Y ’s are generated according to a graph-
ical model like the left side of Fig. 1 (with r = 1 for now).
Under what conditions can we interpret these Y ’s as latent
factors that generate the data? In other words, when can we
flip the arrows to get the graphical model on the right where
the Y ’s generate the dependence in X? The graphical model
on the right side of Fig. 1 is equivalent to a set of conditional
independence relationships that can be summarized by saying
TC(X|Y ) + TC(Y ) = 0 [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2017]. In
other words, each layer explains the correlations in the layer
below or is independent. This is one way to write the CorEx
objective (for one layer).
min
p(yj |x)
TC(X|Y ) + TC(Y )
The objective is non-negative and the global minimum occurs
at zero, in which case we can flip the arrows to interpret Y ’s as
generating the dependence in X . Looking at Table 1, we see
that this optimization has an ICA term plus another term that
demands that Y ’s make the X’s conditionally independent.
With some manipulation, it can be seen that this optimization
is also equivalent to the following optimization [Ver Steeg and
Galstyan, 2015].
min
p(yj |x)
∑
j
I(Yj ;X)−
∑
i
I(Xi;Y )
X1 X2 X... Xn
Y 1m1Y
1
1 Y
1
...
Y r1 Y
r
mrk=r
k=1
k=0 X1 X2 X... Xn
Y 1m1Y
1
1 Y
1
...
Y r1 Y
r
mr
?
=)
... ...
Figure 1: A hierarchical representation where each layer is a proba-
bilistic function of the layer below it. We deduce a condition under
which we can flip the arrows and interpret the constructed factors, Y ,
as generating the dependence in the data.
Again looking at Table 1, this alternate form shows the similar-
ity to the information bottleneck. Instead of requiring labels,
Z, we simply compress X into each latent factor Yj while
maintaining relevance about each of our observed variables,
Xi. From this point of view, we can view CorEx as a special
unsupervised version of the information bottleneck.
Multiple Layers Now we extend to the hierarchical case.
We start by building a hierarchy with r layers as on the left
side of Fig. 1. For simplicity we define the variables at layer
k as Y k and we define Y 0 ≡ X and Y r+1 = 0 (a constant).
Now let each layer explain dependence in the layer below.
min
p(ykj |x)
r∑
k=0
TC(Y k|Y k+1) (1)
Again, this quantity is non-negative and has a global minimum
at zero. At the global minimum, we can flip the arrows and
interpret the latent factors as a generative model for the depen-
dence in X . We can again re-write the objective as a sum of
bottleneck-like optimizations at each layer of the hierarchy.
max
p(ykj |x)
r∑
k=0
∑
i
I(Y ki ;Y
k+1)−
∑
j
I(Y k+1j ;Y
k)
 (2)
An advantage of writing the objective in this second form is
that it can be directly plugged into a useful inequality [Ver
Steeg and Galstyan, 2015].
TC(X) ≥
r∑
k=0
∑
i
I(Y ki ;Y
k+1)−
∑
j
I(Y k+1j ;Y
k)
 (3)
TC(X) is the amount of dependence observed in the data. For
high-dimensional systems, this is hard to estimate. However,
the bound in Eq. 3 allows us to solve a hierarchy of opti-
mization problems giving progressively tighter lower bounds
on the dependence in X . Because each layer directly con-
tributes to the lower bound on TC(X), we can quantify the
value of depth and stop adding layers to the hierarchy when
the lower bound stops increasing. Local optima of this non-
convex optimization can be found using algorithms with low
computational and sample complexity.
CorEx hierarchically decomposes multivariate information
in X in terms of contributions from latent factors at each
layer of a hierarchy. This decomposition can be viewed as a
generalization of the hierarchical decomposition introduced
by Watanabe [Watanabe, 1960].
Incremental CorEx Just as PCA has an incremental ver-
sion where one component is extracted at a time, the in-
cremental version of the CorEx principle is the informa-
tion sieve [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2016]. For the incre-
mental version, we consider the special case where Y is
one-dimensional so that TC(Y ) = 0 and the objective in
Eq. 1 reduces to minY TC(X|Y ). After learning one Y
that optimizes the objective, we transform the data (a kind
of information-theoretic orthogonalization) so that we can
learn another factor that extracts more dependence. The
sieve optimization is a dual formulation of the optimiza-
tion defining the Wyner common information [Wyner, 1975;
Op’t Veld and Gastpar, 2016] and can be viewed as a decom-
position of common information [Ver Steeg et al., 2017].
2.2 Implementations of the CorEx Principle
We briefly review implementations of the CorEx principle,
including their applicability and limitations. Code is available
at http://github.com/gregversteeg.
• CorEx [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2014]: The original
implementation is restricted to discrete variables and tree
structured latent factors. The functionality is subsumed
by other versions.
• bio_corex [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2015; Pepke and
Ver Steeg, 2017]: The most flexible version includes aug-
mentations that were designed for challenges in the biol-
ogy domain, though there is nothing specific to biology
in the implementation. This version handles discrete and
continuous variables, overlapping latent factor structure,
and missing data. Although CorEx has intrinsically low
sample complexity, some biology data is severely under-
sampled. This version implements a Bayesian smoothing
of the marginal parameter estimates that reduces the ap-
pearance of spurious correlations [Pepke and Ver Steeg,
2017]. This version runs quickly for problems with up to
thousands of variables.
• discrete_sieve [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2016]:
This is the first implementation of the information sieve
for discrete variables. In the discrete case, the informa-
tion orthogonalization required by the sieve is extremely
challenging. The approach is impractical for most real
world problems.
• LinearSieve [Ver Steeg et al., 2017]: The linear ver-
sion of the information sieve (for continuous variables) is
fast and practical for finding the top components explain-
ing the most correlation in data. Like other incremental
methods, repeated application eventually introduces nu-
merical instability.
• LinearCorEx [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2017]: The
fastest, non-sparse version of CorEx assumes latent fac-
tors are linear functions of the inputs. Linear CorEx is
very effective for covariance estimation and subspace
clustering in high-dimensional, under-sampled data.
• corex_topic [Reing et al., 2016; Gallagher et al.,
2016]: This implementation exploits sparsity for major
speed-ups, easily handling hundreds of thousands of vari-
ables depending on the sparsity of the data. While this
version was developed for topic modeling using binary
bag of words data, it can be applied to any binary data.
This implementation includes a semi-supervised option.
3 Applications
The most successful applications of the CorEx principle in-
volve high-dimensional data in complex domains that are dif-
ficult to model a priori. In practice, the learned hierarchical
representation is used in several ways. First, the structure
induces a hierarchical clustering of input variables. Second,
the latent factors at each layer constitute a reduced dimension-
ality representation of the input data. Third, individual factors
often disentangle true latent factors of variation in the data.
Finally, like PCA, we can rank factors according to their value.
While PCA finds components that explain the most variance,
in CorEx we find factors that explain the most dependence.
Social Science Latent factor models like the “Big 5” person-
ality factors are popular in social science because of their sim-
plicity and interpretability. Given data from an online survey
with the Big 5 questions, CorEx was able to perfectly recon-
struct the Big 5 factors while standard methods failed [Ver
Steeg and Galstyan, 2014]. CorEx outperforms traditional
factor methods when the number of variables is larger than the
number of samples [Ver Steeg et al., 2017], as is increasingly
common in social science experiments.
Gene Expression If DNA is the software for our biology,
then gene expression tells us which code is running. New
sequencing methods allow us to read expression levels for
thousands of genes but, unfortunately, only a tiny fraction
of these processes are understood. Applying CorEx to gene
expression reveals a rich array of strong biological signals.
Gene clusters discovered by CorEx exhibit four times more
enrichment with respect to known biology in gene ontology
databases than standard approaches [Pepke and Ver Steeg,
2017]. The CorEx hierarchy also seems to accurately reflect
biological organization. For instance, two low-level clusters,
immune cell activation and inflammatory response, are com-
bined in a higher-level group related to immune signaling.
Neuroscience Next generation imaging technology gives
detailed views of individual brains but even the largest studies
can only afford to image a relatively small number of brains.
Small sample sizes with high-dimensional data has led to low
statistical power in most studies and a crisis of replication
in the field [Button et al., 2013]. Exploratory data analysis
using CorEx can help identify only the strongest, most robust
dependencies in the data, even with small sample sizes. Early
results have identified well-known relationships along with
novel, biologically plausible candidate effects that increase
predictive power [Madsen et al., 2015; Madsen et al., 2016;
Zavaliangos-Petropulu et al., 2017]. Moreover, CorEx out-
performs ICA for disentangling spatial modes in imaging
data [Ver Steeg et al., 2017].
Language Applied to bag of words vectors of text data,
CorEx representations can be interpreted as hierarchical
topic models [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2014; Hodas et al.,
2015]. Latent tree based methods like CorEx outperform
LDA [Chen et al., 2016a] on several measures of topic qual-
ity. A semi-supervised version further increases the inter-
pretability of topics by allowing us to “anchor” some latent
factors to designated words of interest [Reing et al., 2016;
Gallagher et al., 2016].
Finance The stock market exhibits a high degree of depen-
dence and measuring this dependence is important for quanti-
fying risk. Applied to monthly returns on the S&P 500, CorEx
discovers a hierarchy of latent factors related to industry sec-
tors [Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2015]. Using a linear version
of CorEx allows us to estimate covariance matrices and this
approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods like GLASSO
for under-sampled, high-dimensional stock market data [Ver
Steeg and Galstyan, 2017].
4 Conclusion
Learning useful representations of observations without su-
pervision across diverse domains is a challenging, unsolved
problem. While successes in supervised learning have not
immediately translated to comparable results for unsuper-
vised learning, the engineering achievements that have driven
those successes now allow us to define flexible, power-
ful architectures and quickly and easily optimize them un-
der a wide variety objectives [TensorFlow, 2015]. Taking
information-theoretic learning principles and applying them
within these powerful frameworks has already generated many
compelling results [Chen et al., 2016b; Kolchinsky et al., 2017;
Achille and Soatto, 2016]. Applying the CorEx principle in
the same context is a logical step for future work.
Unlike similar learning principles, CorEx naturally decom-
poses information in a hierarchical way. This hierarchical
structure has numerical advantages since the objective is less
reliant on back-propagation for training. Credit for predicting
a correct label does not have to be assigned to intermediate
representations as in supervised learning [Minsky, 1961], in-
stead each latent factor in the representation has a quantifiable
information value within the hierarchical decomposition. Be-
sides the technical advantages, many applications show that
individual latent factors learned via CorEx reflect diverse and
meaningful structure in real-world datasets. We hope that
ongoing CorEx developments continue to accelerate the dis-
covery of knowledge through unsupervised learning.
References
[Achille and Soatto, 2016] Alessandro Achille and Stefano Soatto.
Information dropout: Learning optimal representations through
noisy computation. ArXiv e-prints, 2016.
[Barlow et al., 1989] Horace B Barlow, Tej P Kaushal, and Graeme J
Mitchison. Finding minimum entropy codes. Neural Computation,
1(3):412–423, 1989.
[Bell and Sejnowski, 1995] Anthony J Bell and Terrence J Se-
jnowski. An information-maximization approach to blind sep-
aration and blind deconvolution. Neural computation, 7(6):1129–
1159, 1995.
[Bengio et al., 2012] Yoshua Bengio, Aaron C Courville, and Pascal
Vincent. Unsupervised feature learning and deep learning: A
review and new perspectives. CoRR, abs/1206.5538, 1, 2012.
[Bengio et al., 2013] Yoshua Bengio, Aaron Courville, and Pascal
Vincent. Representation learning: A review and new perspec-
tives. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 35(8):1798–
1828, 2013.
[Button et al., 2013] Katherine S Button, John PA Ioannidis, Claire
Mokrysz, Brian A Nosek, Jonathan Flint, Emma SJ Robinson,
and Marcus R Munafò. Power failure: why small sample size
undermines the reliability of neuroscience. Nature Reviews Neu-
roscience, 14(5):365–376, 2013.
[Chen et al., 2016a] Peixian Chen, Nevin L Zhang, Leonard KM
Poon, and Zhourong Chen. Progressive em for latent tree models
and hierarchical topic detection. In Thirtieth AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, 2016.
[Chen et al., 2016b] Xi Chen, Yan Duan, Rein Houthooft, John
Schulman, Ilya Sutskever, and Pieter Abbeel. Infogan: Inter-
pretable representation learning by information maximizing gen-
erative adversarial nets. In Advances In Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems 29 (NIPS), pages 2172–2180, 2016.
[DeDeo, 2015] Simon DeDeo. Information theory for intelligent
people, 2015.
[Dinh et al., 2014] Laurent Dinh, David Krueger, and Yoshua Ben-
gio. Nice: Non-linear independent components estimation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1410.8516, 2014.
[Gallagher et al., 2016] R.J. Gallagher, K. Reing, D. Kale, and
G. Ver Steeg. Anchored correlation explanation: Topic
modeling with minimal domain knowledge. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1611.10277, 2016.
[Goerg and Shalizi, 2012] G.M. Goerg and C.R. Shalizi. Licors:
Light cone reconstruction of states for non-parametric forecasting
of spatio-temporal systems. arXiv:1206.2398, 2012.
[Hodas et al., 2015] N. Hodas, G. Ver Steeg, J. Harrison, S. Chikk-
agoudar, E. Bell, and C. Corley. Disentangling the lexicons of
disaster response in twitter. In The 3rd International Workshop on
Social Web for Disaster Management (SWDM’15), 2015.
[Hyvärinen and Oja, 2000] A. Hyvärinen and E. Oja. Independent
component analysis: algorithms and applications. Neural net-
works, 13(4):411–430, 2000.
[Jaynes, 2003] Edwin T Jaynes. Probability theory: the logic of
science. Cambridge university press, 2003.
[Kolchinsky et al., 2017] Artemy Kolchinsky, Brendan D Tracey,
and David H Wolpert. Nonlinear information bottleneck. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1705.02436, 2017.
[Linsker, 1988] Ralph Linsker. Self-organization in a perceptual
network. Computer, 21(3):105–117, 1988.
[Madsen et al., 2015] Sarah K. Madsen, Greg Ver Steeg, Adam
Mezher, Neda Jahanshad, Talia M. Nir, Xue Hua, Boris A. Gut-
man, Aram Galstyan, and Paul M. Thompson. Information-
theoretic characterization of blood panel predictors for brain at-
rophy and cognitive decline in the elderly. IEEE International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, 2015.
[Madsen et al., 2016] Sarah K. Madsen, Greg Ver Steeg, Madelaine
Daianu, Adam Mezher, Neda Jahanshad, Talia M. Nir, Xue Hua,
Boris A. Gutman, Aram Galstyan, and Paul M. Thompson. Rel-
ative value of diverse brain mri and blood-based measures for
predicting cognitive decline in the elderly. SPIE Medical Imaging,
2016.
[Minsky, 1961] Marvin Minsky. Steps toward artificial intelligence.
Proceedings of the IRE, 49(1):8–30, 1961.
[Oizumi et al., 2014] Masafumi Oizumi, Larissa Albantakis, and
Giulio Tononi. From the phenomenology to the mechanisms of
consciousness: integrated information theory 3.0. 2014.
[Op’t Veld and Gastpar, 2016] Giel Op’t Veld and Michael C Gast-
par. Caching gaussians: Minimizing total correlation on the gray–
wyner network. In 50th Annual Conference on Information Sys-
tems and Sciences (CISS), 2016.
[Pepke and Ver Steeg, 2017] Shirley Pepke and Greg Ver Steeg.
Comprehensive discovery of subsample gene expression com-
ponents by information explanation: therapeutic implications in
cancer. BMC medical genomics, 10(1):12, 2017.
[Reing et al., 2016] Kyle Reing, David C Kale, Greg Ver Steeg, and
Aram Galstyan. Toward interpretable topic discovery via anchored
correlation explanation. In Proceedings of the 2016 ICML Work-
shop on Human Interpretability in Machine Learning (WHI 2016),
number arXiv:1606.07043, 2016.
[Shannon, 1948] C.E. Shannon. A mathematical theory of commu-
nication. The Bell System Technical Journal, 27:379–423, 1948.
[Shannon, 1956] Claude Shannon. The bandwagon (edtl.). IRE
Transactions on Information Theory, 1(2):3, 1956.
[Simoncelli and Olshausen, 2001] Eero Simoncelli and Bruno Ol-
shausen. Natural image statistics and neural representation. Annu.
Rev. Neurosci., 24, 2001.
[Szegedy et al., 2014] C. Szegedy, W. Zaremba, I. Sutskever,
J. Bruna, D. Erhan, I. Goodfellow, and R. Fergus. Intriguing
properties of neural networks. In ICLR, 2014.
[TensorFlow, 2015] TensorFlow. Large-scale machine learning on
heterogeneous systems, 2015. Software available from tensor-
flow.org.
[Tishby and Zaslavsky, 2015] Naftali Tishby and Noga Zaslavsky.
Deep learning and the information bottleneck principle. In Infor-
mation Theory Workshop (ITW), 2015 IEEE. IEEE, 2015.
[Tishby et al., 2000] Naftali Tishby, Fernando C Pereira, and
William Bialek. The information bottleneck method.
arXiv:physics/0004057, 2000.
[Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2014] G. Ver Steeg and A. Galstyan. Dis-
covering structure in high-dimensional data through correlation
explanation. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NIPS), 2014.
[Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2015] Greg Ver Steeg and Aram Galstyan.
Maximally informative hierarchical representations of high-
dimensional data. In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International
Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS),
2015. http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.7404.
[Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2016] Greg Ver Steeg and Aram Galstyan.
The information sieve. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2016.
[Ver Steeg and Galstyan, 2017] Greg Ver Steeg and Aram Galstyan.
Low complexity gaussian latent factor models and a blessing of
dimensionality. arXiv:1706.03353 [stat.ML], 2017.
[Ver Steeg et al., 2014] Greg Ver Steeg, Aram Galstyan, Fei Sha,
and Simon DeDeo. Demystifying information-theoretic clustering.
In International Conference on Machine Learning, 2014.
[Ver Steeg et al., 2017] Greg Ver Steeg, Shuyang Gao, Kyle Reing,
and Aram Galstyan. Sifting common information from many
variables. IJCAI, 2017.
[Vincent et al., 2008] Pascal Vincent, Hugo Larochelle, Yoshua Ben-
gio, and Pierre-Antoine Manzagol. Extracting and composing
robust features with denoising autoencoders. In Proceedings of
the 25th international conference on Machine learning, pages
1096–1103. ACM, 2008.
[Watanabe, 1960] Satosi Watanabe. Information theoretical anal-
ysis of multivariate correlation. IBM Journal of research and
development, 4(1):66–82, 1960.
[Wolpert et al., 2014] David H Wolpert, Joshua A Grochow, Eric
Libby, and Simon DeDeo. A framework for optimal high-level de-
scriptions in science and engineering—preliminary report. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1409.7403, 2014.
[Wyner, 1975] Aaron D Wyner. The common information of two
dependent random variables. Information Theory, IEEE Transac-
tions on, 21(2):163–179, 1975.
[Zavaliangos-Petropulu et al., 2017] Artemis Zavaliangos-
Petropulu, Emily L Dennis, Greg Ver Steeg, Talin Babikian,
Richard Mink, Christopher Babbitt, Jeffrey Johnson, Christo-
pher C Giza, Robert F Asarnow, and Paul M Thompson. Variable
clustering reveals associations between subcortical brain volume
and cognitive changes in pediatric traumatic brain injury. In 12th
International Symposium on Medical Information Processing and
Analysis. International Society for Optics and Photonics, 2017.

