Two-Stage Hybrid Day-Ahead Solar Forecasting   
 
Mohana Alanazi, Mohsen Mahoor, Amin Khodaei 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
University of Denver 
Denver, USA 
mohana.alanazi@du.edu, mohsen.mahoor@du.edu, amin.khodaei@du.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Power supply from renewable resources is on a 
global rise where it is forecasted that renewable generation will 
surpass other types of generation in a foreseeable future. 
Increased generation from renewable resources, mainly solar and 
wind, exposes the power grid to more vulnerabilities, conceivably 
due to their variable generation, thus highlighting the 
importance of accurate forecasting methods. This paper proposes 
a two-stage day-ahead solar forecasting method that breaks 
down the forecasting into linear and nonlinear parts, determines 
subsequent forecasts, and accordingly, improves accuracy of the 
obtained results. To further reduce the error resulted from 
nonstationarity of the historical solar radiation data, a data 
processing approach, including pre-process and post-process 
levels, is integrated with the proposed method. Numerical 
simulations on three test days with different weather conditions 
exhibit the effectiveness of the proposed two-stage model. 
Keywords—Solar generation forecast, global horizontal 
irradiance, autoregressive moving average model with exogenous 
input, nonlinear autoregressive neural network. 
NOMENCLATURE 
GHIactual  Target global horizontal irradiance 
GHI actual   Average target GHI 
GHI forecast  Forecasted global horizontal irradiance   
N   Number of GHI values 
q    Back shift operator  
t   Index for hour 
u(k)  ARMAX input 
v(k)  Disturbance/error 
y(k)   ARMAX output 
Yt   Detrended solar time series  
I. INTODUCTION 
ENEWABLE generation has become a viable source that 
can provide sustainable and inexpensive supply of 
electricity, due to significant technological advances and 
many local and national incentives. However, generation from 
renewable resources has confronted variety of challenges, 
mainly because of the inherently variable generation. Such 
variability is caused by various climatic parameters such as 
temperature, air pressure, cloudiness, etc. [1]. An accurate 
forecast of generation of these resources will provide the power 
system operator the ability to plan ahead and control any 
generation variability form renewable resources by dispatching 
controllable generation resources in a coordinated fashion [1].  
 
Fig. 1 The new added U.S. electric generation from 2010 to Q1 2016 [2]. 
 
Fig. 2 U.S. solar energy deployment [3]. 
The growth in the amount of generation from renewable 
energy resources has been unprecedented. This growth is 
driven by the environmental concerns associated with CO2 
emissions and the global warming, as well as the state and 
governmental support of renewable resources, combined with 
the falling cost of the renewable energy technology. As shown 
in Fig. 1, in the first quarter of 2016 the added generation 
capacity from solar to the U.S grid represents 64% of the 
newly-added generation capacity. In the second quarter of 
2016, the U.S. installed 2051 MW of solar, which is 43% 
higher of the installation in the similar timeframe in 2015, to 
reach a total installed capacity of 31.6 GW [2]. 
In December 2015, legislation was singed to extend the 
solar Investment Tax Credit (ITC) through 2020 in the Unites 
States. The ITC extension will result in more than 72 GW of 
PV to be deployed from 2016 through 2020. Fig. 2 depicts the 
projected solar PV deployment in this timeframe [3]. With 
such increase in solar generation installations, a proper 
forecasting is needed to help power system operators safely 
integrate solar generation and accordingly optimize electricity 
production and system management.  
R    
There are extensive studies on solar generation forecasting 
based on variety of methods with the common goal of 
minimizing the forecasting error. Using an efficient 
forecasting tool, power system operators will be able to 
schedule generation, obtain operating reserves, and 
administrate changes in loads and power outputs 
economically. Solar forecast is used in power industry to 
shape generation portfolios. For instant, a total of 38 GW of 
solar capacity was traded in energy market in Germany. Such 
amount of capacity would robustly have an effect on market 
prices [4]. Forecasting is commonly performed using physical 
or statistical models, or a combination of the two. Physical 
models rely on the physical description of the atmosphere and 
utilize the current observations of weather data and process 
them in order to predict future conditions using 
supercomputers. Physical models are suitable for long-time 
horizons and can be divided into two categories of numerical 
weather prediction (NWP) and the satellite/cloud imagery. 
The NWP is based on the current observations in atmosphere, 
which are processed to produce hundreds of meteorological 
elements such as temperature and solar irradiance through a 
process called assimilation. There are different NWP models 
such as global forecast system (GFS) and the ERA5 by the 
European center for medium range weather forecast [5]. In 
[6], different NWP  models are analyzed to predict 14 hours of 
GHI, where the resulted root mean square error (RMSE) 
ranges from 20% to 40%. The satellite/cloud imagery helps 
understand the cloud motion by knowing the cloudiness with 
high spatial resolution. By understanding the cloud motion, 
the cloud position can be predicted, and thus the solar 
irradiance can be forecasted [7].  
The statistical models require a large set of historical data in 
order to form a relationship between input and other important 
factors to forecast the output. These models rely on different 
mathematical algorithms to identify the patterns and trends in 
the time series. The common statistical models are persistence 
model, which predicts the next value based on the previous 
value, autoregressive (AR), moving average (MA), 
autoregressive and moving average (ARMA), and artificial 
neural networks (ANNs). Time series models aim to predict 
the future sequence of observations using historical data over 
various time horizons such as hourly, daily, or weekly. As the 
observations could be random, the time series is referred as a 
stochastic process [8]. Time series models focus only at the 
patterns of the data. In order to forecast a time series, these 
patterns should be identifiable and predictable. One of the 
most widely-used time series models is the ARMA model, 
which was created by Peter Whittle in 1951 and thoroughly 
developed and explained by Box-Jenkins in 1971. The ARMA 
model can be represented mathematically as  
, where  is 
coefficient for AR part,  is the coefficient for MA part,  is 
the white noise, and p and q are the orders of the AR and the 
MA, respectively. In [9], it is reported that the ARMA model 
shows an improvement in the mean square error (MSE) as 
much as 44.38% over the persistence model for 1-hour-ahead 
forecast. It should be noted that the time series has to be 
stationary before it is fed to the ARMA model [10]. The 
artificial neural network (ANN) is another viable statistical 
forecasting method that is based on the idea of the biological 
neural system in the human brain. The ANNs have the ability 
to process a complex nonlinear time series and find the 
relationship between the input and the target output using 
different training and learning algorithms. There are different 
types of ANNs such as the recurrent neural network (RNN), 
feed forward neural network (FFNN), and radial basis 
function neural network (RBFNN). A detailed review of 
different ANNs for solar forecasting applications is provided 
in [11]. Hybrid models have become more popular as they 
offer the combined advantages and reduce the limitations of 
other methods. In hybrid models, two or more forecasting 
methods are combined to get a better forecasting accuracy. In 
[12], a hybrid model of a variety of forecasting models is 
proposed to predict the next 48 hours solar generation in North 
Portugal. The hybrid model has shown an improvement of 
57.4% over the persistence model and 34.06% over the 
statistical model. Some of the viable solar forecasting models 
in the literature can be found in [13]–[25]. 
The objective of this paper is to propose a two-stage model 
to improve the solar irradiance forecasting. In each stage, a 
certain method is used to provide a specific part of the 
forecast. As a contribution to this area of study, this paper 
develops the decomposed model in a way that nonlinear and 
linear models are separated, thus greatly improving individual 
as well as overall forecast. The accuracy of the two-stage 
model is addressed and compared with the single-stage 
method. To further improve the forecasts, a data processing 
approach is proposed that prepares and feeds stationary data to 
the two-stage forecasting model.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
presents the architecture and the formulation of the proposed 
forecasting model. Numerical simulations are presented in 
Section III. Discussions and conclusions are provided in 
Section IV. 
II. THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE FORECASTING MODEL  
Fig. 3 depicts the architecture of the proposed decomposed 
forecasting model. The forecasting model uses two cascaded 
stages based on Nonlinear Autoregressive Neural Network 
(NARNN) and the Autoregressive Moving Average with 
Exogenous Input (ARMAX). The main advantage of this 
decomposed model is to process both linear and nonlinear 
parts of the solar time series. NARNN deals with the nonlinear 
part of the forecasting and is used to predict a fitting model 
based on the historical stationary solar data. On the other 
hand, ARMAX considers the linear part of the forecasting and 
is used to forecast solar irradiance using the predicted fitting 
model as an input. These two stages along with data 
processing is explained in the following: 
  
Fig. 3 The architecture of the proposed forecasting model. 
A. Data Prepration and Preprocessing 
The solar data considered in this model are the horizontal 
global irradiance (GHI) that represent the solar irradiance 
received at horizontal surface on the ground. The historical 
GHI data are analyzed and undergone several preprocessing 
steps to ensure the quality of the data. 
The GHI data preparation includes: removing GHI 
nighttime values, removing offset, and detrending. The offset 
is removed by subtracting the historical GHI from the clear 
sky GHI, which is the maximum GHI received at the surface 
in clear sky conditions. The resultant data from this process 
represent solar irradiance scattered by clouds or other factors. 
The resultant data are more dependent on the location and 
time that reflects other meteorological data. The next step is to 
consider only daytime hours, as solar output at nighttime 
hours is zero. By eliminating nighttime hours, knowing the 
exact sunrise and sunset times, the data size will be reduced to 
almost half, which accelerates time needed for simulation.  
Statistical models require data set to be stationary before it 
is fed to forecasting tool. The output data from previous two 
steps are detrended and then tested using the Augmented 
Dickey–Fuller (ADF) test to validate the stationarity of the 
time series. The ADF test checks if there is a unit root. If test 
result comes below a defined critical value, then the null 
hypothesis should be rejected and the time series is stationary. 
Otherwise, the null hypothesis should be accepted and the 
time series is nonstationary. Different detrending models are 
addressed and compared in [26] and [27]. 
The data are detrended using Al-Sadah’s model, which is 
represented mathematically in (1). Constants  are 
determined using the least square regression analysis to fit the 
actual data set:  
Yt = a0 +a1h+a2h
2 +...+anh
n  (1) 
where h is the local time. After the data are tested for the 
stationarity and verified, it will be normalized to obtain a 
number between 0 and 1. Normalization is an important step 
to ensure all data sets are under same reference scale, and to 
eliminate any variability due to the changes in the peak of the 
clear sky irradiance. More detail on GHI data preprocessing 
can be found in [28]. 
B. Forecasting – Stage 1: Nonlinear Autoregressive Neural 
Network 
The NARNN model is a time series model that requires a 
large set of historical data. In order to train the model and 
predict the fitting model, a large set of the previous hourly 
stationary data from the target day are used. One key issue is 
that the larger number of days that are used for the training, 
the more accurate the prediction will be. The NARNN is 
presented in (2) where d is the number of previous hourly 
samples, determined through trial and error.  
Once the fitting model is achieved, it is introduced as an 
exogenous input to the second stage of the forecasting, i.e. 
ARMAX. The predicted fitting model form this stage plays an 
active role in forecasting of the next stage, where a more 
accurately predicted fitting model in the first stage better 
ensures a more precise forecasting result in the second stage. 
The architecture of the NARNN is depicted in Fig. 4. 
))(),...,2(),1(()( dtytytyfty   (2) 
  
Fig. 4 The architecture of the NARNN. 
In order to evaluate the performance of the fitting model the 
coefficient of determination R2, which ranges between 0 and 
1, is calculated as in (3). If R2 =1, the NARNN is able to 
predict the fitting model without any error, while R2 =0 means 
that the NARNN is not able to predict the fitting model and 
further training is needed.  





















N
t
actualactual
N
t
forecastactual
tGHItGHI
tGHItGHI
R
1
2
1
2
2
))()((
))()((
1
  (3) 
C. Forecasting – Stage 2: Autoregressive Moving Average 
with Exogenous Input  
The autoregressive moving average model with exogenous 
input includes two parts and can be mathematically 
represented as in (4). 
A(q)y(k) = B(q)u(k)+C(q)v(k)  (4) 
where, A(q)=1+a1q-1+…+anq-n, n is the order and a1,…,an are  
coefficients for the AR part. B(q)=b1+b2q-1+…+bmq-m+1, m is 
the order and b1,…,bm are coefficients for the input. 
C(q)=1+c1q-1+…+crq-r, r is the order and c1,…,cr are 
coefficients for the MA part. 
In order to find the coefficients for both AR and MA parts, 
the previous day is used to train the ARMAX model and 
estimate coefficients. The order of the ARMAX can be 
identified using the partial and autocorrelation plots. More 
detail on how to estimate the order of ARMAX model can be 
found in [29]. In addition, the Akaike Information Criterion 
(AIC) can be used to determine the order of ARMAX model. 
The AIC is modeled under different ARMAX orders and the 
best order is the one with the lowest AIC [30]. However, in 
this paper another method is used to find the orders of the AR 
and the MA. It is assumed that the orders of both the AR and 
the MA are the same, and then the error value is calculated by 
increasing the orders. The point with the least error for test 
data is considered as the best order for the ARMAX model. 
Fig. 5 shows the procedure of finding the order of the 
ARMAX model. 
Once the ARMAX is developed, the fitting model predicted 
from Stage 1 is introduced as an exogenous input to this stage 
and the target output is forecasted. To achieve the final GHI, 
the forecasted output resulted from the ARMAX is adjusted as 
well.  
 
Fig. 5 Determining AR and MA orders based on error value. 
D. Data Post-processing 
The resultant forecasted data from last stage represent the 
daytime GHI values in normalized form. Last step. i.e., data 
post-processing, includes three steps: denormalization, adding 
nighttime hours, and calculating the forecasted GHI.  
The performance of the model is accordingly evaluated by 
calculating the Normalized Root Mean Square Error 
(NRMSE) as in (5).   






N
t
actual
N
t
forecastactual
tGHI
N
tGHItGHI
N
NRMSE
1
1
2
)(*
1
))()((*
1
 (5) 
III. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS  
The hourly GHI data for the Denver International Airport 
are used for forecasting [31]. The proposed model is applied 
to three test days under different weather conditions, and the 
R2 and the NRMSE are computed to evaluate output result in 
stage 1 and 2, respectively. The coefficient R2 is used to 
evaluate the performance of the fitting model resulted from 
the NARNN, and accordingly the NRMSE is applied in the 
ARMAX model to evaluate the efficiency of the forested GHI. 
In order to present the effectiveness of the proposed two-stage 
forecasting model and show the role of the data detrending, 
the following cases are studied:  
• Case 1: Forecasting using the proposed model with 
stationary data. 
• Case 2: Forecasting using the proposed model with 
nonstationary data 
• Case 3: Forecasting using only one stage instead of the 
proposed two-stage method 
Case1: Using Two-Stage Model with Stationary Data. 
In this case, stationary data with the proposed two-stage 
forecasting model are used for solar forecasting. In this 
respect, first, the historical GHI data undergo mentioned 
processes to ensure stationarity before the data are fed to 
NARNN. Second, the NARNN is trained based on the 
stationary data to establish the target fitting model. Fig. 6 
depicts the fitting model predicted by the NARNN model for a 
cloudy day. The calculated R2 is 0.90, which reveals that the 
predicted fitting model is close to the target and the fitting 
model is well predicted in order to be fed to Stage 2. Third 
step is to introduce the fitting model to the Stage 2 forecasting, 
i.e., the ARMAX model. The ARMAX model is developed 
using order 2 for both AR and MA. It should be noted that the 
previous day is used to train the model and identify ARMAX 
coefficient. The ARMAX model forecasts the output as shown 
in Fig. 7. The NRMSE is calculated as 0.085.  
In order to evaluate the efficiency of the proposed model, 
Case 1 is further applied to two additional days. The predicted 
fitting model by Stage 1 and the forecasted GHI resulted from 
Stages 2 for the partly cloudy day are depicted in Figs. 8 and 
9, respectively. Similarly, the fitting model and the forecasted 
GHI for the sunny day are respectively shown in Figs. 10 and 
11. Table I summarizes the obtained R2 and the NRMSE for 
each of the studied days. As tabulated in Table I, the NARNN 
detects the fitting model and the ARMAX forecasts the GHI 
quite accurately. Moreover, the proposed two-stage model 
with stationary data can accurately forecast not only the sunny 
days, but also the cloudy and partly cloudy ones. 
TABLE I 
R2 AND NRMSE FOR THE FITTING MODEL AND FORECASTED GHI IN CASE 1. 
Weather Condition R2 NRMSE 
Cloudy 0.90 0.085 
Partly Cloudy 0.91 0.100 
Sunny 0.86 0.048 
Case 2: Using Two-Stage Model with Nonstationary Data. 
Data stationarity has a significant role in forecasting solar 
irradiance. This case aims at investigating the effect of using 
stationary data in the proposed method. In this regards, the 
proposed two-stage method is utilized but instead of feeding 
stationary data to the model, the nonstationary data are used. 
The simulation processes including Stages 1 and 2 (fitting 
model predicted by NARNN and the ARMAX model) are 
completely executed for Case 2 without the pre-processing. 
Table II compares the NRMSE values in this case with the 
same three days as in Case 1. The NRMSE values for the two-
stage method using nonstationary solar data are higher 
compared to NRMSE values computed before. That means 
even though the cascaded two-stage method is a useful 
approach to deal with nonlinear and linear parts of the 
forecasting, the data stationarity plays a critical role in the 
accuracy of the results.  
Case 3: Using One-Stage Forecasting Method. 
To show the merits of the two-stage method over a single-
stage method, the forecasting is performed using only one 
stage, here the NARNN. In this case, the stationary data are 
applied to forecast the target days. That is, similar to Case 1, 
the historical GHI data undergo preprocess to ensure 
stationarity before the data is used in the NARNN. It is then 
trained based on the historical data set considering a similar 
number of previous hourly samples, as in Cases 1 and 2. Table 
II shows the NRMSE values for the single-stage method 
comparing with the proposed two-stage method in Case 1. The 
two-stage method in Case 1 has a better performance in solar 
forecasting as the NRMSE values are much less than this case, 
exhibiting the advantages of the two-stage method over a 
single-stage method. These results advocate on the merits of 
decomposing model to reap the benefit of both linear and 
nonlinear parts in the proposed model.   
TABLE II 
THE NRMSE FOR DIFFERENT CASE STUDIES 
Weather 
Condition 
NRMSE (Two-
Stage model 
and stationary 
data) 
NRMSE (Two- 
Stage model and 
nonstationary 
data) 
NRMSE (One 
stage model 
NARNN) 
Cloudy 0.085 0.3007 0.512 
Partly Cloudy 0.100 0.6799 0.9899 
Sunny 0.048 0.212 0.301 
The maximum NRMSE for one day ahead forecast using 
the proposed two-stage model and stationary data under 
different weather conditions is 0.1, which is a promising 
result. In the proposed model, the minimum NRMSE is 
achieved in a sunny day, which is quite expected as the trends 
of the solar time series under clear sky conditions are more 
predictable. Nevertheless, the two-stage model accuracy has 
improved by 71% to 85% when using stationary data 
compared to nonstationary data. Finally, the two-stage model 
outperforms the single-stage model and reduces the NRMSE 
by almost 83% to 90%. 
 
Fig. 6 The fitting model for the cloudy day using NARNN. 
 
Fig. 7 Forecasted GHI for the cloudy day using ARMAX. 
 
Fig. 8 The fitting model for the partly cloudy day using NARNN. 
 
Fig. 9 Forecasted GHI for the partly cloudy using ARMAX. 
 
Fig. 10 The fitting model for the sunny day using NARNN. 
Fig. 11 Forecasted GHI for the sunny day using ARMAX. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a solar forecasting model based on 
decomposed linear and nonlinear statistical methods was 
proposed. The proposed model benefited from NARNN in 
Stage 1 forecasting and ARMAX in Stage 2 forecasting 
combined with a carefully developed data processing 
approach. The model was simulated to forecast three days 
under different weather conditions of sunny, partly cloudy, 
and cloudy. The maximum resultant NRMSE was obtained as 
0.1, for a partly cloudy day, which shows the acceptable 
performance of the proposed model. To exhibit the 
effectiveness of the two-stage model, three cases were further 
studied, comparing the two-stage model with a single-stage 
model, which clearly demonstrated improvements in NRMSE. 
The importance of the data stationarity in improving 
forecasting accuracy was moreover investigated.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Watetakarn and S. Premrudeepreechacharn, “Forecasting of solar 
irradiance for solar power plants by artificial neural network,” in 
Smart Grid Technologies-Asia (ISGT ASIA), 2015 IEEE Innovative, 
2015, pp. 1–5. 
[2] S. Kann, J. Baca, M. Shiao, C. Honeyman, A. Perea, and S. Rumery, 
“US Solar Market Insight - Q3 2016 - Executive Summary,” GTM 
Research,Wood Mackenzie Business and the Solar Energy Industries 
Association. 
[3] “IMPACTS OF SOLAR INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT 
EXTENSION.” SEIA, 18-Dec-2015. 
[4] A. Tuohy et al., “Solar Forecasting: Methods, Challenges, and 
Performance,” IEEE Power Energy Mag., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 50–59, 
Nov. 2015. 
[5] J. Kleissl, Solar Energy Forecasting and Resource Assessment. 
Academic Press, 2013. 
[6] J. Remund, R. Perez, and E. Lorenz, “Comparison of solar radiation 
forecasts for the USA,” in Proc. of the 23rd European PV Conference, 
2008, pp. 1–9. 
[7] M. Diagne, M. David, P. Lauret, J. Boland, and N. Schmutz, “Review 
of solar irradiance forecasting methods and a proposition for small-
scale insular grids,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 27, pp. 65–76, 
Nov. 2013. 
[8] A. M. Foley, P. G. Leahy, A. Marvuglia, and E. J. McKeogh, “Current 
methods and advances in forecasting of wind power generation,” 
Renew. Energy, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 1–8, Jan. 2012. 
[9] R. Huang, T. Huang, R. Gadh, and N. Li, “Solar Generation 
Prediction using the ARMA Model in a Laboratory-level Micro-grid,” 
in Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), 2012 IEEE Third 
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 528–533. 
[10] G. P. Nason, “Stationary and non-stationary times series,” Stat. 
Volcanol. Spec. Publ. IAVCEI, vol. 1, pp. 0–0, 2006. 
[11] A. Mellit and S. A. Kalogirou, “Artificial intelligence techniques for 
photovoltaic applications: A review,” Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 
vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 574–632, Oct. 2008. 
[12] J. M. Filipe, R. J. Bessa, J. Sumaili, R. Tome, and J. N. Sousa, “A 
hybrid short-term solar power forecasting tool,” in Intelligent System 
Application to Power Systems (ISAP), 2015 18th International 
Conference on, 2015, pp. 1–6. 
[13] M. Tucci, E. Crisostomi, G. Giunta, and M. Raugi, “A Multi-
Objective Method for Short-Term Load Forecasting in European 
Countries,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 3537–3547, 
Sep. 2016. 
[14] A. Mellit, M. Benghanem, and S. A. Kalogirou, “An adaptive 
wavelet-network model for forecasting daily total solar-radiation,” 
Appl. Energy, vol. 83, no. 7, pp. 705–722, Jul. 2006. 
[15] H. T. C. Pedro and C. F. M. Coimbra, “Assessment of forecasting 
techniques for solar power production with no exogenous inputs,” Sol. 
Energy, vol. 86, no. 7, pp. 2017–2028, Jul. 2012. 
[16] C. Paoli, C. Voyant, M. Muselli, and M.-L. Nivet, “Forecasting of 
preprocessed daily solar radiation time series using neural networks,” 
Sol. Energy, vol. 84, no. 12, pp. 2146–2160, Dec. 2010. 
[17] D. Yang, P. Jirutitijaroen, and W. M. Walsh, “Hourly solar irradiance 
time series forecasting using cloud cover index,” Sol. Energy, vol. 86, 
no. 12, pp. 3531–3543, Dec. 2012. 
[18] R. Marquez and C. F. M. Coimbra, “Intra-hour DNI forecasting based 
on cloud tracking image analysis,” Sol. Energy, vol. 91, pp. 327–336, 
May 2013. 
[19] C. W. Chow et al., “Intra-hour forecasting with a total sky imager at 
the UC San Diego solar energy testbed,” Sol. Energy, vol. 85, no. 11, 
pp. 2881–2893, Nov. 2011. 
[20] E. Lorenz, J. Hurka, D. Heinemann, and H. G. Beyer, “Irradiance 
Forecasting for the Power Prediction of Grid-Connected Photovoltaic 
Systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Appl. Earth Obs. Remote Sens., vol. 2, no. 
1, pp. 2–10, Mar. 2009. 
[21] C. Chen, S. Duan, T. Cai, and B. Liu, “Online 24-h solar power 
forecasting based on weather type classification using artificial neural 
network,” Sol. Energy, vol. 85, no. 11, pp. 2856–2870, Nov. 2011. 
[22] P. Bacher, H. Madsen, and H. A. Nielsen, “Online short-term solar 
power forecasting,” Sol. Energy, vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1772–1783, Oct. 
2009. 
[23] S. Chai, Z. Xu, and W. K. Wong, “Optimal Granule-Based PIs 
Construction for Solar Irradiance Forecast,” IEEE Trans. Power Syst., 
vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 3332–3333, Jul. 2016. 
[24] R. H. Inman, H. T. C. Pedro, and C. F. M. Coimbra, “Solar forecasting 
methods for renewable energy integration,” Prog. Energy Combust. 
Sci., vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 535–576, Dec. 2013. 
[25] H. S. Jang, K. Y. Bae, H.-S. Park, and D. K. Sung, “Solar Power 
Prediction Based on Satellite Images and Support Vector Machine,” 
IEEE Trans. Sustain. Energy, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 1255–1263, Jul. 2016. 
[26] W. Ji and K. C. Chee, “Prediction of hourly solar radiation using a 
novel hybrid model of ARMA and TDNN,” Sol. Energy, vol. 85, no. 
5, pp. 808–817, May 2011. 
[27] K. Benmouiza and A. Cheknane, “Small-scale solar radiation 
forecasting using ARMA and nonlinear autoregressive neural network 
models,” Theor. Appl. Climatol., vol. 124, no. 3–4, pp. 945–958, May 
2016. 
[28] M. Alanazi and A. Khodaei, “Day-ahead Solar Forecasting Using 
Time Series Stationarization and Feed-Forward Neural Network,” 
presented at the North American Power Symposium (NAPS), 2016, 
Denver, 2016, pp. 1–6. 
[29] G. E. P. Box, G. M. Jenkins, and G. C. Reinsel, Time series analysis: 
forecasting and control. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley, 2008. 
[30] H. Akaike, “A new look at the statistical model identification,” IEEE 
Trans. Autom. Control, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 716–723, 1974. 
[31] “Solar Data 1991-2010 Site #725650.” [Online]. Available: 
http://rredc.nrel.gov/solar/old_data/nsrdb/1991-
2010/hourly/siteonthefly.cgi?id=725650. [Accessed: 16-Sep-2014]. 
 

