Types and components 
of computer systems1
6
Why this unit matters
ICT influences what we do, how we travel, what we listen to, how we shop and how we communicate. 
In offices and classrooms people are using computers. While on the move, people use small hand-held 
devices. You may notice goods being scanned at the supermarket, or a car attached to a machine 
that monitors the performance of it’s engine.
All Computers Inc. is a large computer supply company. They supply everything from small hand-held 
computers right up to big computer systems for banks and insurance companies. Many customers find 
it difficult to make a choice when it comes to buying a computer. This is what some of their customers 
have said:
Your practical task 
All Computers Inc. has decided that it would be helpful if the company had some simple 
information sheets to describe:
  the advantages and disadvantages of different operating systems
  the different types of computers that are available to buy
  the different types of computers they sell, to help customers decide which is the best computer for them
  the different components of a computer: CPU, screen, keyboard, printer, and external hard drive
They have asked you to produce this information by creating and editing the contents, appearance and layout 
of documents.
I’ve been looking at the labels that describe the computers. They’re a bit complicated. 
I don’t understand what CPU, RAM or ROM are. I need to know about operating 
systems. I don’t know which one I should choose.
There are so many types of computers here. They all seem to do the same thing but some 
are faster than others, some have keyboards, some don’t. I can’t tell the difference between 
a computer costing $100 and one costing $2,000.
If I buy a computer, what else will I need to get? I’ve heard that 
I need to buy hardware and software. What does that mean, 
and how will I know the difference?
20979_P006_059.indd   6 1/21/15   1:31 AM
Types and components 
of computer systems
7
What this unit covers
1.1 Types of computers
1.2 Hardware and software
1.3 The main components of a computer
1.4 Operating systems
1.5 The impact of emerging technologies
1.6 Using a computer system to communicate
Theory review
1.7 Document production: Entering and editing data from different sources
1.8 Internet research
1.9 Creating a newsletter
1.10 Communication
Practical review
T
h
e
o
ry
P
ra
c
ti
c
a
l
By the end of the theory sessions you 
will be able to:
  identify the different types of computers
  describe a range of emerging technologies
  define what is meant by hardware and software 
and give examples
  identify the main components of a general purpose 
computer
  identify operating systems, including those which 
contain a graphical user interface or a command 
line interface
  show an understanding of a range of documents 
that communicate knowledge and ideas
In your practical work you will 
develop and apply skills in:
  creating, formatting and opening documents 
using information from different sources
  combining text, images and numeric data in 
your work
  formatting texts in lists and tables
  saving and printing your work
  communicating using email
  using the internet as a source of information
  performing a mail merge
Sessions
20979_P006_059.indd   7 1/21/15   1:31 AM
8 Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Types of computers
SESSION 1.1
Background
There are many different kinds of computer systems. Some computer systems are very big because they 
are used to carry out large and complex tasks. Others are small and portable – small enough to put in your 
pocket – even to wear around your wrist or as a pair of glasses. This session will look at the ways in which 
various types of computer are used, as well as their characteristics.
Personal/desktop computers
Personal computers, or general purpose computers, are used by individuals for many 
reasons. Personal computers have various standard components such as a tower, 
monitor, keyboard, mouse (see Session 1.2 for more detail). Some users create and 
store documents, some play games, others create music, video and photographic 
content; the applications are endless. When these computers are being used by 
only one person at a time, a person who is in control of the application software 
being used, providing any required data and using the processed results with no 
connection to any other resource, the computer and its use is referred to as being 
standalone. The computer and any related resources, such as a printer, are being 
used as an isolated workstation. 
Often these computers will be connected together in order to share data, programs and other resources such 
as a printer, application programs or an internet connection. In these cases the computers are considered 
to be networked together. Just think of the computers in your school ICT suite and how resources can 
be shared. It would be crazy for each computer to have its own printer, or that you always had to work on 
the same computer because your files were on that computer’s hard drive. The sharing of any information 
resource and devices means that any user is able to provide information to many other users as well as being 
able to access a wealth of information from someone in the next room, a nearby town or a different country. 
In Unit 4 you will discover the advantages and various ways in which computers can be networked.
Laptop computers/netbooks 
Laptop computers or notebooks are many people’s preferred choice of computer 
because they offer the same processing capabilities as a desktop computer 
but are portable. Many families choose to buy a laptop instead of a desktop 
computer because they take up so little space, can be moved around the house 
depending on who is using it, and can be packed tidily away. A laptop computer 
has an inbuilt screen, keyboard and mouse pad, making it completely self-
contained. Some people may choose to connect an external keyboard or mouse 
but leave them at home when using their laptop when they are out. Because a 
laptop is carefully designed to minimise necessary (physical) space, one problem 
is the ability to upgrade or add extra components.
Tens of thousands of people carry laptops around every city, every day; business people and students. Like 
personal/desktop computers, laptops can be used as standalone computers or as networked computers. If 
you take your laptop to school with you, the Wi-Fi system there connects you to all the school resources and its 
internet connection. The same is true if you are in a cafe or similar public space with Wi-Fi you have access to their 
Wi-Fi, and as a result the internet.
Tablet computers
Tablet computers are portable computers with slightly smaller screens than an 
average laptop. Their defining characteristic is that user interaction is all through 
touch. There is no mouse or keyboard. Users can swipe, pinch, drag and rotate 
icons on the screen to activate tasks, control the cursor and input data. The use 
of solid state flash memory (see Unit 3) means that these devices switch on and 
are ready for use very quickly. 
20979_P006_059.indd   8 1/21/15   1:31 AM
9
THEORY
Session 1.1 Types of computers
Tablets really exploit Wi-Fi technology because they are devices that many people will use for entertainment 
while on the move: reading newspapers and magazines; internet browsing; playing games; and watching 
TV programmes or films. This means that tablets need the fast internet connection that downloading/
streaming video/TV content demand.
Tablets can run the same applications as laptops, so it would be possible to work on a word processed 
document or a spreadsheet for example. However, the virtual keyboard can be difficult to use for these tasks.
Types of computers
Type of computer Description Advantages Disadvantages
Mainframe computer These are extremely 
large computers used in 
organisations (such as banks 
and government departments) 
where very large amounts of 
data are processed.
  Capable of processing 
very big jobs, which 
make use of their large 
memories and fast 
processor speeds.
  Capable of complex 
problem-solving that 
would take smaller 
computers much longer 
to do.
  Mainframes are so large 
that they take up almost a 
whole room.
  Complex to set up.
  Expensive to operate and 
maintain and they require 
specialist staff to operate 
them.
Desktop or Personal 
computer (PC)
This is a general purpose 
computer made up of separate 
components:
  monitor
  keyboard
  mouse
  processor and storage.
  Spare parts are often 
cheap because they are 
standardised.
  They often have faster 
processors than laptop 
computers for the same 
price.
  There are fewer problems 
with overheating than 
laptops because of their 
larger size.
  Lack of portability – heavy 
and separate components 
are connected by wires.
  Files have to be copied 
and stored on portable 
disks, especially if you 
need to take them with 
you.
Laptop or notebook This is a computer where all 
the components are together 
in a single unit. This means 
that they are portable; unlike 
desktop computers, they can 
be moved from one work area 
to another.
  Portability.
  Users can work anywhere, 
especially if they can 
access Wi-Fi (see Unit 4) 
and link to other media.
  Loss and theft are key 
disadvantages.
  Battery life is limited.
  Keyboards and pointing 
devices are not as flexible 
as those on a desktop.
  Laptops are more 
compact, so overheating 
can be a problem.
Tablet Like a laptop this is a small 
portable computer but the 
biggest difference is that its 
user interface is all through 
touch.
  Portable and easy to use.
  Quick to switch on.
  Thousands of 
downloadable 
applications available.
  Not all have 3G/4G access.
  Touch-screen typing can 
be difficult.
  Cannot make phone calls.
20979_P006_059.indd   9 1/21/15   1:31 AM
10
THEORY
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Type of computer Description Advantages Disadvantages
Personal Digital 
Assistants (PDAs)
Small handheld computers with 
a touch screen. Some have 
traditional keyboards behind or 
underneath the screen. Others 
display a keyboard on the 
screen. Some use handwriting 
recognition software to enter 
text.
These machines have 
developed quickly from 
sophisticated diaries into small 
and powerful computers that 
include satellite navigation 
facilities (GPS), mobile phone 
capability and versions of 
application software that have a 
limited range of functions.
  Extremely portable – they 
fit into pockets and bags.
  Usually have bigger 
screens than mobile 
phones.
  Web and email 
connectivity.
  Often have a QWERTY 
keyboard.
  Designed for organising 
information: diary, 
calendar, alarm, clock, 
address book, etc.
  The keyboards are very 
small, so it makes it 
difficult to enter text and 
numbers quickly.
  Screen sizes make it 
difficult to read long 
documents.
  Versions of software (see 
Session 1.2) that have a 
limited range of functions 
may make it difficult to 
complete tasks effectively.
Smartphones This is an advanced mobile 
phone that is combined with the 
functions of a PDA, with, among 
other features: web browsers, 
high-resolution touch screens, 
GPS navigation and Wi-Fi 
access. Smartphones are often 
used as media players and 
cameras.
  Online access to data.
  Better web browsing 
capability than a more 
simple mobile phone.
  Just one device can 
accomplish many tasks at 
work or at home.
  Contacts’ details and 
phone numbers can be 
integrated.
  Similar disadvantages to 
PDAs due to their size.
  Costs can be high as most 
providers want the user 
to commit to a long-term 
contract with internet 
access.
  Some webpages may not 
display or function entirely 
as the web designer 
expected.
Look through the list of computer types and think about where you have seen them being used. Discuss with a partner and decide 
on three reasons why a student might choose a laptop computer rather than a general purpose desktop computer.
Activity 1
You can see in the table above that the devices described become physically smaller. However, many PDAs 
and smartphones have similar processing capabilities to much larger general purpose computers. Advances 
in technology mean that smaller devices are increasingly capable of better performance.
We all know that you can make phone calls with a smartphone, but it can do so much more. It adds in features that not too long 
ago you would have found only on a personal digital assistant or a computer; such as the ability to send and receive email, edit 
documents and play games. Do some research and determine:
  how a smartphone is different from a conventional mobile phone
  a clear definition of a smartphone
  from a computing perspective, what can a smartphone be used for? 
  what is it that makes it smart?
Activity 2
You should now be able to:
  identify different types of computers including the personal or desktop computer, mainframe, 
laptops, tablets, smartphone and Personal Digital Assistant.
Review and revise
20979_P006_059.indd   10 1/21/15   1:32 AM
11
Hardware and software
Session 1.2 Hardware and software
SESSION 1.2
Background
Computer systems are made up of hardware and software. Computer hardware is made up of the parts of 
the computer that you can touch: its physical components. Software is the programs, instructions and data 
that controls the operation of a computer and enables the computer to carry out a task.
Hardware
When you look at a computer and all the peripheral devices that are attached to it, you can see examples of 
hardware such as:
  monitor
  keyboard
  mouse
  printer
  speakers
  scanner
Some peripheral devices have more than one function. Many people now choose to have their scanner, 
photocopier and printer together in one device, which are widely known as All-In-One printers. Touch-
sensitive screens allow us to use them as input devices as well as output devices (see Session 2.1, page 62).
Having an external hard drive is an excellent way of giving yourself extra portable 
storage space as well as providing a backup facility.
Can you identify each of the seven examples of hardware listed in this picture?
Activity 1
Of course, there are other examples besides the hardware that can actually be 
seen. There is other hardware that is built into, or inside the computer case (or 
tower) including:
  Memory chips (RAM and ROM – see Session 1.3)
  Processing chips (see Session 1.3)
  A motherboard (see Session 1.3)
  Video cards (note the connection sockets such as VGA, HDMI, DVI)
  Sound cards (note the sockets for such hardware as headphone and 
microphone)
  Internal hard disk drive
There is also computer hardware in devices like mobile phones, satellite navigation 
systems, automatic washing machines and even in car engines.
Software
There are two types of software that are used to operate a computer.
System software These are programs and files that make up the computer’s operating system.
Examples of system software include the software to connect with the printer, that controls 
the way the screen appears, the software that deletes a file or a folder. These run invisibly in 
the background so that you can do your work effectively.
Applications software Also known as applications programs. These programs allow users to write letters, solve 
problems, perhaps using spreadsheet and database software, or to play games.
VGA connects a PC/laptop to a 
monitor or data projector.
DVI and HDMIs, although they are 
slightly different to each other, 
connect a PC/laptop to a TV, Blu-ray/
DVD device, data projectors and 
satellite TV boxes.
Real world
20979_P006_059.indd   11 1/21/15   1:32 AM
12
THEORY
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Examples of applications software
If you look at your computer screen, you should see that there are many different kinds of applications 
software. You might see examples of the following software (you are likely to have many more):
  word processing
  presentation software
  modelling software – spreadsheets
  data-handling software – databases
  desktop publishing
  video editing software
  apps
Complete the following table by deciding whether the listed software is either applications or system software and then give a 
description of what it does. You might need to search for some answers on the internet.
Software for… Applications/System What does it do?
Word processing Application Creation of reports/letters/posters/flyers 
Anti-virus software
Spreadsheet
Operating system
Internet browser
Photo-editing software
File manager
The programming language ‘Scratch’
Printer driver
Activity 2
You should now be able to:
  identify a variety of hardware components
  describe the key elements of hardware and the difference between 
hardware and software
  describe the difference between system and applications software
  give examples of applications software.
Review and revise
When referring to applications 
software, it is better if you can 
describe what the software does 
rather than just knowing the name 
of the software. No marks will be 
awarded for using brand names of 
software packages or hardware.
T ip
See Session 1.8 for information and 
advice about internet research.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   12 1/21/15   1:32 AM
13Session 1.3 The main components of a computer
The main components 
of a computerSESSION 1.3
Background
Computer systems also include a processor and memory. Computer systems are made up of many devices. 
In the last session reference was made to peripheral devices such as keyboards and printers. Some devices, 
such as keyboards and scanners, are used to input data to a computer. Other devices, such as a printer or 
speakers, are needed so that we can understand the output from a computer. A range of input and output 
devices are explored in detail in Unit 2.
Peripheral devices such as these provide data for the processor or central processing unit (CPU) to 
work with and then to communicate the results of that processing. Without a processor there would be no 
computer system, the data you entered would have nothing done with it – no processing would have taken 
place. This session looks at the processor itself – the ‘brain’ of a computer system.
Motherboard
A motherboard (sometimes known as the mainboard or system board) is the 
main circuit board found in a computer. It holds the crucial electronic components 
of the system, such as the processor (CPU) and main memory. It also provides 
connectors for other peripherals such as video and sound cards, and USB 
devices such as a mouse. The non-volatile memory that holds the system BIOS 
will also be directly attached to the motherboard. This is true not just for your 
desktop computer but also laptop/tablet and even your mobile phone. If the 
processor is the ‘brain’ of the system, then the motherboard is certainly the 
‘spine’ onto which all other devices are connected.
Processor – Central Processing Unit (CPU)
The processor is at the centre of a system, between input, output and storage devices, and is known as the 
Central Processing Unit (CPU). Storage devices are explained in Unit 3.
Output
devices
Storage
devices
CPUInput
devices
The processor: 
  interprets and executes commands from the computer’s hardware and software
  is a single integrated circuit, also found in many devices that involve control and monitoring (like an 
engine management system in a car, or the automatic stopping systems in trains).
Microprocessors
The processor of a device is designed for a general purpose and is able to run any sort of program. However, a 
microprocessor (see photo on the right) is a special form of CPU, used in microcomputers and small computerised 
devices. It is important to remember that when they are used in small computerised devices, they are designed to 
carry out a specific task and will only ever carry out that task, such as the control circuit of a burglar alarm.
All the computers introduced in Session 1.1 such as mainframes, laptops and 
smartphones can perform a wide variety of tasks; they can be programmed to a great 
extent. In comparison, a washing machine is just a washing machine and will have a 
limited number of functions for which it was designed – washing your clothes.
There are many devices in the home that are controlled or powered by a 
microprocessor, but are designed, programmed and built to fulfil only a specific task, 
for example, a refrigerator, microwave oven or DVD player.
20979_P006_059.indd   13 1/21/15   1:32 AM
14
THEORY
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Some devices in the home that are fitted with microprocessors are known as labour-saving devices – they perform functions that, 
without the technology, we would have to do ourselves. Can you identify which of the following household devices that 
use microprocessors are labour-saving?
Dishwasher  Oven  Television  Burglar alarm  Washing machine  Toaster  Central heating system
Activity 1
Main memory
The main memory of the computer stores all the data and instructions that 
enable the computer to function. There are other names for the main memory:
  internal memory
  central memory
  primary memory
There are two types of central memory
RAM (Random Access Memory)
  RAM is an internal memory chip where data is stored temporarily when 
applications are running. If your program is large, such as Word or 
Photoshop, you might notice that it takes a while to load. This is because 
it is being brought from your computer’s hard drive (where it is stored) into 
RAM. From here the processor can rapidly respond to instructions, as the 
program is immediately accessible in RAM.
  RAM can be both read and written to.
  RAM is volatile (temporary), because its contents are lost when the power is 
turned off.
ROM (Read Only Memory)
  ROM stores data or instructions that need to be permanent.
  Permanent memory is used to store the processes that the computer needs 
to go through when it is switched on.
  ROM retains its contents when the power is switched off.
  It is also known as non-volatile or permanent memory.
An important use of ROM is to store the software that allows a machine to start 
up successfully. This software is known as BIOS, or Basic Input and Output 
System, and it loads and runs the boot file (the start-up instructions).
When the computer is switched on, BIOS starts the boot file sequence, which:
  checks that all the hardware devices are attached and are working properly
  copies the operating system to the RAM
  stores the date, time and system configuration on a battery-powered non-volatile chip known as a CMOS 
(a Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor).
The RAM component of computers is gradually getting bigger and bigger – in 2005, RAM would typically have been about 500 
MB, in 2011 around 4 GB (or 4000 MB) was normal and by 2014 8 GB (8000 MB) had become common. What is the reason for 
this? What advantages does having larger amounts of RAM offer the user?
Activity 2
Secondary or backing storage devices
Storage devices are used to store programs and data when the computer is switched off. It is important 
that you do not confuse memory with backing storage. Remember that internal (main) memory is inside the 
computer connected to the CPU. Backing storage (with the exception of the internal hard drive, inside the 
computer case) is outside the computer (external) and can be moved from one computer to another – it is a 
peripheral. For example, portable hard discs, CD- and DVD-ROMs, memory sticks and flash memory cards.
Main memory is referred to by a 
number of different names, but the 
important point to remember is that 
this memory, although not physically 
part of the CPU, is directly connected 
to it, and because of this it really is 
central memory.
Real world
Do not confuse ROM, which is a part 
of the computer’s internal memory, 
with CD-ROMs and DVD-ROMs, 
which are optical storage devices with 
enormous capacity – see Unit 3.
T ip
Remember that RAM and ROM are 
referred to as central memory.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   14 1/21/15   1:32 AM
15
THEORY
Storage devices are sometimes called:
  backing/backup storage or backing/backup store
  secondary storage
  external storage.
Why have internal and external storage?
It is important to realise that the computer works very fast when instructions and data are immediately 
accessible to the processor. If the processor continually had to transfer instructions and data to and from 
external devices, such as a hard drive, and RAM, it would slow down processing tremendously. That is why 
computers have RAM in increasingly large capacities.
External storage is still needed though. RAM is volatile storage and its contents are lost when the computer 
is switched off. We need to store that data or those programs somewhere safe. There are also many times 
when we need to take a file and use it on another computer – you may use a pen drive to work on files at 
school and then take them home to complete for homework. You could not do that if the files were stored in 
the computer at school – you would also always have to work at the same computer and the computer could 
never be turned off!
Input and output devices
You will learn more about input and output devices in Unit 2, but it is useful be able to identify the differences. 
The devices you have learnt about so far can be divided into two categories:
  Input devices are those that are used to put information into the computer.
  Output devices are those that take information from the computer for other uses.
Some examples of input and output devices are listed below:
Input devices: keyboard, mouse, webcam
Output devices: monitor, printer, speakers
Give a brief explanation of the type of inputs and outputs that each of the devices above are used for. For example: A webcam 
inputs moving images of the person using the computer for video or video messaging.
Activity 3
You should now be able to:
  describe the main components of a typical computer system: motherboard, central processing 
unit (CPU), main/internal memory (including ROM and RAM), input devices, output devices and 
secondary backing storage
  explain the difference between internal and backing storage.
Review and revise
Session 1.3 The main components of a computer
20979_P006_059.indd   15 1/21/15   1:32 AM
16 Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
SESSION 1.4
Operating systems
Background
Operating systems are made up of software that allows users to interact with the computer system. 
Operating systems have a number of key functions:
  controlling the input, output and backing storage devices
  loading, running and storing applications programs
  handling errors that occur in applications programs
  maintaining the security of the computer system
  keeping a log of computer usage
  managing the user interface so that the user can communicate with the computer system.
User interfaces
A user interface allows the user to interact effectively with the computer system. There are two main types of 
user interfaces:
  Command Line Interface – CLI
  Graphical User Interface – GUI.
Command Line Interfaces
CLIs are often seen in specialist systems, where users type instructions for activities like opening or saving a file. 
Users have to learn and remember commands that have to be typed in for even the simplest of actions. In a PC 
with the Windows 7 operating system, you can access the CLI by following the menu options: All Programs > 
Accessories > Command Prompt. In Windows 8 you will need to find the cmd app. On a MAC OS X you need to 
access the Applications folder and choose Utilities > Terminal.
Advantages of CLIs are that the user communicates directly with the computer and can make decisions 
about exactly what they want to see happen.
Disadvantages of CLIs are that typing in commands can be very slow and relies on the user remembering 
the way that commands have to be given to the computer. They can be difficult to edit or change.
Graphical User Interfaces
GUIs use pictures and symbols rather than having to type in a number of commands. All the commands that 
would have been typed in using a CLI are already programmed into the GUI. This means that users do not 
have to learn and remember a lot of commands – they just need to know what actions the icons represent.
Command line instruction dir d: 
which lists the contents of a CD 
in drive d:
20979_P006_059.indd   16 1/21/15   1:32 AM
17
THEORY
Session 1.4 Operating systems
You can see GUIs on your Mp3 players, gaming devices, digital cameras and 
mobile phones as well as on your computers. The type of GUI will depend on 
the device you are using.
One of the most common GUIs is the WIMP interface. WIMP stands for Windows, 
Icons, Menu and Pointing device. It uses a mouse (or similar device) to control 
a cursor, which can be used to select icons that open and run programs. Many 
programs can be selected to run at the same time.
To make it easy to find programs that are open and running, the operating system places each file in a 
separate window. Many windows can be displayed at the same time. This might make it difficult to work 
with, so it is possible to ‘minimise’ a window to the area at the bottom of the screen: the program stays open, 
but you can choose when to bring the window up on the screen again.
In this GUI, you can see that there are:
1 17 icons that will open programs or files
2 windows that have been minimised to the tray 
at the bottom.
A number of windows have been opened and then 
minimised. They are highlighted to show that they 
are open:
3 web browser 
4 email program
5 word processing file
6 folder
There are other icons in the tray. 
These can be clicked on to open:
7 start menu 
8 another web browser
9 spreadsheet program
10 presentation program
11 text editing program
Touch screens
There are other GUIs that do not rely on a cursor to select an icon. You have probably seen, and used, a 
touch-screen device to select icons, open programs and change the layout. This operation is known as post-
WIMP interaction, because it was developed after WIMP.
Touch-screen devices are newer, allowing users to scroll, pinch (choose and resize) and rotate images 
and documents using fingers and thumbs. This type of action would be difficult using a simple mouse. 
Touch screens are a common feature in small, portable devices. They are becoming popular on large desktop 
screens, on laptops and are the primary way of operating tablet computers.
Key differences between CLIs and GUIs
CLIs tend to be used by technicians and specialists who need access to all areas of the computer. Knowing 
the different commands enables technicians to look after the computer system, and to make changes.
Symbols in a GUI are also known as 
icons.
Language
6 3
7 8 9
10 1145
2
1
20979_P006_059.indd   17 1/21/15   1:32 AM
18
THEORY
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Because GUIs use icons, users need only limited knowledge to carry out complex activities. GUIs have been 
developed in such a way so that young children can use them. However, users can only access programs or 
carry out activities that have icons allocated to them; without a visible icon in a GUI, users will not know how 
to access it.
There are many operating systems in use. Windows, Linux and MAC OS X may be familiar to you, but there are others that are in 
everyday use on mainframe computers and the latest smartphones.
Create a table like this:
Computer type/size
Operating system Mainframe Desktop Smartphone
Windows
OS X
WindowsCE
Linux
Unisys OS 2000
Android
z/OS
iOS
Find out what type and size of computer the listed operating systems are designed for and place a tick in the appropriate column. 
Find one more operating system for each computer type/size.
Activity 1
You should now be able to:
  understand the function of an operating system
  describe the difference between CLIs and GUIs.
Review and revise
20979_P006_059.indd   18 1/21/15   1:32 AM
19
SESSION 1.5
The impact of emerging 
technologies
Session 1.5 The impact of emerging technologies
Background
General developments, such as the way that storage capacity changes, drive the development of smarter 
devices because more can be squeezed into a smaller space, but the technology and how we interact with it 
remains largely the same. It takes a real innovation to shift the way technology is used. For example, in the 
late 2000s the introduction of touch technology (properly called capacitive touch) changed the way in which 
we interact with, and therefore control, technology.
The idea of being able to touch/swipe/pinch our way through a TV listing, an 
email, a webpage or a photograph album would have been an extraordinary 
idea before the iPhone hit the stores in 2007 (although touch-screen technology 
had been around for a number of years before that). Apple’s iPad and the 
resulting rush of tablet computers have shifted our use of technology.
This session will explore some of the emerging technologies that are breaking 
into, and having an impact on, our everyday life.
Security
All students entering examination halls may soon find themselves submitting 
to technology applying the latest in artificial intelligence biometrics. A few 
examination boards already use fingerprint recognition devices to identify students in 
the examination room. If a student needs to leave the room, to use the bathroom for 
example, their fingerprint is recorded as they leave and then again as they re-enter 
– to make sure the person who left is the same as the one entering. Finger and palm 
print recognition door locks do exist not just in major organisations. Soon you may 
be able to open your house front door or the family garage simply by placing a finger 
over a special scanner built into the door handle. Many people quickly pass through 
airport controls because they have had the iris in their eye scanned. This could be 
used to manage access to restricted areas of buildings.
It is not difficult to see the use of these technologies becoming more common-
place. Imagine never having to carry a front door key around in your bag, or 
your parents not needing car keys anymore, because there are small fingerprint 
scanners built into door handles, or eye scanners built into door frames or the 
steering wheel.
Research the development of Facial Recognition Systems. How do they work? Where typically might they be best used? Might 
there be an issue with people’s privacy? 
Activity 1
We are all used to checking that certain websites such as ones used for shopping are secure. We expect that 
all information transferred is safe. The process of ‘scrambling’ and ‘descrambling’ a message (encrypting 
and decrypting) is called cryptography. This process is based on mathematical algorithms which use a 
‘scrambling’ key, with the sender and receiver of the message knowing what combination of keys to use. 
Without the proper key, it’s virtually impossible to decipher an encoded message. For many years it has been 
recognised that, as computers become faster, the prospect of an eavesdropper being able to work out a 
key, and understand the message being transmitted, is increasing. To overcome this, and make messages 
completely unbreakable without knowing the key, quantum cryptology is being developed. This uses physics 
rather than mathematics to create a key based on the behaviour of photons – tiny, massless packets of light – 
it is a method that has little chance of being cracked using mathematics. Quantum cryptography also has the 
property of alerting the receiver to an eavesdropper because the act of eavesdropping affects the transmission.
In October 2007 votes cast in the Swiss canton of Geneva during their parliamentary elections were transmitted 
using quantum cryptology, so the votes cast by citizens in Geneva were more protected than ever before.
Keep an eye out for new or emerging 
technologies and gadgets as they are 
launched. Examiners will award marks 
if you can demonstrate that you are 
aware of the latest developments.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   19 1/21/15   1:32 AM
20
THEORY
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
You should be familiar with images of robots working in industrial settings, but robots are 
being developed for use in many different settings: there is an experimental robot on the 
International Space Station; exoskeletons have been developed to help those working to clean 
up areas after natural and industrial disasters; Unmanned Aerial Vehicles seem to be given a 
new uses on a regular basis. Choose an area such as medicine, the home, space or commerce, 
and find out what you can about the most recent developments in robotics in that area.
Activity 2
Text translation
Computer-assisted translation is language translation in which a person translates with the aid of computer 
(application) software. The person carrying out the translation can use a variety of software including: 
monolingual and bilingual dictionaries, parallel texts, translation memory, and language search engines. 
With translation memory, the text being translated is broken into small segments such as a sentence 
or clause. Each segment is compared with previously saved translated segments – if one exists, if not, 
the software allows the translator to enter a new translation for that segment which is saved. The text is 
worked through a segment at a time, gradually building up a translated text from saved fragments and new 
translation.
Language search engines are internet based systems that work in the same way as internet search engines. 
The difference is that instead of searching the internet, a language search engine searches a large selection 
of translation memories to find previously translated sentence fragments, phrases, whole sentences, even 
complete paragraphs that match the segment that the translator is working with. 
Many companies are building websites that are multilingual, and brochures for products and services may 
be required in different languages. For example, if your school is bilingual or international, many of your 
publications will be in two or more languages, and the school website may also offer pages of translated 
text. With companies and markets developing and moving ever faster the need for accurate and consistent 
translation is paramount. 
20979_P006_059.indd   20 1/21/15   1:32 AM
21
THEORY
Vision enhancement
When illumination is inadequate for a person to see clearly, vision enhancement devices enable images to 
be formed by intensifying or enhancing the low level of light that exists. The image many of us have of this 
technology is of night-vision scopes, which exist either to be mounted on vehicles, weapons or worn by a person 
as a pair of goggles. Age-related night vision problems make it difficult for people who drive at night for a living, 
such as truck drivers, taxi drivers, police officers, ambulance drivers, firefighters, and other public safety officers. 
Not only must they regularly drive at night, but also must be able to see exceptionally well because their jobs 
may require them to drive quickly in emergency situations. Generally, goggles provide poor peripheral vision 
which means that although the wearer will see the central parts of the road much more clearly, they will still not 
have good vision of anything entering the road from the side. This is the current focus of research – being able 
to provide a more ‘widescreen’ or panoramic field of vision. Who knows, in the coming years, a pair of night time 
goggles may be as necessary as a seatbelt!
The use of 3D imaging in medicine to enhance CT, MRI and ultrasound scans is providing a 
wealth of extra, detailed information for medical procedures. What is holography? Is there a 
connection between 3D imaging and holographic imaging? Identify three possible uses for this 
technology.
Activity 3
A second way that an image can be enhanced is by capturing infrared light and producing on screen a 
thermal image. Infrared images are used for a wide variety of forensic and industrial purposes, because they 
can reveal chemical compositional differences not evident in visible light. We often see thermal imaging being 
used to reveal where homes are losing heat (for checking insulation) but border security agencies or police 
forces can use these devices when trying to discover or find people.
Many of us still only associate virtual reality (VR) with gaming and experimental, fictional worlds, 
but VR products are now commonly used by many companies, often to test product designs and 
simulate user interaction. VR head-mounted displays are also used in flight simulators and custom-
made VR devices are used for medical training and to help with patient recovery.
Activity 4
Research the current state of VR technology, including virtual immersion, and think about how this technology 
could be used, for example, in museums and archaeology.
New technology, new applications and new generations of users combine to push our use of ICT into many 
new areas of medicine, travel, shopping, warehousing/retailing, industry and entertainment. Unit 5 considers 
the effects of using ICT in many situations.
You should now be able to:
  describe how emerging technologies are having an impact on everyday life.
Review and revise
Session 1.5 The impact of emerging technologies
20979_P006_059.indd   21 1/21/15   1:32 AM
22
SESSION 1
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Using a computer system 
to communicate
1.6
Background
A range of ICT applications are used in our everyday lives and the way you 
communicate is influenced by computer systems and the software that is 
available. This session will look at some of the things you need to consider 
when using software applications for five of the most common forms of 
communication:
1 newsletters, flyers and posters
2 websites
3 multimedia presentations
4 music scores
5 cartoons. 
Newsletters, flyers and posters
Newsletters are information sheets that are distributed within organisations 
or communities to keep them up-to-date with the latest news that affects or 
interests them directly. Your school may have its own newsletter. Newsletters 
can be produced using desktop publishing software, but in the practical 
sessions of this unit you will be learning how to produce them using word 
processing software.
Flyers and posters can also be produced quickly and easily using word processing or desktop publishing 
software. As with newsletters, they can include photographs and images. Flyers and posters are usually one-
page documents that are designed to present information quickly. A poster is usually one-sided and is likely 
to have only a few key words on it. A poster advertising an event would need to include:
  the name of the event
  the time, date and place
  the names of key people you would see
  a brief indication of why you should attend.
A flyer might be two-sided and is likely to have more words. Flyers are usually used to advertise something.
What would a flyer advertising a new takeaway restaurant need to include?
Activity 1
Considering the needs of the audience
Each newsletter, flyer or poster should be produced with the intended audience in mind.
20979_P006_059.indd   22 1/21/15   1:32 AM
23
THEORY
Description and key features How is the audience 
reached?
Audience
Newsletter Newsletters are usually produced for a specific 
audience. Lots of words and images. They are 
likely to contain information about local news, 
events and activities.
Either handed out or 
collected by those 
who want them.
Often a group such as local 
residents or members of a club 
or society.
Flyer Flyers are usually produced to advertise 
products and services. More colour than a 
newsletter, with fewer words. The font size may 
be larger. The focus is mainly on the service or 
products being advertised. Flyers are usually no 
more than one page and are designed so that 
they can be posted.
Often posted by hand 
through letterboxes, or 
inserted loosely inside 
magazines.
Flyers are sometimes produced 
to appeal to a particular 
audience. For example, a flyer 
about life insurance might only 
be sent to people over a certain 
age.
Poster Often much larger than a flyer. Used to 
advertise an event or a single product or 
service, or persuade people to take notice who 
might not initially be interested. Few words and 
often only one large image.
Producing documents using a computer
Producing a newsletter, flyer or poster on a computer has a number of advantages:
  They are cheap to produce.
  An organisation can print as many newsletters as they need.
  Previous newsletters and different versions can be stored electronically.
  They can be distributed as paper copies or electronically.
  Physical copies can be printed onto different types and sizes of paper and printed on one side or both to 
form a booklet or pamphlet.
Producing a newsletter, flyer or poster using word processing software has a number of advantages:
  Correcting errors is quick and easy – the inbuilt dictionary highlights spelling and grammatical errors, 
offering suggestions where potential errors are highlighted.
  Formatting the document to meet the needs of the audience is also straightforward. Writers of newsletters 
can include features such as:
  columns to structure text
  white space to draw the eye to key areas
  pictures, diagrams and other images such as photographs
  changing the size and CASE of text to emphasise headings
  suitable fonts, such as  or Times New Roman or Comic Sans
  adding emphasis by using italics, underlining, bold or other special effects
  using bullet points and indentations – just like this list.
Consider the audience for posters by providing answers for the remaining sections of the table above.
Activity 2
Desktop publishing (DTP) software
DTP shares many features of word processing – the way that images are inserted, the formatting of 
paragraphs and text, the use of columns, and so on. You can produce good flyers and posters using word 
processing software, so what advantages does using DTP software give you?
  The key is to do with professional looking pages. DTP software lets you be far more creative with your work 
than traditional word processor software does, which is why it is used to create newsletters, flyers and posters.
  They are frame-based – the information is placed on the page in blocks or frames. If the text you are 
placing does not fit into a frame then it will spill over into another, continuing frame, automatically. This is a 
really good feature because the frames can be anywhere on the page, or even on different pages. Frames 
can be of different sizes so that text can be broken up and appear in an attractive layout.
You will learn more about using word 
processing software in the practical 
sessions of Units 1, 3 and X.
T ip
Session 1.6 Using a computer system to communicate
20979_P006_059.indd   23 1/21/15   1:33 AM
24
THEORY
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
  DTP software also gives you a selection of publication layouts, which are automatically created for you. A 
flyer could be a sheet of A4 paper folded to create a small booklet. You do not need to worry about where 
the frames go in order to create the layout, and how they are orientated to achieve the correct effect when 
folded. The software takes care of all that. Text wrapping (explained in the practical sessions of this unit) 
of images or any other imported element (table, chart, clip art) works in the same way.
It is worth noting, however, that no matter how professional your document appears on screen, the quality of 
the finished publication depends on the quality of your printer.
You are probably aware of DTP software such as Microsoft Publisher or if you work with an Apple Mac maybe 
you have seen or used something like Swift Publisher. 
DTP for corporate image publications
In Session 1.8 you will find discussion about corporate image and the importance of image and styling, along 
with a practical exercise. 
An important question is, “What software applications are available if more adventurous work than simple 
flyers and booklets of only a handful of pages are to be produced?” You may need to start investigating, 
industry standard software that allows good image manipulation as well as framing text.
There are a number of applications that are used to produce publicity material such as brochures and 
prospectuses as well as flyers and posters, of high quality. You may have come across QuarkXPress and 
Adobe’s InDesign, Illustrator or Photoshop. There are some open software applications as well, Scribus, for 
example. What these products offer, by themselves or in combination, is the ability to produce material of a 
high, professional standard. 
The resolution of images is important; you do not want a school brochure that has grainy or pixilated images! 
Colour in photographs might need to be manipulated, the images used may need to ‘bleed’, or run off the 
page without leaving a coloured border. Text might need to creatively wrap around part of an image. Colours 
will need to be matched exactly with the corporate style guide. A page template may have been created and 
will need to be followed throughout. The list of requirements that you have for an application package may be 
very long. 
Creativity is the key. Can your software produce business cards? How might you go about creating them? 
In Session 6.11 you will see how a database program can be used to create business cards but this is not a 
sophisticated and graphically interesting solution. Ideally you would set up a template with a DTP program 
and work on individual details only. The template would adhere to company corporate style guidelines.
20979_P006_059.indd   24 1/21/15   1:33 AM
25
THEORY
Session 1.6 Using a computer system to communicate
Any such software will save the document/file in an industry standard format and to a high resolution so that it 
can be sent to a printing house for loading into their presses with the minimum of adjustment. In many cases 
it makes sense to send files to printing houses as .pdf documents – although there is a variety and number of 
types of these and images may be required to be saved as .psd, .tiff or another format. It is important that you 
work with your printing house to establish exactly what file formats they need.
Look through this book and pick out the elements that make the template for the page. What elements are on every single page? 
What colour scheme is being followed? What are the styles of the main headings sub-headings and body text? Can you see 
columns on the pages? Now think about how/if possible you might organise this in your word processing software. Do you have a 
DTP program, if so how could you arrange these elements in that program?
Activity 3
Websites
In many respects, websites are electronic versions of newsletters, flyers 
and posters. There are many software packages for creating webpages and 
websites, known as web authoring software.
Websites offer the owners, producers and users of the websites a number of 
advantages:
  Rather than just having text and images, websites can have sound, video 
and animation.
  Buttons, images and highlighted text can encourage the reader to focus on 
specific aspects – and can be used to link directly to other webpages.
  The producer can add a hit counter to monitor the number of people visiting 
the website.
  Websites can be viewed all over the world.
Of course, there are also disadvantages:
  Websites can be illegally altered without the knowledge or authorisation 
of the producer. It is difficult for a user or reader to know if unauthorised 
changes have been made.
  You cannot usually see a website unless you have access to a computer 
system or the internet. Unless you have access to a portable device you are 
not able to carry the website content with you.
  A website needs to be updated regularly to keep it up-to-date. People 
expect the page they see to contain the latest information.
Connect to the internet:
1 View the BBC news website: http://news.bbc.co.uk. When was this site last updated? 
How often is it updated? How can you tell?
2 Visit the Cambridge home page at www.cie.org.uk. When was this page last updated? 
How do you know?
3 Visit the website of your favourite musician or sports team. When was this site last updated? 
How do you know? Are you happy with how up-to-date this information is?
4 Many websites do not give any indication of when they were last updated. Does this make you less sure of the reliability of the 
information that is presented? Why?
5 Why do you think there is a difference between the ‘update cycles’ of the BBC and Cambridge websites? 
6 Can you think of (and find) any websites that are only updated once a year? Are there any websites that are never updated?
Activity 4
Multimedia presentations
Like websites, multimedia presentations engage the audience, often showing and explaining to them the 
content of a topic by using not just text, but images, charts and diagrams, sound, video and animation. 
You won’t need to know how to use 
desktop publishing software for the 
IGCSE course, but it is important to 
be aware of why you might choose 
either word processing or desktop 
publishing software when producing 
various documents.
T ip
An example of a website
You’ll learn more about web 
authoring software and how to create 
webpages in the practical sessions of 
Unit 4.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   25 1/21/15   1:33 AM
26
THEORY
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
There are many software packages designed to produce simple and complex multimedia presentations. 
Presentations come in many forms and for different purposes.
Advantages of multimedia presentations:
  A good presentation (using sound, animation and video) helps to focus the 
audience’s attention on the key points being made.
  Presentations can be interactive – links to different presentation slides, new 
information, even to websites, can be included.
Disadvantages of multimedia presentations:
  You cannot usually run a presentation for an audience without a computer 
system and a projector, which can be very expensive.
  If links to websites are included, the presentation will be limited to locations 
with an internet connection.
  A poorly produced presentation, perhaps with too much text on a slide, or 
too many animations, will lose its impact because the audience may not be 
able to recognise the key points.
The head teacher of your school has some important information about changes to IGCSE 
subjects to give to parents, and she is wondering how to communicate this. She has invited you 
(as Head of ICT) and the Head of English to a meeting. The Head of English thinks that the 
information should go out in a newsletter. You believe that there should be a parents’ meeting 
where the head teacher explains the changes with the aid of a presentation. Write a list of 
advantages of using a presentation, and a list of disadvantages of using a newsletter.
Activity 5
Music scores
Music software can be used on a computer system to compose music and then 
to print the music score. This has many advantages for the composer:
  The music can be played at different speeds and in a different key without having to rewrite it.
  Many changes can be made automatically.
  Scores for different instruments can be printed.
  The musician can also choose to hear how different instruments might play the music.
  Musicians can play a tune on the computer and the software will write the notes into the score. This 
means that a musician does not always have to understand how to write music.
Cartoons
Computers are often used to make cartoon animations. In the past, cartoons 
were made up of thousands of hand-drawn images. Even feature-length cartoon 
films were hand-drawn, which meant that it took a very long time to produce 
a cartoon film. Today, many films are animated using computer generated 
imagery, widely known as CGI. With CGI, images can be scanned, replicated 
and altered. One image can be used to create thousands of other, similar 
images. This makes the production of crowd and battle scenes in films much 
easier to produce. A great advantage for film companies is that they do not have 
to pay for human actors to fight in a battle scene if the computer can generate 
enough images!
You’ll learn more about creating and 
producing multimedia presentations 
in the practical sessions of Unit 2.
T ip
Computer Supplies Inc.
Computer Supplies Inc.
Computer Supplies Inc.
Computer Supplies Inc.
Computer Supplies Inc.
Computer Supplies Inc.
An example of multimedia 
presentation slides
You won’t need to know how to use 
music software or create animations 
using CGI for the IGCSE course, but 
it is important to be aware of the 
impact of ICT in each of these areas.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   26 1/21/15   1:33 AM
27
THEORY
Session 1.6 Using a computer system to communicate
For each of the scenarios below, decide which of A-E is the best way to communicate the information. Give reasons for your choices.
A a newsletter
B a flyer
C a poster
D a website
E a multimedia presentation.
Scenario A B C D E Reason
1 Amika is in charge of preparing a document that is to be sent 
to all the parents of pupils in Excelsior School. The document 
will include news about recent events and activities. There 
will also be information about the parents’ evening, prize-
giving and sports events. The Parent Teacher Association 
wants to include a quiz.
2 Douglas Cheung has been asked to share some sales 
information within his company, with a very large audience, 
at the same time and in the same place. 
3 The school theatre group is presenting their own version 
of Romeo and Juliet. They want to advertise their play to 
everyone in the school.
4 The headteacher has decided that a school newsletter 
should be more widely available. She knows that there are 
former pupils in Egypt, the USA, Dubai and the West Indies. 
She would like them all to be able to see what is happening 
at the school today.
5 Junaid of All Computers Inc. wants as many people in the 
local area as possible to see an advertisement for a half-
price sale on laptops and netbooks.
Activity 6
You should now be able to:
  describe a range of communication applications such as:
  newsletters
  flyers and posters
  websites
  multimedia presentations
  music scores
  cartoons.
  discuss the need for software that professional, corporate publications require.
Review and revise
20979_P006_059.indd   27 1/21/15   1:33 AM
28
UNIT 1 Theory review
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
1  Connect each image on the left with a line which 
best describes it in the middle column, then another 
line from the middle column to the best example in 
the right column.
Mainframe Small hand-held 
computer
Business 
executive 
needing a 
powerful 
electronic diary 
while travelling
Desktop Computer 
having very 
fast processing 
capability and 
supporting massive 
storage facilities
Student 
needing to be 
able to work 
as she moves 
around campus
Personal 
Digital 
Assistants 
(PDAs)
Computer where 
all components are 
within a single unit, 
making it portable
Large 
organisation 
such as a 
government 
department
Laptop or 
notebook
General purpose 
computer having 
separate monitor, 
keyboard, etc.
A family 
needing a 
computer at 
home for a 
variety of uses
See Session 1.1
2  For each of these, indicate with a tick whether it is 
hardware or software.
Hardware Software
Operating system
Mouse
Monitor
Word processing 
program
CD-ROM
See Session 1.2
3  For each of these, indicate with a tick whether it is 
applications or system software.
Applications System
Operating system
Database program
Printer driver
Disc formatter
Graphics software
See Session 1.2
4  The memory of a computer can be volatile or non-
volatile.
a  Describe what is meant by the terms volatile 
and non-volatile.
b Which type of memory is volatile?
c  The instructions for starting up a computer will 
be held in which type of memory? Why?
See Session 1.3
What have you covered?
In these six theory sessions you have:
  discovered the range of computers in common use today
  been introduced to a variety of hardware and software components in a computer system
  been shown the difference between applications and system software
  compared memory types
  been shown the components, and relative advantages, of different user interfaces
  evaluated the different ways that a computer user might communicate with a target audience
  explored some of the emerging technologies which are beginning to have an impact on our everyday life.
Some practice questions
Progress check
20979_P006_059.indd   28 1/21/15   1:33 AM
29
THEORY
Theory review
What have you covered?
In these six theory sessions you have:
  discovered the range of computers in common use today
  been introduced to a variety of hardware and software components in a computer system
  been shown the difference between applications and system software
  compared memory types
  been shown the components, and relative advantages, of different user interfaces
  evaluated the different ways that a computer user might communicate with a target audience
  explored some of the emerging technologies which are beginning to have an impact on our everyday life.
5  Rana is not a confident computer user and has just 
bought her first computer, a laptop. The operating 
system provides her with a GUI.
Give three reasons why the GUI is an advantage to 
her.
See Session 1.4
6  Pete is a vet who runs a parrot sanctuary for 
pet parrots that have been abandoned by their 
owners. He is going to organise an open day at the 
sanctuary in the hope that some of the abandoned 
parrots will be adopted. He needs some publicity 
material to be produced.
He tells you that he thinks it might be a good idea 
to build a new page into his website for this.
You do not think that is a good idea and want to 
suggest creating a simple flyer instead.
Before you talk to Pete, you decide to write 
down the advantages and disadvantages of both 
options – the webpage and the flyer – paying 
particular attention to the event that Pete is 
organising and the people he hopes to attract to 
it. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages, to 
Pete, of using webpages and flyers.
See Session 1.6
7  You are applying for the post of Innovations Director 
at a car manufacturer and are asked to provide 
three sample ideas of how emerging technology 
could be built into future cars. Identify and explain 
the desirability of three ideas.
See Session 1.5
Progress check
Aiming for good progress
  You are able to distinguish between hardware 
and software.
  You can distinguish between system and 
applications software.
  You can name the different types of memory and 
state a use for each type.
  You can use the terminology relating to user 
interfaces.
  You are able to choose an appropriate method of 
communication for a target audience.
  You are able to identify emerging technologies 
and link them to everyday situations.
Aiming for excellent progress
  You can distinguish between hardware and software.
  You can describe, and distinguish between, the use of a 
variety of software types.
  You can identify appropriate uses for, and justify the 
selection of, different memory types.
  You are able to describe the features of user 
interfaces.
  You can choose, and justify a choice, between different 
methods of communicating with a target audience.
  You are able to identify and explain how emerging 
technologies may be utilised in everyday 
situations.
20979_P006_059.indd   29 1/21/15   1:33 AM
30
SESSION 1
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
1.7
Document production: Entering and 
editing data from different sources
Background
Every day you are likely to come into contact with documents, posters, letters, leaflets, books and other printed 
materials that were prepared using software that enables users to develop and edit text-based documents. In 
this session, you will be looking at how to create and open documents using information from different sources. 
The examples here are from Microsoft Word, but you can use any word processing software to complete the 
tasks and activities.
Locating and recognising file types
As part of your practical work, you will need to be able to open and edit work 
that has been prepared for you. People do not always work using the same 
types of text editing software, so there are various ‘generic’ file types that all 
computer systems will recognise.
Open the folder titled Session 1.7 within the Unit 1 source files on the course CD and look 
at the file types that are there.
You should see that there are three types of generic files. You can recognise them by their 
extensions (the letters that come after the dot). These are listed in the table below.
Format Meaning Description
.csv comma 
separated 
values
This data contains data items that are separated by commas. When imported into text 
editing software (a word processing program, for example) the data can be formatted as 
a table. Often, .csv files are used as source data for spreadsheets and databases as the 
data can be read by any appropriate software.
.rtf rich text format Text files, which keep some of the formatting that was in the original file.
.txt text file .txt files contain text. All the formatting is removed. .txt files can be opened in any text 
editing or word processing program.
On the CD
Activity 1
Opening documents and importing data from 
existing files
When you create the documents for your practical work, you can use many 
different types of document formats as part of your work. As well as the generic 
file types you could include:
.doc A document file created in Microsoft Word 2003 or earlier
.docx A document created in Microsoft Word 2007 or 2010
.odt A document created in Open Office Writer
Follow the steps below to:
  create a new document
  open a document
  import text
  save as a Word document.
Open your word processing software, for example, Microsoft Word. You need 
to open the document called ComputerTypes.rtf, that you found in the Session 
1.7 folder on the course CD. You need to select File > Open. This will open a 
new window. You need to browse the course CD for the document. You might 
not be able to see the file you need to open, because Word will automatically 
Generic file types means that you will 
be able to work with them regardless 
of the software packages that you 
are using.
Language
Portable document format (.pdf) 
files are another ‘generic’ file type, 
a universal document file format. 
Although specific to the Adobe 
Acrobat system, the Adobe Reader is 
widely and freely available. When you 
convert documents, forms, graphics, 
and web pages to PDF, they look just 
like they would if printed. pdf files 
are especially useful for documents 
such as magazine articles, product 
brochures, or flyers. Portable document 
format files have become the standard 
for transferring documents between 
different computer platforms when you 
want to preserve the original graphic 
appearance and can be opened on any 
computer platform as long as you have 
downloaded Adobe Reader.
Real world
20979_P006_059.indd   30 1/21/15   1:50 AM
31
PRACTICAL
Session 1.7 Document production: Entering and editing data from different sources
look for other Word documents. So you need to go to the drop-down menu at the bottom right of the screen 
and select All Files. You will then see all the files in the folder.
ComputerTypes is an .rtf file. Double click on ComputerTypes.rtf to open it. This will open the file in Word 
and you can now begin to improve the way the document looks, and to format and edit the text. 
Before you do anything with the text the file needs to be saved in a new format, as a word processed file. 
Click on, or select the option to Save As… Save the file as: ComputerTypes with the file type .doc, .docx, 
odt or whatever your software uses.
Page layout
The layout of the pages in your document needs to be considered very carefully. Each time you import text, 
or open a document that someone else has created, you may be dealing with the page settings that were set 
when the document was created. This can have an impact on the layout of your document, and can lead to 
poor quality printing.
Look carefully at the length of ComputerTypes. It should be three or four pages long in your word processor.
In your word processing program select Page Layout and open the Page Setup dialogue box by clicking the 
icon at the bottom right.
From here you can change:
  the orientation of the page 
(landscape or wide, portrait or tall)
  the size of the paper
  the layout of the page
  the size of the margins.
Click here to open 
up the Page Setup 
dialogue box
The gutter that you can see in the 
margins menu refers to part of 
the page outside the margins. This 
is important if the pages are to be 
bound. The gutter leaves space for 
staples or binding, and means that 
the text on the page is printed with 
enough space around it to make 
reading easier. Most of the time, 
the gutter is set to 0 cm. The gutter 
position can be set to: Top (top of the 
page) or, more usually, to: Left.
Real world
20979_P006_059.indd   31 1/21/15   1:33 AM
32
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
How is ComputerTypes laid out? Using the Page Setup 
dialogue box that you have just opened, use the tabs that 
are available to find out the answers to these questions:
1 What is the orientation of the page?
2 How big are each of the margins: left, right, top, 
bottom?
3 What is the paper size?
Activity 2
  
These settings are not convenient. You need the orientation to be 
portrait and hopefully fit everything onto a single page. Open up 
the Page Setup dialogue box again. Using the tabs change the 
page settings so that the document has:
1 a page size of A4
2 a page orientation of portrait
3 all 4 margins set to 2 cm
Save the document.
Activity 3
The document should fit onto one page and the top of it should look like this:
Look through the text that is now on your one page. It looks quite messy. The words are different sizes in 
different paragraphs, some paragraphs are over to the right, some centred and the style of type is different. 
You need to tidy it up.
Font style
The style of a font (sometimes called the font face) can be described as being either serif or sans-serif.
The difference is very easy to see: 
h hThis little mark is called a serif.
This is an example of a serif font 
because it has the little marks added.
This is an example of a sans-serif font because 
it does not have the little marks added.
Text colour
Text highlight
Font
Size
Changing the font, size and colour is very easy. You have a panel that allows you to work with fonts. Can you 
work out what the B, I and U icons will do?
1 Complete this table by deciding whether each of these fonts is serif or sans-serif. 
The first has been done for you.
2 Is the majority of the text in this book serif or sans-serif?
3 Change the whole of the text in ComputerTypes to a serif font of size 11.
Save the document.
Activity 4
Times New Roman Serif
Arial
Perpetua
20979_P006_059.indd   32 1/21/15   1:33 AM
33
PRACTICAL
Session 1.7 Document production: Entering and editing data from different sources
Paragraph alignment
The next layout problem concerns the paragraphs. Some are over to the 
left, some centred and some to the right. This is known as paragraph 
alignment, and you may hear this referred to as justified. Some paragraphs 
are left aligned (or left justified), some centred and some right aligned (or 
right justified). Changing the alignment is very easy. There is a panel that 
allows you to change the alignment with just a click of the mouse.
Click anywhere in the first paragraph and the left alignment button should 
be highlighted. Click anywhere in the third paragraph and see that the right 
alignment button is highlighted, and the fourth and fifth paragraphs are centred.
With the left mouse button, click at the very start of the first word of the second 
paragraph (not the heading), hold down the mouse button and drag the cursor 
to the very end of the second paragraph. Let go of the mouse button and the 
text of the paragraph will be highlighted. Click on the fully justified button to see 
what effect this has – both left and right margins are straight, like you see in a 
newspaper or magazine.
Click and highlight the very first heading, Now click on the bold and underline 
icons in the font panel (B and U). The first paragraph should look like this:
Copying and pasting text from another document
The document is missing any text to do with Desktop or Personal Computers. A friend has prepared some for 
you. It is saved as DesktopComputer.txt on the course CD. Locate and open the file in your word processor.
Click on the first letter of the text and highlight all the text. Find an icon or menu item that allows you to copy 
text. The icon might look like this:
Click on this item and then return to ComputerTypes. Move down the 
document and click in the space between the first and second paragraphs. Now 
find the paste icon (right), or menu item, which will be in the same place that you 
found copy.
The paragraph from DesktopComputer.txt is now pasted into ComputerTypes 
to become the second paragraph. Save the document CompterTypes and 
close DesktopComputer.txt.
Check through ComputerTypes so that:
  all paragraphs are fully justified (both the left and right margins are aligned)
  each heading is left aligned
  each heading (there are six) is bold, underlined and highlighted yellow.
  each heading is a sans-serif font (use the same font for each heading).
Save the document.
Activity 5
Click to the left of the first heading and then press the Enter   key to make a couple of blank lines and then 
click in the empty top line. You are going to give the document a title.
Left Centre Fully justifiedRight
Some useful keyboard shortcuts:
Ctrl + B Bold
Ctrl + U Underline
Ctrl + I Italics
Ctrl + C Copy
Ctrl + V Paste
Ctrl + X Cut
Ctrl + S Save
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   33 1/21/15   1:34 AM
34
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
1 Type in: Computer Types.
2 Make this title a sans-serif font.
3 Change the size of the title to 20.
4 Make the heading bold and centre aligned.
Save the document.
Activity 6
Headers and footers
Sometimes, titles are put at the top of the page as you have done. Important information can also be put 
in the header and footer areas of a document. They can also be used to provide information about the 
document that will appear on every page.
The header is at the top of the page. It can be used to insert the title of the document. The footer is at the 
bottom of the page. It is often used to print the page number of the document. This is really important when 
you have documents that include lots of pages. Page numbers help readers to find their way around a 
document, and to check the order of printed pages.
You are going to put a header in the document – your name, and a footer – today’s date. There is no need to 
enter page numbers in this document.
Double click in the space just above the heading Computer Types and the header space will open up:
In the top of the window you will also be presented with a range of options such 
as adding date, time, or page numbers. All you are interested in is adding your 
name so click on the tab or menu to go back to the panels, which have the 
options for changing font, size and paragraph alignment.
Type in your name in a serif font size 10 and make it italic, left aligned. Double 
click back in the main body of the page. You have now created a header and it 
should be visible to you, but as a faint grey colour. 
1 Double click in the space at the very bottom of the page to open up the footer area. Find 
the options panel for inserting automated objects. It may look like this:
 
2 Place the date in the footer, as an automatically updated field, left aligned.
3 Place the full file path in the footer, as an automatically updated field, after the date, 
separated by a comma
4 Make the footer items: serif font, size 10, italic
5 Double click in the main body of the text and save the document.
Activity 7
Data items such as: date, time, page 
numbers, are often placed in footers 
and headers. These are automated – 
they are placed as fields in the 
document and will update with 
current data, if required. If you insert 
a date field, it will always display 
todays date when you view or print 
the document, unless you have 
deselected the ‘update automatically’ 
option. The same is true of the time 
field, it will display the current time 
when the document is opened or 
printed.
Real world
In the IGCSE examination you may 
be asked to insert the full file path of 
your file, so make sure you know the 
difference between ‘File name’ and 
‘File path’.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   34 1/21/15   1:34 AM
35
PRACTICAL
Session 1.7 Document production: Entering and editing data from different sources
You should now be able to:
  load data from an existing file
  copy and paste text from another document
  open documents of .txt and .rtf file types, saving each as a word processed format
  use headers and footers, with automated fields
  set font styles and sizes, knowing the difference between serif and sans-serif font faces
  emphasise text
  align text paragraphs
  adjust page orientation, page size and margins.
Review and revise
20979_P006_059.indd   35 1/21/15   1:34 AM
36 Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
SESSION 1.8 Internet research 
Background
A good newsletter requires relevant information and images that are suitable for 
the intended audience and purpose. The internet provides access to millions of 
pages, documents, images and descriptions that can help when researching 
any project, but deciding where to start looking and what key words to use can 
be daunting.
All Computers Inc. requires a newsletter containing information about the 
peripherals that are needed to connect to a desktop computer. In order to create 
this newsletter you will need to search the internet for images and technical information. In this session you 
will look at the following:
  using basic searches
  using specific websites
  using advanced searches
  recording the URLs of useful websites
  downloading text and images.
Search engines
There are many search engines available, but they all perform a similar task – 
searching for content based on the words you enter.
Most search engines will help to target your results by allowing you to choose 
the type of information you require.
Specific areas that can be searched 
range from images, news and 
shopping to videos and books.
Targeted searches can 
be carried out without 
extra search terms.
The search engines Google, Yahoo and Ask are mentioned above, but there are many others. How many different search engines 
can you find? Make a list and then compare your list with others in your group. Does it seem like you all use the same ones? Are 
some search engines designed for specific tasks? Can you work out or find out which are the most popular and why?
Activity 1
The examples in this session use the 
browser Internet Explorer, but you can 
use any web browser, although each 
may work slightly differently.
Real world
www.google.com
www.yahoo.com
www.ask.com
20979_P006_059.indd   36 1/21/15   1:34 AM
37
PRACTICAL
Session 1.8 Internet research
Basic searches
Key words are essential for any basic search and they can often be used to 
find information quickly. A simple search will quickly produce information and 
images – not all of which, unfortunately, may be relevant to your school work. 
For the newsletter you need to find images and text that you can copy, edit and 
paste into your newsletter.
Advanced search techniques
More specific searches require more specific questions. There are many words 
that have two or more meanings or are so common that a simple search 
produces millions of results. Most search engines have an advanced search 
feature that allows more key words to be entered in order to refine the search 
and produce more relevant results.
Using mouse as an example, an advanced search could be created as follows:
Language: English
Key word: mouse
Key word: computer
Key word: input or device
Unwanted key words: 
mammal or animal
The first result from the search is a Wikipedia article on the history and technical specifications of a standard 
computer mouse.
Advanced image searches are also possible. Searching for a large image of 3D 
printer could be created as follows:
This should result in images of 3D printers, in full colour and large enough to be 
used in a presentation.
Carry out single-term searches using 
the following ICT words:
mouse   keyboard   scanner   
printer   monitor
Are the results that you find always 
relevant to ICT? And if not, to what 
do they refer? Discuss with a friend 
the advantages and disadvantages of 
basic searches.
Activity 2
Do the two advanced searches 
described. How do the results compare 
to a basic single word search?
Activity 3
20979_P006_059.indd   37 1/21/15   1:34 AM
38
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Boolean operators
Take a look again at the advanced mouse search. The search window now has the following search 
terminology: the use of quotation marks and minus symbols. These last two are Boolean operators. Advanced 
search options generate these terms, but they can be entered manually.
Full color only
Key word: printer
Size of image: Large
Key word: 3D
Unwanted key words: 
inkjet or laser
Quotation marks mean 
that this must be included 
exactly as typed.
Either one of these 
could be in the results.
Neither of these terms 
must appear in the results.
Locating information from a specific website
Many large websites contain their own search functions that allow you to search 
within them. The following website URLs all have internal search facilities:
  www.wikipedia.org
  www.bbc.co.uk
  www.ted.com
  www.nationalgeographic.com
  www.morguefile.com
Downloading and saving information
Images or files relevant to any project can be downloaded onto a computer so that they become available as 
a local resource (this means that these files can be accessed again without the internet).
Before you download any information or images from the internet, it will be useful for you to create a 
folder within your work area, which you will use to collect together the resources that will be going into the 
newsletter.
Create a folder called NEWSLETTER.
The steps below show how to d ownload an image from the internet.
Using the website www.morguefile.
com, enter the key word Games 
controller into the search window. 
If you are successful, try further ICT 
terms.
Activity 5
Carry out a range of advanced 
webpage and image searches of ICT 
terminology and try to include extra 
key words to narrow down results 
and prevent confusion. Also try 
experimenting with Boolean operators 
when manually entering an advanced 
search.
Activity 4
20979_P006_059.indd   38 1/21/15   1:34 AM
39
PRACTICAL
Session 1.8 Internet research
Right clicking an internet image usually 
provides an option to save or download an 
image. The option here is Save Picture As.
A suitable location to save this file would be 
in the same folder that you created for the 
newsletter within your document area.
Recording research results
When carrying out research it is important to record the addresses of useful websites, especially the URL of 
specific pages that contain information that you have decided to use, or of images that you have downloaded. 
Creating a word processed document of URLs that can be referred back to again is a useful way of recording 
them and this document can then be shared with others to help them with a similar task.
In your word processor software open a new document. Save this document as 
NewsletterURLs. Switch back to your internet browser and the image of the 
joystick from the save image task above.
Copying and pasting URLs
Click once in the address bar and the URL will be highlighted. Now hold down 
the Ctrl (or Control) key on your keyboard and then press the C key once. This is 
an instruction to copy whatever has been highlighted.
Switch to the document NewsletterURLs and click in the top line of the page. 
Hold down the Ctrl key again but this time press the V key once. This is an 
instruction to paste whatever has been copied. The URL from the browser is 
pasted into the document. You might want to type in some headings to help you 
remember what the URL was pointing to.
Newsletter research
The newsletter you are going to produce will contain the following input and 
output devices. 
Input devices: keyboard, mouse, scanner, joystick.
Output devices: TFT monitor, Inkjet printer.
Saving text from the internet
Of course the newsletter is not just going to be full of images, it will also need text alongside each image to 
explain what the device is needed for.
You can locate text about anything, just as easily as you can for images. It is tempting to copy lots of text and 
include it in your newsletter but you need to remember that material created by someone else might be copyright 
protected. Session 5.5 explains the issue of copyright fully for you. For now, you need to be aware that the 
people or organisations who post information on a website may not want anybody else to copy and use it. 
There is nothing wrong, of course, with saving text that you will refer to later on. You need to remember that any 
information that you copy and paste should only be used to help you put together the newsletter.
A URL (Uniform Resource Locator) is 
the long string that refers to a web 
address, usually starting with www. 
This indicates to your web browser 
on which server, and stored in which 
folder, the page or image can be 
located.
Real world
Using the search methods described 
so far, find and download images 
for each of the six devices on the 
previous page, saving them into your 
NEWSLETTER folder. Do not forget 
to copy and the paste the image 
URLs into the NewsletterURLs 
document. Remember that you are 
collecting images suitable for a 
professional-looking newsletter. Save 
NewsletterURLs.
Activity 6
20979_P006_059.indd   39 1/21/15   1:34 AM
40
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Now, go back to your search engine and (making sure you are searching for websites and not images) type in 
Joystick for PC.
High on the list will be the Wikipedia website. Click on the link and you should see an image of a joystick 
illustrating the article about joysticks, which is similar to this:
Reading through the text you might decide that the second paragraph is the one with the better information for 
your needs.
Click at the start of the second paragraph and, without releasing the left mouse button, drag the cursor to the 
end of the paragraph. Release the left mouse button and the text of the second paragraph will be highlighted.
As you did with the URL, press Ctrl + C to copy the text. 
Select the document NewsletterURLs and click in the next available line of the page and press Ctrl + V to 
paste the text from the website into your document.
Now copy and paste the Wikipedia page URL into the document as well so that you know where this text 
came from.
Using the method described for locating, copying and pasting text, find text that could be used as background information for each of 
the six devices and copy and paste it (and the URL) into the NewsletterURLs document. Save the document NewsletterURLs.
Activity 7
You now have a document that contains all the URLs of images that you want to use in the newsletter, along 
with suitable background text and their URLs. Additionally, in the folder NEWSLETTER you have six images 
that are going to be used.
These images and the text will be used in the next session to create the newsletter itself.
When you copy any material that will 
be used by you in some way, you must 
remember that the material might be 
copyright protected. See Session 5.5.
Real world
Beware, websites change all the time 
and the results in this screenshot may 
have changed.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   40 1/21/15   1:34 AM
41
PRACTICAL
Session 1.8 Internet research
Downloading tables and charts
There will be times when researching information that you find either a table or a chart that you want to 
download. Downloading a table is a case of copying and pasting the information as you would some text, 
while a chart can be saved just as you saved images in Activity 6. It is important to credit the source of 
information in the table if you use it directly – tell the readers of your document where the data came from.
Open your web browser again and go to the website www.xe.com. This website is a source of information 
regarding currency exchange rates. On the opening page you will see a table that gives the rates for $US, €, 
and £ against one another.
If you want to copy this table to use in your own document then highlight the data in the table.
Press Ctrl + C to copy, and then move to your document and press Ctrl + V to paste. You will then get the 
table as it appeared in the website in your document. Remember to reference its origin. With constantly 
changing data such as this it is also a good idea to date it although in this case the date is within the copied 
data.
You might find a chart that is useful to you. Charts 
in a website will generally be an image and so you 
can save as you have already been doing. For 
example, use Google or some other search engine 
and type in (with quotation marks): “UK CD versus 
digital downloads”
In the results you may find towards the top of the 
listing a link to DiscWizards.com. Click on this link 
(or type in this URL directly: www.discwizards.
com/articles/Digital-Downloads-Versus-
Physical-CD-DVD-Blu-ray-Sales-UK-2012.htm)
On this page you should see something like this:
Right click with the cursor over the image and save 
it in your work area as CDchart.
Once saved in your work area it can be imported/
inserted into your document as you have with 
other images.
You should now be able to:
  choose and use an internet search engine
  use basic and advanced searches to locate relevant text or images
  use the search facilities within specific websites
  record the URLs of useful websites
  download text and images from websites.
Review and revise
20979_P006_059.indd   41 1/21/15   1:34 AM
42 Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Creating a newsletter
SESSION 1.9
Background
All Computers Inc. requires a newsletter containing information about the peripherals that are needed to 
connect to a desktop computer. You have already downloaded the images and text that you think will provide 
a professional and informative newsletter.
In this session you will be guided through the process of combining your images and text in order to create the 
newsletter. To achieve this you will:
  create a document where the information is presented in columns
  stretch and crop images
  arrange text around the images.
If you have not had access to images or text you can use NewsletterText.rtf and 
the images: Keyboard.jpg, Mouse.jpg, Scanner.jpg, Joystick.jpg, TFTMonitor.
jpg, InkjetPrinter.jpg that are on the course CD.
Importing text
The first task is to set up the text in the document in the style that you require. In your word processing 
software open either the NewsletterURLs document that is in your folder NEWSLETTER, or NewsletterText.
rtf from the course CD.
If you are using your own text then carry out these steps:
1 Open a new document in your word processor.
2 In NewsletterURLs highlight and copy all your saved text that will be used in the newsletter.
3 Switch to your new document and paste the text onto the page.
No matter where your text has come from, save your document of text as a word processed document called 
Newsletter.
The page layout needs some work. Using Page Setup, change Newsletter so that:
  the page orientation is Landscape
  all four margins (top, right, bottom and left) are 2 cm
  the page size is A4
  you have a header with the text: All Computers Inc.
  the text of the header is a sans-serif font, size 16, bold and is centred
  has a footer of 2 lines. The first line has the text: Date created: followed by today’s date. A second line has the text: 
Date/time last printed: followed by an automatically updated day/time field
  the text in the footer is a sans-serif font, size 8, italic and right aligned.
Save Newsletter.
Activity 1
Creating columns
The body of the text now needs to be arranged into two columns.
In the area of your word processor where you accessed the Page Layout panel you should also find an icon 
or menu item that allows you to select columns. To arrange text into columns only takes a few steps.
1 Highlight the whole of the first paragraph and click on the icon for columns.
2 You will be asked how many columns are needed – select two. 
 Your text should now be looking like this:
On the CD
20979_P006_059.indd   42 1/21/15   1:34 AM
43
PRACTICAL
Session 1.9 Creating a newsletter
Make the following changes:
1 Arrange the second paragraph (about scanners) into three columns.
2 Arrange the third paragraph into two columns.
3 Highlight the fourth paragraph. Click on the columns icon but now select the option for More Columns… and you might see 
a panel like this:
4 Enter 4 as the number of columns and 1 for the spacing between the columns, and click OK.
5 Save the document.
Activity 2
You should now have a document where the first four paragraphs look like this:
20979_P006_059.indd   43 1/21/15   1:34 AM
44
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Now go through the entire document and change all six paragraphs back to a single column and save the 
document again.
All Computers Inc. have decided that their newsletters and other customer information sheets should always be in a serif font and 
be size 11.
1 Change all the body text (everything except the headers and footers) to size 11 and a serif font.
2 Change all six headings to a sans-serif font, size 12 and bold and underlined.
3 Highlight all the text and set to two columns.
4 Save the document.
Activity 3
Inserting images
Now the images need to be placed. Click before the first word 
in the first paragraph. Find the icon or menu item, which allows 
you to insert an image.
You are going to insert a picture so click on the Picture icon.
You will be asked where the picture is coming from. Navigate 
through your folders until you find your NEWSLETTER folder 
where you saved your six images. You want the keyboard 
picture first so select this to be inserted.
The picture is retrieved and inserted into the text where the 
cursor was and should look like this:
Notice the small points on each corner of the image and at 
the side half-way points. These are also known as ‘resizing 
handles’. If you do not see these, click once on the image.
Resizing an image
You need to resize the image as it is far too big. Click and hold down the left button of the mouse when the 
cursor is over the top right point of the image. Drag the cursor toward the middle of the image. You should 
see either the outline or the image shrinking:
When you have shrunk the outline of the image to a size you think is suitable, let go of the left mouse button. 
The image is resized. It may look like this:
Click here and drag the 
point toward the centre of 
the image.
20979_P006_059.indd   44 1/21/15   1:34 AM
45
PRACTICAL
Session 1.9 Creating a newsletter
Save the document. The keyboard image is a little tall for the space you are using so you will shrink it down a 
little more.
Cropping an image
Click and drag the point in the top edge of the image to flatten it. This does not look good. All you have done 
is squash the image. This is an important lesson to learn. When you resize an image you should always try 
and preserve the aspect ratio. This means that when resized you have kept all the dimensions in proportion. 
In word processing software, when you click and drag on any of the corner sizing points, the aspect ratio 
will be preserved, when you click and resize on any of the mid-side resizing point you will only succeed in 
squashing the image somehow.
To get the image back to its proper aspect ratio, you can either:
  reopen the document as it was before you squashed the keyboard
  click and drag the image back to its original size
  press Ctrl + Z  to undo the last thing you changed.
What you really want to do is crop the image – cut away the part you do not 
want. Click on the image again and look for the icon that allows you to crop. It 
may look something like this:
Click on this icon and move back over the image. Now click on the top middle resizing point and drag down 
into the image. There is a line showing you where the new side will appear, but this time when you let go the 
area that you dragged over will be cut away.
If you are unhappy with it then press Ctrl + Z  to undo the cropping and try again. Resize and crop until you 
are happy with the resulting image size.
Using Ctrl + Z  can be very useful as 
it works with many different software 
programs, not just word processing.
T ip
20979_P006_059.indd   45 1/21/15   1:34 AM
46
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Text wrapping
The final adjustment to make now is with getting the text to flow around the image. This is called text 
wrapping. You may have already seen an icon for this, as shown below.
Click on the keyboard image and then click on the Text Wrapping icon and choose Square from the list. 
Immediately you will see a difference. The text is now wrapping around the image. This makes a great 
difference to the appearance of the newsletter.
Save the document.
Play around with the other wrapping options to see what they do. Be careful with the options 
Behind Text and In Front of Text as you may think that you have lost the image somewhere 
or that it is not going to be visible. Sometimes you will have to introduce blank lines to get the 
image where you want it. What happens if you position the image over the column?
Activity 4
Open the document you saved before Activity 4. Now you need to complete the 
newsletter. You have a number of tasks to do.
1 Change all the body text to be fully justified.
2 Insert the other five images into their correct places in the text.
3 Resize and crop each image so that it appears exactly as you want it to be.
4 Apply text wrapping to all the images.
5 Adjust either the image size or your cropping so that everything remains on one page.
6 Save the document.
Activity 5
The top of the completed document might look like this:
There is a document, Newsletter.pdf, on the course CD that shows a finished example.
You should now be able to:
  create a document where the information is presented in columns
  resize and crop images, maintaining their aspect ratio
  manage text wrapping around images.
Review and revise
20979_P006_059.indd   46 1/21/15   1:34 AM
47
CommunicationSESSION 1.10
Background
Individuals as well as companies need to send out information to individuals. The days of writing letters that 
have personal details inserted have long gone.
This session will show you how to perform a mail merge, and how to manage emails, especially to groups of 
people. This session also assumes that you are familiar with an email application such as Outlook or a web 
based service such as Hotmail, Gmail or MailXchange.
Mail merging
Mail merging (sometimes referred to as a mailshot) is a way of placing content 
from a spreadsheet, database, or table into a word processed document. A 
mail merge is ideal for creating personalised letters or labels. Instead of editing 
an original letter several times to input different personalised information, the 
mail merge process does just that: merging data items into specific parts of a 
document. Clearly, this saves a lot of time. It also means you do not have to 
worry about missing any information for the recipient of one of the letters.
In order to create a mail merge, two documents are needed: a word processed 
document (a template) and a file with the data for each letter. This file can 
take many forms, such as a spreadsheet, a database, or even another word 
processed document that has a table in it.
All Computers Inc. are advertising for a new Marketing Manager and have 
short-listed five candidates to attend a second interview. The details of these 
candidates are held in the file InterviewCandidates.rtf which is on the CD. It is 
these details that are going to be inserted into letters sent to each candidate.
The second part of the mail merge requires the letter that these candidate 
details are going to be inserted into. Your secretary has produced a standard 
letter but it is incomplete. On the CD look for InterviewLetter.rtf and open it in 
your word processor.
The personal details for each candidate need to be inserted in the places 
indicated.
Look for a panel or selection of buttons that allow you to work with mail merge 
documents and fields.
It may look like this:
The first step is to attach the file that contains the list of interview candidates – 
the document just saved: MarketingCandidates
Click on the button: Select Recipients, and then Use an Existing list.
You will need to navigate through your filing system to the folder with 
MarketingCandidates in it.
When you have selected the file it may initially appear as if nothing has 
happened, but if you look at the Mailings panel you should notice that a couple 
of the other options such as ‘Insert merge field’ have now become available. 
This indicates that the table in MarketingCandidates been attached and the 
fields can be inserted.
Delete the couple of lines that tell you where to put the candidates name and 
address details.
Open InterviewCandidates.rtf in 
your word processor. You should see 
the names of five candidates with their 
addresses and interview times.
Anton Kaslov has contacted you to 
indicate that he is unable to continue 
with his application, and so you have 
replaced him with Raphael Tomas who 
lives at: 243 The Maltings, Lillington, 
DT6 9TF.
Make this change to the table 
and save the document as a word 
processed document with the name 
MarketingCandidates.
Activity 1
As with all the other examples in this 
practical unit, the mail merge process 
here is described using Microsoft 
Word.
T ip
Session 1.10 Communication
20979_P006_059.indd   47 1/21/15   1:34 AM
48
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Leaving the cursor in the line where you want the candidate name to be placed, click on the ‘Insert merge 
field’ button which may then display a list of available fields like this:
Click on FirstName and a marker will be placed in the letter where you had left 
the cursor.
Repeat this procedure for: FamilyName, Street, Town, Post_Code. 
Remember to leave a blank space between the FirstName and 
FamilyName, and then place the other three on separate lines.
Now replace the text Candidate’s first name and Candidate interview 
time with the correct merge fields.
Save the letter as a word processed document with the name: 
InterviewLetter.
Everything is now ready for InterviewLetter and InterviewCandidates to be 
merged to produce five personalised letters.
Look for a button on the Mailings panel or elsewhere that allows you to 
complete the merge process. It may look like: 
It is always best to choose to edit the individual letters rather than send them 
straight to the printer. A visual check is a good idea to see that the letters 
are exactly as you expect and that the insertion of some of the details hasn’t 
messed with the layout.
You will be asked if you want to see all the records or just a selection, choose to 
see all of them.
A five page document should now be produced with the first page being the letter addressed to Nigel Mitchel, 
asking him to attend interview at 10 a.m. Scroll through the other pages to make sure that they are as required.
You could now save, edit or print this document as you could any other word processed document.
Usually these will not be saved once printed. Saving the letter with the merge fields is sufficient to reproduce the 
individual ones again if needed.
Corporate style
Having completed the mail merge you are reminded that All Computers Inc. has a corporate style guide. This 
is a very important policy document and will make clear a wide variety of things such as:
  the way standard letters should be laid out 
  the size and font face to use for various elements of a document (headings and paragraphs for example)
  the format of dates
  where a company badge or image should be placed
  the specific colours that must be used (the hexadecimal numbers for a web page background, or text for 
example).
The reason these guides are produced is to ensure consistency across all the publications and documents 
that are produced.
The larger and more widely recognisable the company, the tighter the controls will be regarding colour, font 
face and size, image dimensions and so on.
If you did not have an existing file 
which held details that you needed 
for the merge, you could: 
  create a new set of 
details and save them as 
InterviewCandidates.rtf
  find an option such as ‘Type a 
new list’ which takes you through 
a series of dialogue boxes setting 
up the column headings and 
then entering the data for each 
candidate.
Real world
20979_P006_059.indd   48 1/21/15   1:34 AM
49
PRACTICAL
Session 1.10 Communication
The All Computer Inc. style guide states that:
  all text should be in font face Tahoma, and colour ‘dark blue’
  any normal paragraph should be font size 9.5 with an 8 point space after the paragraph
  all line spacing should be 1.15 lines
Activity 2
In your word processor look for a button that allows you to create a new style. This may be in the same or 
connected to the panel dealing with paragraphs, or connected to formatting. Look for a button similar to this:
When you click this button a dialogue box appears where settings can be selected. 
Choose the font ‘Tahoma’, size 9.5 and colour, dark blue.
Look within this dialogue for an option to format the paragraph.
Set the spacing before to be 0 point, after, 8 point and line spacing to be multiple at 1.15.
Before this definition is saved, name it AllComputerParagraph, with ‘Style type’ paragraph and make sure 
AllComputerParagraph also appears in ‘Style for following paragraph’.
Finally, ensure that the option to add the style to any new document is chosen; otherwise this style will only 
be attached to this single document.
Click ‘OK’ or ‘Save’ for the style to be available as an option.
You should now see your new style, AllComputerParagraph, in the list of available styles.
Now highlight all the text in InterviewLetter and click on the button AllComputerParagraph for the new style to 
be applied to the whole letter.
You will need to right justify the lines of the company address and the date.
Save the document.
Open a new document in your word processor to check that the new style is 
attached. Close without saving.
For a reminder about the differences 
between serif and san-serif fonts look 
back at Session 1.7.
Language
20979_P006_059.indd   49 1/21/15   1:34 AM
50
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Which font for which audience?
There is a great deal of debate about what type of font face is best for a particular purpose, depending on 
the target audience and on the medium used, for example the printed page or the computer screen. Different 
fonts can also be used to give a particular impression of the type of organisation.
Suggestions vary, and there are few guidelines. It is claimed that on the printed page, serif fonts generally 
provide an invisible line that the eye can follow, allowing the eye to flow more easily over the text, improving 
reading speed and decreasing eye fatigue. Most books, newspapers, and magazines use a serif font, often 
because they give a more traditional feel, especially for established organisations with an older audience. 
However, there is very mixed evidence for this preference and many books and other resources printed for 
children are printed in sans-serif fonts (such as this book) because it is claimed that the simplicity of the letter 
shapes make them more recognizable. The cleaner, minimalist feel of a sans-serif font could be favoured by a 
younger, more modern organization.
So while a popular choice might be to send out a sales letter or brochure in the mail set in a serif font, you 
might want to consider other factors – who is going to read the document?
Headings are a little easier. The popular view is to have a sans-serif font because they often have more of a 
‘standout’ value, even if the body text is in a serif font.
On screen, the convention seems to be to use a sans-serif font. There are a couple of easily accepted ideas 
behind this. Firstly, sans-serif fonts are cleaner or neater, given the small space that a pixilated letter is 
created within, and the serifs can make letters blur together. Secondly, with smartphones and other small 
devices having small screens but still accessing large volumes of text, the idea of clean and neat characters 
is important when screen resolution in these devices is not high. This is especially true with today’s users 
rapidly zooming in and out when reading content and text has to be clear and easily read at any size.
Open the document ComputerTypes that you created in the last session.
Create a style for AllComputerHeading with the following definition:
  a sans-serif font, size 12, bold, dark green
  spacing before to be 0 point, after, 8 point
  left justified.
Apply this style to all six headings in the document.
Create a style for AllComputerText with the following definition:
  a serif font, 9.5 point size, dark blue
  spacing before to be 0 point, after, 8 point and line spacing to be multiple at 1.15
  fully justified.
Apply this style to all the body text of the document.
Create a style for AllComputerTitle with the following definition:
  a serif font, size 17, dark blue
  spacing before to be 0 point, after, 8 point
  centred.
Activity 3
The top of the document may look like this:
Save this new document as: ComputerTypesCorporate.
20979_P006_059.indd   50 1/21/15   1:34 AM
51
PRACTICAL
Session 1.10 Communication
Using emails to send attachments
Email is an electronic method of sending and receiving text messages from 
one computer to another over a network – either local – or wide – area. An 
attachment is an electronic copy of a file (which can be anything that converts 
into a digital copy, such as an image, a document, a video or sound clip) which 
is sent with the message.
You should be very familiar with sending and receiving emails. To be able to send 
a file as an attachment it must be available to you, since you need at attach it to 
your email before you can send it. This means you have either created and saved 
it, or downloaded it, into a local folder.
Here is a typical screen layout when composing a new email with an attached file:
Message content
Click to attach a file.
A relevant subject line
Indicating a file is attached
The email address of the person to 
whom you are sending the message
In this case clicking on the ‘Send’ button will send the message and the 
attached file (Newsetter.docx) to Philip Jones (PJones@allcomputersinc.com).
Close the email message without sending it.
If you had multiple files to attach, you would simply click on the paperclip 
icon, browse and attach each file in turn. Your email software may allow you to 
browse folders and make multiple selections in one browsing action.
In your email software click to open a 
new email message. Look around the 
window to find an option to add an 
attachment. A symbol often used is 
a paperclip, or there might simply be 
the words Add attachment or Add 
file. You will need to know where the 
file to be attached is saved, because 
when you click the button to add 
an attachment, you will be given a 
dialogue box to navigate through your 
folders in order to locate it. Search 
through your folders until you find the 
Newsletter you saved in Session 1.8. 
Select it for attachment by clicking on 
the file name, and then on Open (or 
maybe you have Insert).
Activity 4
The file Newsletter is one that needs 
to be emailed to one of your work 
colleagues at All Computers Inc. Ask 
a friend to act as the colleague at 
All Computers Inc. and send them 
an email with your newsletter as an 
attachment.
Activity 5
20979_P006_059.indd   51 1/21/15   1:34 AM
52
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
Receiving and downloading an email attachment
When you receive an email with an attachment, it will be displayed in the 
message and can then be downloaded and stored in a suitable location. 
However, on receiving an email with an attachment do not automatically 
download and save it. You need, constantly, to be thinking about the dangers 
of downloading a file that contains malicious software (.zip and .exe files are 
potentially the most dangerous – although some email software will not allow 
these to be sent/downloaded). You need to ask yourself: Do I know the person 
who has sent this email? Am I expecting an attachment from them? What kind 
of file is the attachment? Do I trust the person who has sent this attachment? 
Be aware of potential dangers.
Clicking on the filename of the attachment or the 
download button will send the file to your default 
download area. The could be a folder name 
DOWNLOADS in the MY DOCUMENTS area, or 
the location where you last saved something
In order to choose the download location of a 
file attachment, right click the mouse on the link 
and select Save File or Save File As. You will 
be given a standard file window to choose the 
location of the download.
Reverse the previous activity and ask a friend to send you a copy of their presentation. Download it to a sensible location and open it.
Activity 6
Using Cc and Bcc
The standard way to add an address to an email is using the To option. 
However, there are occasions when the Cc (carbon copy) and Bcc (blind carbon 
copy) options can be used. Adding an address or addresses to the Cc window, 
in addition to the To window, will result in that person also receiving a copy of 
the message sent. All those involved will be able to see all addressees.
Cc and Bcc are normally positioned 
under the To option. However some 
email programs have the Bcc option 
disabled by default, as it often 
associated with spam and junk mail, 
so you may need to re-enable it 
before it can be used.
Real world
Once all the attachments are added, 
check that you have:
  the correct email address of the 
person to whom you are sending 
the message
  an informative subject line
   a clear and instructive message 
to the person.
Real world
20979_P006_059.indd   52 1/21/15   1:34 AM
53
PRACTICAL
Session 1.10 Communication
For example, Khaled Khan also requires a copy of the newsletter for filing purposes. It’s not directly for him 
to work with; he just needs to be kept up-to-date with what is happening with various publications. Petra 
Svenland of the printing department also needs a copy so that she knows what printing is about to be 
requested. In this case you would Cc Khaled and Petra. Philip Jones would be aware that Khaled and Petra 
had also received the email and attachment.
There are occasions when it is polite not to let everyone who receives an email, know the email addresses 
of everyone else who has received the email. This would not necessarily happen when sending emails within 
an organisation – many organisations actively encourage an openness about communication and require 
everyone’s email address to be visible on a message.
For example, you may have signed up to a fan website of your favourite music group. An email newsletter may 
be sent out to all the people on the group’s email list. As a matter of privacy it would be essential that you did 
not see everyone else’s email address and you would be upset if you knew that your email address had been 
given to many other people without your permission. The way that this would be achieved is by using Bcc.
In this case writer@megapopsensation.org has written the email. The email is sent to themselves as well as 
to Billy, Cathy, Omar and Helga – and anyone else in the list’s continuation. When Billy receives the email he 
will see that it has come from writer@megapopsensation.org but will not see any other email addresses – it 
will seem as though he is the only recipient.
Using email contacts
As has been mentioned, when contacting friends or colleagues using email, their address must be exactly 
right; one single character error and the message will not be received. Being able to save email addresses as 
contacts is an essential feature of any email software program or web-based email provider.
Web-based and software email packages may appear to be different but each will have some way of 
storing contacts and each person (just like an entry in a database) can have a number of different pieces of 
information (or fields) linked to them.
20979_P006_059.indd   53 1/21/15   1:34 AM
54
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
This example of an address book entry shows the sort of information that can 
be saved. This may include:
  name
  contact email(s)
  job title
  company
  telephone number
  addresses
  photo.
For the purpose of this activity, only the name and email addresses need to be 
accurate, the other details can be invented.
To add a contact to the address book click on an icon or a tab that indicates Add New Contact. You may 
have buttons such as these:
Clicking on Contact brings up the panels where you can add the details of the person to be added as a 
contact to your address book.
Once the details for a new contact have been entered they need to be saved.
Eventually you will have built up a contact list like this:
Contact groups/distribution lists
So far you have added the names and contact details of people who will eventually be a part of your 
complete address book. You need these specific contacts to be grouped so that you can refer to them all by 
a single name. This would enable us to send an email to a group instead of a list of individuals. Your email 
software might refer to Distribution Lists, as in the example below rather than Groups.
The first step to creating a group is by naming one. Click on the New Group (or Distribution list) button or 
icon in your software and name the group AllComputersInc.
Save the group.
Here the steps would be:
  select the contact (Philip)
  choose to Add Philip to the group
  click and add the other four employees to the group
  click ‘OK’ to save these employees into the group.
Using the Contact or Address book 
feature of your email package, add 
the details of classmates collected in 
Activity 7.
Activity 8
Add all of the members you 
entered in Activity 8 to the group 
AllComputersInc that you have just 
created so that they can all be referred 
to by the group name.
Activity 9
Choose at least three friends in your 
class and make a note of the following 
information:
  full name
  email address
  mobile phone number
  business telephone number
  job title at All Computers Inc.
Activity 7
20979_P006_059.indd   54 1/21/15   1:35 AM
55
PRACTICAL
Session 1.10 Communication
In some software, once a group is created, members can be added from your existing address book by 
selecting Add Members from a main menu. A Remove Member option will take that person out of the group 
but will not remove the person from the address book.
In the example above, selecting the person in the list and then clicking on ‘Delete’ will remove the person 
from the list.
Selecting just that group (All Computers Inc) will result in just those contacts who belong to that group being 
displayed:
Sending a message to a contact group
After choosing to create a new message all that is necessary is to click on ‘Send To:’ and then select the 
group from the list of available contacts:
In this example, clicking on AllComputersInc in the group list and then ‘OK’, inserts all the emails connected 
to that group in the To: line.
Alternatively, your email software might show the group name like this:
You need to send the Newsletter to all the people in the group AllComputersInc.
Create a new email message that:
  will be sent to the members of the group AllComputersInc
  has your own email address as a Bcc
  has the subject line: Requested newsletter attached
  has the message: Hello everyone, Further to the recent request for the latest version of the newsletter, please 
find it as an attachment. Download and save to an appropriate folder. Kind regards.
Send the email.
  Make sure that all your friends who are on the list received the email.
  Make sure that you (as a Bcc) also received the email.
  Save the attachment in your Downloads folder.
Activity 10
20979_P006_059.indd   55 1/21/15   1:35 AM
56
PRACTICAL
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
To send a fax or to send an email?
This example of sending out the newsletter to a number of different people illustrates the advantage of 
sending an email rather than sending a fax (short for ‘facsimile’).
When sending a fax, the fax machine scans the document converting it into a bitmap image. This image 
is then transmitted through the telephone system. The fax machine receiving the bitmap image converts 
the signal and prints out a copy of the original image. A computer can generate and send a ‘fax’ copy of a 
document to another fax machine which saves the sender having to print out the document first.
However, when a document is attached to an email the person receiving the attachment can download, edit, 
review, make comments on it, and then, after saving it on their computer, can email it back to you. This is 
a tremendous advantage over using fax. Another advantage would be that, as seen above, a single email 
can be sent to many people instantaneously – you would have had to fax everyone individually. Essentially, 
emailing is free whereas faxing will usually involve a cost per fax page. Of course everyone has to have an 
email address to receive an email, but then everyone would have to have a fax machine if you were sending 
faxes. However, the number of people you know who have access to a fax machine is probably very small, 
even zero – do you have one, if not you couldn’t send one!
Emails can of course be hacked or face the threat of viruses.
Finally, do not forget that an attachment could be a document of many pages – such as the chapters of this 
book, which were exchanged a number of times during the writing, proofing and editing stages. Imagine 
having to fax all those pages – which could only be handwritten on and then sent back.
Emailing issues
Wherever you are using email, you need to be aware of issues surrounding your use of it.
The country that you are emailing from (or even into) may have strong filtering/censorship policies in place 
and so it is vital that in composing emails you avoid contentious or inflammatory vocabulary. This is because 
filtering systems will block, or treat as spam, emails that break the rules – meaning that your email does not 
get delivered. 
It is general netiquette (internet etiquette) that you are polite and respect other people’s views, keeping your 
language appropriate to the reader of the email. You never know who that email may get forwarded to – 
your permission might not be asked. DO NOT WRITE EVERYTHING IN CAPITALS, it appears that you are 
shouting or suggests that you are angry. 
If you are emailing within a local area network such as at school or a small business, your school or 
organisation may have rules about the language and style of writing that you use. 
Some organisations will have an encryption policy that applies to certain emails 
(in Session 1.5 advances in encryption was discussed). For example, personal or 
financial information sent by a company to outside agencies might be encrypted 
as a security measure. If you apply for a job you might decide to password 
protect your CV and application so that only the people you want to have see 
them can do so. You would need to let them know the password in a separate 
message.
Copyright is discussed in Session 5.5 but is also relevant here. If you had been 
one of the applicants for the Marketing Managers position in Session 1.10 and 
emailed your ideas for development, is that email copyrighted? If the ideas were 
just that – a few rough thoughts – then probably not, but if they were complete, 
detailed and operable then yes they probably are copyrighted because they 
could be seen as completed creative work.
Do you have a school email address? 
If so, find out what/if any rules are 
in place which govern your use 
of language, slang abbreviations, 
common text speak abbreviations, 
smileys or emoticons. Does your school 
email system have strong filtering 
based on vocabulary in the subject 
line/the text of the message?
Activity 11
20979_P006_059.indd   56 1/21/15   1:35 AM
57
PRACTICAL
You should now be able to:
  create documents and data source for carrying out a mail merge
  describe why corporate style guides are important
  to create and apply styles in a document
  create, send and receive an email message that has an attachment, and download the attachment
  use Cc, Bcc, Reply and Forward appropriately
  create and use an email group
  discuss the advantages of emailing rather than faxing
  discuss the issues surrounding the constraints affecting the use of email.
Review and revise
Session 1.10 Communication
20979_P006_059.indd   57 1/21/15   1:35 AM
58
What have you covered?
  ????????????
UNIT 1 Practical review
Unit 1 Types and components of computer systems
In these four practical sessions you have:
  created new documents from external data and amended this text 
  explored the use of footers and headers
  practised creating and applying styles, including font face, size, bold, underline, italic, alignment
  imported images, clip art and charts, resizing and cropping them
  practised adjusting the page layout: orientation, margins, columns
  practised sending a document as an attachment
  learned how to use advanced searching techniques to locate images and textual information on the internet
  practised copying/downloading images, text, charts and tables from websites
  practised working with templates and source data for a mail merge.
1  Add the following contact for the Cycling Editor at 
the publishers, to your address book:
Cycling Editor  My.Name@abc.com
(where My.Name@abc.com is your email address)
2  Using a suitable software package, load the file 
IndochinaByBicycle.rtf.
3  Save the text as a word processing document with 
the name: IndochinaArticle.
4  Set the page size to A4.
5  Set the page orientation to landscape.
6  Set the top, bottom, left and right margins to 1.5 cm.
7  In the footer of the document place:
  an automated date, centre aligned.
8  In the header of the document place:
  an automated page number, right aligned.
Make sure that the header and footer are displayed 
on every page and that the alignments match the 
page orientation and margins.
9  Insert this heading at the start of the document: 
Across Indochina by Bicycle
10  Create a style IndochinaHeading with these 
settings:
  centre aligned
  a sans-serif font
  bold
  size 28 point
 Apply this style to the heading.
11  Format the body text into two equally spaced 
columns, with a 1 cm gap between the columns.
12  Create a style IndochinaText with these settings:
  be a sans-serif font
  be fully justified
  have one and a half line spacing
  have a font size of 11 points.
 Apply this style to the text in the body of the 
document.
13  Identify the three subheadings and make them bold 
italic.
14  The main image for the article 
is to be a picture of the Victory 
Gate at Angkor Thom, in 
Cambodia, as shown here.
Use a search engine to find an 
image of this gate. If you are 
unable to, there is an image on 
the course CD.
Download and save this image 
into the same folder as you 
have saved IndochinaArticle.
15  Insert this image into IndochinaArticle so that it 
is centred, spanning the two columns on the first 
page. Use the text wrapping options to help with 
this.
Some practice questions
You are going to edit a document, which is to be included as a review in a travel guide 
published by Compass Adventure Holidays. The relevant files are on the CD.
On the CD
20979_P006_059.indd   58 1/21/15   1:35 AM
59
What have you covered?
  ????????????
PRACTICAL
Theory review
In these four practical sessions you have:
  created new documents from external data and amended this text 
  explored the use of footers and headers
  practised creating and applying styles, including font face, size, bold, underline, italic, alignment
  imported images, clip art and charts, resizing and cropping them
  practised adjusting the page layout: orientation, margins, columns
  practised sending a document as an attachment
  learned how to use advanced searching techniques to locate images and textual information on the internet
  practised copying/downloading images, text, charts and tables from websites
  practised working with templates and source data for a mail merge.
Crop and resize the image so that it is the height of 
the column on the page (about 15 cm) and maintain 
the aspect ratio.
The first page should look like this:
Text Image Text
Heading
16  Save the document with a new name.
17  Prepare an email message:
  to be sent to the Cycling Editor (from your 
contacts list)
  with the subject Indochina part 1.
The body of your message should have the text:
Attached is the first section of the Indochina 
article.
18  Attach the document you saved at step 16 to this 
email.
Send the email.
Progress check
Aiming for good progress
With your word processing software you:
  can import text from .rtf and .txt file types into your 
word processing application
  can import images, charts or clip art into a 
document, resizing and cropping as necessary
  can adjust page settings: orientation, size, 
margins, two columns and place data in footers 
and headers
  can create a mail merge template and create 
details mailing list.
You can also:
  search the internet for images, download and save 
them to your computer
  copy text from webpages to place in a document 
of your own.
Using your email software you can:
  compose a message with an attached file
  use the Cc, Reply and Forward options as 
appropriate
  add a person’s email details to a contact list.
Aiming for excellent progress
With your word processing software you:
  can confidently import text from a variety of file types 
into your word processing application
  can import images, charts or clip art into a document, 
resizing and cropping as necessary
  are confident with page settings: orientation, size, 
margins, multiple columns and also using footer and 
headers
  can set up and perform a mail merge successfully.
You can also:
  search the internet for images, download and save 
them to your computer
  copy text and tables from webpages to place in a 
document of your own.
Using your email software you can:
  compose a message with an attached file
  use the Cc, Bcc, Reply and Forward options as 
appropriate
  set up and use contact lists and contact groups.
Practical
20979_P006_059.indd   59 1/21/15   1:35 AM

