Anand Lal Abhishek; International Journal of Advance Research and Development. 
© 2017, www.IJARND.com All Rights Reserved                                                                  Page | 27                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                  
 
(Volume2, Issue5) 
Available online at www.ijarnd.com 
Project Sustainable A.I Robot 
        Abhishek Anand Lal 
                    UPES, Bidholli, Dehradun-248007 
                   abhisheksinghania31@gmail.com 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We people are always been very much fascinated about new technologies, ideas and new innovations which can 
able to reduce the burden of lots of work in this stressful world. That’s why evolving science brings the new 
evolution which can be used to establish world peace and righteousness, nowadays, here is a trend of building 
intellectually advanced machines and robots, a lots of movies have been made in this area and most of the 
scientists claim that it is possible, so why can’t we able to build an A.I robot which can be capable enough to 
protect, nurture and guide our future generations of this planet earth. For the building of such type of highly 
advanced robots, we again require artificially and naturally very advanced tools because only advance theories 
can build advanced machines. If we look into the history then we can see without theories and thoughts, no one 
came with conclusions and equations. This project is possibly possible only with the help of advanced software, 
mechanical, atmosphere (for flight power) and electronic knowledge. Various kinds of important and intelligent 
guidelines must be given to such intelligent robots such that the possibility of wrong steps may be taken by 
robots must be stopped. This can be possible by coding a program through a software and that must be decoded 
into the mind of these robots. We also require the need for mechanical engineers to build the design of its body, 
armor, and shape to forecast its flight power. Now for the flight power, we need to go through the aerospace 
department and for electricity and generation of power, sensors, and actuators, we need to travel electrical 
department. For micro Switches, equipment, tools and elements, 
 
 
Anand Lal Abhishek; International Journal of Advance Research and Development. 
© 2017, www.IJARND.com All Rights Reserved                                                                  Page | 28                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
we should also need to have some sort of knowledge in the field micro engineering. Now a lot of questions 
come in mind like how one can avoid wastage of lots of energy? and this machines can consume more energy, 
there is still solutions for this by building it sustainable meaning it regains its lost energy after a certain time and 
now for less time we again need to do some research. As energy can neither be created nor be destroyed, that 
means whatever energy is being lost from our body or machines are never vanish, rather it is present in this 
environment only and if we somehow able to extract that energy from the environment then we again able to 
provide lost energy into the robots and by energy can never be exhausted. Whatever energy have been 
consumed, if we are able to collect that energy and transform it into the same form as it was before then we will 
able to successfully build an invincible sustainable artificially intelligent robot. 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Energy collection and its conversion can be done through a chemical reaction. Many scientists’ claims that there 
is not any concept of reversible and irreversible reaction, even irreversible reaction attain equilibrium. This 
project will bring revolution in a new era with a bigger change in the society. 
 
This project can also be controlled through one’s mind by decoding one’s mind and recode it into the mind of 
robots with the help of software present in the market like voice recognition software may also be used here. 
This is not easy tasks and in the same time, we also cannot say that this is not possible. Research is not about 
what we know, it is always about something new and bigger than the existing one. In this sense, artificial 
intelligence models have been developed to help understand human memory, particularly the organization of 
information in memory. Intelligence is usually discussed in relation to humans, but it can occur in animals and 
machines as well. We are also capable of making this robot invisible with the help of different reflectors 
polymer which can make it invisible through different ways of reflection of light and can make it invincible. 
 
 
Anand Lal Abhishek; International Journal of Advance Research and Development. 
© 2017, www.IJARND.com All Rights Reserved                                                                  Page | 29                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                                                  
APPLICATION 
1. Robots are best suited to work where a human can't reach. 
2. Robots are generally used in industries and for another various kind of works, these robots are 
designed for the same. Robots have excelled when they can perform better than human at the lower 
cost. 
3. Robots can weld better than human, infant they are good in every activity. 
4. Loading and unloading of heavy machines and tools in industrial regions. 
5. Medical application: Where precise operations or treatment is required. 
6. Precise manufacturing of machines. For defense purposes when one's generosity and respect is at stake. 
7. A.I Robot is being utilized for a wide range of activities including medical diagnosis, electronic 
trading, robot control, and remote sensing. 
8. AI researchers have created many tools to solve the most difficult problems in computer science. 
 
REFERENCES  
1) Abelson, H. and DiSessa, A. (1981). Turtle Geometry: The Computer as a Medium for Exploring 
Mathematics. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA 
2) Aha, D.W., Marling, C., and Watson, I. (Eds.) (2005). The Knowledge Engineering Review, 
special edition on case-based reasoning, volume 20 
(3). Cambridge University Press.http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayIssue?jid=KER&volumeId 
=20&issueId=03 
3) Antoniou, G. and van Harmelen, F. (2008). A Semantic Web Primer. MIT Pres, Cambridge, MA, 
2nd edition 
4) Bacchus, F. and Kabanza, F. (1996). Using temporal logic to control search in a forward chaining 
planner. In M. Ghallab and A. Milani (Eds.), New Directions in AI Planning, pp. 141-153. ISO Press, 
Amsterdam. 

