ar
X
iv
:1
70
6.
10
11
7v
1 
 [
cs
.A
I]
  3
0 
Ju
n 
20
17
Restricted Causal Inference
Mieczys law A. K lopotek
Institute of Computer Science, Polish Academy of Sciences
e-mail: klopotek@ipipan.waw.pl
1 Introduction
Causally insufficient structures (models with latent or hidden variables, or with confound-
ing etc.) of joint probability distributions have been subject of intense study not only in
statistics (e.g.[4], [1]) , but also in various AI systems [2],[10]. In AI, belief networks, being
representations of joint probability distribution with an underlying directed acyclic graph
(dag), [3]) structure, are paid special attention due to the fact that efficient reasoning (un-
certainty propagation) methods have been developed for them [7], [9]. Algorithms have been
therefore elaborated to acquire the belief network structure from data [2], [7]. As artifacts
due to variable hiding negatively influence the performance of derived belief networks, mod-
els with latent variables have been studied and several algorithms for learning belief network
structure under causal insufficiency have also been developed [2], [10]. Regrettably, some
of them are known already to be erroneous (e.g. IC algorithm of [8] - compare Discussion
in chapter 6 of [10], FCI algorithm of [10] - compare [5]) and other not tractable for more
than 10 variables (e.g. CI [10] - compare chapter 6 therein). This paper proposes a new
algorithm for recovery of belief network structure from data handling hidden variables. It
consists essentially in an extension of the CI algorithm of [10] by restricting the number of
conditional dependencies checked up to k variables and in an extension of the original CI by
additional steps transforming so called partial including path graph into a belief network.
Its correctness is demonstrated.
2 Basic Definitions
Please refer to [10] (chapter 6) to recall definitions of including path graph, partially oriented
including path graph, directed path, definite discriminating path, collider. Refer to [3] for
definitions of active and passive trail, d-separation.
A partially oriented including path graph π contains the following types of edges unidi-
rectional: A− > B, bidirectional A < − > B, partially oriented Ao− > B and non-oriented
2 MIECZYS lAW A. K lOPOTEK
Ao − oB, as well as some local constraint information A ∗ −∗B∗ − ∗Cmeaning that edges
between A and B and between B and C cannot meet head to head at B. (Subsequently an
asterisk (*) means any orientation of an edge end: e.g. A ∗ − > B means either A− > B or
Ao− > B or A < − > B).
Let us introduce some notions specific for r(k)CIA:
(i) A is r(k)-separated from B given set S (card(S) ≤ k) iff A and B are conditionally
independent given S
(ii) In a partially oriented including path graph π, a node A is called legally removable iff
there exists no local constraint information B ∗−∗A∗−∗C for any nodes B and C and
there exists no edge of the form A ∗ − > B for any node B.
3 The Algorithm
The Restricted-to-k-Variables Causal Inference Algorithm (r(k)CIA):
Input: Empirical joint probability distribution
Output: Belief network.
A) Form the complete undirected graph Q on the vertex set V.
B) if A and B are r(k)-separated given any subset S of V, remove the edge between A and
B, and record S in Sepset(A,B) and Sepset(B,A).
C) Let F be the graph resulting from step B). Orient each edge o-o. For each triple of
vertices A,B,C such that the pair A,B and the pair B,C are each adjacent in F, but
the pair A,C are not adjacent in F, orient A*-*B*-*C as A ∗ − > B < − ∗ C if and
only if B is not in Sepset(A,C), and orient A*-*B*-*C as A ∗ −∗B∗ − ∗C if and only
if B is in Sepset(A,C).
D) Repeat
(D1) if there is a directed path from A to B, and an edge A*-*B, orient A*-*B as
A ∗ − > B,
(D2) else if B is a collider along < A,B,C > in π, B is adjacent to D, A and C
are not adjacent, and there exists local constraint A ∗ −∗D∗ − ∗C, then orient
B ∗ − ∗D as B < − ∗D ,
(D3) else if U is a definite discriminating path between A and B for M in π and P
and R are adjacent to M on U, and P-M-R is a triangle, then
if M is in Sepset(A,B) then M is marked as non-collider on subpath P ∗−∗M∗−R
else P ∗ − ∗ AM ∗ − ∗R is oriented as P ∗ − > M < − ∗R,
RESTRICTED CAUSAL INFERENCE 3
(D4) else if P ∗ −> M∗ − ∗R then orient as P ∗ − > M− > R.
until no more edges can be oriented.
E) Orient every edge Ao− > B as A− > B.
F) Copy the partially oriented including path graph π onto π′.
Repeat:
In π′ identify a legally removable node A. Remove it from π′ together with every
edge A ∗ − ∗ B and every constraint with A involved in it. Whenever an edge
Ao− oB is removed from π′, orient edge Ao− oB in π as A < −B.
Until no more node is left in π′.
End of r(k)CIA
4 Differences to Spirtes et al. CI Algorithm
Steps E) and F) constitute an extension of the original CI algorithm of [10], bridging the gap
between partial including path graph and the belief network. Their properties are subject
of [6] with respect to CI. Their correctness for r(k)CIA may be proven in the same way.
Step B) was modified by substituting the term ”d-separation” with ”r(k)-separation”.
This means that not all possible subsets S of the set of all nodes V (with card(S) up to
card(V)-2) are tested on rendering nodes A and B independent, but only those with car-
dinality 0,1,2,...,k. If one takes into account that higher order conditional independences
require larger amounts of data to remain stable, superior stability of this step in r(k)CIA
becomes obvious.
Step D2) has been modified in that the term ”not d-connected” of CI was substituted by
reference to local constraints. In this way results of step B) are exploited more thoroughly
and in step D) no more reference is made to original body of data (which clearly accelerates
the algorithm). This modification is legitimate since all the other cases covered by the
concept of ”not d-connected” of CI would have resulted in orientation of D ∗− > B already
in step C). Hence the generality of step D2) of the original CI algorithm is not needed here.
5 Properties of the Algorithm
Obviously, the algorithm r(k)CIA will leave some edges actually not present in original data.
As demonstrated in [6], superfluous edges may lead to incorrect belief network recovery. We
shall show therefore that this is not the case with r(k)CIA.
In [6] it has been proven that the original CI extended by above-mentioned steps E) and
F) will produce a dag compatible with the original data. Preliminaries for that result are
that given the ”real” dag G with visible variables Vs and hidden ones Vh one can define
4 MIECZYS lAW A. K lOPOTEK
an ”intrinsic” dag F in Vs indistinguishable from G with respect to dependencies and in-
dependences within set Vs such that the modified CI algorithm produces a dag statistically
indistinguishable from F. (This dag F is called ”including path graph” in [10]). Below we
show possibility of defining such a dag F for the r(k)CIA algorithm.
Let us define the r(k)-including path graph: G be a dag with a set of hidden variables
Vh and of visible variables Vs. A graph π be a r(k)-including path graph for G iff its set of
nodes is Vs, and an edge between A and B from Vs exists in π iff no subset S of Vs with
cardinality not exceeding k does not d-separate nodes A and B in G. This edge is out of A iff
there exists such a subset S’ of Vs with cardinality not exceeding k-1 that no trail in G from
B to A into A is active with respect to S’. Otherwise this edge is ingoing into A. It is easily
demonstrated that every edge in π is either unidirectional or bidirectional (no edge is left
unoriented). Because there exists never a trail outgoing from A and outgoing from B which
is active with respect to an empty set S (card(S) = 0 ≤ k).Furthermore, if there is an edge
A− > B in π, then there exists a directed path from A to B in G. This is easily seen: Let
S’ be a subset of Vs with cardinality not exceeding k-1 that no path in G from B to A into
A is active with respect to S’. (1) Then clearly there must exist a trail in G outgoing out of
A towards B which is active with respect to S’ (otherwise edge AB would be absent from π
as S’ would d-separate A and B). (2) Let us go along this trail in G as long as edges along
it passing edges from tail to head. In this way we either reach B (which would complete
the proof) or stop at a collider along this trail. This collider must either be in S’ or have
a successor in S’ (as active trail definition requires). Let us continue the journey towards
the blocking node in S’. The node is either not necessary for S’ to block all ingoing trails
from B to A (in this case we remove it from S’ and start the procedure from the beginning
- that is from point (1)) or it is necessary for that purpose. (3) In the latter case there is
a trail between B and A ingoing into A this node is blocking. Let us continue our journey
along this trail now in the direction where we pass edges from tail to head (at least one such
direction exists). We continue at point (2). As the graph is a dag and the set S’ is finite,
the procedure is granted to terminate on reaching node B. This proves our claim.
Furthermore, in π if we have two edges A− > B < −C with A and C not adjacent
in π then no subset S of Vs with cardinality not greater than k containing B such that S
d-separates A and C in G. Because if such a set S existed then the set S-{B} with cardinality
not greater than k-1 would have to block in G all trails from A to B into B or all trails from
C to B into B (as this is required by definition of d-separation). But then the aforementioned
definition of π would require that either edge BA or BC resp. would be out of B.
Also in π if A,B are adjacent, B,C are adjacent, but A,C are not adjacent in π and on the
trail A-B-C node B is non-collider then there exists no such subset S of Vs with cardinality
not greater than k not containing B that S d-separates A and C in G. Otherwise if such a
set S existed then (without restriction of generality let us assume A < −B) there exists a
directed path from A to B in G. The set S would either block it or not. If not, then S would
have to block all the trails from C to B which is a contradiction because then edge BC could
RESTRICTED CAUSAL INFERENCE 5
not exist in π. Hence it must block it. But then S would have to block every trail ingoing
into B either from direction of A or of C. Should it block those from direction of A (C) then
there would exist an active trail outgoing from B towards A (C) and an active trail between
B and C (A). But this is a contradiction as then there would exist an active trail connecting
A and C (via B). This proves our claim.
Last not least it may be demonstrated that if there exists in π a bidirectional edge
between A and B, and if there existed an oriented path from A to B and if there exists
edge C ∗ − > A in π, then in π there exists also the edge C ∗ − > B. This means that a
bidirectional edge A < − > B in π can be treated as a unidirectional edges A < −H− > B,
with H being a parentless hidden variable and A and B being not adjacent in the graph.
The above-mentioned statements indicate that for a faithful graph G for edge pair A-B
and B-C with A and C not adjacent a statistical test of independence of A and C relatively to
sets S containing B with cardinality not greater than k will correctly decide about orientation
of edges with respect to the r(k)-including path graph π.
In this sense we can prove for π that it is a directed acyclic graph. Because graph G is a
dag, bidirectional edges in π have no impact on ordering, and unidirectional edges in π must
have orientation in accordance with G as existence of an oriented path in G between nodes
at both ends of an edge of π is assumed.
With these prerequisites correctness proof of a modified version of CI algorithm from [6]
extends straight forward to r(k)CIA algorithm
6 Discussion and Concluding Remarks
Within this paper a new algorithm of recovery of belief network structure from data has
been presented and its correctness demonstrated. It relies essentially on ”acceleration” of
the known CI algorithm of Spirtes, Glymour and Scheines [10] by restricting the number
of conditional dependencies checked up to k variables and it extends CI by additional steps
transforming so called partial including path graph into a belief network. Sample outputs of
CI, r(1)CIA and r(2)CIA are shown in Fig.1. Though r(k)CIA introduces redundant edges
(e.g. AC and FC in Fig.1b), indicating dependencies not present in the original data, it
actually avoids pitfalls of the FCI algorithm, another CI ”accelerator” proposed by Spirtes,
Glymour and Scheines [10], as visible from section 5 and [6].
References
[1] Bentler P.: Multivariate analysis with latent variables: causal modeling, Annual Review
of Psychology 31,1980, 419-456.
[2] G.F. Cooper, E. Herskovits: A Bayesian method for the induction of probabilistic net-
works from data, Machine Learning 9 (1992), 309-347.
6 MIECZYS lAW A. K lOPOTEK
a) ✉
A
✉
B
✉
C
✉
D
✉
E
✉
F
✉
G
❡
H
b) ✉
A
✉
B
✉
C
✉
D
✉
E
✉
F
✉
G
❛
❛ ❛
❛
❛
❛
❛
❛
❛
c) ✉
A
✉
B
✉
C
✉
D
✉
E
✉
F
✉
G
d) ✉
A
✉
B
✉
C
✉
D
✉
E
✉
F
✉
G
Figure 1: a) Original dag, b) CI output, c) r(1)CIA output, d) r(2)CIA output
[3] Geiger D., Verma T, Pearl J.: d-Separation: From theorems to algorithms, M.Henrion,
R.D.Shachter, L.N.Kamal, J.F.Lemmer (Eds): Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence 5,
Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland), 1990, pp. 139-148.
[4] Joreskog K., Sorbom D.: Model search with TETRAD II and LISREL, Sociological
Methods and Research 19, 1990, 93-106.
[5] K lopotek M.A.: Too Fast Causal Inference under Causal Insufficiency - submitted
[6] K lopotek M.A.: Learning Belief Network Structure From Data under Causal Insuffi-
ciency , to appear in Proc. 13th European Conference on Machine Learning, Catania,
Italy, April 1994.
[7] Pearl J.: Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems:Networks of Plausible Inference,
Morgan Kaufmann, San Mateo CA, 1988
[8] Pearl J., Verma T.: A theory of inferred causation,, [in:] Principles of Knowledge Rep-
resentation and Reasoning, Proc. of the Second International Conference, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, April 22-25, 1991, Allen J., Fikes R., Sandewell E. Eds,, San Mateo
CA:Morgen Kaufmann, 441-452.
[9] R.D. Shachter: Evidence absorption and propagation through evidence reversals , in: M.
Henrion, B.D. Shachter, L.N. Kanal, J.F. Lemmer: Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence
5, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V (North-Holland) (1990), 173- 190
[10] Spirtes P., Glymour C., Scheines R.: Causation, Prediction and Search, Lecture Notes
in Statistics 81, Springer-Verlag, 1993.

