                 
        
                 ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
             ISSN (Print):  2320-9798                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer  
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 9, September 2015             
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                  DOI: 10.15680/IJIRCCE.2015. 0309017                                                     8030   
  
A Study of Speech Recognition  
Kaladharan N 
Assistant Professor, Dept. of .Electrical Engineering, Annamalai University, Tamilnadu, India 
 
ABSTRACT: Speech is the superior personality of the human beings gifted by the nature. Speech helps to deliver the 
thoughts and messages between human. Human are trying to develop an intelligent systems which can recognize and 
accept the command via speech, which is known as human computer interface. Speech recognition is the process of the 
computer recognizing human speech to generate a string of words or commands. Sometimes it is known as automatic 
speech recognition. Speech recognition is becoming more perplexing and difficult task. The speech recognition 
research is focuses mainly on large vocabulary, continuous speech capabilities and speaker independence.  The design 
of speech recognition requires cautious attention to some issues like speech representation, depiction of various types 
of speech Classes, techniques, and database and performance evaluation. This paper presents the review of the different 
speech recognition system and its recent progress. 
 
KEYWORDS:Speech Recognition, Feature Extraction, MFCC, LPC, HMM, Neural Network, DTW. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Speech is the most broadly and frequently used method of communication between humans [1]. There are several 
spoken languages which are used throughout the world. Humans are very much interested to attach with speech to the 
computer system effectively and friendly. Such type of system is called speech recognition system. Speech recognition 
is the process of converting a speech signal to a sequence of word or other spoken entity, by means of an pragmatic as 
computer platform [3][6].The speech recognition system would support many valuable application like dictation, 
command and control, embedded applications, telephone directory assistance ,spoken data base querying , medical 
applications, blind peoples, banking etc.,[4][5] . Speech Recognition is a distinct case of pattern recognition. In speech 
recognition, two phases are contains viz training and testing. In the training phase, data for known classes are fed to the 
system. In the recognition phase, the system computes the features of pattern for unknown input and identifies the input 
with the class whose reference pattern matches these features most closely [8][10][11].In a speech recognition system, 
the parameters like as vocabulary size, speaker dependency, speaker individuality, period for recognition, Speaking 
styles, accents, social dialects, gender, type of speech and recognition environment condition are mostly affect the 
accuracy of recognition [11][15].Robustness and noise tolerant are few of the problems which make speech recognition 
systems difficult to use. This paper delivers an overview of speech recognition system through its approaches and 
performance evaluation at various stages. 
 
This paper is organized as follows, Section II describe speech recognition system, Section III represent types of 
speech recognition method, Section IV approaches to speech recognition, Section V deals speech feature extraction 
techniques, Section VI denotes performance evaluation, and Section VII deals the conclusion.  
II. SPEECH RECOGNITION SYSTEM 
 
InSpeech recognition system is to accurately and efficiently convert a speech signal into a text message transcription 
of the spoken words independent of the speaker, environment or the device used to record the speech [8]. Some of the 
major applications of such speech recognition are voice-recognized passwords, voice repertory dialers, automated call-
type recognition, call distribution by voice commands, directory listing retrieval, credit card sales validation, speech to 
text processing, automated data entry etc.[11].    Figure 1, shows basic representation of speech recognition system. It 
comprises four main stages namely speech analyses or preprocessing, feature extraction coding, language conversion 
and message accepting.  
 
 
                 
        
                 ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
             ISSN (Print):  2320-9798                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer  
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 9, September 2015             
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                  DOI: 10.15680/IJIRCCE.2015. 0309017                                                     8031   
  
Input language 
 
 
 
Exercise 
 
 
Recognized Speech  
 
Fig. 1.Representation diagram of Speech Recognition System 
 
Speech analysis block is used to remove the noise, silence and ending point detection from the input speech audio, 
which are necessary to improve the performance of speech recognition system. Then the feature extraction block is use 
to remove the unwanted and redundant information and retains only the useful information in type of speaker 
independent speech recognition. Language conversion unit is used capture the properties of a language and to predict 
the next word in the speech sequence. Then finally Speech recognition engine block is to convert the input audio into 
text. 
III. TYPES OF SPEECH RECOGNITION 
 
3.1Types of speech 
  
3.1.1. Text to speech -Text to speech will operate a string of text into an audio slide.  It is also useful for blind 
persons to be able to use computers. 
 
3.1.2 .Simple voice device/ commands - This is the basic form of Speech to text application and this modules are 
designed to recognize a small number of exact, typically one-word commands and then perform an action. 
 
3.1.3. Complete dictation recognition-Complete dictation and recognition software permits the user to read full 
sentences or paragraphs and translates that data into text on the fluster. 
 
3.2. Isolated word 
 
Isolated word pronunciation needs more gap between words, system is able to recognize the word by difference of 
utterance. It obtains single words or single utterance at a time. The main disadvantage of this type is choosing different 
limits affects the entire results. Some examples for isolated words are „hello‟, „go‟, „Start‟, etc. 
 
3.3. Connected word 
 
Connected word, similar to isolated word recognition however user can pronounce the words together with fewer 
gaps in time. Example of this word is, to spell the word by isolated model like „g..o..o..d‟ 
 
3.4. Continuous word 
 
Continues speech, system is able to recognize the word though person is speaking naturally. Really, it's computer 
dictation. It embraces a great pact of "co articulation", where contiguous words run together without pauses or any 
other apparent division between words. In some examples, linguistically different sequences have very similar or 
identical acoustic information. Example for the continuous word is e.g., „Good day‟ vs. „Good A‟.This sort of speech 
makes machine understanding much more difficult. 
 
 
Speech analysis  
Language 
conversion  
Feature extraction  
Speech Engine 
                 
        
                 ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
             ISSN (Print):  2320-9798                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer  
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 9, September 2015             
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                  DOI: 10.15680/IJIRCCE.2015. 0309017                                                     8032   
  
3.5. Spontaneous word  
 
Spontaneous speech, system is able to understand words during natural speech with all the gaps and stutters. When a 
person reads usually in a context that has been previously prepared, but when a person uses spontaneous speech, it is 
difficult to recognize the speech because of the disfluencies. Examples like "uh" and "um", wrong starts, incomplete 
verdicts, stuttering, coughing, and laughter and limited vocabulary. 
 
3.6. Types of speaker model 
 
3.6.1. Speaker dependent model-Speaker dependent systems are designed for a specific speaker. Some speaker 
dependent systems require only that the user record a subcategory of system vocabulary to make the entire vocabulary 
recognizable. 
 
3.6.2. Speaker independent model-This speaker-independent system does not necessitate any recording earlier to 
speaker-dependent system requires that the user record an example of the word, sentence, or phrase system use. 
Speaker independent system is established to operate for any speaker of a particular type. e.g., American English. 
 
3.6.3. Speaker adaptable-A speaker adaptive system is established to adapt its operation to the characteristics of new 
speakers with speaker dependent data to recognize the speech. 
 
3.7. Types of vocabulary 
Small words like „read‟, „write‟, „give‟ etc.,-(three to ten words) 
Medium words like „Sit down‟, „Come fast‟ etc., (ten to hundred words) 
Large words like „As I have some work, so I am very busy‟ etc., (hundred to thousand words) 
Out of words like „wanna‟, „gonna‟etc., (depends upon the region) 
Very huge words are too many sentences (more than thousand words) 
 
 
IV. APPROACHES TO SPEECH RECOGNITION 
 
i. The acoustic-phonetic approach-This approach is based upon theory of acoustic phonetics and guesses. 
ii. Pattern Recognition approach-Pattern training and comparison are the steps includes in pattern recognition 
approach. Using a well formulated mathematical framework and pledges reliable speech pattern for pattern 
comparison. 
iii. Artificial intelligence approach-Machine works like human being. It is the combination of the pattern 
recognition approach and acoustic phonetic method. 
iv. Template based approaches- Unknown speech is equaled against a set of pre-recorded words patterns correct 
to catch the best Match. 
v. Stochastic approach-Stochastic modeling involves the use of probabilistic models to pact with uncertain or 
inadequate information. 
vi. Knowledge /Rule based approach - The “skilled” knowledge about distinctions in speech is hand-coded into 
the system. And it uses set of topographies from the speech, then the training system engenders set of 
production rules automatically from the samples. 
vii. Dynamic time warping- Dynamic Time Warping is an algorithm for calculating resemblance between two 
classifications which may diverge in time or speed. This technique is also fairly efficient for isolated word 
recognition and can be adapted to recognize connected word too. 
viii. Learning based approach-Objective of machine learning is study or determine some kind of knowledge from a 
documents set. 
ix. Neural Network based approach- An extra broad approach spending neural networks is phoneme recognition. 
It is better than HMMs model results. 
 
                 
        
                 ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
             ISSN (Print):  2320-9798                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer  
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 9, September 2015             
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                  DOI: 10.15680/IJIRCCE.2015. 0309017                                                     8033   
  
x. Statistical based approach- Here the differences in speech are modeled statistically, by the learning events. 
This approach signifies the current state of the skill. 
xi. Hidden markov model-Hidden Markov Model are very much used because, they can be trained automatically. 
Hence the HMM is simple and computationally possible to use. 
xii. Vector quantization -   Vector Quantization (VQ) is frequently applied in speech recognition and it is valuable 
for speech coders, that is., efficient data lessening. 
xiii. Support vector machine- SVMs use linear and nonlinear separating hyper-planes for data classification. 
xiv. Bayesian  
V. SPEECH FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES 
 
5.1. Linear Predictive Coding 
LPC is used in audio, speech and signal processing to indicates the spectral surround of a speech digital signal in 
compacted way. This LPC is very much useful for training good quality of speech with low bit rate and provide 
accurate speech. LPC analyses the speech signal by estimating the formants, removing their chattels from the speech 
signal. 
 
5.2. Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC) 
MFCC are the coefficients obtained from the Mel-frequency Cepstrum account. The Mel Frequency Cepstrum 
(MFC) can be defined by the short time power continuum of speech signal which is calculated as the linear cosine 
transform of the log power spectrum on a nonlinear Mel scale of frequency(18)(15). The Mel-frequency Cepstrum 
Coefficient (MFCC) technique is often used to create the fingerprint of the sound files. MFCC are based on the 
known dissimilarity of the human ear‟s vital bandwidth frequencies with filters output.. MFCC is also ever more 
detection uses in music information such as genre classification, audio similarity quantify and so on. It gives high 
accuracy results for clean speech. 
 
5.3. Signal Subspace Method 
The approach engages the use of a signal dependent convert to decompose a noisy signal into two split subspaces, 
the signal in addition noise subspace, and the noise-only subspace (5).The change employed to perform by using the 
Karhuenen-Loeve transform (KLT) method. Speech can only period the signal plus noise subspace, called the signal 
subspace, while noise can extent the entire Euclidean gap. Only the signal subspace is used to estimating the clean 
signal.  
VI. PERFORMANCE OF METHODS 
 
The performance of speech recognition system is usually specified in terms of accuracy and speed. Accuracy is 
computed by word error rate, whereas speed is measured with the real time factor.Word error rate (WER) is a common 
metric of the performance of a speech recognition or machine translation system. WER can then be computed by the  
WER =S+D+1/ N 
Where S is the no. of substitutions, D is the no. of deletions, I is the no. of insertions, and N is the no. of words in the 
reference. While reporting the performance of a speech recognition system, sometimes word recognition rate (WRR) is 
by  
WRR = 1-WER = N-S-D-1/N = H-I/N 
Where H is N-(S+D) the no. of properly recognized words. Further techniques of accuracy include Command 
Success Rate (CSR) and Single Word Error Rate (SWER). 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
This review paper discussed the speech recognition process which includes the feature extraction, types of speech 
recognition approaches and speech classification techniques. Every method has a different recognition rate with altered 
classification process. Therefore this research effort is to understand the process of speech recognition and to develop 
in future an efficient speech recognition system for the people with unlimited accuracy. 
                 
        
                 ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
             ISSN (Print):  2320-9798                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                               
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer  
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 9, September 2015             
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                  DOI: 10.15680/IJIRCCE.2015. 0309017                                                     8034   
  
REFERENCES 
 
1. Pratik K. Kurzekar.et.al “Continuous Speech Recognition System: A Review”, Asian Journal of Computer Science and Information 
Technology. 4: 6 (2014) 62 - 66. 
2. Aseem Saxena.et.al “Speech Recognition Using Mat lab”, International Journal of Advances in Computer Science and Cloud Computing. 
Volume- 1, Issue- 2, Nov-2013. 
3. Ms. Vrinda, Mr. Chander Shekhar “speech recognition system for English language”, international journal of advanced research in computer 
and communication engineering, Vol. 2, issue, January 2013. 
4. Vimala.C et.al, “ A Review on Speech Recognition Challenges and Approaches”, World of Computer Science and Information Technology 
Journal (WCSIT), ISSN: 2221-0741 Vol. 2, No. 1, 1-7, 2012 
5. M.A.Anusuya “Speech Recognition by Machine: A Review”,International Journal of Computer Science and Information Security, Vol. 6, No. 
3,2009 
6. Nnamdi Okomba et.al, “Survey of Technical Progress in Speech Recognition by Machine over Few Years of Research”, IOSR Journal of 
Electronics and Communication Engineering (IOSR-JECE) e-ISSN: 2278-2834, p- ISSN: 2278-8735.Volume 10, Issue 4, Ver. I (Jul - Aug 
.2015), PP 61-67 
7. Kavita S.Yadav , M.M.Mukhedkar, “Review on Speech Recognition”, International Journal of Science and Engineering, vol 1,number 2,2013 
pp-61-70 
8. Anchal Katyal, Amanpreet Kaur, Jasmeen Gill, “ Automatic Speech Recognition: A Review”,International Journal of Engineering and 
Advanced Technology (IJEAT) ISSN: 2249 – 8958, Volume-3, Issue-3, February 2014  
9. Yogesh K. Gedam,et.al , “Development of Automatic Speech Recognition of Marathi Numerals - A Review”, International Journal of 
Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT) Volume 3, Issue 9, March 2014. 
10. Asm SAYEM, “Speech Analysis for Alphabets in Bangla Language: Automatic Speech Recognition”, International Journal of Engineering 
Research (ISSN: 2319-6890)(online),2347-5013(print),Volume No.3, Issue No.2, pp : 88-93 01 Feb. 2014. 
11. Mayur R Gamit. et.al, “Classification Techniques for Speech Recognition: A Review”, International Journal of Emerging Technology and 
Advanced Engineering, Volume 5, Issue 2, February 2015. 
12. Akanksha Singh Thakur et.al, “Speech Recognition Using Euclidean Distance”, International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced 
Engineering, Volume 3, Issue 3, March 2013 
13. Preeti Saini et.al, “Automatic Speech Recognition: A Review”, International Journal of Engineering Trends and Technology- Volume4, Issue2- 
2013. 
14. Rashmi C R, “Review of Algorithms and Applications in Speech Recognition System”, International Journal of Computer Science and 
Information Technologies, Vol. 5 (4), 2014, 5258-5262. 
15. Shanti Therese S.et.al, “Review of Feature Extraction Techniques in Automatic Speech Recognition”, International Journal of Scientific 
Engineering and Technology, Volume No.2, Issue No.6, pp.: 479-484 1 June 2013. 
16. Santosh K.Gaikwad.et.al “A Review on Speech Recognition Technique”, International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887), 
Volume 10– No.3, November 2010. 
17. Kishori R. Ghule, R. R. Deshmukh, “Feature Extraction Techniques for Speech Recognition: A Review”, International Journal of Scientific & 
Engineering Research, Volume 6, Issue 5, May-2015. 
18. Harpreet Singh,et.al, “ A Survey on Speech Recognition”, International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer Engineering & Technology 
(IJARCET) Volume No. 2, Issue No. 6, June 2013. 
19. Hooman Heidari , Suresh Gobee, “Isolated Word Command Recognition for Robot Navigation” International Symposium on Robotics and 
Intelligent Sensors 2012. 
20. Saroj B. Jadhav.et.al, “Speech Recognition in Marathi Language onAndroid O.S.”, International Journal of Research in Computer and 
Communication Technology, Vol 3, Issue 8, August – 2014. 
21. Swati Atame.et.al, “A Survey On: Continuous Voice Recognition techniques”, International Journal of Emerging Trends & Technology in 
Computer Science (IJETTCS),Volume 4, Issue 3, May-June 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 

