International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
DOI : 10.5121/ijcseit.2012.2101                                                                                                                       1 
  
GENDER RECOGNITION SYSTEM USING SPEECH 
SIGNAL 
 Md. Sadek Ali1, Md. Shariful Islam1 and Md. Alamgir Hossain1 
1
 Dept. of Information & Communication Engineering 
Islamic University, Kushtia 7003, Bangladesh. 
E-mail :{ sadek_ice, afmsi76, alamgir_ict}@yahoo.com  
 
ABSTRACT 
In this paper, a system, developed for speech encoding, analysis, synthesis and gender identification is 
presented. A typical gender recognition system can be divided into front-end system and back-end system. 
The task of the front-end system is to extract the gender related information from a speech signal and 
represents it by a set of vectors called feature. Features like power spectrum density, frequency at 
maximum power carry speaker information. The feature is extracted using First Fourier Transform (FFT) 
algorithm. The task of the back-end system (also called classifier) is to create a gender model to recognize 
the gender from his/her speech signal in recognition phase. This paper also presents the digital processing 
of a speech signals (pronounced “A” and “B”) which are taken from 10 persons, 5 of them are Male and 
the rest of them are Female.  Power Spectrum Estimation of the signal is examined .The frequency at 
maximum power of the English Phonemes is extracted from the estimated power spectrum. The system uses 
threshold technique as identification tool. The recognition accuracy of this system is 80% on average. 
  
KEYWORDS 
Gender Recognition, Feature Extraction, First Fourier Transform (FFT), Font-end, Back-end. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
“Speech” according to Webster’s Dictionary is the “communication or expression of throughout 
in speaker words”. Speech signal not only caries the information that is need to communicate 
among people but also contents the information regarding the particular speaker. The 
nonlinguistic characteristics of a speaker help to classify speaker (male or female). Features like 
power spectrum density, frequency at maximum power carry speaker information. These speaker 
features can be tracked well varying the frequency characteristics of the vocal tract and the 
variation in the excitation. The speech signal also carry the information of the particular speaker 
including social factors, affective factor and the  properties of the  physical voices production 
apparatus for which human  being are  able to  recognize  whether the speaker  is a male  or a 
female  easily, during telephone conversation or any hidden condition of the speaker [1][2]. With 
the current concern of security worldwide gender classification has received great deal of 
attention among of the speech researchers. Also a rapidly developing environment of 
computerization, one of the most important issues in the developing world is gender recognition.  
 Gender recognition, which can be classified into two different tasks: Gender identification and 
Gender verification. In the identification task, or 1: N matching, an unknown speaker is compared 
against a database of N known speakers, and the best matching speaker is returned as the 
recognition decision. The verification task, or 1:1 matching, consists of making a decision 
whether a given voice sample is produced by a claimed speaker. An identity claim (e.g., a PIN 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
2 
code) is given to the system, and the unknown speaker’s voice sample is compared against the 
claimed speaker’s voice template. If the similarity degree between the voice sample and the 
template exceeds a predefined decision threshold, the speaker is accepted, and otherwise rejected.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In section II shows the related works. Section III 
describes the mathematical tools and techniques for gender recognition systems. Section IV 
describes speech recording and feature extraction process. Computations of power and frequency 
spectrum are described in section V. System implementation is detailed in section VI. 
Recognition and experimental results are given in section VII. Finally, section VIII concludes the 
paper.   
 2. RELATED WORKS 
Gender recognition is a task of recognizing the gender from his or her voice. With the current 
concern of security worldwide speaker identification has received great deal of attention among 
of the speech researchers. Also a rapidly developing environment of computerization, one of the 
most important issues in the developing world is speaker identification. Speech processing based 
several types of research work have been continuing from a few decade ago as a field of digital 
signal processing (DSP). The most efficient related work is “Speaker recognition in a multi-
speaker environment” was submitted in Proc. 7th European Conference on Speech 
Communication and Technology (Eurospeech 2001) (Aalborg, Denmark, 2001), pp. 787–90[3]. 
Another related work is “Spectral Feature for Automatic Voice-independent Speaker 
Recognition” was developed in the department of Computer Science, Joensuu University, Finland 
2003 [4]. From the study of different previous research works it was observed that among the 
different features the power spectrum results in best classification rate. Based on the power 
spectrum, we have computed frequency spectrum from maximum power of speech signal. We 
have implemented a complete gender recognition system to identify particular gender 
(male/female) using frequency component. In addition to description, theoretical and 
experimental analysis, we provide implementation details as well.  
3. MATHEMATICAL TOOLS AND TECHNIQUES 
For digital communication or digital signal synthesis, it is necessary to convey the analog signal 
such as speech, music etc. as a sequence of digitized number, which is commonly done by 
sampling the speech signal denoted by Xn (t) periodically to produce the sequence  
X(n) = Xn (nt)             α < n < α  ……………………………………………...(1) 
Where n0 have only integer value. In this paper, we have used pulse code modulation (PCM) 
technique to digitize speech signal. 
The sampled data are operated to find out the different parameter. Discrete Fourier Transform 
(DFT) computes the frequency information of the equivalent time domain signal [5]. Since a 
speech signal contains only real point values, we can make use of this fact and use a real-point 
Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) for increased efficiency. The resulting output contains both the 
magnitude and phase information of the original time domain signal. The Short time Fourier 
analysis of windowed speech signal can produce a reasonable feature space for recognition [6]. 
The Fourier Transform for a discreet time signal f kT( ) is given by 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
3 
F n f kT e j Nnk
k
N
( ) ( ) / .= −
=
−
∑ 2
0
1
π
………………………………………………………………….. (2)                                     
Equation (2) can be written as   
F n f k WN
nk
k
N
( ) ( )= −
=
−
∑
0
1
……………………………………………………………………… (3) 
Where f k f kT( ) ( )= andW eN
j N
=
2π /
, WN is usually referred to as the kernel of the transform. 
There are several algorithms that can considerably reduce the number of computations in a DFT. 
DFT implemented using such schemes is referred to as Fast Fourier Transform (FFT). Among the 
FFT algorithms there are two popular algorithms: decimation-in-time and decimation- in 
frequency. Through out this paper, the DFT is computed using decimation-in-time algorithm. 
4. SPEECH RECORDING AND FEATURE EXTRACTION 
Human speech signal contains significant amount of energy within 2.5 KHz. So, we have taken 
the sampling rate of speech signal as 8 KHz, 8 bit mono, which is sufficient for representing 
signals up to 4 KHz without aliasing effect. To record speech signal we have used Intel(r) 
Integrated sound card, a normal microphone and windows default sound recorder software. 
Speech was recorded in room environment. The recorded sound was stored in PCM (.wav) sound 
file format. The file header is stored at the beginning of the PCM file and occupied 44 bytes [7]. 
We also know that the actual wave data are stored after 58 bytes from the beginning. So, to 
extract wave data, we first discard 58 bytes from the beginning of the wave file and then read 
wave data as character. This data are stored in a text file (.txt) as integer data.  
Feature extraction is the process of converting the original speech signal to a parametric 
representation that gives a set of meaningful features useful for recognition. Feature extractions is 
the combination of some signal processing steps including the computation of drive data from 
wave sound, computation of Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), Power spectrum, the sample point at 
maximum power and finally compute the frequency. 
5. COMPUTATION OF POWER AND FREQUENCY 
Power spectrum estimation uses an estimator called peridogram [5][6]. The power spectrum is 
defined at N/2+1 frequency as  
[ ] ( )P f N F F k Nk k N k( ) | | | | , ,.......,= + − − − − − − − − − = −−1 1 2 2 12 2 2  
Where fk is defined only for the zero and positive frequencies  
f k N f k N k Nk c≡ = − − − − − − − =∆ 2 0 1 2, ,....,   
To compute the power spectrum of speech, the speech data is segmented into K segments of 
N=2M points. Where N is the length of a window, taken as a power of 2 for the convenient 
computation of FFT. Each segment is FFTed separately and the resulting K periodograms are 
averaged together to obtain a Power Spectrum estimate at M frequency values between 0 and fc. 
The figure 1 and 2 shows the signal waveform (fig1.a and fig2.a), power spectrum (fig1.b and 
fig2.b) of male and female speaker for phoneme “A”. 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
                            
 
 
 
 
   (a)                                                                            (b) 
Figure 1. The signal waveform and power spectrum of a male speaker for Phoneme “A”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a)                                                                                                  (b) 
Figure 2. The signal waveform and power spectrum of a female speaker for phoneme “A”. 
 
 
 
 
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0 200 400 600 800
Frequency in Hz
P
o
w
e
r 
M
a
g
n
it
u
d
e
 
0
0.002
0.004
0.006
0.008
0.01
0 200 400 600 800
Frequency in Hz
P
o
w
e
r 
M
a
g
n
it
u
d
e
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
5 
The computation steps for frequency can be summarized as shown in figure 3. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The sequence of operations in converting a speech signal into Frequency features 
6. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION 
The following figure 4 shows the abstraction of a gender recognition system. Regardless of the 
type of the task (classification or verification), gender recognition system operates in two modes: 
training and recognition modes. In the training mode, a new gender person’s voice is recorded 
and analysis. The recognition mode, an unknown gender person gives a speech input and the 
system makes a decision about the speaker’s identity. Both the training and the recognition modes 
include feature extraction, sometimes called the front-end of the system. The feature extractor 
converts the digital speech signal into a sequence of numerical descriptors, called feature vectors. 
The features provide a more stable, robust, and compact representation than the raw input signal. 
Feature extraction can be considered as a data reduction process that attempts to capture the 
essential characteristics of the speaker with a small data rate. 
 
Speech Signal 
Drive data from recorded 
Wave sound 
FFT 
Log10. 2 
Sample point at maximum 
power spectrum 
Power Spectrum 
Frequency determination at max power 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
6 
Figure 4. Block diagram of the Gender Recognition System 
The software system contains the following steps: 
1. To code and record the speech data as a disk file 
2. To compute the Fast Fourier Transform of the data from recorded file 
3. To compute the power spectrum from transformer data of step 2. 
4. To compute the frequency from power spectrum of step 3. 
5. To identify the Speaker as a male person or as female person or give a message that indicate     
the speaker is neither a male person nor a female person.  
The developed system is applied to store and analyze English phonemes “A” and “B”. The speech 
data are recorded for male and female speaker, FFT and power spectrum is calculated using these 
data files by the developed system. The results are shown in tabular form in Table1: 
 
 
 
 
      Training Phase 
  Input    
Speech 
    Feature  
   Extraction 
Pattern    
Matching 
Decision Logic 
 
Decision 
     Recognition phase 
    Feature  
   Extraction  
 Store Extracted 
Feature (data) in 
Database. 
Input 
Speech             
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
7 
Table 1. Frequency at maximum power of some male and female corresponding English 
phonemes “A” and “B”. 
Speaker 
ID 
Phonemes No.of 
sample 
Frequency at 
maximum power 
(Male voice) 
Frequency at 
maximum power 
(Female  voice) 
1 A 1 570 672 
2 A 1 588 720 
3 A 1 498 672 
4 A  1 462 729 
5 A 1 432 687 
 
 
7. SYSTEM RESULTS 
7.1. RECOGNITION RESULTS 
The detailed recognition results are shown in Table 2. 
Table 2. For sample #1 
No. of  
speaker 
 
No. of accuracy 
of Gender 
Recognize 
Percentage (%) 
1 Male 100 
2 Male 100 
3 Male 100 
4 Male 100 
5 Male 100 
6 Female 100 
7 Female 100 
8 Female 100 
9 Female 100 
10 Female 100 
 
 
 
1 B 2 432 618 
2 B 2 342 402 
3 B 2 543 666 
4 B  2 366 612 
5 B 2 510 414 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
8 
Table 2. For sample #2  
No. of  
speaker 
 
No. of accuracy 
of Gender 
Recognize 
Percentage (%) 
1 Male 100 
2 Male 0 
3 Male 100 
4 Male 0 
5 Male 100 
6 Female 100 
7 Female 0 
8 Female 100 
9 Female 100 
10 Female 0 
 
7.2. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The system was tested with 10 speakers (5 male people and 5 female people).The speech 
(utterance) of word (“A” and “B”) of 10 speakers was recorded separately. The threshold 
technique was used in recognition. The objective of the experiment was to study the recognition 
performance of the system with different speakers. The percentage of accuracy rate of recognition 
has been calculated using following equations: 
                                   No. of accurately recognized gender 
Recognition Accuracy (%) =                                                             X 100...................... (4) 
                                   No. of correct gender expected 
From recognition result, number of accurately recognized gender 16, number of correct gender 
expected 20.The recognition accuracy is = 16*100/20 = 80%. 
8. CONCLUSION 
In this paper the main goal was to develop a gender recognition system using speech signal. The 
feature selection is one of the most important factors in designing a gender recognition system. 
From the study of different previous research works it was observed that among the different 
features the power spectrum results in best classification rate. Thus the power spectrum has been 
selected as the feature for classification. Among the different technique, the statistical analysis 
and threshold technique is simple in computation and produces very good results. This is why this 
method was selected for pattern comparison in recognition process to obtain improved 
performance. The average recognition accuracy is 80 %. From experimental result, it can be seen 
that recognition rate decreases as the number of speaker increases. Therefore, the system 
efficiency is decreases, if the number of reference speakers in the speaker database increases. For 
recognition constant thresholds have been used. If we could use dynamic threshold for 
recognition it might produce more accurate and better recognition results.   
 
 
International Journal of Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJCSEIT), Vol.2, No.1, February 2012 
9 
REFERENCES 
[1]. Prabhakar, S., Pankanti, S., and Jain, A. “Biometric recognition: security and privacy concerns” 
IEEE Security and Privacy Magazine 1(2003), 33-42. 
[2]. Huang X., Acero, A., and Hon, H.-W. “Spoken Language Processing: a Guideto Theory, Algorithm 
and System Development” prentice-Hall, New Jersey, 2001. 
[3].  Martin, A., and Przybocki, M. Speaker recognition in a multi-speaker environment.In Proc. 7th 
European Conference on Speech Communication and Technology (Eurospeech 2001) (Aalborg, 
Denmark, 2001), pp. 787–90. 
[4]. Tomi  Kinnunen  “ Spectral  Feature  for  Automatic  Voice-independent Speaker Recognition” 
Depertment of Computer  Science, Joensuu  University,Finland. December  21, 2003. 
[5]. John R. Deller, John G Proakis and John H. L. Hansen, “Discrete- Time Processing of Speech 
Signals” Macmillan Publishing company, 866 Third avenue, New York 10022. 
[6]. Rabiner Lawrence, Juang Bing-Hwang, “Fundamentals of Speech Recognitions”, Prentice Hall New 
Jersey, 1993, ISBN 0-13-015157-2. 
[7]. Md. Saidur Rahman, “Small Vocabulary Speech Recognition in Bangla Language”, M.Sc. Thesis, 
Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering, Islamic University, Kushtia-7003, July-2004. 
Biography 
Md. Sadek Ali received the Bachelor’s and Master‘s Degree in the Department of 
Information and Communication Engineering (ICE) from Islamic University, Kushtia, 
in 2004 and 2005 respectively. He is currently a Lecturer in the department of ICE, 
Islamic University, Kushtia-Bangladesh. Since 2003, he has been working as a 
Research Scientist at the Signal and Communication Research Laboratory, 
Department of ICE, Islamic University, Kushtia, where he belongs to the spread-
spectrum research group. He has three published paper in international and one 
national journal in the same areas. He has also two published paper in international 
and one national conference in the same areas. His areas of interest include Signal processing, Wireless 
Communications, optical fiber communication, Spread Spectrum and mobile communication.  
 
Md. Shariful Islam received the Bachelor’s and Master‘s Degree in Applied  Physics, 
Electronics & Communication Engineering from Islamic University, Kushtia, 
Bangladesh in 1999, and 2000 respectively. He is currently Assistant Professor in the 
department of ICE, Islamic University, Kushtia-7003 Bangladesh. He has five 
published papers in international and national journals. His areas of interest include 
signal processing & mobile communication. 
 
 
Md. Alamgir Hossain received the Bachelor’s and Master‘s Degree in the Dept. of 
Information and Communication Engineering (ICE) from Islamic University, Kushtia, 
in 2003 and 2004, respectively. He is currently Lecturer in the department of ICE, 
Islamic University, Kushtia-7003, and Bangladesh. He was a lecturer in the Dept. of 
Computer Science & Engineering from Institute of Science Trade & Technology 
(Under National University), Dhaka, Bangladesh. from 23th October, 2007 to 18
th
 
April 2010.  Since 2003, he has been working as a Research Scientist at the 
Communication Reasearch Laboratory, Department of ICE, Islamic University, Kushtia, where he belongs 
to the spread-spectrum research group. He has two published paper in international and one national journal 
in the same areas. His current research interests include Wireless Communications, Spread Spectrum and 
mobile communication, Signal processing, Data Ming.  

