International Journal of Advances In Computer Science and Cloud Computing, ISSN: 2321-4058  Volume- 1, Issue- 2, Nov-2013 
 Speech Recognition Using Matlab 
 
26 
SPEECH RECOGNITION USING MATLAB 
 
1ASEEM SAXENA, 2AMIT KUMAR SINHA, 3SHASHANK CHAKRAWARTI, 4SURABHI CHARU 
 
1,2,3,4 Suresh Gyan Vihar University, Jaipur, Rajasthan, India 
Email:- saxena.aseem11@gmail.com, amitsinha4@hotmail.com, moon.shashank87@gmail.com, 
surabhicharu10@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract-Speech Recognition is the process in which certain words of a particular speaker will automatically recognized that 
are based on the information included in individual speech waves. This paper enlightens upon the invention as well as 
technological advancement in the field of voice recognition and also focuses upon different steps involved for speaker 
identification using MATLAB Programming. In this paper firstly we will going to perform speech editing as well as 
degradation of signals by the application of Gaussian Noise. This background noise then will successfully removed by the 
application of Butterworth Filter. Moreover, the technique applied here is to develop a code using MATLAB Programming 
which will compare the pitch and formant vectors of a known speech signal which will then compare with the bunch of other 
unknown speech signals and prior to it choose the appropriate matches. 
 
Keywords: Formants, Gaussian Noise, MATLAB Programming, Pitch Vector, Speech Editing, Speech Recognition. 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Speech is one of the most important medium by 
which a communication can take place. With the 
invention and widespread use of mobiles, telephones, 
data storage devices  etc. has provided a major help in 
setting up of speech communication and its analysing. 
The term and the basic concept of speech 
identification was began in the early 1960`s with 
exploration into voiceprint analysis which was 
somewhat similar to fingerprint concept. It was in 
1984 that a science fiction called “Star Trek to 
George Orwell`s,” derived the concept that a machine 
can recognize the human voice. [1]  Nowadays, with 
further growth & advancement in the field of speech 
recognition, the humans who are physically 
challenged such as blind and deaf can easily 
communicate with the machines. So in biological 
terms a voice that is being generated through trachea 
will be decoded by brain.    
In this paper we will going to study about five basic 
principles that are involved in speech recognition as 
well as the related works that has been done on this 
technology till now [2].  
These are: 
 Speech Editing 
 Speech Degradation  
 Speech Enhancement 
 Pitch Analysis  
 Formant Analysis 
 
Speech Editing 
In this technique we will going to record a set of the 
speech signal in ‘.wav’ (dot) wave format and taking 
a speech signal from the set of recorded speech waves 
on which we will going to perform  
Speech Editing. Here the length of the vector 
representing this speech file must have a magnitude  
 
of 30,000. However, this vector is then divided into 
two separate vectors having equal length & in 
opposite order. Now with the help of MATLAB 
Programming & Tools we will going to develop a 
code by which the given wave file is read and then 
the same file is played in reverse order. The general 
representation of the speech editing waveform in 
forward mode as well as reverse mode is shown in 
fig.1. 
 
Fig.1: Representation of Speech Edited Waveform. 
 
II. SPEECH DEGRADATION & 
ENHANCEMENT 
 
Noise plays a vital role in speech enhancement as 
well as speech degradation. Thus noise estimation is 
one of the major part while performing the speech 
recognition task. Therefore, it is understood if the 
estimated noise is low it will not affect the speech 
signal but if the noise is high then speech will get 
distorted and loss intelligibility. So to remove the 
noise we have discussed two techniques i.e. speech 
degradation and speech enhancement. [3] The speech 
degradation technique involves the addition of 
gaussian noise to the original .wav format file with 
the help of MATLAB Function called randn().  
Moreover, this process not only help us in making 
International Journal of Advances In Computer Science and Cloud Computing, ISSN: 2321-4058  Volume- 1, Issue- 2, Nov-2013 
 Speech Recognition Using Matlab 
 
27 
comparison between the clean file and the signal with 
the added gaussian noise, it also can be further 
viewed as which filter in DSP (Digital signal 
proceesing) such as Chebysev Filter, Butterworth 
Filter etc. can be worked better to remove this 
gaussian noise.The general representation of the 
degraded speech wave is shown in fig.2. 
 
 
Fig.2: Representation of Speech Degraded Waveform. 
 
The speech enhancement technique enlightens upon 
the major use Speech Degradation technique i.e. 
removal of gaussian noise from the original speech 
wave. In this technique firstly the degraded signal i.e 
original signal mixed with gaussian noise is first 
converted to the frequency domain with the  help of 
FFT tool in MATLAB Programming. Then higher 
frequency noise components are then removed with 
the help of 3rd order Butterworth low pass filter, 
according to the equation,        
Where  
D (u,v) is the rms value of u and v, Do determines the 
cut-off frequency, n is the filter order. The reason to 
choose butterworth filter here because it has the 
capability to filter the Gaussian noise more closely & 
approximates an ideal low pass filter as the order, n, 
is increased. The resulting filtered signal was then 
scaled and plotted with the original noisy signal to 
compare the filtering result and the general 
representation of speech enhancement type waveform 
is shown in fig.3 
 
 
Fig.3: Representation of Speech Enhancement Waveform 
Pitch Analysis 
Pitch in terms of speech analysis can be defined as a 
technique which allows the ordering of sounds on 
a frequency-related scale. Pitch analysis helps us in 
identifying the state of speech of a person. The 
considered states are neutral, happy, sad.  Therefore it 
is very important to understand the concept of pitch 
pitch analysis.[4] The paper describes a technique 
that involves the extraction of basic parameters of 
Pitch Analysis. Now, the calculation of the average 
pitch of the entire .wav format speech file that are 
recorded in our data base of different speakers was 
done and found to have a certain value which can be 
used in voice recognition, where the differences in 
average pitch can be used to characterize a voice file. 
The general representation of pitch analysis with 
respect to time is shown infig.4.  
 
 
Fig.4: Representation of Pitch Analysis Waveform 
Formant Analysis 
 
In Formant Analysis technique, we will going to 
perform on any of the .wav format speech file taken 
from the set of recorded .wav speech signal. Further 
with the help of MATLAB Programming we had 
prepared a code for Formant Analysis. With the help 
of this code we can easily calculate the first five 
formants that are present in .wav speech file, 
calculation of difference between the vector peak 
positions of these five formants, vector position of the 
peaks in the power spectral density were easy 
calculated and can be used to determine the speech 
file. The general waveform of formant analysis can 
be shown in fig.5  
 
 
Fig.5: Representation of Formant Analysis Waveform 
III. WAVEFORM COMPARISON 
International Journal of Advances In Computer Science and Cloud Computing, ISSN: 2321-4058  Volume- 1, Issue- 2, Nov-2013 
 Speech Recognition Using Matlab 
 
28 
 
Formants in normal language can be defined as the 
spectral peaks of the sound spectrum.With the help of 
above discussed Pitch and Formant Analysis, a 
waveform comparison code was written with the help 
of MATLAB Programming. Thus, based on this code 
we can easily characterized Speech waveform files. 
In this process a reference .wav file was used which 
is then compared with the remaining .wav files. 
Moreover, a sorting routine is performed in which 
sorting and comparison of the average pitch of the 
reference file with all the other 5 .wav files. The 
technique further includes the comparison of formant  
vector of the reference file to all .wav files, and thus 
sorting for the top 3 average pitch correlations and 
then again sort these files by formant vectors 
correlations and then sort these by average pitch. In 
this way, we can easily recognise the speaker. 
 
IV. RELATED WORKS 
 
[5]Controlling Of Device Through Voice 
Recognition Using MATLAB 
 
In this paper a technique is described in which firstly 
a speech command can be determined by power of 
speech signal which can be taken by the help of 
microphones being connected to the computer itself. 
Using MATLAB Programming the sampling of the 
speech signal takes place with sampling rate of 8000 
samples/sec according to nyquist criteria i.e. 
F=2*fm 
Where 
F=Sampling Frequency, fm = maximum component 
of frequency being present in speech signal. The 
sampled signal is then filtered off by using band pass 
filter lying in the range of 300 Hz-4000 Hz, which 
filters all the speech signal lying below 300 Hz of 
frequency range. Moreover, it includes the algorithm 
for the creation of speech templates which can be 
achieved by calculating the power of each sampled 
signals respectively. Now, a dictionary is created in 
which same command is taken many times and thus 
the average of these will represent a speech template 
which can be then stored in a library. Now the 
command templates that are being received by 
microphone are than compared with the templates 
being stored in library according to Euclidean`s 
Distance i.e. Euclidian Distance=Σi =1((dic[i]-
com[i])2)  Where i denotes the number of sample 
points.  Thus, the command will be detected by a 
particular device and it will performs the operation 
accordingly & if it does not match, the device should 
not follow that command. The general block diagram 
of the interfacing is shown in fig.6. 
 
Fig.6: Block Diagram- Interfacing 
 
[6]Speech Recognition using Digital Signal 
Processing 
 
This paper truly based on independent speech 
recognition which can be achieved by the use of Mel 
Frequency Cepstrum Coefficients which will process 
the input speech signal and further will recognise the 
speaker. This above task can be performed by using 
MATLAB Programming use of Digital Signal 
Processing (DSP) as a hardware platform This 
phenomena is broadly classified into three categories 
in order to understand the concept of speech 
recognition. 
 Speaker Identification 
 Speaker Verification  
 MFCC 
Speaker Identification 
 
The general block diagram of Speaker Identification 
is shown in fig.7. 
 
Fig.7: Block Diagram of Speaker Identification 
 
In the above figure, when the input signal i.e. the 
speech signal is provided the Speech Extraction 
process simply extracts all the necessary phenomena 
such as pitch, frequency etc. which will be needed at 
the end for the recognition of speaker. Further, the 
Speech Matching Block will simply matches all the 
properties that are extracted before with the set of 
International Journal of Advances In Computer Science and Cloud Computing, ISSN: 2321-4058  Volume- 1, Issue- 2, Nov-2013 
 Speech Recognition Using Matlab 
 
29 
speech signals being stored. The speech recognition 
system consist of two separate phases. The first one is 
referred to the enrolment sessions or training phase 
while the second one is referred to as the operation 
sessions or testing phase. Due to this the system can 
construct an efficient model for that speaker. 
 
Speaker Verification 
The general block diagram of Speaker Verification is 
shown in fig.8. 
 
Fig.8: Block Diagram of Speaker Verification 
 
The working of this block is similar to speaker 
identification process with a difference that here we 
have included a threshold block above the decision 
block as shown in above figure. 
 
Mel-Frequency Cepstrum Coefficients Processor 
(MFCC): 
MFCC's is a type of algorithm i.e. basically used to 
define relationship between human ear's critical 
bandwidths with frequency. This method is basically 
used for analysing and extraction of pitch vectors. 
The general diagrammatic representation of the block 
diagram of MFCC is shown in fig.9. 
 
Fig.9: Block Diagram MFCC 
 
V. LIMITATIONS OF RELATED WORKS 
 
 The above discussed papers were failed to 
discuss general features and characteristic 
behaviour of speech signals were not described 
properly. 
 The above discussed task of speech recognition 
can be easily challenged by highly variant input 
speech signals. 
 The above discuss process of handling devices 
can be overruled in presence of some noise.  
 The above discussed papers, were failed to 
discuss about the use of filters for the noise 
removal. 
  
System Proposed 
Speech recognition process is one of the most 
important step that has brought the humans and 
machines more closely to each other. The main aim 
of this paper is to describe the basic features as well 
as characteristic behaviours of speech waves. It also 
enlightens upon speech editing as well as the basic 
filtering techniques. Moreover, the use of generation 
of the codes using MATLAB Programming makes it 
more advanced in the study of speech recognition 
process. 
 
System Architecture 
As discussed earlier about the basic limitations and 
drawbacks, here in this section, we will going to 
present an architecture by which we can easily 
overcome the above problems.The basic block 
diagram of our system architecture is shown in fig.10. 
 
Fig.10: System Architecture Block Diagram 
 
In the given block diagram a given .wav format file 
was taken in which we added the Gaussian noise and 
its FFT was taken which is then used for pitch 
analysis. Moreover, we have also generated 
programming codes with help of MATLAB 
Programming, for the formant analysis. Furthermore, 
we have used the filter as shown in block diagram by 
which the Gaussian noise can be removed. Therefore 
through our paper we have successfully described 
about the waveform comparison with the help of 
above discussed principles and have successfully 
defined how the speech recognition is carried out.  
 
CONCLUSION  
 
This paper successfully defines about various 
characteristics and behaviour of speech signals and 
also entails upon the setting up of communication 
between human speech signals with the machines. In 
this paper we have generated codes with the help of 
MATLAB Programming which requires .wav format 
speech signals. Thus, in order to remove this 
limitation there is a requirement for the study of 
International Journal of Advances In Computer Science and Cloud Computing, ISSN: 2321-4058  Volume- 1, Issue- 2, Nov-2013 
 Speech Recognition Using Matlab 
 
30 
various formats of speech signals which can be used 
for the communication with the machines. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] [1].“Speaker Recognition Using MFCC and Vector 
Quantization Model”. 
[2] E. Darren Ellis Department of Computer and Electrical 
Engineering – University of Tennessee, Knoxville 
Tennessee 37996  topic on “Design of a Speaker 
Recognition Code using MATLAB” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[3] Topic on “Noise estimation Algorithms for Speech 
Enhancement in highly non-stationary 
Environments”ijcsi.org/papers/IJCSI-8-2-39-44.pdf  
[4] Topic on “Extraction of Pitch and Formants and its Analysis 
to identify 3 different emotional states of a person” 
ijcsi.org/papers/IJCSI-9-4-1-296-299.pdf 
[5] Topic on “Controlling of Device through Voice Recognition 
Using Matlab1” ISSN NO: 2250-3536 VOLUME 2, ISSUE 
2, MARCH 2012 http://www.ijater.com/Files/fd54f0ee-
1aae-4e88-ab81-b89f32ac57c6_IJATER_03_35.pdf   
[6] Topic on “Speech Recognition using Digital Signal 
Processing” ISSN:2277-9477, Volume2,Issue 6. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

