COMPUTER SCIENCE
www.gonzaga.edu/computer-science
THE PROGRAM
The School of Engineering and Applied Science 
offers a Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in Computer 
Science. Computer science is the study of 
computing in all of its forms. It has led to the 
development of the software that runs on 
our computers. Software makes much of a 
computer’s everyday functionality possible. 
Web browsing, downloading music and videos, 
and even the very existence of digital music and 
videos are all made possible by software.
The Computer Science major at Gonzaga 
is built on a foundation of courses in science, 
mathematics, intensive programming, software 
development and engineering, and computer 
architecture. The program offers a broad range 
of advanced computer science topics, including: 
•	 artificial intelligence
•	 computer graphics
•	 computer networks
•	 database management systems
•	 cryptography
•	 computer security
•	 mobile programming
•	 speech and natural language processing
All seniors participate in either a large 
software engineering or group research project, 
completed under the guidance of a faculty 
member and a project sponsor.
Gonzaga University also offers an 18-credit 
minor in Computer Science. Students 
who are considering a business, science or 
humanities career will benefit from this option. 
The minor consists of three required courses 
(Computer Science I, Computer Science II, 
and Data Structures) and nine credits of 
computer science electives. Students may use 
the nine credits of electives to focus on an 
area of particular interest, including artificial 
intelligence, database management, web 
design, and computer graphics.
THE EQUIPMENT
The Department of Computer Science operates 
the following labs: 
•	 The	Intel	Corporation	Computational	Science	
Laboratory consists of a computing cluster 
that provides the computational presence 
for both faculty and undergraduate students 
to use in classes and for research. 
•	 The	Computer	Science	Research	Lab	is		
 available for faculty research projects in  
 sensors, NLP, and data management.
•	 The	General	Computing	Lab	contains	32	
machines running both virtual Linux and 
Windows.
•	 The	Senior	Lab	has	24	networked	computers	
running a mix of Windows, Linux, and Mac 
OS, which is used for senior software 
engineering projects.
RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES
Promising undergraduates have the opportunity 
to assist faculty in their research. Faculty 
research interests include remote sensor 
networks, wireless mobile networks, robotics, 
genetic algorithms, speech recognition, 
mathematical modeling, scientific data 
management, database systems, cloud 
computing, and computer security. The 
Department of Computer Science is also a 
joint participant, along with Mathematics and 
Civil Engineering, in the Gonzaga University 
Center for Evolutionary Algorithms (GUCEA). 
GUCEA has presented student-assisted 
research at international conferences in Europe 
and the United States. Select students can 
participate in these and other projects through 
GUCEA, the Intel Corporation Computational 
Sciences Laboratory, the Sensor Networks 
and	Robotics	Laboratory,	or	directly	with	a	
faculty mentor. To read more about specific 
research opportunities at Gonzaga, please visit       
gonzaga.edu/computer-science. 
OUTCOMES
Graduates of computer science programs 
typically work as software engineers, computer 
scientists, and computational scientists, though 
many go on to careers in business and law as 
well.
Software engineers are responsible for the 
design, development, and maintenance of 
the software that makes computing possible. 
SC
H
O
O
L 
O
F 
EN
G
IN
EE
R
IN
G
 A
N
D
 A
PP
LI
ED
 S
C
IE
N
C
E 
THE PASSION
It is difficult, maybe even impossible, to imagine 
contemporary civilization without computing 
machines and the software that brings them 
to life. From science to medicine, engineering 
to commerce, and music to reading—digital 
devices are everywhere. Computer science 
majors are also everywhere—designing 
software for business and industry, implementing 
the next generation of video games, using 
computation to unravel the mysteries of genes 
and human intelligence, and building increasingly 
sophisticated computers and other digital devices. 
At Gonzaga, computer science students gain the 
skills to innovate with these technologies, while 
also expanding their capacities for critical thinking 
and ethical reflection in the Jesuit tradition. 
Software engineers designed the operating system 
on your computer, the applications on your cell phone, 
and the air traffic control systems that make air travel 
possible. A major in Computer Science at Gonzaga 
can lead you immediately into a software engineering 
career.
An increasing fraction of our students go on to fully-
funded doctoral work in computer science. When 
finished with their studies, they work as computer 
scientists in academic, government, and industrial 
research labs. Computer scientists are responsible 
for the theoretical breakthroughs that make modern 
computing possible. In recent years, computer 
scientists have developed new techniques for speech 
recognition programs, machine learning, networks 
of sensor devices, cryptographic algorithms, and 
programming languages, among many others. 
Computational scientists bring the richness of 
computational power to the complex problems that 
arise in science, engineering, and the social sciences. 
One of the most spectacular examples is the decoding 
of the human genome, an enterprise unthinkable 
without computers, software, and the computational 
scientists who harnessed them. Computational 
scientists usually have training both in computer 
science and in an application discipline like biology, 
chemistry, climate science, or physics.
Computer Science graduates from Gonzaga often 
go directly to the computer industry or to further 
study in business, law, another scientific discipline, 
or computer science itself. To prepare for these 
opportunities, many Gonzaga Computer Science 
students pursue summer research or internships. 
Many of our students secure summer research funding 
through the National Science Foundation-sponsored 
Research	Experience	for	Undergraduates	program.	
Others intern in the computer industry, some with 
companies that regularly work with our department.
Our graduates frequently begin their careers in 
software engineering at some of the best-known 
firms in computing like Amazon, Boeing, Microsoft, 
and Google. Those going on to graduate programs in 
computer science usually receive a full stipend that 
covers their graduate tuition, fees, and some living 
expenses. 
SC
H
O
O
L 
O
F 
EN
G
IN
EE
R
IN
G
 A
N
D
 A
PP
LI
ED
 S
C
IE
N
C
E
THE PEOPLE
The Computer Science faculty are committed both to 
teaching and advancing the state of the discipline. All 
faculty members teach a full range of courses, from 
freshman to senior level. All maintain posted office 
hours, advising sessions, and a commitment to student 
success.
Several of the faculty have years of industry 
experience with noteworthy computing firms. Several 
others have research programs in speech recognition, 
genetic algorithms, database management systems, 
computer networks, and computer modeling that 
employ students as research assistants.
Faculty Contacts and Specialties 
Shawn Bowers | Ph.D., OGI School of Science and 
Engineering, Oregon Health & Science University | 
data management, conceptual modeling, workflow 
systems | bowers@gonzaga.edu
Paul De Palma | Ph.D., University of New Mexico | 
speech recognition, genetic algorithms | 
depalma@gonzaga.edu 
Keifei Wang | Ph.D., University of Nebraska | computer 
security, computer networks, virtual computing, 
mobile programming, and computer science education 
| wangk@gonzaga.edu  
Kathie Yerion | Ph.D., University of Montana | Dept. 
Chair | computational modeling of non-linear systems, 
differential equations, graph theory, and computer 
science education | yerion@gonzaga.edu 
Yanping Zhang | Ph.D., University of Alabama | 
computer networks, wireless sensors and actuator 
networks, telemedicine, e-Health, visualization 
technology, hardware/software design | 
zhangy@gonzaga.edu 

