  
  
Voice-Recognition Software –  
An Introduction 
 
What is Voice Recognition? 
Voice recognition is an alternative to typing on a keyboard. Put simply, you talk to the 
computer and your words appear on the screen. The software has been developed to 
provide a fast method of writing on a computer and can help people with a variety of 
disabilities. It is useful for people with physical disabilities who often find typing difficult, 
painful or impossible. Voice-recognition software can also help those with spelling 
difficulties, including users with dyslexia, because recognised words are almost always 
correctly spelled. 
 
Voice-Recognition Software 
Voice-recognition software programmes work by analysing sounds and converting them 
to text. They also use knowledge of how English is usually spoken to decide what the 
speaker most probably said. Once correctly set up, the systems should recognise 
around 95% of what is said if you speak clearly.  
 
Several programmes are available that provide voice recognition. These systems have 
mostly been designed for Windows operating systems, however programmes are also 
available for Mac OS X. In addition to third-party software, there are also voice-
recognition programmes built in to the operating systems of Windows Vista and 
Windows 7. 
 
Most specialist voice applications include the software, a microphone headset, a 
manual and a quick reference card. You connect the microphone to the computer, 
either into the soundcard (sockets on the back of a computer) or via a USB or similar 
connection. Then you can begin talking using the following steps. 
 
Voice Recognition Software – An Introduction 
Page 2 of 6  March 2009 
Enrolment 
Everybody’s voice sounds slightly different, so the first step in using a voice-recognition 
system involves reading an article displayed on the screen. This process, called 
enrolment, takes less than 10 minutes and results in a set of files being created which 
tell the software how you speak. Many of the newer voice-recognition programmes say 
this is not required, however it is still worth doing to get the best results. The enrolment 
only has to be done once, after which the software can be started as needed.  
 
Dictating and Correcting 
When talking, people often hesitate, mumble or slur their words. One of the key skills in 
using voice-recognition software is learning how to talk clearly so that the computer can 
recognise what you are saying. This means planning what to say and then speaking in 
complete phrases or sentences. 
The voice-recognition software will misunderstand some of the words spoken, so it is 
necessary to proofread and then correct any mistakes. Corrections can be made by 
using the mouse and keyboard or by using your voice. 
When you make corrections, the voice-
recognition software will adapt and learn, 
so that (hopefully) the same mistake will 
not occur again. Accuracy should improve 
with careful dictation and correction.  
In the example at right, the word ‘typing’ 
has been recognised by the software as 
‘twenty’. To correct it, you would say “Correct twenty,” followed by “Choose 2.” 
 
Editing and Formatting Text 
Text can be edited very easily. You can highlight the text to be changed by using 
commands such as “Select line,” or “Select paragraph,” and then saying the changes 
you want to make to the computer. These will then replace the selected text.  
Voice Recognition Software – An Introduction 
Page 3 of 6  March 2009 
Applying formatting is just as straightforward. For example, if a document has the 
phrase ‘introductory thoughts’, you can underline this phrase by saying “Select 
introductory thoughts,” and then saying “Underline that.” 
Controlling the Computer 
Many voice-recognition programmes offer the ability to start and control programmes 
through spoken commands.  
• Commands vary, depending on which voice-recognition programme you are using. 
For example, with the programme Dragon NaturallySpeaking you could say “Start 
Microsoft Word,” then “Open letter to John.”  
• Menus can be selected simply by pausing and then saying the menu item. For 
example, saying “File” would open the file menu.  
• On the Internet, you can dictate web addresses and browse websites simply by 
saying the text in the link.  
• For tasks that require a mouse, there are spoken commands to enable the mouse 
to be moved, dragged and clicked. 
 
Examples of Voice-Recognition Programmes  
There are several main voice-recognition programmes available: 
Windows Vista and Windows 7 
The latest versions of Microsoft Windows have a built-in voice-recognition programme 
called Speech Recognition. It does not have as many features as Dragon 
NaturallySpeaking but does have good recognition rates and is easy to use. As it is part 
of the Windows operating system, it does not require any additional cost apart from a 
microphone. 
Web:  http://www.microsoft.com/enable/  
Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
This programme is produced by Nuance. Dragon NaturallySpeaking is widely 
considered to be the market leader for voice-recognition software. It is available in 
different editions, one of which may suit your needs better than the others, as indicated 
Voice Recognition Software – An Introduction 
Page 4 of 6  March 2009 
in the chart below. For Mac OS X, Nuance produces Dragon Dictate (formerly 
MacSpeech Dictate). 
Web: http://www.nuance.co.uk/dragon/ 
 
 Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
Preferred Version 10  
Dragon Naturally Speaking 
Professional Version 10  
Overview  A good choice for people with 
physical difficulties and dyslexia: 
 
• A comprehensive set of 
commands to allow voice 
control of the computer 
• Speech output facilities to help 
with corrections 
• It can be used with portable 
recorders 
A more advanced version for 
business users and for people  
who need to work completely 
hands-free: 
 
• Voice commands for Lotus 
Notes and Microsoft Outlook. 
• The ability to write new voice 
commands to assist easy 
hands-free use of the computer 
 
Training and Support 
People who are new to voice-recognition software often need to arrange a number of 
one-to-one training sessions to get the most out of the software. There are a number of 
specialist suppliers of voice-recognition solutions who can provide you with training, 
suggest suitable computer systems and assist with installation. 
Frequently Asked Questions 
• How is it affected by background noise? The headset microphones supplied 
with the products are fairly good at filtering out background noise. If background 
noise is a particular issue, you may need a higher-specification microphone. 
• What about technical jargon? Modern voice-recognition systems already 
‘know’ thousands of words, including specialist language from the legal and 
medical fields. New words and phrases can be added and trained easily.  
Voice Recognition Software – An Introduction 
Page 5 of 6  March 2009 
• Is ‘voice strain’ a risk? When working with speech-recognition systems, you 
should take steps to minimise strain: sit comfortably; speak at a normal 
pitch/volume; take breaks and drink regularly. 
• What about catching colds? Some people’s voices change when they have a 
cold and this may result in slightly worse recognition.  
• How many people can use the software on one computer? There is no limit 
to the number of users. Each one will require 20-30MB of space on the hard disk 
of the machine. Each person needs to load their own voice settings before they 
start to dictate. 
• Can the software be used to transcribe meetings? No – it only works with 
one speaker at a time. 
• Can recording devices be used with speech recognition systems? Yes – 
speech recorded on pocket-sized recorders can be transferred to a computer 
and then ‘transcribed’ to text (see the factsheet ‘Voice-Recognition – Advanced 
Features’ for further information). 
Troubleshooting 
There may be issues with voice-recognition software for users with specific needs or 
who have particular ways of working.  
• The software runs too slowly: Voice-recognition systems need relatively new 
computers with a lot of memory. Business users and people working with large 
applications will benefit from having additional memory. 
• Poor recognition: This can be a problem if the computer is not getting a clear 
signal from the microphone or if the user is not speaking clearly.  
• Difficulty spotting mistakes in work: This can be an issue particularly for 
people with dyslexia. Choose a package that includes text-to-speech so that text 
can be spoken by the computer and reading avoided – then you can listen out 
for mistakes. For further information, see the factsheet ‘Dyslexia and Voice-
Recognition Software’. 
Voice Recognition Software – An Introduction 
Page 6 of 6  March 2009 
• Difficulty using a headset microphone: There are a number of alternative 
designs of microphone that can be used, including stand microphones, collar 
microphones, array microphones and hand-held microphones.  
• Impaired speech: Voice-recognition software can adapt to non-standard 
speech. Some systems are better than others – seek advice as to which might 
work best for you. 
Other Useful Factsheets 
This factsheet gives an overview of voice-recognition software. The following factsheets 
cover more advanced topics: 
• Voice-Recognition Software – Advanced Features and Concepts 
• Dyslexia and Voice-Recognition Software 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Notes:  
• This factsheet has been developed through a partnership between My web my way 
(www.bbc.co.uk/accessibility) and AbilityNet, a UK computing and disability charity.  
• Although this factsheet lists the producer (manufacturer or publisher) for specific 
products, this is for informational purposes, especially as the features of software 
applications can change in a short period of time. Most of these products are 
available from a variety of retailers specialising in accessibility-related products, and 
may in some cases also be available from general software and computer retailers.  
• The BBC is not responsible for the content of external internet sites. 

