 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 3, Issue 12, December 2013) 
367 
 
Feature Extraction and Classification Techniques for Speech 
Recognition: A Review  
 Nidhi Desai
1
,
 
Prof.Kinnal Dhameliya
2
, Prof.Vijayendra Desai
3
 
1
M.Tech. [Electronics and Communication] Student, Department Of Electronics and Communication Engineering, C.G.P.I.T, 
Bardoli, Gujarat 
2
Asst.Professor, Department Of Electronics and Communication Engineering, C.G.P.I.T, Bardoli, Gujarat 
3
Asst.Professor, Department Of Electronics and Communication Engineering, CKPCET, Surat, Gujrat
Abstract— Speech is the most natural form of human 
communication and speech processing has been one of the 
most inspiring expanses of signal processing. Speech 
recognition is the process of automatically recognizing the 
spoken words of person based on information in speech signal. 
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) system takes a human 
speech utterance as an input and requites a string of words as 
output. This paper introduce a brief survey on Automatic 
Speech Recognition and discuss the major subjects and 
improvements made in the past 60 years of research, that 
provides technological outlook and a respect of the 
fundamental achievement that has been accomplished in this 
important area of speech communication. Definition of 
various types of speech classes, feature extraction techniques, 
speech classifiers and performance evaluation are issues that 
requires attention in designing of speech recognition system. 
The objective of this review paper is to summarize some of the 
well known methods used in several stage of speech 
recognition system.  
Keywords—Acoustic Phonetic Approach, Artificial 
Intelligence, Feature extraction, LPC, MFCC, Pattern 
Recognition Approach, Speech Recognition, Word Error Rate 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Speech Recognition is the ability of machine or program 
to identify words and phrase from spoken language and 
convert them in to machine readable format. It is also 
known as Automatic Speech Recognition or computer 
speech recognition and speech to text conversion.  
The main intension of speech recognition area is to 
evolve techniques and system for speech input to machine. 
Speech is the primary means of communication between 
humans, and it is the dominancy of this medium that 
motivates research efforts to allow speech to become a 
viable human computer interaction [5].So, Automatic 
speech recognition (ASR) is viewed as inherent part of 
human-computer interfaces, that are visualized to use 
speech, among other means, to achieve natural, prevalent 
and ubiquitous computing. There are usually two categories 
for isolated and continuous speech recognition: speaker-
dependent and speaker-independent. Speaker dependent 
method involves training a system that recognize each of 
the lexicon words uttered single or multiple times by 
specific set of speakers [7], while for speaker independent 
training methods are generally unworkable and words are 
recognized by analyzing their inherent acoustical properties 
[7]. With the rapid evolution of computer hardware and 
software, speech recognition technology is moderately key 
technology in computer information processing technology. 
It is widely used in voiced-activated telephone exchange, 
medical services, banking services, industrial control every 
side of society and people’s lives. 
Fig.1 shows basic representation of speech recognition 
system in simple equation which contains feature 
extraction, database, network training and testing or 
decoding. The recognition process is shown below (Fig.1).
 
    Input Speech                                                                                                                                                            Output Speech 
 
 
                                                                                 FIGURE1.BASIC MODEL OF SPEECH RECOGNITION SYSTEM 
 
     Feature 
   Extraction 
  Testing or  
  Decoding 
   Database    Network 
    Training 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 3, Issue 12, December 2013) 
368 
 
II. TYPES OF SPEECH UTTERED 
Separation of speech recognition system in different 
classes can be made based on what type of utterance they 
have ability to recognize. 
A. Isolated speech  
Isolated word recognizer usually set necessary condition 
that each utterance having little or no noise on both sides of 
sample window. It requires single utterance at a time. 
Often, these types of speech have “Listen/Not-Listen 
states”, where they require the speaker to have pause 
between utterances. Isolated word might be better name for 
this type. 
B. Connected word  
Connected word require minimum pause between 
utterances to make speech flow smoothly. They are almost 
similar to isolated words. 
C. Continuous speech  
Continuous speech is basically computer’s dictation. It is 
normal human speech, without silent pauses between 
words. This kind of speech makes machine understanding 
much more difficult. 
D. Spontaneous speech  
Spontaneous speech can be thought of as speech that is 
natural sounding and no tried out before. An ASR system 
with spontaneous speech ability should be able to handle a 
diversity of natural speech features such as words being run 
at the same time. 
III. FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES-AN OVERVIEW 
Feature extraction is the most important part of speech 
recognition as it distinguishes one speech from other. The 
utterance can be extracted from a vast range of feature 
extraction techniques suggested and successfully utilized 
for speech recognition task, but extracted feature should 
meet some criteria while negotiating with the speech signal 
such as [5]: 
 Easy to measure extracted speech feature 
 It should not be receptive to mimicry 
 It should show less variation from one speaking 
environment to another 
 It should be balanced over time 
 It should occur normally and naturally in speech 
Different techniques for feature extraction are LPC,       
MFCC, AMFCC, PLP, PCA, cepstral analysis, RAS etc. 
 
A. Linear prediction coding(LPC) 
LPC is one of the most powerful signal analysis methods 
for linear prediction. It is predominant technique for 
determining the basic parameters of speech and provides 
precise estimation of speech parameters and computational 
model of speech. Speech sample can be approximated as a 
linear combination of past speech samples is the basic idea 
behind LPC. Following figure.2 shows the steps involved 
in LPC feature extraction. 
 
Figure2.Steps involve in LPC Feature extraction [8] 
B. Mel frequency Cepstral Coefficient(MFCC) 
MFCC is the most evident and popular feature extraction 
technique for speech recognition. It approximates the 
human system response more closely than any other system 
because frequency bands are placed logarithmically here. 
They are obtained from a Mel-frequency cepstrum where 
frequency bands are equally spaced on the Mel scale. 
Computation technique of MFCC is based on the short-
term analysis and thus from each frame MFCC vector is 
computed. MFCC can be computed by using the formula: 
Mel (f) =2595*log10 (1+f/700) 
Following figure.3 shows the steps involved in MFCC 
feature extraction. 
 
Figure.3 Steps involve in MFCC Feature extraction[8] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 3, Issue 12, December 2013) 
369 
 
C. Linear prediction cepstral coefficient(LPCC) 
The goal of feature extraction is to demonstrate speech 
signal by finite number of measures of the signal. Linear 
Predictive Coding is used to obtain the LPCC coefficients 
from the speech tokens. The LPCC coefficients are then 
translated to cepstral coefficients.The cepstral coefficients 
are regularized in between 1 and -1[6]. LPCC was 
implemented using autocorrelation method. LPCC are 
highly sensitive to quantization noise is the main drawback 
of it.  
IV. SPEECH RECOGNITION TECHNIQUE CLASSIFICATION 
Basically there are three approaches to speech 
recognition.  
A. Acoustic Phonetic Approach  
B. Pattern Recognition Approach  
C. Artificial Intelligence Approach 
 
Figure4.Speech recognition Technique Classification [2] 
A. Acoustic phonetic approach 
Acoustic phonetic approach for speech recognition is 
based on finding speech sound and providing appropriate 
labels these sounds. The basis of acoustic phonetic 
approach based on the fact that, there exist finite and 
exclusive phonemes in spoken language and these are 
broadly characterized by a set of acoustic properties that 
are demonstrated in the speech signal over time. With 
speaker and co articulation effect, the acoustic properties of 
phonetic units are highly variable, it is assumed in this 
approach that, the criteria governing the instability are 
straightforward and can be readily learned by machine.  
Steps included in acoustic phonetic approach are as 
follows: The first step is the spectral analysis of speech 
which describes the broad acoustic properties of different 
phonetic units. The next step is segmentation and labeling 
the speech, that results in a phoneme lattice 
characterization of the speech. The last step is 
determination of string of words or a valid word from 
phonetic label sequences brought out by the segmentation 
to labeling. This approach has not been most extensively 
used in most commercial application [3]. 
B. Pattern recognition approach 
Two essential steps involves in pattern recognition 
approach are, pattern training and pattern comparison. 
Using a well formulated mathematical framework and 
initiates consistent speech pattern representation for 
reliable pattern comparison, from a set of labeled training 
samples through formal training algorithm is essential 
feature of this approach. In this, there exist two methods: 
Template base approach and stochastic approach. 
Stochastic model are more suitable approach to speech 
recognition as it uses probabilistic models to deal with 
undetermined or incomplete information [1].there exits 
many methods in this approach like HMM, SVM, DTW, 
VQ etc, among these hidden markov model is most popular 
stochastic approach today. 
Hidden markov model (HMM):  A hidden markov model 
is signalizing by a finite state markov model and a set of 
output distributions. The alteration parameter in the 
Markov chain models are temporal variability’s, while the 
output distribution model parameters are spectral 
variability. These two types of variability are essential for 
speech recognition. Hidden Markov modeling is more 
general and has a secure mathematical foundation 
compared to template based approach. Compared to 
knowledge base approach, HMM enables easy 
incorporation of knowledge sources into organized 
architecture.HMM do not provide much insight on the 
recognition process, is negative side effect of HMM. To 
improve performance of HMM system, analyses of errors 
of system is made, but it is quite difficult. However, 
judicious incorporation of knowledge has significantly 
improved HMM based system. 
Dynamic time warping (DTW):   Dynamic time warping 
is an algorithm for measuring similarity between two 
sequences which may vary in time or speed[4].DTW has 
been applied to video,audio,graphic, infect any data which 
can be develop into a linear representation can be analyzed 
with DTW.  
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 3, Issue 12, December 2013) 
370 
 
In general, DTW allows a computer to search an optimal 
match between two time series if one time series may be 
“warped” non-linearly by pulling or shriveling it along its 
time axis. This warping between two time series can then 
be used to find equivalently regions among the two time 
series or to diagnose the similarity between two times 
series [4].Continuity is not much important in DTW than in 
other pattern matching algorithms. 
A.  Artificial intelligence approach (knowledge based 
approach) 
Combination of acoustic phonetic approach and pattern 
recognition approach makes The Artificial Intelligence 
approach. Acoustic phonetic knowledge is used to 
developed classification rules for speech sound where 
template based methods provide less insight about human 
speech processing, but these methods have been very 
productive in the design of a diversity of speech 
recognition system. This approach is not much successful 
as complexness in quantifying skilful knowledge. 
Integration of levels of human knowledge i.e. phonetics, 
lexical access, syntax and semantics, is the another problem 
of this approach. Artificial Neural Network method is more 
reliable method for this approach. 
Artificial neural networks (ANN):  An artificial neural 
network contains potentially large number of simple 
processing element that is called units or neurons, which 
impact each other’s performance via a network of 
excitatory or repressive weights [5]. It is a feed-forward 
artificial neural network which has more than one layer of 
hidden units between its inputs and its outputs. Neural 
Network provides three types of learning methods namely 
supervised, unsupervised and reinforced. 
V. PERFORMANCE MEASURING PARAMETERS 
The performance of speech recognition system is often 
described in terms of accuracy and speed.Accuracy may be 
meausured in terms of word error rate(WER),where speed 
is measured with the real time factor.Single Word Error 
Rate(SWER) and Command Success Rate(CSR) are 
another measures of accuracy[3]. 
A. Word error rate (WER) 
Word error rate is familiar measurement of the 
performance of a speech recognition or machine translation 
system. The recognized word sequence can have different 
length from the reference word sequence is more general 
difficulty in performance measurement.  
The WER is acquired from the Levenshtein distance, 
working at the word level alternatively to the phoneme 
level [9].Word error rate can be computed as 
N
IDS
WER


 
Where, 
S is the number of substitutions. 
D is the number of the deletions. 
I is the number of the insertions. 
N is the number of words in the reference. 
When reporting the performance of a speech recognition 
system, sometimes word recognition rate (WRR) is used 
instead of WER, 
N
IH
N
IDSN
WERWRR



1
 
Where is N-(S+D), the number of correctly recognized 
word. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
Different feature extraction techniques and recognition 
techniques are discussed in this paper and it can be 
concluded that performance of MFCC technique is superior 
to LPCC performance[6].This paper attempts to provide a 
comprehensive survey on speech recognition and to deliver 
some year wise progress to this date and it is challenging 
and interesting problem in and of itself. It has been found 
that HMM is the best technique in developing language 
model. Speech recognition has attracted scientist as an 
important regulation and has created a technological 
influence on society. It is hoping that this paper bring out 
understand and inspiration amongst the research group of 
ASR. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M.A.Anusuya, “Speech Recognition by Machine,” International 
Journal of Computer Science and Information security, Vol.6, No.3, 
2009 
[2] S.J.Arora and R.Singh, “Automatic Speech Recognition: A Review, 
“International Journal of Computer Applications, vol60-No.9, 
December 2012 
[3] Santosh K.Gaikward and Bharti W.Gawali, “A Review on Speech 
Recognition Technique,” International Journal of Computer 
Applications, vol 10, No.3, November 2010 
[4] Lindasalwa Muda, “Voice Recognition Algorithms using Mel 
Frequency Cepstral Coefficient (MFCC) and Dynamic Time 
Warping (DTW) Techniques “, Journal Of Computing, Volume 2, 
Issue 3, March 2010 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 3, Issue 12, December 2013) 
371 
 
[5] Nidhi Srivastava and Dr.Harsh Dev“Speech Recognition using 
MFCC and Neural Networks”, International Journal of Modern 
Engineering Research (IJMER), march 2007 
[6] Dr.R.L.K.Venkateswarlu, Dr.R.Vasantha Kumari and 
A.K.V.Nagavya, “Efficient Speech  Recognition by Using Modular 
Neural Network”, Int. J. Comp. Tech. Appl., Vol 2 (3) 
[7] Bishnu Prasad Das and Ranjan Parekh, “Recognition of Isolated 
Words using Features based on LPC, MFCC, ZCR and STE, with 
Neural Network Classifiers”, International Journal of Modern 
Engineering Research (IJMER) , Vol.2, Issue.3, May-June 2012 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[8] Om Prakash Prabhakar and Navneet Kumar Sahu, “A Survey On: 
Voice Command Recognition Technique,” International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering, 
Volume 3, Issue 5, May 2013 
[9] Milind U. Nemade and Prof. Satish K. Shah, “Survey of Soft 
Computing based Speech Recognition Techniques for Speech 
Enhancement in Multimedia Applications”, International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Computer and Communication Engineering 
Vol. 2, Issue 5, May 2013 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

