 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 2, February 2015) 
58 
 
Classification Techniques for Speech Recognition: A Review 
Mayur R Gamit
1
, Prof. Kinnal Dhameliya
2
, Dr. Ninad S. Bhatt
3
 
1
M.Tech student, 
2
Assistant Professor, E&C Department, C.G.P.I.T, Bardoli, India 
3
Associate Professor, E&C Department, CKPCET, Surat, India
Abstract— Speech Processing is emerged as one of the 
important application area of digital signal processing. 
Various fields for research in speech processing are speech 
recognition, speaker recognition, speech synthesis, speech 
coding etc. Speech recognition is the process of automatically 
recognizing the spoken words of person based on information 
content in speech signal. This paper introduces a brief survey 
on Automatic Speech Recognition and discusses the various 
classification techniques that have been accomplished in this 
wide area of speech processing. The objective of this review 
paper is to summarize some of the well-known methods that 
are widely used in several stages of speech recognition system. 
Keywords—Feature Extraction, Acoustic phonetic 
Approach, Pattern Recognition,Artificial intelligence 
Approach, Speech Recognition. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Automatic speech recognition (ASR) has been the most 
investigated topic in speech processing since early 1960s
 [1]
. 
Speech recognition is a popular and active area of research, 
used to translate words spoken by humans so as to make 
them computer recognizable. It usually involves extraction 
of features from speech signal and representing them using 
an appropriate data model. ASR system involves two 
phases. Training phase and Testing phase. In training phase, 
known speech is recorded and parametric representation of 
the speech is extracted and stored in the speech database. In 
the testing phase, for the given input speech signal the 
features are extracted and ASR system compares it with the 
reference templates to recognize the utterance.  
There are usually two categories for isolated and 
continuous speech recognition: Speaker dependent and 
Speaker independent [2].Speaker dependent method 
involves training a system that recognize each of the words 
uttered single or multiple times by specific set of speakers, 
while for speaker independent training is not applicable and 
words are recognized by analyzing their inherent acoustical 
properties. The main challenges of speech recognition 
involves modeling the variation of the same word as spoken 
by different speakers depending on speaking styles, accents, 
social dialects, gender, vocabulary size ,recognition 
environment etc.  
 
Some typical applications of such speech recognition are 
voice-recognized passwords, voice repertory dialers, 
automated call-type recognition, call distribution by voice 
commands, directory listing retrieval, credit card sales 
validation, speech to text processing, automated data entry 
etc. 
Figure 1, shows basic representation of speech 
recognition system which consist of pre-processing, feature 
extraction, classification block as shown below. 
 
Input                                                                                               
speech 
 
 
Figure 1. Basic model of Speech Recognition system 
A fundamental distinctive unit of a language is a 
phoneme. Different languages contain different types of 
phoneme sets. Syllables contain one or more phonemes, 
while words are formed with one or more syllables, 
concatenated to form phrases and sentences. One broad 
classification for English is in terms of vowels, consonants, 
diphthongs, affricates and semi-vowels [3]. The speech 
recognition system can be classified by the type of speech. 
They are continuous speech, isolated word, connected word 
and spontaneous speech. 
II. PRE-PROCESSING 
At the time of recording speech the interference due to 
noise mainly occurs. The performance can be degraded 
mainly due to noise. Before feeding the speech signal to 
feature extraction block the noise contained in speech signal 
must be removed. Preprocessing does this task. It removes 
the noise based on zero-crossing rate and energy. The 
separation of voiced and unvoiced speech based on both 
energy and zero-crossing rate gives the best result [4]. The 
start point and end points are determined based on energy 
and zero-crossing rates. The output speech contains the 
information and noise is eliminated. 
 
Pre-
processing 
Feature 
Extraction 
Classification 
Pre-
processing 
Feature 
Extraction 
Classification 
Recognized 
speech 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 2, February 2015) 
59 
 
III. FEATURE EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES 
In speech recognition, feature extraction is the most 
important phase and the systems performance mainly 
depends on this block.  The main task of feature extraction 
phase is to extract the feature from speech signal and 
representing them using an appropriate data model of the 
input signal. Various feature extraction techniques that are 
commonly used in speech recognition are as follows [7] [9] 
[11] [4]. 
A. Mel-Frequency Cepstrum Coefficients (MFCC) 
B. Linear Predictive Coding (LPC) 
C. Linear Prediction Cepstral Coefficients (LPCC) 
D. Perceptual Linear Prediction (PLP) 
E. Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) 
F. Discrete Wavelet Transform (DWT) 
G. Relative Spectral (RASTA-PLP) 
H. Principal Component analysis (PCA) 
IV. CLASSIFICATION TECHNIQUES 
In speech recognition there are three approaches [19][21]. 
     A. Acoustic Phonetic Approach 
     B. Pattern Recognition Approach 
     C. Artificial Intelligence Approach 
A. Acoustic Phonetic Approach 
In Acoustic Phonetic approach the speech recognition 
were based on finding speech sounds and providing 
appropriate labels to these sounds[2] [21].This is the basis 
of the acousticphonetic approach which postulates that 
there exist finite, distinctive phonetic units called 
phonemes and these units are broadly characterized by a set 
of acoustics properties present in speech. 
B. Pattern Recognition Approach 
The Pattern Recognition approach involves two essential 
steps namely, pattern training and pattern testing [19]. The 
essential feature of this approach is that it uses a well 
formulated mathematical framework and establishes 
consistent speech pattern representations for reliable pattern 
comparison. Thisapproach contains many techniques such 
as HMM, DTW, SVM, VQ etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Classification techniques in speech recognition[3] 
1) Hidden Markov Model (HMM) 
Hidden Markov model (HMM) is the most powerful 
parametric model at the acoustic level. The HMM is popular 
statistical tool for modeling a wide range of time series data 
[10]. An HMM is a doubly stochastic process with an 
underlying Markov process that is not observable. 
The semantic of the model is usually encapsulated in the 
Hidden part for instance in ASR, an HMM can be used to 
model a word in the task-dependent vocabulary, where each 
state of the hidden part represents a phoneme[1]. The HMM 
can be described as follows: 
 A set S of Q states, S= {S1, S2…SQ}, which are 
distinct values that the discrete hidden stochastic 
process can take. 
 An initial state probability distribution is given by the 
𝜋 = {P (Si |t=0), Si ∈S}, where t is a discrete time 
index. 
 An observation or the feature space F of states, which 
is γi = {P (Sj =qt)}, it is a last state probability. 
 
 
 
 
 
Speech 
Recognition 
Techniques 
Acoustic 
Phonetic 
Approach 
Pattern 
Recognition 
Approach 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Approach 
Model 
based 
Approach 
Rule  
based 
Approach 
Template 
based 
Approach 
Knowledge 
based 
Approach 
 
HMM 
SVM 
DTW 
Bayesian 
VQ 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 2, February 2015) 
60 
 
 A probability distribution that characterizes the state 
transition probabilities which is aij = {Sj |Si}. 
 A set of probability distribution that describe the 
statistical properties of the observations for each state 
model: b (k) = {P (Ot | qt)}. 
 The summation of all these probability must be equal 
to one. 
The sum of all the transition probability, initial state, last 
state and observation of states probability is equal to zero. 
The most popular algorithms are the forward-backward 
and the Viterbi algorithms [1]. These belong to the class of 
unsupervised learning techniques, since they perform 
unsupervised parameter estimation of probability 
distribution. This technique is widely used because of its 
high recognition accuracy [10].   
2) Dynamic Time Warping (DTW)                                   
The time alignment of different utterances is the core 
problem for distance measurement in speech recognition. A 
small shift leads to incorrect identification. Dynamic time 
warping is an algorithm for measuring similarity between 
two sequences which may vary in time or speed. 
DTW is a method that finds an optimal match between 
two given sequences with certain restrictions. The 
sequences are warped nonlinearly in the time dimension 
[19]. DTW was recognized as the most suitable method for 
speech recognition because of its capability to cope with 
different speaking speeds. The Euclidean can be calculated 
as follows [17]: 
 (   )  (     )
 
                                   ( ) 
Various sections of the utterances are stretched and 
compressed so as to find alignment that result in best 
possible match between test and reference vectors feature 
by feature basis[6].The local distance measure is the 
distance between features at a pair of frames while the 
global distance from beginning of utterance until last pair 
of frames.  
3) Vector Quantization (VQ) 
Vector Quantization is the pattern classification 
technique applied to speech data to forms a representative 
set of feature vectors. In the training phase, a speech 
specific VQ codebook is formed for each speech uttered by 
clustering the speech training acoustic vectors. Each group 
is represented by its centroid point. Vector quantization is a 
lossy data compression method based on principle of block 
coding. It is a fixed-to-fixed length algorithm [18].  
 
It is a process of mapping vectors from a large vector 
space to a finite number of regions in that space. Each 
region is called a cluster and can be represented by its center 
called a codeword. The collection of all codeword is called 
a codebook. The Euclidean distance is calculated from the 
input vectors by using the equation: 
 (   )  ∑(     )
              ( )
 
   
 
Vector quantization involves extraction of features from 
training and testing data and VQ codebook model is built 
for all speech samples [5]. The distance between the input 
feature vectors and the code words are calculated and those 
having minimum distance can be selected as the recognized 
word. 
4) Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
Support vector machine is a simple and effective 
algorithm for classification of speech or speaker recognition 
[14]. SVM is a binary nonlinear classifier capable of 
guessing whether an input vector x belongs to a class-1 or 
class-2 category[15]. The margin known as soft margin is 
determined. The distance (R) between the sample points and 
margin are calculated. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Decision logic in SVM 
As shown in above figure 3, the feature space consists of 
the features extracted from the speech signal. The decision 
boundary or soft-margin is determined to classify the 
problems. The distance between the margin and samples are 
computed. The sample that is nearer to margin or having 
least distance is chosen.  
5) Polynomial Classifier 
Polynomials have the excellent properties as classifiers. 
Polynomial classifiers are universal approximators to the 
bayes classifiers because of weierstrass approximation 
theorem[13].  
Samples 
Decision 
logic 
Feature 
space 
R 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 2, February 2015) 
61 
 
The structure of classifiers is shown in figure 4. It 
consists of various blocks. The input features vectorsX1, X2 
…XN are given to the classifier. The speaker model is given 
by      
  and P(x) is the vector of the polynomial basis 
terms of the input feature vectors [12]. For each input 
feature vectors Xi the score is produced by     
  (  ) . The 
output is averaged to obtain the score. 
 
 
Figure 4. Structure of Polynomial classifier [12] 
The score equation is given as follows [13]: 
   
 
 
∑   (  )
 
   
                             ( ) 
Where,   =  
   input test feature, w = speaker model, 
 (  )= vector of polynomial basis terms of the input test 
vectors. 
C. Artificial Intelligence Approach 
The artificial intelligence approach attempts to 
mechanize the recognition procedure according to the way a 
person applies its intelligence in visualizing, analyzing and 
finally making a decision on the measured acoustic features. 
The artificial intelligence approach is a hybrid of the 
acoustic phonetic approach and pattern recognition 
approach [7] [19].The hybrid concept of both Hidden 
Markov Model and Artificial Neural Network is also 
applied in speech recognition [1]. The various methods in 
artificial intelligence are Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP), 
Self-Organizing Map (SOM), Back-propagation Neural 
Network (BPNN), Time Delay Neural Network (TDNNs) 
[1][20]. 
1) Time Delay Neural Network (TDNNs) 
Time Delay Neural Network is an advanced version of 
the artificial neural network. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Time Delay Neural Network [1] 
Time-delay neural networks (TDNNs) represent an 
effective attempt to train a static multilayer perceptron 
(MLP) for time sequence processing. An example of a 
TDNN is shown in figure 5.  
The input layer has been enlarged to accept as many 
input patterns as the fixed sequence length to be processed 
at each time step. There are three layers input, hidden and 
output layers. The input vector enters the network from the 
leftmost set of input neurons. At each time step the inputs 
are shifted to right through the unit time delay. The outputs 
of the input layers are feed to the right most of the hidden 
layer and procedure for all the subsequent layers. Finally 
the output layer gives the output. This technique gives the 
ability to deal with more complicated time dependences. 
The back propagation algorithm can be used to train such a 
network. Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) is a better 
concept of artificial neural network. 
2) Self-Organizing Map (SOM) 
Kohonen proposed a neural network architecture which 
can be automatically generate self-organizing properties 
during unsupervised learning called Self-Organizing Map 
(SOM) [8].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 P(x) Average X1….XN Score 
Output 
Output layer(s) 
Ht Ht-1 Ht-2 Ht-3 τ τ τ 
τ τ 
It It-1 It-2 Input 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 2, February 2015) 
62 
 
SOM uses Euclidean distance to measure the distance 
between data vectors. The input vectors are normalized 
between -1 and +1 before it is feed into the network. 
 The learning algorithm is as follows[8]: 
 Each nodes weight is initialized between 0 to1. 
 A vector is chosen at random from a set of training 
data. 
 Every node is examined to calculate which nodes 
weights are most likely the input vectors. 
 The winning node is commonly known as Best 
Matching Unit (BMU). 
 The radius of neighborhood of BMU is calculated. 
 More the node closest to BMU more the weights are 
updated. 
 This procedure repeats until it is closer to the input 
vectors.  
This technique is used to classify the features to reduce 
the feature vectors and complexity in speech recognition. 
3) Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) 
This MLP is a type of neural network which has one 
input layer, more than one hidden layer and one output layer 
that contains neurons [4]. 
As shown in figure 6, there are three input neurons, four 
hidden neurons and three output neurons. Weights 
associated to input and hidden layer are wij and uij are 
hidden and output weights. The input is given from left side 
of input neurons. The output of input neurons are multiplied 
with weights and feed as input to hidden neurons. Same 
operation is performed for hidden and output layer. This 
technique is commonly used in speech recognition systems 
[16].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Multilayer perceptron [9] 
V. PERFORMANCE MEASURING PARAMETERS 
The performance of the speech recognition system is 
often described in terms of accuracy and speed. Accuracy 
may be measured in terms of Word Error Rate (WER), 
where speed is measured with the real time factor.  
Single Word Error Rate (SWER) and Command Success 
Rate (CSR) are other measures of accuracy [2] [3]. 
A. Word Error Rate (WER) 
Word error rate is a common metric of the performance 
of speech recognition. The general difficulty of measuring 
performance lies in the fact that the recognized word 
sequence can have a different length from the reference 
word sequence. The WER is derived from the Levenshtein 
distanceworking at the word level instead of the phoneme 
level. The word error rate can be computed as [2]. 
 WER = (S + D + I)/N                                    (4) 
Where, 
S is the number of substitutions, 
D is the number of deletions, 
I is the number of insertions, 
N is the number of words in the reference. 
When reporting the performance of a speech recognition 
system, sometimes Word Recognition Rate (WRR) is used 
instead of Word Error Rate (WER). 
WRR = 1- WER = (N-S-D-I)/N = (H-I)/N          (5) 
Where, H = (N-S-D) is the correctly recognized words. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper different classification technique are 
introduced. Several advanced concept of classification 
techniques have been used recently in speech recognition 
systems. The problem always arises due to variation of the 
speech in time and environmental noise makes the 
recognition accuracy difficult. This paper describes the 
different classification techniques that can be helpful in 
speech recognition approach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Xian Tang, “Hybrid Hidden Markov Model and Artificial Neural 
Network for Automatic Speech Recognition,” Pacific-Asia 
Conference on Circuits, Communication and System, IEEE 
Computer society, 2009. 
[2] Nidhi Desai, Prof. Kinnal Dhameliya, “Feature Extraction and 
Classification Techniques for Speech Recognition: A Review,” 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced 
Engineering (IJETAE), Vol. 3, Issue 12, December 2013.  
[3] Shanthi Therese S, Chelpa Lingam, “Review of Feature Extraction 
Techniques in Automatic Speech Recognition,” International Journal 
of Scientific Engineering and Technology (IJSET), Vol. 2, Issue 6, 
pp.479-484, June 2013. 
[4] Bishnu Prasad Das, Ranjan Parekh, “Recognition of Isolated Words 
using Features based on LPC, MFCC, ZCR and STE with Neural 
Network Classifiers,” International Journal of Modern Engineering 
Research,(IJMER) Vol. 2, Issue 3,pp.854-858, June 2012. 
Inputs Outputs 
wij uij 
 
International Journal of Emerging Technology and Advanced Engineering 
Website: www.ijetae.com (ISSN 2250-2459, ISO 9001:2008 Certified Journal, Volume 5, Issue 2, February 2015) 
63 
 
[5] Revathi, Y. Venkataramani, “Speaker Independent Continuous 
Speech and Isolated Digit Recognition using VQ and HMM,” IEEE 
conference, pp. 198-202, 2011. 
[6] P. G. N. Priyadarshani, N. G. J. Dias, AmalPunchihewa, “Dynamic 
Time Warping Based Speech Recognition for Isolated Sinhala 
Words,” IEEE Journal, pp. 892-895, 2012. 
[7] Santosh K. Gaikwad, Bharti W. Gawali, PravinYannawar, “A 
Review on Speech Recognition Technique,” International Journal of 
Computer Applications (IJCA), Vol. 10, Issue 3, Nov. 2010. 
[8] Goh Kia Eng, Abdul Manan Ahmad, “Malay Speech Recognition 
using Self-Organizing Map and Multilayer Perceptron”, Proceeding 
of the Postgraduate Annual Research Seminar, 2005. 
[9] S. Karpagavali, P.V. Sabitha, “Isolated Tamil Words Speech 
Recognition using Linear Predictive Coding and Networks,” 
International Journal of Computer Science and Management 
Research, Vol.1, Issue 5, December 2012. 
[10] Ahmad A. M. Abushariah, Teddy S. Gunawan, Mohammad A. M. 
Abushariah, “English Digit Speech Recognition System Based on 
Hidden Markov Model,” International Conference on Computer and 
Communication Engineering, IEEE, May 2010. 
[11] UtpalBhattacharjee, “A Comparative Study of LPCC and MFCC 
Features for the Recognition of Assamese Phonemes,” International 
Journal of Engineering Research and Technology (IJERT), Vol.2, 
Issue 1, January 2013. 
[12] W. M. Campbell, K.T. Assaleh, C.C. Broun, “Speaker Recognition 
with Polynomial Classifiers”, IEEE Transaction on Speech and 
Audio Processing, Vol.10, No.4, May 2002. 
[13] Hemant A. Patil, Robin Jain, Prakhar Jain, “Identification of 
Speakers from their Hum”, Springer- Verlag Berlin 
Heidelberg,pp.461-468, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
[14] C. Sunitha Ram, Dr. R. Ponnusamy, “An Effective Automatic 
Speech Emotion Recognition for Tamil Language using Support 
Vector Machine”, International Conference on Issues and Challenges 
in Intelligent Computing Techniques, 2014. 
[15] Huo Chun bao, Zhang Caijuan, “The Research of speaker 
recognition based on GMM and SVM”, International Conference on 
System Science and Engineering, IEEE, pp.373-375, July 2012. 
[16] A. Hmich, A. Badri, A. Sahel, “Automatic Speaker Identification by 
using Neural Network”, IEEE conference, 2010. 
[17]  L. Muda, M. Begam, I. Elamvazuthi, “Voice Recognition 
Algorithms using Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficient (MFCC) and 
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) Techniques”, Journal of 
Computing, Vol.2, Issue 3, March 2010.  
[18] Md. R. Hasan, M. Jamil, Md. G. Rabbani, Md. S. Rahman, “Speaker 
Identification using Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients”, 3rd 
International Conference on Electrical & Computer Engineering, 
Dhaka, December 2004. 
[19] Sanjivani S. Bhabad, Gajanan K. Kharate, “Overview of Technical 
Progress in Speech Recognition”, International Journal of Advanced 
Research in Computer Science and Software Engineering 
(IJARCSSE), Vol.3, Issue 3, March 2013. 
[20] Divyesh S. Mistry, Prof. A.V. Kulkarni, “Overview: Speech 
Recognition Technology, Mel-Frequency Cepstral Coefficients 
(MFCC), Artificial Neural Network (ANN)”, International Journal 
of Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT), Vol.2, Issue 10, 
October 2013. 
[21] Ranu Dixit, NavdeepKaur, “Speech Recognition Using Stochastic 
Approach: A Review”, International Journal of Innovative Research 
in Science, Engineering and Technology (IJIRSET), Vol.2, Issue 2, 
February 2013. 
 

