Why is Speech Recognition Difficult?
Markus Forsberg
Department of Computing Science
Chalmers University of Technology
markus@cs.chalmers.se
February 24, 2003
Abstract
In this paper we will elaborate on some of the difficulties with
Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR). We will argue that the main
motivation for ASR is efficient interfaces to computers, and for the
interfaces to be truly useful, it should provide coverage for a large
group of users.
We will discuss some of the issues that make the recognition of a
single speaker difficult and then extend the discussion with problems
that occur when we target more than a single user.
1 Introduction
The problem of automatically recognizing speech with the help of a computer
is a difficult problem, and the reason for this is the complexity of the human
language. We will in this article try to sketch some of the issues that make
ASR difficult. We will not give any solutions, or present other’s solutions, we
will instead try to give you a panorama of some of the potential difficulties.
We start by presenting the general setting - what we mean by ASR, why
we are interested in performing ASR, and what speech actually is, and then
we will list some of the problems we may encounter, and finally end with a
discussion.
1
2 What is speech recognition?
Speech recognition, or more commonly known as automatic speech recogni-
tion(ASR), is the process of interpreting human speech in a computer.
A more technical definition is given by Jurafsky[2], where he defines ASR
as the building of system for mapping acoustic signals to a string of words[2].
He continues by defining automatic speech understanding(ASU) as extending
the goal to producing some sort of understanding of the sentence.
We will consider speaker independent ASR, i.e. systems that have not
been adapted to a single speaker, but in some sense all speakers of a particular
language.
3 Why do we want speech recognition?
The main goal of speech recognition is to get efficient ways for humans to
communicate with computers. However, as Ben Schneiderman points out in
[6], human-human communication is rarely a good model for designing effi-
cient user interfaces. He also points out that verbal communication demands
more mental resources than typing on a keyboard. So do we really want to
communicate with computers via spoken language?
Mats Blomberg [5] enumerates some of the applications of ASR, and
some of the advantages that can be achieved. For example, he mentions
personal computers that can be voice-controlled and used for dictation. This
can be an important application for physically disabled, lawyer etc. Another
application he mention is environmental control, such as turning on the light,
controlling the TV etc.
We feel that speech recognition is important, not because it is ’natural’
for us to communicate via speech, but because in some cases, it is the most
efficient way to interface to a computer. Consider, for example, people that
have jobs that occupies their hands, they would greatly benefit from an ASR
controlled environment.
4 What is speech?
When we as humans speak, we let air pass from our lungs through our mouth
and nasal cavity, and this air stream is restricted and changed with our tongue
and lips. This produces contractions and expansions of the air, an acoustic
2
wave, a sound. The sounds we form, the vowels and consonants, are usually
called phones. The phones are combined together into words.
How a phone is realized in speech is dependent on its context, i.e. which
phone is proceeding it and which phone is directly following it (the term
triphones is used for a phone in context). This phenomenon is studied within
the area of phonology.
However, speech is more than sequences of phones that forms words and
sentences. There are contents of speech that carries information, e.g. the
prosody of the speech indicates grammatical structures, and the stress of a
word signals its importance/topicality. This information is sometimes called
the paralingustic content of speech.
The term speech signal within ASR refers to the analog electrical rep-
resentation of the contractions and expansions of air. The analog signal is
then converted into a digital representation by sampling the analog continu-
ous signal. A high sampling rate in the A/D conversion gives a more accurate
description of the analog signal, but also leads to a higher degree of space
consumption.
5 Difficulties with ASR
5.1 Human comprehension of speech compared to ASR
Humans use more than their ears when listening, they use the knowledge they
have about the speaker and the subject. Words are not arbitrarily sequenced
together, there is a grammatical structure and redundancy that humans use
to predict words not yet spoken. Furthermore, idioms and how we ’usually’
say things makes prediction even easier.
In ASR we only have the speech signal. We can of course construct a
model for the grammatical structure and use some kind of statistical model
to improve prediction, but there are still the problem of how to model world
knowledge, the knowledge of the speaker and encyclopedic knowledge. We
can, of course, not model world knowledge exhaustively, but an interesting
question is how much we actually need in the ASR to measure up to human
comprehension.
3
5.2 Body language
A human speaker does not only communicate with speech, but also with
body signals - hand waving, eye movements, postures etc. This information
is completely missed by ASR.
This problem is addressed within the research area multimodality, where
studies are conducted how to incorporate body language to improve the
human-computer communication.
5.3 Noise
Speech is uttered in an environment of sounds, a clock ticking, a computer
humming, a radio playing somewhere down the corridor, another human
speaker in the background etc. This is usually called noise, i.e., unwanted
information in the speech signal. In ASR we have to identify and filter out
these noises from the speech signal.
Another kind of noise is the echo effect, which is the speech signal bounced
on some surrounding object, and that arrives in the microphone a few mil-
liseconds later. If the place in which the speech signal has been produced is
strongly echoing, then this may give raise to a phenomenon called reverber-
ation, which may last even as long as seconds.
5.4 Spoken language = Written language
Spoken language has for many years been viewed just as a less complicated
version of written language, with the main difference that spoken language is
grammatically less complex and that humans make more performance errors
while speaking. However, it has become clear in the last few years that
spoken language is essentially different from written language. In ASR, we
have to identify and address these differences.
Written communication is usually a one-way communication, but speech
is dialogue-oriented. In a dialogue, we give feed-back to signal that we un-
derstand, we negotiate about the meaning of words, we adapt to the receiver
etc.
Another important issue is disfluences in speech, e.g. normal speech is
filled with hesitations, repetitions, changes of subject in the middle of an
utterance, slips of the tounge etc. A human listener does usually not even
4
notice the disfluences, and this kind of behavior has to be modeled by the
ASR system.
Another issue that has to be identified, is that the grammaticality of
spoken language is quite different to written language at many different levels.
In [4], some differences are pointed out:
• In spoken language, there is often a radical reduction of morphemes
and words in pronunciation.
• The frequencies of words, collocations and grammatical constructions
are highly different between spoken and written language.
• The grammar and semantics of spoken language is also significantly
different from that of written language; 30-40% of all utterances consist
of short utterances of 1-2-3 words with no predicative verb.
This list can be made even longer. The important point is that we can
not view speech as the written language turned into a speech signal, it is
fundamentally different, and must be treated as such.
5.5 Continuous speech
Speech has no natural pauses between the word boundaries, the pauses
mainly appear on a syntactic level, such as after a phrase or a sentence.
This introduces a difficult problem for speech recognition — how should
we translate a waveform into a sequence of words?
After a first stage of recognition into phones and phone categories, we have
to group them into words. Even if we disregard word boundary ambiguity
(see section 5.9.2), this is still a difficult problem.
One way to simplify this process is to give clear pauses between the words.
This works for short command-like communication, but as the possible length
of utterances increases, clear pauses get cumbersome and inefficient.
5.6 Channel variability
One aspect of variability is the context were the acoustic wave is uttered.
Here we have the problem with noise that changes over time, and differ-
ent kinds of microphones and everything else that effects the content of the
acoustic wave from the speaker to the discrete representation in a computer.
This phenomena is called channel variability.
5
5.7 Speaker variability
All speakers have their special voices, due to their unique physical body and
personality. The voice is not only different between speakers, there are also
wide variations within one specific speaker.
We will in the subsections below list some of these variations.
5.7.1 Realization
If the same words were pronounced over and over again, the resulting speech
signal would never look exactly the same. Even if the speaker tries to sound
exactly the same, there will always be some small differences in the acoustic
wave you produce. The realization of speech changes over time.
5.7.2 Speaking style
All humans speak differently, it is a way of expressing their personality. Not
only do they use a personal vocabulary, they have an unique way to pro-
nounce and emphasize. The speaking style also varies in different situations,
we do not speak in the same way in the bank, as with our parents, or with
our friends.
Humans also communicate their emotions via speech. We speak differ-
ently when we are happy, sad, frustrated, stressed, disappointed, defensive
etc. If we are sad, we may drop our voice and speak more slowly, and if we
are frustrated we may speak with a more strained voice.
5.7.3 The sex of the speaker
Men and women have different voices, and the main reason to this is that
women have in general shorter vocal tract than men. The fundamental tone
of women’s voices is roughly two times higher than men’s because of this
difference.
5.7.4 Anatomy of vocal tract
Every speaker has his/hers unique physical attributes, and this affects his/her
speech. The shape and length of the vocal cords, the formation of the cavities,
the size of the lungs etc. These attributes change over time, e.g. depending
on the health or the age of the speaker.
6
5.7.5 Speed of speech
We speak in different modes of speed, at different times. If we are stressed,
we tend to speak faster, and if we are tired, the speed tends to decrease. We
also speak in different speeds if we talk about something known or something
unknown.
5.7.6 Regional and social dialects
Dialects are group related variation within a language. Janet Holmes[3] de-
fines regional and social dialects as follows:
Regional dialect Regional dialects involves features of pronunciation, vo-
cabulary and grammar which differ according to the geographical area
the speaker come from.
Social dialect Social dialects are distinguished by features of pronuncia-
tion, vocabulary and grammar according to the social group of the
speaker.
In many cases, we may be forced to consider dialects as ’another language’
in ASR, due to the large differences between two dialects.
5.8 Amount of data and search space
Communication with a computer via a microphone induces a large amount
of speech data every second. This has to be matched to group of phones
(monophones/diphones/triphones), the sounds, the words and the sentences.
Groups of groups of phones that build up words and words builds up sen-
tences. The number of possible sentences are enormous.
The quality of the input, and thereby the amount of input data, can be
regulated by the number of samples of the input signal, but the quality of the
speech signal will, of course, decrease with a lower sampling rate, resulting
in incorrect analysis.
We can also minimize our lexicon, i.e. set of words. This introduces
another problem, which is called out-of-vocabulary, which means that the
intended word is not in the lexicon. An ASR system has to handle out-of-
vocabulary in a robust way.
7
5.9 Ambiguity
Natural language has an inherent ambiguity, i.e. we can not always decide
which of a set of words is actually intended.
This is, of course, a problem in every computer-related language appli-
cation, but we will here discuss what kind of ambiguity that typically arises
within speech recognition. There are two ambiguities that are particular to
ASR, homophones and word boundary ambiguity.
5.9.1 Homophones
The concept homophones refers to words that sound the same, but have
different orthography. They are two unrelated words that just happened to
sound the same. In the table below, we give some examples of homophones:
one analysis alternative analysis
the tail of a dog the tale of the dog
the sail of a boat the sale of a boat
Figure 1: Examples of homophones
How can we distinguish between homophones? It’s impossible on the
word level in ASR, we need a larger context to decided which is intended.
However, as is demonstrated in the example, even within a larger context, it
is not certain that we can choose the right word.
5.9.2 Word boundary ambiguity
When a sequence of groups of phones are put into a sequence of words, we
sometimes encounters word boundary ambiguity. Word boundary ambiguity
occurs when there are multiple ways of grouping phones into words. An
example, taken from [1], illustrate this difficulty:
It’s not easy to wreck a nice beach.
It’s not easy to recognize speech.
It’s not easy to wreck an ice beach.
8
This example has been artificially constructed, but there are other exam-
ples that occurs naturally in the world. This can be viewed as a specific case
of handling the continuous speech, where even humans can have problems
with finding the word boundaries.
6 Discussion
In this paper, we have addressed some of the difficulties of speech recognition,
but not all of them. But one thing is certain, ASR is a challenging task.
The most problematic issues being the large search space and the strong
variability.
We think that the problems are especially serious, because of our low
tolerance to errors in the speech recognition process. Think how long you
would try to communicate verbally with a computer, if it understood you
wrong a couple of times in a row. You would probably say something nasty,
and start looking for the keyboard of the computer.
So, there are many problems, but does this mean that it is too hard, that
we actually should stop trying? Of course not, there have been significant
improvements within ASR, and ASR will continue to improve. It seems quite
unlikely that we will ever succeed to do perfect ASR, but will surely do good
enough.
One thing that should be investigated further, is if humans speak differ-
ently to computers. Maybe it isn’t natural for a human to communicate in
the same way to a computer as to a human. A human may strive to be unam-
biguous and speak in a hyper-correct style to get the computer to understand
him/her. Under the assumption that the training data also is given in this
hyper-correct style, this would simplify the ASR. However, if not, it may be
the case that hyper-correct speech even make the ASR harder. And if this is
not the case, we may investigate how we as human speaker can adapt to the
computer to increase the quality of the speech recognition. As pointed out
before, our goal is not a ’natural’ verbal communication, we want efficient
user interfaces.
9
References
[1] N. M. Ben Gold. Speech and Audio Signal Processing, processing and
perception of speech and music. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2000.
[2] J. H. M. Daniel Jurafsky. Speech and Language Processing, An intro-
duction to Natural Language Processing, Computational Linguistics, and
Speech Recognition. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458,
2000.
[3] J. Holmes. An introduction to sociolinguistics. Longman Group UK
Limited, 1992.
[4] E. A. Jens Allwood. Corpus-based research on spoken language. 2001.
[5] K. E. Mats Blomberg. Automatisk igenkänning av tal. 1997.
[6] B. Schneiderman. The limits of speech recognition. Communications of
the ACM, 43:63–65, 2000.
10

