         
       ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
         ISSN (Print):  2320-9798     
                                                                                                                             
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 4, April 2015 
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                                 10.15680/ijircce.2015.0304057                                                      3287  
 
The Learning Method of Speech Recognition 
Based on HMM 
 
Vidwath R Hebse 
1
, Anitha G 
2 
Student, Dept. of CSE, UBDTCE, VTU, India  
Associate Professor, Dept. of CSE, UBDTCE, VTU, India  
 
ABSTRACT: This paper helps to improve the student’s  interest towards speech recognition. It implements Automatic 
Speech Recognition System based on the following: Preprocessing, Feature Extraction Technique (MFCC- Mel 
Frequency Cepstrum Coefficients) and Hidden Markov Model (used in recognition phase) .Its purpose is that the 
human voice can be converted to a computer-readable input, Such as buttons, binary-coded, or sequence of characters. 
Acoustic phonetic approach, Knowledge based approach and Pattern recognition approach are the three approaches 
used in speech recognition. In this paper Pattern recognition technique is used. This  approach requires no explicit 
knowledge of speech. This approach has two steps – namely, train ing of speech patterns based on some generic spectral 
parameter set and recognition of patterns via pattern comparison. 
 KEYWORDS: Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR), HMM model, MFCC-Mel Frequency Cepstrum Coefficients  
I. INTRODUCTION 
     Communicating with a machine in a natural mode such as speech brings out not only several technological 
challenges, but also limitations in our understanding of how people communicate so effortlessly. The key is to 
understand the distinction between speech processing (as is done in human communication) and speech signal 
processing (as is done in a machine). When people listen to speech, they apply their accumulated knowledge of spee ch 
in relation to a language to capture the message. The language is unique to humans; it is the most basic form of human 
transmission of information. As the development of computer technology, communicat ion between people and 
computers become more extensive and in-depth, so that the computer can understand human language, is not only a 
cherished ideal of mankind since the birth of the computer, but also an important research direction of multip le 
disciplines. 
 
     Real time continuous speech recognition is a computationally demanding task, and one which tends to benefit from 
increasing the available computing resources. A typical speech recognition system starts with a preprocessing stage, 
which takes a speech waveform as its input, and extracts from it feature vectors or observations which represent the 
informat ion required to perform recognition. This stage is efficiently performed by software. The second stage is 
recognition, or decoding, which is performed using a set of phoneme-level statistical models called hidden Markov 
models (HMMs). Word-level acoustic models are formed by concatenating phone-level models according to a 
pronunciation dictionary. These word models are then combined with a language model, which constrains the 
recognizer to recognize only valid word sequences.  
 
II. LITERATURE S URVEY 
 
     In [1] authors proposed Inter-word Co articu lation modeling and MMIE training for improved connected digit 
recognition The authors describe developments by the speech research group at CRIM (Centre de Recherche 
Informatique de Montreal), in the field of speaker-independent connected digit recognition, using hidden Markov 
models (HMMs) trained with maximum mutual informat ion estimation (MMIE). The experiments described were all 
performed on the complete adult portion of the TIDIGITS corpus. Techniques that made it possible to improve greatly 
the recognition rate are described. New results include a 0.28% word error rate and a 0.84% string error rate with two 
models per d igit (one for male and one for female speakers) using context -dependent discrete HMMs. 
         
       ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
         ISSN (Print):  2320-9798     
                                                                                                                             
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 4, April 2015 
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                                 10.15680/ijircce.2015.0304057                                                      3288  
 
     In [2] authors present a research method to directly recognize greeting voice without segmentation to avoid error 
recognition because of error segmentation. The basic principle of b iometric pattern recognition is applied  to speaker-
independent and continuous speech recognition of greeting. The high-dimension space covering theory is applied to the 
learning process of speaker-independent and continuous speech recognition of greeting during the construction of voice 
pattern. And the dynamic search method of high-dimensional space covering is implemented on the dynamic search of 
continuous speech of greeting to recognize it. Some satisfactory recognition results are obtained by experiment.  
      In [3] authors proposed Robust Features for Noisy Speech Recognition using MFCC Computation from Magnitude 
Spectrum of Higher Order Autocorrelation Coefficients. Noise robustness is one of the most challenging problems in 
automatic speech recognition. The goal of robust feature ext raction is to improve the performance of speech recognition 
in adverse conditions. The mel-scaled frequency cepstral coefficients (MFCCs) derived from Fourier transform and 
filter bank analysis are perhaps the most widely used front-ends in state-of-the-art speech recognition systems. One of 
the major issues with the MFCCs is that they are very sensitive to additive noise. To improve the robustness of speech 
front-ends we introduce, in this paper, a new set of MFCC vector which is estimated through three steps. First, the 
relative higher order autocorrelation coefficients are extracted. Then magnitude spectrum of the resultant speech signal 
is estimated through the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and it is differentiated with respect to frequency. Finally, th e 
differentiated magnitude spectrum is transformed into MFCC-like coefficients. These are called MFCCs extracted from 
Differentiated Relative Higher Order Autocorrelation Sequence Spectrum (DRHOASS). Speech recognition 
experiments for various tasks indicate that the new feature vector is more robust than traditional mel-scaled frequency 
cepstral coefficients (MFCCs) in additive noise conditions. 
 
III. HMM-BAS ED SPEECH RECOGNITION 
A. Principle and System for Speech Recognition (AUTOMATIC SPEECH RECOGNITION)  
     Voice recognition technology, also known as automatic speech recognition (ASR), its purpose is that the human 
voice can be converted to a computer-readable input, Such as buttons, binary-coded, or sequence of characters. Speech 
recognition, is different from speaker recognition, Speaker Recognition is not to identify words which is in the 
vocabulary content.[1] Speech recognition systems usually assumed that the voice signal is encoded into one or a 
plurality of symbol sequence of the information entity. In order to achieve the reverse operation, namely to identify the 
sequence of symbols of a given speaker's voice, the first continuous speech waveform is converted into a long discrete 
parameter vector sequence. Assuming that the sequence of this parameter vector is a speech waveform accurately 
represented in a vector corresponding to the period of time (typically, 10ms and so on), the voice signal can be regarded 
as smooth. This characteristic can be used to good description of the HMM. The concept of the Markov model is a 
discrete-time domain finite state automata, hidden Markov model HMM refers to the internal state of this Markov 
model is not visible to the outside world, the outside world can only see the output value of each moment. The acoustic 
characteristic of the speech recognition system, the output value is usually calculated from the respective frames. HMM 
portrayed speech signal the need to make two assumptions, one internal state of the transfer is only related to a previous 
state, and the other is that the output value is only relevant to the current state (or the current state of the transfer), these 
two assumptions greatly reduced the model complexity.  
 
The basic configuration of  the speech recognition system 
 
         
       ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
         ISSN (Print):  2320-9798     
                                                                                                                             
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 4, April 2015 
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                                 10.15680/ijircce.2015.0304057                                                      3289  
 
A.1 Pre-emphasis: 
    In order to flatten speech spectrum, a p re-emphasis filter is used before spectral analysis. Its aim is to compensate the 
high-frequency part of the speech signal that was suppressed during the human sound production mechanis m.  
 
 
A.2 Frame Blocking and Windowing: 
     The speech signal is divided into a sequence of frames where each frame can be analyzed independently and 
represented by a single feature vector. Since each frame is supposed to have stationary behavior, a compromise, in 
order to make the frame blocking, is to use a 20-25 ms window applied at 10 ms intervals (frame rate of 100 frames/s 
and overlap between adjacent windows of about 50%), as Holmes & Holmes exposed in 2001.  In o rder to reduce the 
discontinuities of the speech signal at the edges of each frame, a tapered window is applied to each one. The most 
common used window is Hamming window[2]. 
 
 
Speech Endpoint Detection 
In the process of speech recognition, When the system receives a signal containing voice, system will detect and locate 
speech endpoint, removal of excess noise before and after the speech, Complete voice will be submitted to the next 
level recognition. Voice endpoint detection algorithm is mainly based on the energy of the voice,zero crossing rate, 
LPC coefficients, information entropy, cepstral, band variance and so on. The endpoint detection effects and the actual 
environmental noise has a great relationship, Therefore, the endpoint detection of pre -denoising can improve the 
recognition rate. We introduce a traditional detection methods based on short -term energy, short-time zero-crossing 
rate. 
 
Characteristic Parameter Extraction 
Sub-frame and endpoint detection is complete, the next feature extraction parameters. Feature extraction amount is the 
effective characteristics of the signal is extracted from the speech signal, but also try to remove the noise informat ion of 
the speech signal, to improve the accuracy of identification. Since voice having a short-time characteristic, the speech 
characteristic parameters by frame in formation extract ion, frame feature vector. A voice after feature extraction, into a 
vector sequence. This vector sequence to train for and then some kind of model for speech recognition voice template. 
Voice characteristic parameter of extract ion is  very important, directly affects the accuracy of the speech recognition. 
A good speech features to meet the requirements of three:  
 
(1)Can effectively extract the signal characteristics of the speech, including the channel characteristics of the human 
auditory model;  
         
       ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
         ISSN (Print):  2320-9798     
                                                                                                                             
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 4, April 2015 
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                                 10.15680/ijircce.2015.0304057                                                      3290  
 
(2)Good independence between the order parameter;  
(3)The characteristic parameters have an efficient method of calcu lating.  
 
A.3 Mel-Cepstrum 
     Davis & Mermelstein (1980) pointed the Mel Frequency Cepstrum6 Coefficients (MFCC) representation as a 
beneficial approach for speech recognition (Huang et al., 2001).[3] The MFCC is a representation of the speech signal 
defined as the real cepstrum of a windowed short-time signal derived from the FFT of that signal (Huang et al, 2001) 
which, is first subjected to a log-based transform of the frequency axis (mel-frequency scale), and then decorrelated 
using a modified Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT-II). Figure illustrates the complete process to extract the MFFC 
vectors from the speech signal. It is to be emphasized that the process of MFCC extraction is applied over each frame 
of speech signal independently. 
 
MFCC extraction process 
After the pre-emphasis and the frame blocking and windowing stage, the MFCC vectors will be obtained from each 
speech frame. The process of MFFC extraction will be described below considering in any instant that all the stages are 
being applied over speech frames.  
The first step of MFCC extraction process is to compute the Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) of each frame and obtain its 
magnitude. The FFT is a computationally efficient algorithm of the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT). If the length of 
the FFT, is a power of two (K=2
n
), a faster algorithm can be used, so a zero-padding to the nearest power of two within 
speech frame length is performed. 
 The next step will be to adapt the frequency resolution to a perceptual frequency scale which satisfies the properties of 
the human ears (Molau et al., 2001), such as a perceptually mel-frequency scale. This issue corresponds to Mel 
filterbank stage. 
The last step involved in the extract ion process of MFCC is to apply the modified DCT to the log -spectral-energy 
vector, obtained as input of mel filterbank, resulting in the desired set of coefficients called Mel Frequency Cepstral 
Coefficients. 
 
 
         
       ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
         ISSN (Print):  2320-9798     
                                                                                                                             
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 4, April 2015 
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                                 10.15680/ijircce.2015.0304057                                                      3291  
 
B. HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS  
B.1 Introduction 
 
     The Hidden Markov model (HMM) is a very powerful mathemat ical tool for modeling time series. It provides 
efficient algorithms for state and parameter estimation, and it automatically performs dynamic time warping for signals 
that are locally squashed and stretched. It can be used for many purposes other than acoustic modeling.  
 
B.2 Markov Chains 
 
     Hidden Markov models are based on the well-known Markov chains from probability theory that can be used  to 
model a sequence of events in time. Figure below shows such a graphical network representation of such a model, it 
has two states a and band some connections indicated by arrows that show how one can get from one state to another 
     The topology of the network shows an important property of Markov chains, namely that the next state only depends 
on the current state the model is in, regardless of how it got in the current state; this property is often referred to as the 
Markov property. By starting in one of the two states and at each time step moving through the model fo llowing the 
arrows out of the current state to the other state or once again to the same state, sequences of a’s   and b’s can be 
generated[4]. 
 
Fig 1: A Markov Chain 
The arrows leaving a state are annotated with a probability  that indicates how likely it is that this particular transition 
out of the state will be chosen. As a transition has to be made the probabilities associated with all arrows leaving a state 
should sum to one. The distribution π indicates how likely each state is to be the start state, in Figure 1 both states are 
equally likely to be the start state. Using these probabilit ies a Markov model can be used for recognition. Imagine that 
we have two processes that produce outputs that can be encoded as sequences of a’s and b’s and each of these processes 
can be modeled by a Markov model, the one from Figure 1 and the one from Figure 2.  
If we now receive for example a sequence abba we can calculate for each model the probability that it generated  this 
sequence by simply mult iplying the probabilities along the path that corresponds to the sequence 2 .  
Probability model 1: 0.5 •0.3 •0.6 •0.4 = 0.036  
 Probability model 2: 0.4 •0.5 •0.7 •0.3 = 0.042 
 
 After which we may conclude that the output is most likely to be generated by the second process. 
 
Fig 2:  A second Markov model 
     The concept of the Markov model is a discrete-time domain finite state automata, hidden Markov model HMM 
refers to the internal state of this Markov model is not visible to the outside world, the outside world can only see the 
output value of each moment. The acoustic characteristics of the speech recognition system, the output value is usually 
calculated from the respective frames.HMM portrayed speech signal the need to make two assumptions, one internal 
state of the transfer is only related to a previous state, and the other is that the output value is only relevant to the 
current state (or the current state of the transfer), these two assumptions greatly reduced the modelcomplexity.HMM 
         
       ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
         ISSN (Print):  2320-9798     
                                                                                                                             
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 4, April 2015 
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                                 10.15680/ijircce.2015.0304057                                                      3292  
 
scoring decoding algorithm and corresponding training forward algorithm, Viterbi algorithm and fo rward-backward 
algorithms. 
 
C. PROCESSES AND IMPLEMENTATION  
     HMM is one of the ways to capture the structure in this sequence of symbols. In order to use HMMs in speech 
recognition, one should have some means to achieve the following:  
Evaluation: Given the observation sequence O = (o1, o2, …,ot) and a HMM λ = (A,B, π) to choose a corresponding 
state sequence Q = q1, q2,…,qt which optimal in some meaningful sense, given the HMM.  
Training: To  adjust the HMM parameters λ = (A,B, π) to maximize P(O | λ).  
 
The following are some of the assumptions in the Hidden Markov Modeling for speech. 
 
 Successive observations (frames of speech) are independent and therefore the probability of sequence of observation 
P = (o1, o2, …,ot) can be written as a product of probabilities of indiv idual observations, i.e . O = (o1, o2, ….ot)= 
 𝑃𝑇𝑖 (Oi) 
 
 Markov assumption: The probability of being in a state at time t, depends only on the state at time t-1.  
 
The problems associated with HMM are exp lained as follows:  
(a) Evaluation: Evaluation is to find probability of generation of a given observation sequence by a given model. The 
recognition result will be the speech unit corresponding to the model that best matches among the different competing 
models. Now to find P(O | λ), the probability of observation sequence O = (o1, o2, …,ot) given the model λ i.e . P(O | λ). 
 
 (b) Decoding: Decoding is to find the single best state sequence, Q = q1, q2,…,qt, for the given observation sequence O 
= (o1, o2, …,ot). Consider δ t (i) defined as 
 
that is δ t(i) is the best score along single path at time t, which accounts for the t observations and ends in state i. by 
induction, 
 
(c) Training (Learning): Learning is to adjust the model parameters (A, B, π) to maximize the probability of the 
observation sequence given the model. It is the most difficult task of the Hidden Markov Modeling, as there is no 
known analytical method to solve for the parameters in  a maximum likelihood model. Instead, an iterative procedure 
should be used. Baum-Welch algorithm is the extensively used iterative procedure for choosing the model parameters. 
In this method, start with some in itial estimates of the model parameters and modify the model parameters to maximize 
the training observation sequence in an iterative manner t ill the model parameters reach a crit ical value.  
 
(d)Identification 
Use the Viterbi algorithm to dynamically find the hidden Markov model state transition sequence (ie identify the 
results), the time complexity is far less than the total probability formula.  
The Viterb i algorithm is widely used in the dynamic programming algorithm in the  field of communication, the 
algorithm in speech recognition applications. The total probability formula, you can calculate the output probability of 
the system, but were unable to find an optimum state transition path. Using the Viterbi algorithm can be found not only 
a good enough state transition path and the path corresponding to the output probability can also be obtained. 
Meanwhile, with the Viterb i algorithm to calculate the output probability of the amount of computation required is 
much s maller than the amount of calculation of the total probability formula.  
 
 
         
       ISSN(Online): 2320-9801 
         ISSN (Print):  2320-9798     
                                                                                                                             
International Journal of Innovative Research in Computer 
and Communication Engineering 
(An ISO 3297: 2007 Certified Organization) 
Vol. 3, Issue 4, April 2015 
 
Copyright to IJIRCCE                                                                 10.15680/ijircce.2015.0304057                                                      3293  
 
IV. CONCLUS ION 
     The conclusion of this study of recognition and hidden markov model has been carried out to develop a voice based 
user machine interface system. In various applications we can use this user machine system and can take advantages as 
real interface, these application can be related with disable persons those are unable to operate computer through 
keyboard and mouse, these type of persons can use computer with the use of Automatic Speech Recognition system, 
with this system user can operate computer with their own voice commands (in case of speaker dependent and trained 
with its own voice samples). Second applicat ion for those computer users which are not comfortable with English 
language and feel good to work with their native language i.e. English, Kannada, Hindi 
 
REFERECES  
 
[1] R.Cardin, Y. Normadin and  E. Millen, Inter-word coarticulation modeling and MMIE training digit  recognition, ICASSP, p243-246-199. 
[2] Hong Ye,Youzheng Zhang and Jianwei Shen Study on Speech Recognition of Greeting Based on Biometric Pattern Recognition. 
[3] Amita dev and Bansal poonam , Robust Features for Noisy Speech Recognition using MFCC Computation from Magnitude Spectrum of Higher                    
Order Autocorrelation Coefficients. 
[4]Mingjia An,Zhengtao Yu, Jianyi Guo , The Teaching Experiment of Speech Recognition based on HMM. 
[5] Ir. P. Wiggers, Dr. drs. L.J.M. Rothkrantz, AUTOMATIC SPEECH RECOGNITION USING HIDDEN MARKOV MODELS. 
[6] Noelia Alcaraz Meseguer, Speech Analysis for Automatic Speech Recognition . 
[7] Bhupinder Singh, Neha Kapur, Puneet Kaur,  Speech Recognition with Hidden Markov Model: A Review. 

