 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
8
 
Speech Recognition
 
and Synthesis
 
8.1 Introduction.
  
8.2 How Speech Recognition Works: 
A Simplistic View 
   
Types of Speech Recognizers • Vocabularies • Modes of 
Operation for Speech Recognizers • Methods of Error 
Reduction
 
8.3 Recent Applications
  
8.4 Flight Deck Applications 
   
Navigation Functions • Communication 
Functions • Checklist
 
Defining Terms
  
References
  
Bibliography
  
Further Information
   
8.1 Introduction
 
The application of speech recognition (SR) in aviation is rapidly evolving and moving toward more
common use on future flightdecks. The concept of using SR in aviation is not new. The use of speech
recognition and voice control (VC) has been researched for more than 20 years, and many of the proposed
benefits have been demonstrated in varied applications. Continuing advances in computer hardware and
software are making the use of voice control applications on the flightdeck more practical, flexible, and
reliable. There is little argument that the easiest and most natural and ideal way for a human to interact
with a computer is by direct voice input (DVI). 
While speech recognition has improved over the past several years, speech recognition has not reached
the level of capability and reliability of one person talking to another. Using SR and DVI in a flightdeck
atmosphere likely brings to mind thoughts of the computer on board the starship Enterprise from the
science fiction classic 
 
Star Trek
 
, or possibly of the HAL9000 computer from the movie 
 
2001: A Space
Odyssey
 
. The expectation of a voice control system like the computer on the Enterprise and the HAL9000
computer, is that it be highly reliable, work in adverse and stressful conditions, be transparent to the
user, and understand its users accurately without having to tailor their individual speech and vocabulary
to suit the system. Current speech recognition and voice control systems are not able to achieve this level
of performance expectations, although the ability and flexibility of speech recognition and its application
to voice control has increased over the past few years. Whether or not a speech recognition system will
ever be able to function to the level of one person speaking to another remains to be seen. 
 
Douglas W. Beeks
 
Rockwell Collins
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
The current accuracy rate of speech recognition is in the lower to mid 90% range. Some speaker-
dependent systems, and generally those with small vocabularies, have shown accuracy rates into the upper
90% range. While at first glance that might sound good, consider that with a 90% accuracy rate, 1 in 10
words will be incorrectly recognized. Also consider that this 90% and greater accuracy may be under
ideal conditions; many times this high accuracy rate is achieved in a controlled and sterile lab environment.
Under actual operating conditions, including cockpit noise, random noises, bumps and thumps, multiple
people talking at once, etc. the accuracy rate of speech recognition systems can erode significantly.
Currently, several military applications are planning on using SR to provide additional methods to
support the Man-Machine Interface (MMI) to reduce the workload on the pilot in advanced aircraft.
Boeing is incorporating SR into the new Joint Strike Fighter, and the Eurofighter Typhoon is also adding
SR capabilities to its aircraft. Numerous aviation companies worldwide are conducting research and studies
into how the available SR technology can be incorporated into current equipment designs and designs of
the future for both the civilian and military marketplace. Speech recognition technology will likely be first
used in military applications, with the technology working its way into civil aviation by the year 2005.
 
8.2 How Speech Recognition Works: A Simplistic View 
 
Speech recognition is based on statistical pattern matching. One of the more common methods of speech
recognition based on pattern matching uses Hidden Markov Modeling (HMM) comprising two types of
pattern models, the acoustical model and the language model. Which of the two models will be used,
and in some cases both will be required, depends on the complexity of the application. Complex speech
recognition applications, such as those supporting continuous or connected speech recognition, will use
a combination of the acoustical and language models.
In a simple application using only the acoustical model, the application will process the uttered word
into phonemes, which are the fundamental part of speech. These phonemes are converted to a digital
format. This digital format, or pattern, is then matched against stored patterns by the speech processor
in search of a match from a stored database of word patterns. From the match, the phoneme, and word
can be identified.
In a more complex method, the speech processor will convert the utterance to a digital signal by
sampling the voice input at some rate, commonly 16 kHz. The required acoustical signal processing can
be accomplished using several techniques. Some commonly used techniques are Linear Predictive Coding
(LPC) cochlea modeling, Mel Frequency Cepstral Coefficients (MFCC), and others. For this example,
the sampled data is converted to the frequency domain using a fast-Fourier transformation. The trans-
formation will analyze the stored data at 1/30
 
th
 
 to 1/100
 
th
 
 of a second (3.3 ms to 100 ms) intervals, and
convert the value into the frequency domain. The resulting graph from the converted digital input will
be compared against a database of known sounds. From these comparisons, a value known as a feature
number will be determined. 
The feature numbers will be used to reference a phoneme found using that feature number. This,
ideally, would be all that is required to identify a particular phoneme, however, this will not work for a
number of reasons. Background noises, the user not pronouncing a word the same way every time, and
the sound of a phoneme will vary, depending on the surrounding phonemes that may add variance to
the sound being processed. To overcome problems of variability of the different phonemes, the phonemes
are assigned to more than one feature number. Since the speech input was analyzed at an interval of
1/30
 
th
 
 to 1/100
 
th
 
 of a second and a phoneme or sound may last from 500 ms to 2 s, many feature numbers
may be assigned to a particular sound. By using statistical analysis of these feature numbers and the
probability that any one sound may contain those feature numbers, the probability of that sound being
a particular phoneme can be determined.
To be able to recognize words and complete utterances, the speech recognizer must also be able to determine
the beginning and the end of a phoneme. The most common method to determine the beginning and
endpoint is by using the Hidden Markov Models (HMM) technique. The HMM is a state transition
model and will use probabilities of feature numbers to determine the likelihood of transitioning from
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
one state to another. Each phoneme is represented by a HMM. The English language is made up of 45 to
50 phonemes. A sequence of HMM will represent a word. This would be repeated for each word in the
vocabulary. While the system can now recognize phonemes, phonemes do not always sound the same,
depending on the phoneme preceding and following it. To address this problem, phonemes are placed in
groups of three, called tri-phones, and as an aid in searching, similar sounding tri-phones are grouped together. 
From the information obtained from the HMM state transitions, the recognizer is able to hypothesize
and determine which phoneme likely was spoken, and then by referring this to a lexicon, the recognizer
is able to determine the word that likely was spoken. 
This is an overly simplified definition of the speech recognition process. There are numerous adapta-
tions of the HMM technique and other modeling techniques. Some of these techniques are neural
networks (NNs), dynamic time warping (DTW), and combinations of techniques.
 
8.2.1 Types of Speech Recognizers
 
There are two types of speech recognizers, speaker-dependent and speaker-independent.
 
8.2.1.1 Speaker-Dependent Systems 
 
Speaker-dependent recognition is exactly that, speaker dependent. The system is designed to be used by
one person. To operate accurately, the system will need to be ‘‘trained” to the user’s individual speech
patterns. This is sometimes referred to as “enrollment” of the speaker with the system. The speech patterns
for the user will be recorded and patterned from which a template will be created for use by the speech
recognizer. Because of the required training and storage of specific speech templates, the performance
and accuracy of the speaker-dependent speech recognition engine will be tied to the voice patterns of a
specific registered user. Speaker-dependent recognition, while being the most restrictive, is the most
accurate, with accuracy rates in the mid to upper 90% range. For this reason, past research and applica-
tions for cockpit applications have opted to use speaker-dependent recognition. 
The major drawback of this system is that it is dedicated to a single user, and that it must be trained
prior to its use. Many applications will allow the speech template to be created elsewhere prior to use on
the hosting system. This can be done at separate training stations prior to using the target system by
transferring the created user voice template to the target system. If more than one user is anticipated, or
if the training of the system is not desirable, a speaker-independent system might be an option.
 
8.2.1.2 Speaker-Independent Recognizers 
 
Speaker-independent recognition systems are independent of the user. This type of system is intended
to allow multiple users to access a system using voice input. Examples of speaker-independent systems
are directory assist programs and an airline reservation system with a voice input driven menu system.
Major drawbacks with a speaker-independent system, in addition to increased complexity and difficult
implementation, are its lower overall accuracy rate, higher system overhead, and slower response time.
The impact of these drawbacks continues to lessen with increased processor speeds, faster hardware, and
increased data storage capabilities. 
A variation of the speaker-independent system is the speaker-adaptive system. The speaker-adaptive
system will adapt to the speech pattern, vocabulary, and style of the user. Over time, as the system adapts
to the users’ speech characteristics, the error rate of the system will improve, exceeding that of the
independent recognizer.
 
8.2.2 Vocabularies
 
A vocabulary is a list of words that are valid for the recognizer. The size of a vocabulary for a given speech
recognition system affects the complexity, processing requirements, and the accuracy of that system. There
are no established definitions for how large a vocabulary should be, but systems using smaller vocabularies
can result in better recognizer accuracy. As a general rule, a small vocabulary may contain up to 100 words,
a medium vocabulary may contain up to 1000 words, a large vocabulary may contain up to 10,000 words,
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
and a very large vocabulary may contain up to 64,000 words, and above that the vocabulary is considered
unlimited. Again, this is a general rule and may not be true in all cases.
The size of a vocabulary will be dependent upon the purpose and intended function of the application.
A very specific application may require only a few words and make use of a small vocabulary, while an
application that would allow dictation or setting up airline reservations would require a very large vocabulary.
How can the size and contents of a vocabulary be determined? The words used by pilots are generally
specific enough to require a small to medium vocabulary. Words that can or should be in the vocabulary
could be determined in a number of ways. Drawing from the knowledge of how pilots would engage a
desired function or task is one way. This could be done using a questionnaire or some similar survey method. 
Another way to gather words for the vocabulary is to set up a lab situation and use the ‘‘Wizard of
Oz’’ technique. This technique would have a test evaluator behind the scenes acting upon the commands
given by a test subject. The test subject would have various tasks and scenarios to complete. While the
test subject runs through the tasks, the words and phrases used by the subject are collected for evaluation.
After running this process numerous times, the recorded spoken words and phrases will be used to
construct a vocabulary list and command syntax, commonly referred to as a grammar. The vocabulary
could be refined in further tests by only allowing those contained words and phrases to be valid, and
have test subjects again run through a suite of tasks. Observations would be made as to how well the test
subjects were able to complete the tasks using the defined vocabulary and syntax. Based on these tests,
and the evaluation results, the vocabulary is modified as required. 
A paper version of the evaluation process could be administered by giving the pilot a list of tasks, and
then asking them to write out what commands they would use to perform the task. Following this data
collection step, a second test could be generated having the pilot choose from a selected list of words and
commands what he would likely say to complete the task. As a rule, pilots will tend to operate in a
predictable manner, and this lends itself to a reduced vocabulary size and structured grammar.
 
8.2.3 Modes of Operation for Speech Recognizers 
 
There are two modes of operation for a speech recognizer: continuous recognition, and discrete or isolated
word recognition.
 
8.2.3.1 Continuous Recognition 
 
Continuous speech recognition systems are able to operate on a continuous spoken stream of input in
which the words are connected together. This type of recognition is more difficult to implement due to
several inherent problems such as determining start and stop points in the stream and the rate of the
spoken input. 
The system must be able to determine the start and endpoint of a spoken stream of continuous speech.
Words will have varied starting and ending phonemes depending on the surrounding phonemes. This
is called “co-articulation.” The rate of the spoken speech has a significant impact on the accuracy of the
recognition system. The accuracy will degrade with rapid speech.
 
8.2.3.2 Discrete Word Recognition 
 
Discrete or isolated word recognition systems operate on single words at a time. The system requires a
pause between saying each word. The pause length will vary, and on some systems the pause length can
be set to determined lengths. This type of recognition system is the simplest to perform because the
endpoints are easier for the system to locate, and the pronunciation of a word is less likely to affect the
pronunciation of other words (co-articulation effects are reduced). A user of this type of system will speak
in a broken fashion. This system is the type most people think of in terms of a voice recognition system.
 
8.2.4 Methods of Error Reduction 
 
There are no real standards by which error rates of various speech recognizers are measured and defined.
Many systems claim accuracy rates in the high 90% range, but under actual usage with surrounding noise
conditions, the real accuracy level may be much less. Many factors can impact the accuracy of SR systems.
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
Some of these factors include the individual speech characteristics of the user, the operating environment,
and the design of the SR system itself. 
There are four general error types impacting the performance of a SR system; these are substitution
errors, insertion errors, rejection errors, and operator errors,
• Substitution errors occur when the SR system incorrectly identifies a word from the vocabulary.
An example might be the pilot calling out “Tune COM one to one two four point seven” and the
SR system incorrectly recognizes that the pilot spoke “Tune NAV one to one two four point seven.”
The SR system substituted NAV in place of COM. Both words may be defined and valid in the
vocabulary, but the system selected the wrong word.
• Insertion errors may occur when some source of sound other than a spoken word is interpreted
by the system as valid speech. Random cockpit noise might at some time be identified as a valid
word to the SR system. The use of noise-canceling microphones and PTT can help to reduce this
type of error.
• Rejection errors occur when the SR system fails to respond to the user’s speech, even if the word
or phrase was valid.
• Operator errors occur when the user is attempting to use words or phrases that are not identifiable
to the SR system. A simple example might be calling out “change the radio frequency to one one
eight point six” instead of “Tune COM one to one one point eight six,” which is recognized by
the vocabulary.
When designing a speech recognition application, several design goals and objective should be kept in mind:
•
 
Limitations of the hardware and the software 
 
— Keep in mind the limitations of the hardware
and the software being used for the application. Will the system need to have continuous recog-
nition and discrete word recognition? Will the system need to be speaker independent, or will the
reduced accuracy in using a speaker-independent recognizer be acceptable. Will the system be able
to handle the required processing in an acceptable period of time? Will the system operate accept-
ably in the target environment?
•
 
Safety 
 
— Will using SR to interface with a piece of equipment compromise safety? Will an error
in recognition have a serious impact on the safety of flight? If the SR system should fail, is there
an alternate method of control for that application?
•
 
Train the system in the environment in which it is intended to be used 
 
— As discussed earlier,
a SR system that has a 99% accuracy in the lab, may be frustrating and unusable in actual cockpit
conditions. The speech templates or the training of the SR system needs to be done in the actual
environment, or in as similar an environment as possible.
•
 
Don’t try to use SR for tasks that don’t really fit 
 
— The problem with a new tool, like a new
hammer, is that everything becomes a nail to try out that new hammer. Some tasks are natural
candidates for using SR, many are not. Do not force SR onto a task if it is not appropriate for use
of SR. Doing so will add significant risk and liability. Good target applications for SR include radio
tuning functions, navigation functions, FMS functions, and display mode changes. Bad target appli-
cations for SR would be things that can affect the safety of flight, in short, anything that will kill you.
•
 
Incorporate error correction mechanisms 
 
— Have the system repeat, using either voice synthesis
or through a visual display, what it interprets, and allow the pilot to accept or reject this recognition.
Allow the system to be able to recognize invalid recognition. If the recognizer interprets that it
heard the pilot call out an invalid frequency, it should recognize it as invalid and possibly query
the pilot to repeat, or prompt the pilot by saying or displaying that the frequency is invalid.
•
 
Provide feedback of the SR system’s activities 
 
— Allow the user to interact with the SR system.
Have the system speak, using voice synthesis, or display what it is doing. This will allow the user
to either accept or reject the recognizer interpretation. This may also serve as a way to prompt a
user for more data that may have been left out of the utterance. “Tune COM 1 to….” After a delay,
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
the system might query the user for a frequency: ‘‘Please select frequency for COM1.’’ If the user
selects some repeated command, the system may repeat back the command as it is executed:
‘‘Tuning COM 1 to ….”
 
8.2.4.1 Reduced Vocabulary 
 
One way to dramatically increase the accuracy of a SR system is to reduce the number of words in a
vocabulary. In addition to the reduction in words, the words should be carefully chosen to weed out
words that sound similar. 
Use a trigger phrase to gain the attention of the recognizer. The trigger phrase might be as simple as
‘‘computer ” followed by some command. In this example, ‘‘computer” is the trigger phrase and alerts
the recognizer that a command is likely to follow. This can be used with a system that is always on-line
and listening. 
Speech recognition errors can be reduced using a noise-canceling microphone. The flightdeck is not the
quiet, sterile place a lab or a desktop might be. There are any number of noises and chatter that could interfere
with the operation of speech recognition. Like humans, a recognizer can have increased difficulty in under-
standing commands in a noisy environment. In addition to the use of noise-canceling microphones, the use
of high-quality omnidirectional microphones will offer further reduction in recognition errors. Using push-
to-talk (PTT) microphones will help to reduce the occurrence of insertion errors as well as recognition errors.
 
8.2.4.2 Grammar 
 
Grammar definition plays an important role in how accurate a SR application may be. It is used to not only
define which words are valid to the system, but what the command syntax will be. A grammar notation
frequently used in speech recognition is Context Free Grammar (CFG). A sample of a valid command in CFG is 
This definition would allow valid commands of ‘‘tune COM radio,’’ and ‘‘tune NAV radio.’’ Word order
is required, and words cannot be omitted. However, the grammar can be defined to allow for word order
and omitted words.
 
8.3 Recent Applications 
 
Though speech recognition has been applied to various flightdeck applications over the past 20 years,
limitations in both hardware and software capability have kept the use of speech recognition from serious
contention as a flightdeck tool. Even though there have been several notable applications of speech
recognition in the recent past, and there are several current applications of speech recognition in the
cockpit of military aircraft, it will likely be several more years before the civilian market will see such
applications reach the level of reliability and pilot acceptance to see them commonly available. 
In the mid 1990s, NASA performed experiments using speech recognition and voice control on
an OV-10A aircraft. The experiment involved 12 pilots. The speech recognizer used for this study
was an ITT VRS-1290 speaker-dependent system. The vocabulary used in this study was small,
containing 54 words. The SR system was tested using the 12 pilots under three separate conditions:
on the ground, 1
 
g
 
 conditions, and 3
 
g
 
 conditions. There was no significant difference in SR system
performance found between the three conditions. The accuracy rates for the SR system under these
three test conditions was 97.27% in hangar conditions, 97.72 under 1
 
g
 
 conditions, and 97.11% under
3
 
g
 
 conditions.
 
3 
 
A recent installation that is now in production is a military fighter, the Eurofighter, Typhoon. This
aircraft will be the first production aircraft with voice interaction as a standard OEM configuration with
speech recognition modules (SRMs). The speech recognizer is speaker dependent, and sophisticated
enough to recognize continuous speech. The supplier of the voice recognition system for this aircraft is
Smiths Industries. In addition, the system has received general pilot acceptance. Since the system is speaker
…
start〈 〉 tune COM |NAV( ) radio
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
dependent, the pilot must train the speech recognizer to his unique voice patterns prior to its use. This is
done at ground-based, personal computer (PC) support stations. The PC is used to create a voice template
for a specific pilot. The created voice template is then transferred to the aircraft prior to flight, via a data
loader. Specifications for the recognizer include a 250-word vocabulary, a 200-ms response time, contin-
uous speech recognition, and an accuracy rate of 95–98%.
 
2 
 
Another recent application of speech recognition technology is in the Joint Strike Fighter (JSF) being
developed by Boeing and BAe Systems. Continuous speech recognition is being integrated into the
cockpit. The speech recognition system will provide selected cockpit controls sole operation by using
voice commands. The JSF speech recognition system will be used to allow the pilot to avoid the distraction
of selected manual tasks while remaining focused on more critical aspects of the mission. The supplier
of the speech recognition system for this aircraft is ITT Industries’ Voxware (formerly VERBEX) voice
recognition system. The Voxware system was chosen for this application due its recognized and previously
proven ability to perform in a noisy cockpit environment.
 
1
 
8.4 Flightdeck Applications 
 
The use of speech recognition, the enabling technology for voice control, should not be relied on as the
sole means of control or entering data and commands. Speech recognition is more correctly defined as
an assisted method of control; and should have reversionary controls in place if the operation and
performance of the SR system is no longer acceptable. It is not a question of whether voice control will
find its way into mainstream aviation cockpits, but a question of when and to what degree. As the
technology of SR continues to evolve, care must be exercised so that SR does not become a solution
looking for a problem to solve. Not all situations will be good choices for the application of SR. In a high
workload atmosphere, such as the flightdeck, the use of SR could be a logical choice for use in many
operations, leading to a reduction in workload and heads-down time. 
Current speech recognition systems are best assigned to tasks that are not in themselves critical to the
safety of flight. In time, this will change as the technology evolves. The thought of allowing the speech
recognition system to gain the ability to directly impact flight safety brings to mind an example that
occurred at a speech recognition conference several years ago. While a speech recognition interface on a
PC was being discussed and demonstrated before an audience, a member of the audience spoke out
“format C: return,” or something to that effect. The result was the main drive on the computer was
formatted, erasing its contents. Normally an event such as this impacts no one’s safety, however, if such
unrestricted control were allowed on an aircraft, there would be serious results. 
Some likely applications for voice control on the flightdeck are navigation functions; communications
functions such as frequency selection, toggling of display modes, checklist functions, etc.
 
8.4.1 Navigation Functions 
 
For navigation functions, SR could be used as a method of entering waypoints and inputting FMS data.
Generally, most tasks requiring the keyboard to be used to enter data into the FMS would make good
use of a SR system. This would allow time and labor savings in what is a repetitive and time consuming
task. Another advantage of using SR is that the system is able to reduce confusion and guide the user by
requesting required data. The use of SR with FMS systems is being evaluated and studied by both military
and civilian aviation.
 
8.4.2  Communication Functions 
 
For communication functions, voice control could be used to tune radio frequencies by calling out that
frequency. For example, “Tune COM1 to one one eight point seven.” The SR system would interpret this
utterance, and would place the frequency into stand-by. The system may be designed to have the SR
system repeat the recognized frequency back through a voice synthesizer to the pilot for confirmation
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
prior to the frequency being placed into standby. The pilot would then accept the frequency and make
it active or reject it. This would be done with a button press to activate the frequency. Another possible
method of making a frequency active would be to do this by voice alone. This does bring about some
added risk, as the pilot will no longer be physically making the selection. This could be done by a simple,
“COM one Accept” to accept the frequency, but leave it in pre-select. Reject the frequency by saying,
“COM one Reject,” and to activate the frequency by saying, “COM one activate.” 
The use of SR would also allow a pilot to query systems, such as by requesting a current frequency
setting; ‘‘What is COM one?’’ The ASR system could then respond with the current active frequency and
possible the pre-select. This response could be by voice or by display. Other possible options would be
to have the SR respond to ATC commands by moving the command frequency change to the pre-select
automatically. Having done this, the pilot would only have to command ‘‘Accept,’’ ‘‘Activate,’’ or ‘‘Reject.’’
The radio would never on its own, place a frequency from standby to active mode. 
With the use of a GPS position-referenced database, a pilot might only have to call out ‘‘Tune COM
one Phoenix Sky Harbor Approach.’’ By referencing the current aircraft location to a database, the SR
systems could look up the appropriate frequency and place it into pre-select. The system might respond
back with, ‘‘COM one Phoenix Sky Harbor Approach at one two oh point seven.” The pilot would then
be able to accept and activate the frequency without having to know the correct frequency numbers or
having to dial the frequency into the radio. Clearly a time-saving operation. Possible drawbacks are out-
of -date radio frequencies in the database or no frequency listing. This can be overcome by being able
to call out specific frequencies if required. ‘‘Tune COM one to one two oh point seven.”
 
8.4.3 Checklist 
 
The use of speech recognition is almost a natural for checklist operations. The pilot may be able to
command the system with “configure for take-off.” This could lead to the system bringing up an appro-
priate checklist for take-off configuration. The speech system could call out the checklist items as they
occur and the pilot, having completed and verified the task, could press a button to accept and move on
to the next task. It may be possible to allow a pilot to verbally check-off a task, vs. a button selection;
however, that does bring about an opportunity for a recognition error. 
 
Defining Terms
 
Accuracy
 
: Generally, accuracy refers to the percentage of times that a speech recognizer will correctly
recognize a word. This accuracy value is determined by dividing the number of times that the
recognizer correctly identifies a word by the number of words input into the SR system.
 
Continuous speech recognition
 
: The ability of the speech recognition system to accept a continuous,
unbroken stream of words and recognize it as a valid phrase.
 
Discrete word recognition
 
: This refers to the ability of a speech recognizer to recognize a discrete word.
The words must be separated by a gap or pause between the previous word and successive words.
The pause will typically be 150 ms or longer. The use of such a system is characterized by “choppy”
speech to ensure the required break between words.
 
Grammar
 
: This is a set of syntax rules determining valid commands and vocabulary for the SR system.
The grammar will define how words may be ordered and what commands are valid. The grammar
definition structure most commonly used is known as ‘‘context free grammar” or CFG.
 
Isolated word recognition
 
: The ability of the SR system to recognize a specific word in a stream of words.
Isolated word recognition can be used as a ‘‘trigger” to place the SR system into an active standby
mode, ready to accept input.
 
Phonemes
 
: Phonemes are the fundamental parts of speech. The English language is made up from 45
to 50 individual phonemes.
 
Speaker Dependent
 
: This type of system is dependent upon the speaker for operation. The system will
be trained to recognize one person’s speech patterns and acoustical properties. This type of system
will have a higher accuracy rate than a speaker-independent system, but is limited to one user.
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
Speaker Independent
 
: A speaker-independent system will operate regardless of the speaker. This type of
system is the most desirable for a general use application, however the accuracy rate and response
rate will be lower than the speaker-dependent system.
 
Speech Synthesis
 
: The use of an artificial means to create speech-like sounds.
 
Text to Speech
 
: A mechanism or process in which text is transformed into digital audio form and output
as “spoken” text. Speech synthesis can be used to allow a system to respond to a user verbally.
 
Tri-Phones
 
: These are groupings of three phonemes. The sound a phoneme makes can vary depending
on the phoneme ahead of it and after it. Speech recognizers use tri-phones to better determine
which phoneme has been spoken based upon the sounds preceding and following it.
 
Verbal Artifacts
 
: These are words or phrases, spoken with the intended command that have no value
content to the command. This is sometimes referred to simply as garbage when defining a specific
grammar. Grammars may be written to allow for this by disregarding and ignoring these utterances,
for example, the pilot utterance, “uhhhhhmmmmmmm, select north up mode.” The “uhhhh-
hmmmmmmm” would be ignored as garbage.
 
Vocabulary
 
: The vocabulary a speech recognition system is made up of the words or phrases that the
system is to recognize. Vocabulary size is generally broken into four sizes; small, with tens of words,
medium with a few hundred words, large with a few thousand words, very large with up to 64,000
words, and unlimited. When a vocabulary is defined, it will contain words that are relative, and
specific to the application.
 
References
 
1. Boeing JSF to feature voice-recognition technology, [On-Line]. Available: www.boeing.com/news/
releases/2000/news_release_000222o.htm.
2. The Eurofighter Typhoon Speech Recognition Module, [On-Line]. Available: www.smithsind-
aerospace.com/PRODS/CIS/Voice.htm
3. Williamson, David T., Barry, Timothy P., and Liggett, Kristen K., Flight test results of ITT VRS-
1290 in NASA OV10A. Pilot-Vehicle Interface Branch (WL/FIGP), WPAFB, OH.
 
Bibliography
 
Anderson, Timothy R., Applications of speech-based control, in 
 
Proc. Alternative Control Technologies:
Human Factors Issues,
 
 14-15 Oct., 1998, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH, (ISBN 92-837-1003-7).
Anderson, Timothy R., The technology of speech-based control, in 
 
Proc. Alternative Control Technologies:
Human Factors Issues,
 
 14-15 Oct., 1998, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH, (ISBN 92-837-1003-7).
Bekker, M. M., “A comparison of mouse and speech input control of a text-annotation system,” Faculty
of Industrial Design Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Jaffalaan 9, 2628 BX Delft, The
Netherlands.
Boeing, JSF to feature voice-recognition technology, [On-Line]. Available: www.boeing.com/news/
releases/2000/news_release_000222o.htm.
Eurofighter Typhoon Speech Recognition Module, Available: www.smithsind-aerospace.com/
PRODS/CIS/Voice.htm.
Hart, Sandra G., Helicopter human factors, in 
 
Human Factors in Aviation,
 
 Wiener, Earl L. and Nagel,
David C., Eds., Academic Press, San Diego, 1988, chap. 18.
Hopkin, V. David, Air traffic control, in 
 
Human Factors in Aviation,
 
 Wiener, Earl L. and Nagel, David C.,
Eds., Academic Press, San Diego, 1988, chap. 19.
Jones, Dylan M., Frankish, Clive R., and Hapeshi, K., Automatic Speech Recognition in Practice, Behav.
Inf. Technol., 2, 109–122, 1992.
Leger, Alain, Synthesis and expected benefits analysis, in 
 
Proc. Alternative Control Technologies: Human
Factors Issues,
 
 14-15 Oct., 1998, Wright-Patterson AFB, OH, (ISBN 92-837-1003-7).
Rood, G. M., Operational rationale and related issues for alternative control technologies, in 
 
Proc.
Alternative Control Technologies: Human Factors Issues,
 
 14-15 Oct., 1998, Wright-Patterson AFB,
OH, (ISBN 92-837-1003-7).
 
© 2001 by CRC Press LLC
 
Rudnicky, Alexander I. and Hauptmann, Alexander G., Models for evaluating interaction protocols in
speech recognition, School of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, 1991.
Wickens, Christopher D. and Flach, John M., Information processing, in 
 
Human Factors in Aviation,
 
Wiener, Earl L. and Nagel, David C., Eds., Academic Press, San Diego, 1988, chap. 5.
Williamson, David T., Barry, Timothy P., and Liggett, Kristen K., Flight test results of ITT VRS-1290 in
NASA OV10A. Pilot-Vehicle Interface Branch (WL/FIGP), WPAFB, OH.
Williges, Robert C., Williges, Beverly H., and Fainter, Robert G., Software interfaces for aviation systems,
in 
 
Human Factors in Aviation,
 
 Wiener, Earl L. and Nagel, David C., Eds., Academic Press, San
Diego, 1988, chap. 14.
 
Further Information
 
There are numerous sources for additional information on speech recognition. A search of the Internet on
“speech recognition” will yield many links and information sources. The list will likely contain companies
and corporations that deal primarily in speech recognition products. Some of these companies include:
• Analog Devices (800) 262-5643 www.analog.com
• AT&T Adv Speech Products Group (800) 592-8766 www.att.com/aspg 
• Brooktrout Technology (617) 449-4100 www.techspk.com
• Dialogic (201) 993-3000 www.dialogic.com
• Dragon Systems (800) 825-5897 www.dragonsys.com 
• Entropic Cambridge Research Labs (202) 547-1420 www.entropic.com
• IBM Speech Products (800) 825-5263 www.software.ibm.com/is/voicetype
• Kurzweil Applied Intelligence (617) 883-5151 www.kurzweil.com
• Lernout & Hauspie (617) 238-0960 www.lhs.com
• Nuance Communications (415) 462-8200 www.nuance.com
• Oki Semiconductor (408) 720-1900 www.oki.com
• Philips Speech Processing (516) 921-9310 www.speech.be.philips.com
• PureSpeech (617) 441-0000 www.speech.com
• Sensory (408) 744-1299 www.SensoryInc.com
• Smith Industries (610) 296-5000 www.smithsind-aerospace.com/
• Speech Solutions (800) 773-3247 www.speechsolutions.com
• Texas Instruments (800) 477-8924
 
 
 
x
 
 
 
4500 www.ti.com

