 Please help support this charitable service by 
donating £3* Text  Ability to 84858
Voice Recognition Software - Advanced 
Features and Concepts 
In this fact sheet the features of two versions of voice recognition software are 
described and compared. This should be read in conjunction with Voice Recognition 
Software - an Introduction, which gives an overview of the subject. The applications 
described are Dragon NaturallySpeaking and the Speech Recognition feature of 
Windows Vista. 
Vista Speech recognition User Interface Dragon Naturally Speaking ‘Dragon Bar’ 
 
Features Explained 
Vocabularies 
Both Dragon NaturallySpeaking and Windows Vista speech recognition match the 
words they hear to a list of words stored in the software's vocabulary. These 
vocabularies are accessed to produce transcribed text as the user dictates to the 
computer. The vocabularies are used to correct misrecognised words. The number 
of words held in the vocabulary is huge. In the case of Dragon NaturallySpeaking the 
full vocabulary can include more than 300,000 words. 
Personalising the Vocabulary 
As corrections are made the vocabulary will increase to reflect the addition of new 
words (for example, technical or scientific terms and surnames). The accurate 
correction of misrecognition is key to improving the user's voice recognition 
experience. Simply editing misrecognised text will not improve recognition accuracy 
over time. 
A number of tools built into both Dragon NaturallySpeaking and Vista can be used to 
add to the vocabulary. The user is able to: 
• add individual words 
• add lists of words (Dragon Naturally Speaking only) 
• analyse entire documents and e-mail accounts to increase the available 
vocabulary 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk 1 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Both Dragon NaturallySpeaking and Windows Vista include the option to add words 
as individual misrecognised words. For example, if the word "misrecognised" is 
initially transcribed as "Miss recognised" and "misrecognised" does not exist in the 
software vocabulary, correcting using the Spell dialogue box will add the word 
"misrecognised" to the vocabulary. Words can also be deleted from vocabularies.  
Example: Using Windows Vista Speech Recognition to add a new word to the 
vocabulary 
 
Right click the user interface and chose “Open Speech Dictionary”. 
  
Once the Speech Dictionary Wizard starts, Click "Add a new word".  
  
  
On the following screen, type the new word in the Word or Expression field. 
  
  
Click Next. 
  
To record the pronunciation of the word, on the following screen tick the "Record a 
pronunciation upon Finish" box.  There are additional options on this screen for 
selecting the correct capitalisation for the new word. 
  
  
On the following screen, click record to record for Speech Recognition. 
  
Click Finish.  
  
From then on, when using Speech Recognition, the word will be recognised. 
  
  
  
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  2 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Recorded Speech 
Recognition accuracy in both applications can reach a percentage in the high 90s, 
but there can be occasions when it is necessary to compare what was dictated with 
the transcribed text on the screen. This helps when correcting misrecognition and 
amending mispronunciation. Both programs can use recorded speech to offer the 
user an audible confirmation of the words they dictated. The actual words spoken 
can be compared with the text on screen. Vista offers a “play audible feedback” 
option when text is selected while Dragon has an “automatic playback on correction 
feature” available via the Options menu.  The result is the same in both applications; 
as soon as a correction command is used for a word or phrase the words are played 
to the user in their own voice.  The major difference here is the availability of the 
“Play That Back” feature in Dragon NaturallySpeaking. Text can be selected (a 
single word or entire paragraphs) and replayed in the user’s voice.  
Text to Speech 
With Dragon Naturally Speaking, text can be listened to using the synthesised text to 
speech engine. Text to speech is useful for proofreading. The major difference 
between Dragon and Vista is the availability of text to speech in Dragon Naturally 
Speaking compared to Vista Speech Recognition. It is possible to access Dragon 
text to speech using one command; typical commands include "Read Paragraph”, 
“Read That” and “Read Down From Here”. To access text to speech in Vista involves 
starting Narrator, tweaking the settings and knowing which keyboard shortcuts to 
use. Furthermore, Dragon’s text to speech feature will consistently read from 
Microsoft Word while you may find it necessary to copy text into Notepad if you want 
to listen to text using Vista Narrator.  
 
 
The Dragon Naturally 
Speaking  
Sound menu  
 
Delegated Correction 
Some people will find it helpful to dictate work and then ask someone else to make 
corrections for them at a later time. To do this they need to be able to save their 
recorded speech with the documents they have created. This facility is only available 
in Dragon NaturallySpeaking Professional edition. With dictation saved to a file an 
assistant can load the files later, listen to what was said and make corrections. 
Recent versions of Dragon NaturallySpeaking include the Auto Transcribe Folder 
Agent. This tool automatically detects files to transcribe from one folder to another 
once a recording device is detected (see details of recording devices below). This 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  3 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
provides a further option for third party correction once automatic transcription has 
created the text. 
Working on the move 
Voice recognition software can be installed and used on lightweight laptop 
computers. Many laptops are now available which weigh little more than 1 kg and 
have a specification suitable for running voice recognition. A more portable option is 
available by using a hand-held recording device. Digital recorders, such as those 
available from Olympus, Phillips and Sony among other manufacturers, can be used 
to dictate and store recordings. Recordings can be transcribed from a number of 
formats including .wav, .wma and .mp3. If you are considering the use of a recording 
device: 
• Seek advice from a specialist supplier; not all devices are suitable. 
• remember that a clear and confident dictation style is needed using 
commands recognised by the software 
• only use a recording of an individual’s dictation. The software described here 
will not transcribe the content of a meeting or a lecture. 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  4 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Hands-Free Facilities 
People who have little or no use of their hands but have clear speech can use a 
computer entirely by voice. A hands-free user will need to have the following: 
• the software running a start-up (available with Dragon NaturallySpeaking and 
Vista) 
• the microphone listening when the software launches; both programs can 
start with a microphone listening out for commands. Voice recognition users 
will often begin with the microphone on, but "asleep". Once the program has 
loaded the user can simply say a command to "wake" the microphone up. 
• the knowledge to make corrections by voice 
• knowledge of the commands required to select menus and launch programs 
• mouse control available using the voice. Both programs offer slightly varying 
ways of achieving this. Dragon NaturallySpeaking and Vista speech 
recognition include a "MouseGrid". This feature superimposes a grid of nine 
squares on the screen and through a series of commands the user homes in 
on an area of the screen to reposition the pointer. Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
also includes commands such as "move mouse right", "mouse double-click" 
and "mouse up 10". 
 
 
Windows Vista Mouse grid – from left to right: ‘homing in’ on an area of the screen 
• Internet navigation by voice. Both programs cater for voice-activated Internet 
browsing. Dragon NaturallySpeaking supports the use of Internet Explorer and 
Mozilla Firefox. Vista speech recognition is compatible with Internet Explorer 
but is a little slower with other browsers; although most applications can be 
used with Vista by utilising the "Show Numbers" command.  
 
• key pressing by voice. Both programs offer the option of sending individual 
keystrokes to the computer using voice commands. For example, "press shift 
enter”. 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  5 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
 
Example: Using Dragon NaturallySpeaking to browse within Internet Explorer 
With the microphone awake say “Start Internet Explorer” 
Once the home page is displayed, dictate your search criteria. 
 
In the example above, saying "Google Search" applies a number to any item on 
screen with that title. In this example saying "Choose 2" is equivalent to clicking the 
"Google Search" control button. 
 
By dictating ‘unique' text on a webpage, i.e. a word or words only found in one link, 
Dragon NaturallySpeaking will automatically click that link without showing numbers 
against links.  
 
The "Click Link" command will apply a number to every link on a webpage. From 
there, it is simply a matter of saying "Choose 7", "Choose 8" etc to follow the chosen 
link. 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  6 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
 
Natural Language Commands 
Dragon NaturallySpeaking incorporates large command sets that make it easier to 
control applications and manipulate text. Rather than having to use logical steps 
involving multiple menu selections Natural Language Commands make it possible to 
say what you want by using flexible, more natural command syntax. The term 
"Natural Language Command" is used in Dragon NaturallySpeaking and there is little 
command flexibility built into Windows Vista. As there are thousands of Natural 
Language Commands options it is often worth taking a guess at a command such as 
"indent this line by 3 cm” (a command which would work in Microsoft Word using 
Dragon NaturallySpeaking) to see what will happen. 
Examples of formatting commands available in Dragon NaturallySpeaking for use in 
Microsoft Word include: 
• "Bold this paragraph” 
• “Bullet the rest of the page” 
• “Make it Arial” 
• “Move this up two lines” 
 
Dragon NaturallySpeaking now includes quick voice commands which offer the 
opportunity to quickly move from the current task to, for example, an Internet search 
based on a particular subject. As an example, saying "search the web for voice 
recognition”, while working in Microsoft Word will launch the default browser 
application and kick off a search for the subject stated in the command.  Similarly, 
saying “send an e-mail to John Smith” will launch or open your e-mail program, open 
a new email and place the recipient’s name in the “To” field. 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  7 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Dictation Shortcuts, Text Macros and Scripting 
When writing, people often make use of standard phrases or paragraphs. Such 
strings of text can be stored in Dragon NaturallySpeaking and, once stored, they can 
be typed out in full by saying a short command. The facility to add text Macros in 
Vista has been available since 2008 with the 
release of Windows Speech Recognition 
Macros (or WSR Macros). This tool is 
available as a free download from Microsoft.  
In this example from Dragon 
NaturallySpeaking saying "AbilityNet Info" 
will result in the contact information being 
entered into the document.  
 
 
 
Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
Professional includes "step-by-
step” scripting. These provide 
options for creating commands 
to automate often repeated 
tasks, automate tasks in "non-
standard" applications and 
other functions. This offers a 
relatively simple way of 
automating a multi-step task 
without the need to learn the 
scripting rules of the Advanced 
 
 
scripting tool.  
 
 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  8 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Dragon Naturally Speaking also includes macro and advanced scripting tools.  
Advanced scripting (written using XML) is also available in the Windows Speech 
Recognition Macros tool. Both require some programming knowledge or the 
willingness and ability to learn the scripting languages.  
Select and Say Dictation 
Both of the programs detailed in this sheet make it possible to dictate, edit and 
correct by voice in Microsoft Word.  Words can be selected simply by saying “select” 
followed by the word.  Dictating “over the top” of selected text is quicker and easier 
using Dragon NaturallySpeaking; you simply dictate the word or words you require 
after selecting the text.  Using Windows Vista Speech Recognition involves selecting 
the text and then picking the new text from an “Alternates panel”. 
It is not possible to use Select and Say dictation in all programs and sometimes it is 
necessary to dictate into a “well behaved” word processor and then transfer the 
corrected dictation.  Dragon NaturallySpeaking includes a basic word processor, the 
DragonPad and also the “Dictation Box”. The Dictation Box offers a blank window 
into which the user dictates and corrects.  A single command transfers the dictated 
text into a pre-selected edit field in another application.  
 
 
 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  9 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Comparison of Popular Systems 
 Naturally-Speaking 
Preferred V9 
Naturally-Speaking 
Professional V9 
Windows Vista 
Speech 
Recognition 
Vocabulary 
Tools 
   
Natural 
Language 
Commands 
In DragonPad, 
Internet Explorer, 
Word, Wordperfect 
and Excel, Outlook 
Express 
DragonPad, 
Internet Explorer, 
Word, 
Wordperfect, 
Excel, Outlook, 
Powerpoint + 
navigation 
commands for 
Outlook & Lotus 
Notes 
No 
Text Macros Yes Yes Yes – by 
downloading WSR 
Macros 
Command 
Macros 
No Yes - requires 
some 
programming 
knowledge 
Yes – by 
downloading WSR 
Macros. Requires 
some 
programming 
knowledge 
Text To 
speech 
Yes - RealSpeak Yes – RealSpeak Limited using 
Windows Narrator 
Dictation 
Playback 
Yes Yes No 
Delegated 
Correction 
(saving audio 
with text 
dictation) 
No Yes No 
    
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  10 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Mobile 
recorder 
support 
Yes Yes No 
Microphone 
supplied 
Yes – Headset Yes- Headset No 
 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  11 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Hands-Free Facilities 
 
 Naturally-
Speaking 
Preferred V9 
Naturally-
Speaking 
Professional V9 
Windows Vista Speech 
Recognition 
Microphone 
listening at 
startup 
Yes  - but this needs to be set as an option in each program 
Hands-free 
correction 
and editing in 
own word-
processor 
Yes – DragonPad No 
Hands free 
correction 
and editing in 
Microsoft 
Word 
Yes Yes Yes 
Control 
desktop and 
applications 
menus by 
voice 
Yes yes Yes 
Move the 
mouse by 
voice 
Yes Yes Yes 
Navigate the  
Internet by 
voice  
Yes – Internet 
Explorer / 
Mozilla Firefox 
 
Yes – Internet 
Explorer / Mozilla 
Firefox 
 
Limited to Internet 
Explorer 
 
Mouse 
movement by 
voice 
Yes Yes No 
Press keys 
by voice 
Yes Yes Not all – but can be 
added using WSR 
Macros 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  12 
 
 
 
Factsheet - March 2009 - AbilityNet Reg Charity Number England and Wales 1067673 - Scotland SC039866 
Telephone: 0800 269545 - Email: enquiries@abilitynet.org.uk - Web: www.abilitynet.org.uk  13 
 
We would normally recommend: 
Requirement Product 
To overcome difficulties with spelling NaturallySpeaking Preferred / Windows 
Vista 
To help reduce keyboard/mouse use NaturallySpeaking Preferred / Windows 
Vista 
Hands-free use NaturallySpeaking Professional 
Business users wishing to limit 
keyboarding and use Outlook by voice 
NaturallySpeaking Professional 
 
Useful Factsheets 
The following factsheets are also available: 
• Dyslexia and Voice Recognition Software 
• Voice Recognition Software - An Introduction 
 
 

