© Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge, Cornell University, September 1999 
Survey of Continuous Speech Recognition Software Usability 
 
Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge 
Cornell University 
Department of Design & Environmental Analysis 
MVR Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853. 
 
Abstract 
This research examines the usability of English language continuous speech 
recognition software programs. Continuous speech recognition programs (CSRP) 
were brought to market at the end of 1997, with claims that they are capable of 
recognizing users' continuously spoken speech and translating this directly into text 
processing software. A comprehensive usability survey questionnaire was 
administered via the web to collect information from both CSRP users and non-users. 
Survey respondents were recruited via newsgroup announcements, email referrals, 
and email-lists. Over a two month period, 162 respondents answered the survey, and 
80 were CSRP users. Results from the survey profile patterns of general computer 
usage and opinions on CSRP. Results from the CSRP users indicates user behavior 
pattern, the pros and cons of current CSRP, new design opportunities, and levels of 
user satisfaction. Results from the survey are relevant to ergonomic guidelines for 
improving interface design for future CSRP. 
Introduction 
The pace of development in microprocessor development continues to follow 
Moore's law, and recent generations of computer chips have the power to meet the 
processing demands of speech recognition. Improvement in computer technology 
coupled with new approaches to speech recognition algorithms has recently produced 
several commercially available software programs that claim to support continuous 
speech recognition. The use of continuous speech may provide for a more natural and 
user-friendly interface. Continuous speech recognition programs (CSRP) also may 
obviate the need for extensive use of the computer keyboard and mouse, thereby 
reducing risks of musculoskeletal discomfort and repetitive strain injuries. 
 In 1997, Dragon Systems released "Naturally Speaking", the first general-
purpose speech recognition system claimed to  allow users to dictate to a computer in 
1 
 
© Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge, Cornell University, September 1999 
2 
a conversational manner (ZDnet, 1998). In 1998, two leading continuous-speech 
recognition programs were tested by PC Labs (ZDnet, 1998).  Both continuous speech 
recognition programs (Dragon Systems NaturallySpeaking and IBM's ViaVoice) offer 
apparently impressive features: their abilities to transcribe continuous speech, to 
decipher seemingly difficult words, to access large lexicons, to allow speech control 
of most computer operations. However, neither product achieved the 95 percent 
accuracy rate, which users apparently would like to see in a mainstream consumer 
product. PC Labs also found that making corrections or formatting documents using a 
speech interface could be painstaking.  
Speech technology is more than just a way of transmitting words or ideas; it 
conveys the essence of human emotion, moods, and personality (Westall, Johnston, & 
Lewis, 1996). In 1997, Dillon and Norcio conducted on a research on novice and 
expert nurses performed a hands-busy and eyes-busy task using a continuous speech-
input interface. The results suggested that factors that improve the user's performance 
include expertise in the domain, experience with the interface, and the use of a small 
vocabulary. Also, experience with the interface corresponded with a higher degree of 
acceptance.  
In sum, although some researchers have investigated human performance 
aspects of speech recognition programs, no published studies have evaluated user 
reactions to all aspects of CSRP or the actual usability of the software interface. The 
present study reports results from a survey of users and non-users of CSRP that 
focuses on detailed usability issues. Non-users of CSRP were surveyed to elucidate 
reasons for not using CSRP.  
Research Method 
Subjects 
One hundred and sixty two respondents participated in this research. Eighty 
respondents were CSRP users. 
 
Survey instrument 
An electronic survey questionnaire was developed for administration via the world-
wide web. The questionnaire was comprised of 2 parts: a section of 13 questions 
 2
© Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge, Cornell University, September 1999 
3 
asking for responses to 45 items for completion by all respondents, and a section of 31 
questions asking for responses to 201 items for completion only by CSRP users. For 
most questions responses were made by selecting appropriate radio buttons or check 
boxes. For some questions, respondents selected answers from a pull-down menu or 
typed a short answer into a text box. 
 
Procedure 
 A sample of users and non-users of CSRP was obtained by targeting potential 
respondents with an electronic research request announcement, which described the 
project and provided a hyperlink to the Web survey. This request was posted to 
selected newsgroups and email-lists (Table 1). Respondents were also encouraged to 
forward the request to colleagues.  
The first section of the Web survey for all respondents took 3-5 minutes to 
complete. The second section for CSRP users took around 20 minutes to complete. 
Respondents received confirmation of successful submissions. Survey data were 
collected automatically for subsequent statistical analysis. 
 
RESULTS 
General Computer Usage  
The demographic profile of respondents shows that 67.3% were male; 68.6% 
were aged 26-50 years; 93% used a computer >3 years; 79% used a computer 6 to 7 
days a week; 51.8% used computers 7-9 hours a day; 25.9% use 4-6 hours a day; and 
66.7% use a windows (Win95/98/NT) platform. 
Eighty four percent indicated that they knew about computer continuous 
speech recognition programs, such as Dragon NatuallySpeaking, IBM Via Voice, and 
L & H Voice Xpress (Kurzweil) and 11.7% had not heard of these. 51.2% of 
respondents think CSRP will replace keyboards for 'composing documents' and 24.0% 
think CSRP will replace keyboards for 'computer image manipulation'. 
 
 
 3
© Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge, Cornell University, September 1999 
4 
Usability of Computer Continuous Speech Recognition Programs (CSRP)  
The demographic profile of CSRP users showed that 73.8% were male; 70.1% 
were aged 26-50; 85% use their CSRP on a 'Desktop' computer; and 97.5% use CSRP 
on a windows platform ('Win95/98/NT'). 48.8% users have a 200-300 MHz CPU; and 
56.1% users had 128 Mbytes RAM in their computers. Sixty-nine CSRP users (86.3 
%) were native English speakers; seven were not; four people did not specify.  
More than half CSRP users in this survey use Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
(DNS): 22 users (27.5%) use Dragon NaturallySpeaking Preferred 3.0, and 19 people 
(23.8%) use Dragon NaturallySpeaking Professional. Other subjects use other 
versions of DNS or IBM Via Voice or L & H VoiceXpress (Kurzweil). When asked 
what programs they previously used: 26 respondents used Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
Preferred 2.0; 19 used 'IBM Via Voice Gold'; 17 used Dragon NaturallySpeaking 
Professional, and 13 people used Dragon NaturallySpeaking Preferred 3.0. Thirty-four 
users have/had used their CSRP for '1-6 months'; twelve have used for '7-11 months'; 
twenty-seven have used for '1-2 years'. About 59% users reported that they use/used 
their continuous speech recognition programs 5-7 days a week. The total time of using 
CSRP was calculated by summing usage time for different locations. Users use CSRP 
3.04 hours a day on average. 
Users were asked how well the CSRP worked for various tasks (1 indicates 
'very poorly' and 4 is 'very well'). Use for 'Dictating Letters' was ranked first (average 
score of 3.16) and 'Navigation between Programs' was ranked last (average score of 
2.06). When asked what made them choose to use a CSRP: 22.4% reported that this 
was 'an alternative to typing' and 21.8% said 'to improve personal productivity'.  
When asked how they chose their program: 36.7% responses said this was based upon 
a 'Product review on Internet or computer magazine' and 32.7% on 'Other' (e.g. tried 
all programs, the software came with hardware purchase, from work). Users were 
asked about the importance of various CSRP software features that affected their 
choice of CSRP ('1' is very unimportant and '4' is very important): 'Product accuracy' 
had the highest average score (3.79) over the other aspects and 'Price' has lowest score 
(2.49). When asked which characteristics users thought were most important for a 
CSRP after they had used their chosen CSRP: 21.8% responses were 'Product 
 4
© Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge, Cornell University, September 1999 
5 
accuracy', and 15.8% responses were 'Dictation speed'. Users were asked how long 
they had trained her/his CSRP before starting to use this: 31 subjects (40.8%) replied 
'30-59 min'. 44.6% of users did not feel annoyed with CSRP training, mostly because 
this was seen as 'very necessary'; 32.6% also said the training was not annoying and 
that it helped to familiarize them with the program.' When asked how long they had 
read their manual before they started to use the CSRP software 38.8% subjects 
answered '<30 min'; 25.0 % users said '30-59 min'; and 23.49 % people said '0 min, 
because I didn't have to'.   
Users were asked to rate the various aspects of user's continuous speech 
recognition program on a 4 point scale (1 was negative attribute and 4 was positive 
attribute): 'Ability to expand vocabulary' had highest average score of 3.39 and 'User 
(technical) support' had the lowest score of 2.45. 
When asked which input advice users' would prefer to finish the following 
tasks: 45 CSRP users (56.3%) preferred to use 'Voice' for composing documents; 22 
subjects chose 'Voice & Keyboard' & 17 chose 'Keyboard & Mouse' for correcting 
mistakes in documents; 21 subjects chose 'Voice & Keyboard' & 15 chose 'Keyboard 
& Mouse' for editing documents; 34 subjects chose 'Keyboard', 19 chose 'Voice' and 
17 preferred 'Voice and Keyboard' for database input; 23 subjects preferred 'Mouse' 
and 18 preferred 'Keyboard & Mouse' for computer image manipulation. 18 people 
selected 'Keyboard' and 18 selected 'Mouse' for searching & browsing information; 
21 people preferred 'Mouse' for navigating within a program; and 20 users chose 
'Mouse' and 17 chose 'Voice' for navigating between programs. 
Users were asked which symptoms, if any, they had experienced that they 
attributed to the sustained use of CSRP: 45.3% responses reported  'Dry throat' and 
30.2% said 'Vocal strain'. 32 subjects (40 %) had experienced that a bad cold affected 
the performance of their CSRP. 27.5% of users said that CSRP had increased their 
productivity, and 19.6% indicated other benefits (e.g. reduce RSI risk, saved money).  
Users indicated several current limitations of CSRP: 29% said 'The reliability 
is not consistent while the task complexity increases' and 24.3% said 'Performance 
might be sensitive to voice changes, such as 'catching a cold'. Problems that users 
experienced when they first started to use CSRP were as follows: 29.2% said that 
 5
© Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge, Cornell University, September 1999 
6 
there original computer capabilities 'didn't satisfy the minimum equipment 
requirement of the program' and 15.4% said that they didn't know 'what kind of 
soundcard they should get'. To solve these problems, 24 out of 43 respondents 
upgraded or bought a new computer. Users reported several usability problems with 
their CSRP: 29.1% said 'I tried to improve the accuracy but there was not much 
improvement'; 23.3% found that their environment was 'so noisy that it decreased the 
accuracy of speech recognition', and 19.8% reported cognitive difficulties concerning 
the fact that they could not think while talking to the computer. Over one-third of 
users reported that either they still haven't solved problems or that they have 
'uninstalled the program'. 
Fifty-one subjects (63.8%) reported that to effectively use the CSRP they had 
to change their way of speaking. Forty-five users (56.3%) said they were satisfied 
with the documentation that came with their CSRP. Sixty-two users (77.5%) are 
planning more extensive use of their CSRP in the future.  
 
Comparison of Dragon NaturallySpeaking (DNS) Preferred 3.0 and DNS Professional 
The two major programs used by this sample of CSRP users were Dragon 
NaturallySpeaking (DNS) Preferred 3.0 (22 users) and DNS Professional (19 users). 
Comparison of reactions to these programs showed significant differences between 
these in 'Varieties of functions' (Chi-square = 4.18, df = 1, p < 0.05) and 'Dictation 
speed' (Chi-square = 8.58, df = 1, p < 0.05). Users of DNS Professional rated these 
two dimensions significantly higher than users of DNS Preferred 3.0. 
 
 6
© Hsin Eu and Alan Hedge, Cornell University, September 1999 
7 
 7
References 
Dillon, T.W., & Norcio, A. F. (1997, October). User performance and acceptance of a 
speech-input interface in a health assessment task. International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies, 47(4), 591-602. 
IBM Voice Type (1998). 
http://www.software.ibm.com/workgroup/voicetyp/us_menu.html 
Speech Technology Timeline. (1998, March). 
http://www5.zdnet.com/products/content/pcmg/1705/283053.html 
Watch What You Say. (1998). 
http://www.zdnet.com/pcmag/features/speech/intro.html 
Westall F. A., Johnston R. D., & Lewis, A.V. (1996, January). Speech technology for 
telecommunications. BT Technology Journal, 14 (1), 9-27. 

