Enabling Next-
Generation RFID 
Applications: Solutions 
and Challenges
Quan Z. Sheng 
University of Adelaide 
Xue Li 
University of Queensland 
Sherali Zeadally
University of the District of Columbia 
Radio-frequency identification 
technology provides promising 
benefits such as inventory 
visibility and business process 
automation. However, if 
companies are to realize these 
benefits, researchers must 
address major challenges such 
as data processing, integration 
architecture design, security, 
and privacy.
T
he ability to uniquely identify individual objects is essen-
tial to many aspects of modern life such as manufactur-
ing, distribution logistics, access control, and fighting 
terrorism. Radio-frequency identification is a wireless 
communication technology that is useful for precisely 
identifying objects.1 RFID uses radio-frequency waves to transfer 
identifying information between tagged objects and readers without 
line of sight (LOS), providing a means of automatic identification.
Although RFID has been around for more than half a century,2 
it began to attract a lot of attention only in recent years due to the 
convergence of lower cost and the increased capabilities of RFID 
tags. Currently, RFID is emerging as an important technology for 
revolutionizing a wide range of applications, including supply-chain 
management, retail sales, anticounterfeiting, and healthcare.1,3 
Many organizations are planning to or have already exploited 
RFID to achieve more automation, efficient business processes, and 
inventory visibility. For example, Wal-Mart reportedly reduced out-
of-stocks by 30 percent on average after launching its RFID program 
(http://rfidtimes.org/2006/05/17). Predictions indicate that RFID 
will be worth billions of dollars in new investments. According to 
IDTechEx, a leading market research and advisory firm, the RFID 
market will increase from US$4.96 billion in 2007 to US$26.88 
billion in 2017 (www.idtechex.com/products/en/view.asp?product 
categoryid=119).
While RFID provides promising benefits in many applications, 
researchers must overcome some major hurdles before these benefits 
can be realized. An important challenge is managing RFID data, 
which is noisy, generated dynamically in very large streams, has a 
limited active lifespan, and possesses useful contextual character-
istics such as temporality, spatiality, and implicit semantics.4,5 The 
deployment of large-scale RFID applications also introduces unique 
challenges such as scalability and heterogeneity. Finally, given the 
ability to inexpensively tag and thus monitor numerous items or peo-
ple, RFID raises serious security and privacy concerns that inhibit 
adoption of the technology.6
system basics
An RFID system’s main function is automatic identification of objects 
or persons using radio waves. A typical RFID system consists of 
0018-9162/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Published by the IEEE Computer Society  September 2008 21
P E R S P E C T I V E S
 22	 Computer
a transponder or tag attached to the objects or per-
sons, 
an interrogator or reader that creates an RF field for 
detecting radio waves, and 
a computer network to connect the readers. 
A tag contains a chip that stores the identifying 
information of the object or person to which it is 
attached and an antenna that communicates the 
information via radio waves. When a tag passes 
through an RF field that a reader generates, the tag 
transmits that information to the reader, thereby 
identifying that object or person. Consequently, 
there is no LOS requirement for object identification 
in an RFID system. The reading distance ranges from 
a few centimeters to more than 
300 feet depending on tag type, 
reader power, interference from 
other RF devices, and so on.
RFID tags are classified by 
energy source. An active tag has 
its own transmitter and a power 
source to run the microchip’s cir-
cuitry and broadcast signals to 
readers. A passive tag does not have its own power 
source and instead scavenges power from the electro-
magnetic radiation emitted by readers; it also has an 
indefinite operational life. Semiactive tags use their 
own power source to run the microchip’s circuitry but 
also scavenge power from the waves sent out by read-
ers to broadcast their signals.4
Active and semiactive tags are expensive and typi-
cally used for high-value goods or large assets that must 
be tracked over long distances. For example, the US 
Department of Defense uses active tags to track many 
containers being shipped to military bases and units 
overseas. In contrast, passive tags are inexpensive and 
can be used for common materials in very large quan-
tities. Currently, significant research efforts are under 
way to achieve 5-cent tags by shrinking chip size, cut-
ting antenna cost, and increasing tag consumption—for 
example, to meet RFID mandates from Wal-Mart and 
the US Department of Defense.
RFID tags have different capabilities, are composed 
of various materials, and come in many shapes—
including key fobs, credit cards, capsules, and pads—
and are available in sizes ranging from as small as a 
grain of rice to as big as a six-inch ruler. The tags can 
have metal external antennas, embedded antennas, or 
printed antennas.
RFiD aPPLicatiONs
During the past few years, RFID technology has been 
moving rapidly from a limited number of applications—
for example, access control and toll collection—to many 
new application areas.
•
•
•
industrial and commercial 
RFID technology is being deployed in a wide range of 
industrial and commercial systems, including manufac-
turing and logistics, retail, animal tracking, and trans-
port and admission ticketing.
An important application in this area is supply-chain 
management, where RFID helps close information gaps 
by enabling real-time supply chain visibility. Numer-
ous organizations currently exploit RFID technology 
to track products from supplier to distribution center, 
warehouse stock, and point of sale (www.rfidjournal.
com/article). The ability to precisely record product 
movement is also useful for theft prevention, product 
recall, and anticounterfeiting. 
Livestock tagging is becoming a substantial market 
for RFID, given the rising concern 
about food safety. For example, 
many countries now demand that 
all cattle be RFID-tagged so that 
they can be tracked in the event of 
an outbreak of mad cow disease.
RFID technology is widely used for 
transport and admission ticketing 
for better service and security. The 
Hong Kong Octopus transport ticketing system (www. 
octopuscards.com) is one of the most successful RFID-
enabled transportation payment applications; more 
than eight million people hold the card and use it on all 
forms of public transport in the city. In 2005, Japan’s 
NTT DoCoMo launched an RFID-enabled mobile 
phone that can be used as an electronic wallet to make 
electronic purchases, act as a boarding pass on domes-
tic air flights, and authorize entry through corporate 
security doors (www.spectrum.ieee.org/nov05/2150).
entertainment 
Several research projects are investigating the exploita-
tion of RFID technology in entertainment applications. 
For example, San Francisco’s Exploratorium uses the 
RFID-based eXspot system7 to help visitors interact with 
exhibits within the science museum, allowing them to 
register and document their interests, then extend the 
visit via the Internet after going home. 
Healthcare and pharmaceuticals 
RFID technology is a promising candidate for reduc-
ing operating costs and improving patient safety in the 
healthcare industry by tracking and monitoring patients, 
doctors, medical assets, and drugs. For example, Intel’s 
Proactive Health project8 uses RFID technology to facili-
tate elder care by monitoring activities such as medica-
tion intake.
aPPLicatiON DeVeLOPmeNt issUes
Many applications use RFID technology and comput-
erized systems such as networking services, databases, 
RFiD technology has been 
moving rapidly from a limited 
number of applications to  
many new application areas.
 September 2008 23
and Web servers to achieve advanced business goals—for 
example, real-time product tracking.1
Figure 1 shows a generic RFID framework. Interac-
tions in RFID applications occur at three layers. The 
devices layer consists of RFID tags and readers as 
well as RFID protocols—for example, ISO 14443 and 
Electronic Product Code (EPC; www.epcglobalinc.org/
standards) Class 0 and Class 1—for reading and writ-
ing RFID data. The data processing layer consists of 
several software components for communicating with 
RFID readers, filtering and cleaning RFID data, and 
adapting such data for high-level applications including 
semantic filtering and automatic data transformation 
and aggregation. The data integration layer consists 
of applications that exploit local RFID data as well as 
RFID data coming from outside business entities. 
For an organization to achieve a seamless integration 
of RFID data with business processes, the applications 
must be able to understand different data semantics. 
RFID data can be formatted in, for example, Physical 
Markup Language (http://web.mit.edu/mecheng/pml), 
and sent to different targets as messages, streams, or 
other formats via Web services, the Java Message Ser-
vice, HTTP responses, or TCP/IP data packets.
Data characteristics
RFID data possesses a unique set of characteristics 
that RFID applications must consider.4 
inaccuracy. While current RFID reader accuracy is 
improving, erroneous readings still occur in RFID sys-
tems such as duplicate reads, missed reads, and ghost 
reads (when an RFID reader “reads” an identifier that 
is not stored on any tag within the reader’s field) due 
to interference or temporary or permanent malfunction 
of some component. Therefore, RFID data tends to be 
noisy and unreliable.
Large-volume streams. RFID data is generated 
quickly and automatically, and the volume can be enor-
mous. For example, Wal-Mart generates around 7 tera-
bytes of data every day from tags used at the item level.
temporality and spatiality. RFID data is generated 
dynamically and is associated with time stamps when 
Trading
partner
applications
Enterprise
resource
planning
Supply-chain
management
system
Warehouse
management
system
RFID
data
Internet
Tagged items
RFID readers
Filtering and
cleaning
Filtering and
cleaning
Transformation and
aggregationTransformation
and aggregation
Raw 
RFID data
Processed
RFID data
Enterprise
applications
RFID
devices
RFID data
processing
RFID data
integration
Other
enterprise data
 Figure 1. RFID framework architecture. Interactions in RFID applications occur at three layers: devices, data processing, and data 
integration.
readings are made. In addition, tagged objects are typi-
cally mobile and go through different locations during 
their life cycle. Temporal and spatial information is 
important for tracking and monitoring RFID objects. 
For example, using time stamps, it is possible to track 
how long it takes an aircraft part to move from the ware-
house to the maintenance venue.
implicit inferences. RFID data always carries implicit 
information such as changes of state and containment 
relationships among objects. To use RFID data, applica-
tions require the context of other information—such as 
environmental situations—to make proper inferences. 
For example, a supply-management system that captures 
a case of cameras and a pallet together in a packing sta-
tion could infer that the case is packed in the pallet.
Limited active lifespan. RFID data normally has a 
limited active life period, during which a given system 
actively updates, tracks, and monitors the data. For 
example, in a supply-chain management system this 
period starts when the manufacturer delivers the prod-
ucts and ends when customers purchase the products.
Data integration 
Integrating RFID data with business processes pres-
ents many challenges.9 
scalability. An important criterion to consider when 
evaluating RFID integration solutions is scalability, which 
refers to a system’s ability to grow in one or more dimen-
sions—such as the volume of RFID data and the number of 
transactions—without affecting performance. Organiza-
tions that adopt RFID technology must handle data from 
thousands of readers distributed across various sites. 
Heterogeneity. An RFID solution can be deployed 
across multiple sites, companies, or even countries using 
different hardware, data structures, and standards. 
RFID systems must support the distribution of message 
preprocessing functionality—for example, filtering and 
aggregation—as well as business logic across multiple 
nodes to better map to existing company and cross-com-
pany structures.9
manageability. Good support of administration and 
testing is a prerequisite for the successful deployment of 
an RFID solution in large-scale, distributed applications. 
RFID systems must facilitate the supervision, testing, 
and control of their individual components as well as 
end-to-end processing of RFID data.
security. The vast amount of potentially sensitive 
information involved in RFID systems makes security 
critical.2 For example, a company that implements RFID 
in its supply chain does not want competitors to track 
its shipments and inventory. Further, standard secu-
rity mechanisms such as the Secure Sockets Layer are 
resource-consumption intensive and unsuitable in RFID 
systems involving other CPU-intensive work such as fil-
tering. Sophisticated security measures must be in place 
to ensure the safe protection of RFID applications.
Openness. System interoperability is another impor-
tant parameter in RFID data integration. For instance, 
a well-designed reader adapter at the edge server makes 
RFID integration reader-agnostic. In addition to being 
hardware-agnostic, RFID systems should be based on 
existing communication protocols such as TCP/IP and 
HTTP as well as syntax and semantics standards such 
as XML, PML, and EPC. An open RFID architecture 
will allow use of RFID devices from a wide array of 
hardware providers and, more importantly, support the 
deployment of RFID solutions across institutional or 
country boundaries.
Data PROcessiNg aPPROacHes
Due to its unique characteristics, RFID data must be 
appropriately processed before an application can use it. 
Table 1 compares representative research work on RFID 
data processing in industry and academia.
Table 1. RFID data processing approaches.
  Large-volume   Implicit Limited active 
Platform Inaccuracy streams Temporality Spatiality references lifespan
Siemens’  Partially addressed:  RFID data  Dynamic Dynamic Rule-based data Considered in 
RFID  filtering duplicated  partitioning Relationship Relationship transformation RFID data 
middleware readings  ER model ER model  partitioning
SMURF Declarative, adaptive Not addressed Not explicitly Not explicitly  Not addressed Not addressed 
 smoothing filter   addressed addressed 
 based on a statistical  
 sampling approach
EPC-bitmap Not addressed EPC-bitmap data  Not explicitly Not explicitly Not addressed Not addressed 
  type for a collection addressed addressed  
  of EPCs
UIUC’s RFID  Not addressed RFID-cuboid data  Stay table Stay table Not addressed Not explicitly 
warehousing   structure    addressed
 24	 Computer
 September 2008 25
siemens’ RFiD middleware
Siemens’ proposed RFID middleware system5 uses 
Dynamic Relationship ER, an expressive temporal-based 
data model, to represent RFID data. DRER abstracts 
a set of entities—namely object, reader, location, and 
transaction—and models the interactions between them 
as either state- or event-based relationships. For state-
based relationships, the associated attributes tstart and 
tend represent the relationship’s lifespan—for example, 
the period that a product stays in the warehouse. For 
event-based relationships, an associated attribute time 
stamp indicates when the event occurred. Maintaining 
the temporal and spatial history of RFID objects makes 
it easy to track and monitor them—for example, search-
ing for missing items.
smURF
UC Berkeley’s Statistical Smooth-
ing for Unreliable RFID data10 is 
an adaptive smoothing filter for 
cleaning raw RFID data streams. 
By viewing and thereafter model-
ing RFID data streams as a random 
sample of the tags in the physical 
world, SMURF exploits a statistical-sampling-based 
approach to balance reader unreliability (such as missed 
readings) and tag dynamics (tag movements in and out of 
the reader’s detection field) in the data cleaning process. 
The ability to automatically determine the right smooth-
ing window size and continuously adapt it based on the 
observed readings makes it easier to integrate SMURF 
with RFID middleware platforms to provide reliable 
RFID data.
ePc-bitmap
Oracle’s EPC-bitmap11 is a novel data type for effi-
ciently handling high-volume RFID data generated 
from item-level tracking applications. Most such 
applications can track tagged items in groups based on 
their location, expiration date, manufacturer, or other 
shared properties. An EPC-bitmap represents a collec-
tion of EPCs with common segments such as header, 
manager number, and object class, and the application 
can access and manipulate it using a set of EPC-bitmap 
operations—for example, epc2bmp and bmp2epc for 
conversion. This approach achieves significant storage 
savings, while query performance remains the same as 
or better than traditional database systems that natively 
store EPC collections. 
UiUc’s RFiD warehousing
Researchers at the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign (UIUC) have proposed a novel model12 for 
warehousing RFID data that exploits the tendency of 
individual objects to move and stay together, making 
it possible to collapse multiple movements of RFID 
objects into a single record without loss of informa-
tion. The model consists of a hierarchy of highly com-
pact summaries, represented as RFID-cuboids, of data 
aggregated at different abstraction levels where analysis 
takes place. Each RFID-cuboid records object move-
ments and stores product information for each RFID 
object, information on objects that stay together at a 
location, and path information necessary to link multi-
ple stay records. The proposed model results in smaller 
database sizes and provides efficient support for a wide 
range of RFID queries.
Data iNtegRatiON PLatFORms
Major software vendors such as Sun Microsystems, 
SAP, BEA Systems, and IBM, as well as research organi-
zations including the UCLA-based 
Wireless Internet for the Mobile 
Enterprise Consortium (WIN-
MEC), Auto-ID Labs, and Siemens 
Research are currently working 
on RFID data integration. Table 2 
compares some of the major plat-
forms. Note that for commercial 
products, our analyses are based 
on user manuals and white papers as there are few or no 
technical publications detailing those products.
WinRFiD
UCLA’s WinRFID (www.wireless.ucla.edu/rfid/ 
winrfid), a middleware system that enables rapid RFID 
application development, consists of five main layers. 
The physical layer includes the hardware consisting 
of readers, tags, and other sensors. The protocol layer 
abstracts the reader-tag protocols. The data processing 
layer processes the data streams the RFID reader net-
work generates. The XML framework and data presen-
tation layers handle data representation and presenta-
tion, respectively. 
Currently, a Web-service-based distributed architec-
ture is under development. To support extensibility, 
WinRFID exploits the .NET framework’s runtime plug-
in feature. New readers, protocols, and data transfor-
mation rules can be added into corresponding modules 
with minimum disruption of the existing infrastructure. 
A rule-based engine handles data filtering, aggregation, 
and adaptation.
saP aii
SAP’s Auto-ID Infrastructure9 is middleware that inte-
grates data from RFID devices with enterprise applica-
tions. SAP AII is built on SAP’s Web Application Server, 
which is part of the company’s NetWeaver (www.sap.
com/solutions/netweaver) integration and application 
platform.
The SAP AII architecture consists of four layers. The 
device layer supports different types of sensor devices 
RFiD data must be  
appropriately processed  
before an application  
can use it. 
 26	 Computer
via a hardware-independent low-level interface. The 
device operation layer contains one or more device 
controllers, coordinating multiple devices. The busi-
ness process bridging layer associates observation mes-
sages with existing business processes, realized by an 
Auto-ID node component. The enterprise application 
layer supports business processes such as customer rela-
tionship management. To allow RFID application test-
ing without installing physical devices, SAP AII also 
provides tools for simulating readers and messages.
ePcglobal Network
The EPCglobal Network, often referred to as the 
“Internet of things,” was developed by the Auto-ID 
Center and EPCglobal (www.epcglobalinc.org), a not-
for-profit organization that supports worldwide adop-
tion and standardization of EPC technology. The frame-
work seeks to realize a data-on-network system in which 
RFID tags containing an unambiguous ID (EPC) and 
other data pertaining to objects is stored on and acces-
sible over the Internet. 
Major components include the Object Naming Service 
(ONS), which provides references to saved object infor-
mation to facilitate discovery, and the EPC Information 
Service (EPCIS), which offers an interface for accessing 
stored RFID data. 
Information on the movement of RFID objects must 
be continuously published to a centralized discovery ser-
vice for tracking purposes, which unfortunately prevents 
the EPCglobal Network from realizing a full-fledged 
distributed architecture.
sun Java system RFiD software
Sun Java System RFID Software (www.sun.com/ 
software/jini/news/Jini_RFID_Profile_Final.pdf) is 
one of the first RFID integration platforms focusing on 
large-scale deployments. Its service-oriented architec-
ture provides network services to applications through 
several standard protocols and interfaces. 
Java System RFID Software consists of two major com-
ponents: The event manager processes (filters and aggre-
gates) RFID data, while the information server provides 
  Table 2. RFID data integration platforms.
 Platform Scalability Heterogeneity Manageability Security Openness
 WinRFID Self-contained,  Abstracted protocol WinRFID Authentication and Standards-based 
  distributed  module for published  management access restriction framework 
  middleware RFID protocols and  console support of RFID (for example, Web 
  modules XML framework for   data services, XML) 
   data representation   
 SAP AII Distributed device  Hardware-independent Auto-ID administrator, Not addressed Compliant with 
  controllers and  device interface,  tools for simulating  proposed EPCglobal 
  Auto-ID nodes distributed Auto-ID  and testing RFID  standards 
   nodes messages and readers
 EPCglobal  Distributed EPCIS,  EPC-compliant Not explicitly Under development Standards-based 
 Network  centralized  devices  supported  framework such as 
  discovery    Web services and  
  service    XML-based PML 
 Sun Java  Distributed Extensible device Browser-based Security services Standards-based, 
 System RFID  architecture of adapters interface for in Java Enterprise service-oriented 
 Software the RFID event   centralized monitoring System architecture (SOA) 
  manager  and management of  
    devices and services
 BEA WebLogic  Lightweight,  Out-of-box support Administration Not addressed Standards 
 RFID  distributed  of major RFID console, monitoring  compliance (for 
  architecture for  readers, SOAP and management  example, EPCglobal 
  RFID edge servers interfaces   agent, reader simulator  and ISO standards),  
      SOA
 WebSphere  WebSphere Not addressed Offers system Not addressed Standards-based 
 RFID server RFID Device   management capabilities  framework 
  Infrastructure   like management and 
  (only devices   monitoring of hardware 
  embedded with   and applications in 
  the infrastructure)  remote locations
 September 2008 27
access to the business events generated by the event man-
ager and serves as an integration layer that offers options 
for integrating with enterprise applications.
beaWebLogic RFiD
BEA Systems’ BEAWebLogic RFID, which “deliv-
ers the first end-to-end, standards-based RFID infra-
structure platform designed to automate new RFID-
enabled business processes” (www.bea.com/framework.
jsp?CNT=index.htm&FP=/content/products/weblogic/
rfid), consists of three main products. Edge Server is 
lightweight software that can be deployed at various sites 
to filter, integrate, and disseminate RFID data as well as 
monitor and configure RFID readers; Enterprise Server 
centrally manages RFID data collected from RFID edge 
servers; and Compliance Express is 
designed to meet current compli-
ance challenges while establishing a 
foundation for future expansion.
Websphere RFiD
IBM’s RFID solution includes 
three components: RFID devices, WebSphere Premises 
Server (www-306.ibm.com/software/integration/prem-
ises_server/index.html), and WebSphere Business Inte-
gration Server. RFID devices must be embedded with the 
WebSphere RFID Device Infrastructure, software that 
supports functions for RFID data collection and delivery. 
The Premises Server is middleware that aggregates, moni-
tors, interprets, and escalates RFID data and provides an 
interface for integration with enterprise applications.
OPeN ReseaRcH issUes
Despite much progress in RFID data processing and 
integration, many research challenges remain open.
accurate and reliable data provisioning 
Because RFID-enabled applications primarily use 
RFID data to automate business processes, inaccurate 
data could misguide application users.4,10 For example, 
a ghost read at a check-out point might trigger a charge 
to a customer who is not purchasing the corresponding 
goods. Extensive research is needed to improve RFID 
data reliability.
efficient data management 
Because RFID systems can generate large volumes of 
data,4 accumulation of RFID data can easily lead to poor 
performance such as slower queries and updates. Cur-
rent solutions for efficient RFID data management use a 
data-mining-based approach11,12 that assumes data shares 
some common properties—for example, moving together 
in bulk mode or having the same expiration date—and 
can be grouped based on such properties. However, these 
solutions are limited to applications such as supply-chain 
management; a more general approach is needed for han-
dling massive RFID data. Given the limited active lifespan 
of such data, novel mechanisms such as partitioning of 
RFID data will become increasingly important.
intelligent data transformation  
and aggregation 
Raw RFID data presents little value until it is trans-
formed into a form suitable for application-level interac-
tions. Moreover, such data has implicit meanings and 
associated relationships with other RFID data—for 
example, containment—about which applications must 
make appropriate inferences.4 For example, observations 
of two items and a case in a certain time interval can imply 
that the items are packed in the case. Projects such as UC 
Berkeley’s HiFi data management infrastructure (http://
hifi.cs.berkeley.edu/home/about.
html) use event modeling techniques 
to formulate relationships among 
objects for RFID applications.
Large-scale  
application support
Developing and deploying large-scale RFID appli-
cations such as nationwide supply-chain management 
remains a challenge. Although some platforms support 
the distribution of functionalities such as RFID edge pro-
cessing, a full-fledged distributed architecture for sharing 
and synchronizing data across multiple nodes is needed. 
Deploying a large distributed system also requires 
the ability to continuously monitor the state of the sys-
tem and adaptively adjust its behavior. Given the large 
number and highly distributed nature of RFID devices, 
administration tools for visualizing, configuring, test-
ing, and monitoring RFID devices and system compo-
nents will become increasingly important.
seamless integration of  
legacy systems and sensors 
RFID integration platforms must support legacy soft-
ware systems. Such systems are normally mature, heav-
ily used, and constitute massive corporate assets, thus 
replacing them with new systems is too costly. 
Vendors and researchers are currently developing 
middleware that links new RFID systems into exist-
ing infrastructures. They are also working on ways to 
integrate sensors with RFID tags to obtain information 
about the physical world as well as objects’ identity.3 
For example, a sensor-enabled RFID tag attached to an 
airplane part could record the stress and shock experi-
enced during a flight, which could be used to make the 
corresponding preventive maintenance schedule.
security 
High-security applications such as access control, elec-
tronic passports, and systems for making payments or 
issuing tickets are increasingly using RFID. To adopt 
RFiD integration  
platforms must support  
legacy software systems.
 28	 Computer
such applications, businesses must be confident that their 
data is safe. Researchers have proposed a few strategies 
to authenticate and encrypt RFID data,2 but doing so 
increases the resource consumption and latency of read 
cycles. Comprehensive solutions are needed not only to 
protect RFID information but also to maintain desirable 
system performance.
Privacy 
Privacy is generally misperceived as an issue for which 
the natural solution consists of good security mecha-
nisms. Although security and privacy are tightly inter-
related, securing RFID applications does not necessarily 
ensure privacy. 
Two notable privacy concerns in RFID applications 
are their potential to leak personal property information 
and their ability to track consumers’ spending history 
and physical whereabouts.6 For example, terrorists could 
scan digital passports to target specific nationalities, and 
police could abuse a convenient new means of cradle-to-
grave surveillance. 
To address privacy threats for RFID users, research-
ers must implement technical solutions such as RSA 
blocker tags6 as well as legal countermeasures13 to 
ensure consumers that their data will not be misap-
propriated.
I n recent years, RFID has become a vibrant and rap-idly expanding area of research and development. The technology’s ability to precisely identify objects at low 
cost and without LOS creates many new and exciting 
opportunities for applications that could become an 
integral part of our daily lives. To develop and deploy 
these applications, however, researchers first must find 
robust, scalable, secure solutions to the unique chal-
lenges of RFID data that meet the specific requirements 
of system architectures. ■
acknowledgment
This research is partially supported by the Australian 
Research Council Discovery Grant DP0878917.  
References
 1. B. Nath, F. Reynolds, and R. Want, “RFID Technology and 
Applications,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 5, no. 1, 
2006, pp. 22-24.
 2. M.R. Rieback, B. Crispo, and A.S. Tanenbaum, “The Evolu-
tion of RFID Security,” IEEE Pervasive Computing, vol. 5, 
no. 1, 2006, pp. 62-69.
 3. G. Borriello, “RFID: Tagging the World,” Comm. ACM, vol. 
48, no. 9, 2005, pp. 34-37.
 4. S.S. Chawathe et al., “Managing RFID Data,” Proc. 30th 
Int’l Conf. Very Large Databases (VLDB 04), VLDB Endow-
ment, 2004, pp. 1189-1195.
 5. F. Wang and P. Liu, “Temporal Management of RFID Data,” 
Proc. 31st Int’l Conf. Very Large Databases (VLDB 05), 
VLDB Endowment, 2005, pp. 1128-1139.
 6. M. Ohkubo, K. Suzuki, and S. Kinoshita, “RFID Privacy 
Issues and Technical Challenges,” Comm. ACM, vol. 48, no. 
9, 2005, pp. 66-71.
 7. S. Hsi and H. Fait, “RFID Enhances Visitors’ Museum Expe-
rience at the Exploratorium,” Comm. ACM, vol. 48, no. 9, 
2005, pp. 60-65.
 8. E. Dishman, “Inventing Wellness Systems for Aging in Place,” 
Computer, May 2004, pp. 34-41.
 9. C. Bornhövd et al., “Integrating Automatic Data Acquisition 
with Business Processes: Experiences with SAP’s Auto-ID 
Infrastructure,” Proc. 30th Int’l Conf. Very Large Databases 
(VLDB 04), VLDB Endowment, 2004, pp. 1182-1188.
 10. S.R. Jeffery, M.J. Franklin, and M. Garofalakis, “An Adap-
tive RFID Middleware for Supporting Metaphysical Data 
Independence,” VLDB J., vol. 17, no. 2, 2008, pp. 265-289. 
 11. Y. Hu et al., “Supporting RFID-Based Item Tracking Appli-
cations in Oracle DBMS Using a Bitmap Datatype,” Proc. 
31st Int’l Conf. Very Large Databases (VLDB 05), 2005, pp. 
1140-1151. 
 12. H. Gonzalez et al., “Warehousing and Analyzing Massive 
RFID Data Sets,” Proc. 22nd Int’l Conf. Data Engineering 
(ICDE 06), IEEE CS Press, 2006, p. 83.
 13. K.C. Jones, “California Senate Approves Bill to Outlaw Skim-
ming RFID Tags,” InformationWeek, 31 Jan. 2008.
Quan Z. Sheng is a lecturer in the School of Computer Sci-
ence at the University of Adelaide. His research interests 
include Web services, business process integration, data 
integration, and pervasive computing. Sheng received 
a PhD in computer science from the University of New 
South Wales. He is a member of the IEEE and the ACM. 
Contact him at qsheng@cs.adelaide.edu.au.
Xue Li is a senior lecturer in the School of Information 
Technology and Electrical Engineering at the University 
of Queensland. His research interests include data min-
ing, multimedia data security, database systems, and 
intelligent Web information systems. Li received a PhD 
in information systems from the Queensland University 
of Technology. He is a member of the IEEE and the ACM. 
Contact him at xueli@itee.uq.edu.au.
Sherali Zeadally is an associate professor in the Depart-
ment of Computer Science and Information Technology 
at the University of the District of Columbia, Washington, 
D.C. His research interests include computer networks, 
mobile computing, RFID, network and system security, 
and ubiquitous computing. Zeadally received a PhD in 
computer science from the University of Buckingham, 
England. He is a Fellow of the British Computer Society 
and the Institution of Engineering and Technology. Con-
tact him at szeadally@udc.edu.

