This textbook was intended to introduce
students to the subject and to lay the
foundation for further advanced study. The
book lies somewhere between applied
mathematics, physics, and engineering, and
like its author, it undoubtedly has a theoretical
bias. [The SCI® indicates that this book has
been cited in more than 1,700 publications.]
An Introduction to Fluid Dynamics
G.K. Batchelor
Department of Applied Mathematics
and Theoretical Physics
University of Cambridge
Cambridge CB3 9EW
England
The diary that I kept when writing this book
shows that the first notes about its purpose and
the list of chapter titles were made in June 1958. I
had been teaching courses on fluid mechanics,
mainly classical hydrodynamics of “Ideal” (that is,
inviscid) fluids, to second and third year students
of applied mathematics at Cambridge, and I had
become unhappy about the difficulty of relating
the flow systems considered in lectures—and in
the available textbooks—to those actually ob-
served and described in more practical books on
hydraulics and aerodynamics. The difficulty is not,
as is sometimes supposed, that the study of
ideal-fluid flow has nothing to say about the mo-
tion of real fluids; the difficulty is that ideal-fluid
theory itself cannot predict the circumstances in
which ideal-fluid flow coincides with that of a real
fluid. Largeness of the Reynolds number of the
flow is a necessary condition for the coincidence,
but it is not sufficient because the limit is singular.
Elucidation of the additional conditions for reality
of a particular ideal-fluid flow field involves study
of high-Reynoldsnumber flow fields and boundary
layers and the shedding of vorticity from bounda-
ries, which is not easily taught in a first course for
students. There is thus a pedagogical dilemma.
Classical hydrodynamics provides suitable mate-
rial for a first course in fluid mechanics, but a
student does not know which ideal-fluid flow fields
are realistic unless and until he or she goes on to
the more advanced study of the effects of fluid
viscosity. The authors of textbooks for applied
mathematics students used in the 1950s, almost
all prewar publications, were not affected much
by the dilemma because the improved under-
standing of high Reynolds-number flow needed
for decisions on the reality of the ideal-fluid flow
fields was not generally available until the re-
search of the 1930s had been codified and inte-
grated, most notably in S. Goldstein’s Modern
Developments in Fluid Dynamics.1 But the di-
lemma could not be ignored in 1958.
With the usual optimism of the educational
reformer, I resolved to write a textbook in which
the more difficult material on high-Reynolds-
number flow and effects of viscosity would pre-
cede the more straightforward and mainly
mathematical study of ideal-fluid flow. That is the
logical order, but it conflicts with the educational
practice of taking simpler topics first. I am glad I
did invert the conventional order, because text-
books are for teachers as well as for students,
and I think it is essential that the teacher should
be able to perceive the logic of the presentation
and to convey it to students even though, for
practical reasons, the emphasis in an introductory
course might be placed on flow systems which
are amenable to mathematical analysis.
The other and more general purpose that I
had in mind was to convey to students the rich-
ness of fluid dynamical phenomena and the
challenge of understanding them in qualitative
physical terms. A textbook of fluid dynamics, even
one which might be used by applied mathematics
students, gains a lot from the inclusion of photo-
graphs of flow fields and explanations of the me-
chanical processes at work. There are now many
books on fluid dynamics that similarly stress the
importance of understanding flow systems physi-
cally.
The writing was completed after eight years of
hard work. The final product was satisfying to me,
and it is a bonus that a number of students,
teachers, and researchers have learned from it.
Undergraduates have found it hard going, I
gather, but many graduate students in applied
mathematics and engineering have found it
helpful.
1. Goldstein S, ed. Modern developments in fluid dynamics. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press, 1938. (Cited 620 times since 1945.)
Received January 22, 1992
8 CURRENT CONTENTS® ©1992 by ISI®
Batchelor G K. An introduction to fluid dynamics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1967.
615 p. [Applied Mathematics, University of Cambridge, England]
This Week’s Citation Classic® CC/NUMBER 40OCTOBER 5, 1992

