Chapter 2
The Hungarian Method for the Assignment
Problem
Harold W. Kuhn
Introduction by Harold W. Kuhn
This paper has always been one of my favorite “children,” combining as it does
elements of the duality of linear programming and combinatorial tools from graph
theory. It may be of some interest to tell the story of its origin.
I spent the summer of 1953 at the Institute for Numerical Analysis which was
housed on the U.C.L.A. campus. I was supported by the National Bureau of Stan-
dards and shared an office with Ted Motzkin, a pioneer in the theory of inequalities
and one of the most scholarly mathematicians I have ever known. I had no fixed
duties and spent the summer working on subjects that were of interest to me at the
time, such as the traveling salesman problem and the assignment problem.
The Institute for Numerical Analysis was the home of the SWAC (Standards
Western Automatic Computer), which had been designed by Harry Huskey and had
a memory of 256 words of 40 bits each on 40 Williamson tubes. The formulation
of the assignment problem as a linear program was well known, but a 10 by 10 as-
signment problem has 100 variables in its primal statement and 100 constraints in
the dual and so was too large for the SWAC to solve as a linear program. The SEAC
(Standard Eastern Automatic Computer), housed in the National Bureau of Stan-
dards in Washington, could solve linear programs with about 25 variables and 25
constraints. The SEAC had a liquid mercury memory system which was extremely
limiting.
During that summer, I was reading König’s book on graph theory. I recognized
the following theorem of König to be a pre-linear programming example of duality:
If the numbers of a matrix are 0’s and 1’s, then the minimum number of rows and
columns that will contain all of the 1’s is equal to the maximum number of 1’s that
can be chosen, with no two in the same row or column.
Harold W. Kuhn
Princeton University, USA
e-mail: kuhn@math.princeton.edu
29
 
M. Jünger et al. (eds.), 50 Years of Integer Programming 1958-2008, 
DOI 10.1007/978-3-540-68279-0_2, © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2010 
30 Harold W. Kuhn
Indeed, the primal problem is the special case of an assignment problem in which
the ratings of the individuals in the jobs are only 0’s and 1’s. In a footnote, König
refers to a paper of E. Egerváry (in Hungarian), which seemed to contain the treat-
ment of a more general case. When I returned to Bryn Mawr, where I was on the
faculty in 1953, I took out a Hungarian grammar and a large Hungarian-English
dictionary and taught myself enough Hungarian to translate Egerváry’s paper. I then
realized that Egerváry’s paper gave a computationally trivial method for reducing
the general assignment problem to a 0-1 problem. Thus, by putting the two ideas
together, the Hungarian Method was born. I tested the algorithm by solving 12 by
12 problems with random 3-digit ratings by hand. I could do any such problem, with
pencil and paper, in no more than 2 hours. This seemed to be much better than any
other method known at the time.
The paper was published in Naval Research Logistics Quarterly. This was a nat-
ural choice since the project in Game Theory, Linear and Nonlinear Programming,
and Combinatorics at Princeton, with which Al Tucker and I were associated from
1948 to 1972, was supported by the Office of Naval Research Logistics Branch.
Many mathematicians were benificiaries of the wise stewardship of Mina Rees as
head of the ONR and Fred Rigby as chief of the Logistics branch. We were also
fortunate to have Jack Laderman, the first editor of the journal, as our project super-
visor.
I have told much of the same story in my paper [1]. Large sections of this account
are reproduced in the book by Alexander Schrijver [2]. Schrijver’s account places
the Hungarian Method in the mathematical context of combinatorial optimization
and rephrases the concepts in graph-theoretical language.
References
1. H.W. Kuhn, On the origin of the Hungarian Method, History of mathematical programming;
a collection of personal reminiscences (J.K. Lenstra, A.H.G. Rinnooy Kan, and A. Schrijver,
eds.), North Holland, Amsterdam, 1991, pp. 77–81.
2. A. Schrijver, Combinatorial optimization: polyhedra and efficiency, Vol. A. Paths, Flows,
Matchings, Springer, Berlin, 2003.
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 31
32 Harold W. Kuhn
The following article originally appeared as:
H.W. Kuhn, The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem, Naval Research
Logistics Quarterly 2 (1955) 83–97.
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 33
34 Harold W. Kuhn
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 35
36 Harold W. Kuhn
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 37
38 Harold W. Kuhn
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 39
40 Harold W. Kuhn
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 41
42 Harold W. Kuhn
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 43
44 Harold W. Kuhn
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 45
46 Harold W. Kuhn
2 The Hungarian Method for the Assignment Problem 47

