Hardware and Software
for Multimedia
Development
Objectives
At the end of the section, you will be able to
· Outline the hardware requirements for multimedia
development;
List various software for developing multimedia; and
Choose suitable software for developing multimedia.
·
·
C
omputers are now making it possible to combine sound, images and motion
together. In earlier sections, you have read about definitions of multimedia
as propounded by experts. You can now describe the use of multimedia in
educational settings. In this section, we introduce you to the inside story of
multimedia i.e. about the hardware and the software which enable you to get the end
product called . Understanding these concepts is very important as it is
only the hardware (the computer), the software (tools for designing multimedia) and
yourself (your conceptual understanding and skills) which will be crucial for
multimedia development. In this section, we will confine ourselves to the Microsoft
Windows platform only. There are other platforms also like Apple Macintosh, Silicon
Graphics, Sun Microsystems and even mainframes. Since Windows-based
systems (or Windows operating systems) have a worldwide presence, availability
and affordability, it becomes an automatic choice for our purpose. In this section you
will learn about the hardware and the software. In fact the software tells the
hardware as to what to do. This section also highlights the software that enables
development of multimedia. You will also learn about some of the ways to choose
the best combination of hardware and software to suit your requirements.
An is the program that is responsible to manage all the other
programs in a computer, once it is loaded into the computer. The other programs are
called programs. The operating system determines the distribution of
time and order for multiple application programs running simultaneously. It also
manages the sharing of memory among multiple applications. It communicates with
the attached hardware devices about the condition of operations and any errors that
may have occurred. Linux and Windows 2000 are examples of operating systems
while MS-Word is an example of an application program.
In this section we discuss various terminologies used in computer operations and
usage to emphasize their importance in multimedia development.
'multimedia'
The developments in the field of hardware and software for multimedia are such that
it is practically impossible to be current in print. The description in this section is only
informative (and does not necessarily claim to be exhaustive) for enabling you to
familiarize with the concepts and capabilities of some of the software used in
developing multimedia.
operating system
applications
3
Hardware required for Multimedia
To begin your quest with a multimedia project you must have a decent computer. A
decent computer means you should have adequate hardware. Hardware interprets
your commands into computer activity. As of now, if you are asked to develop a
multimedia project, you would ask for a fast computer with lot of speed and storage.
There are many more things that you need to know like which component makes a
computer fast, what is the device for storage, etc. The components are thus divided
into five categories viz.
These are the devices that are the essential components for a computer. These
include microprocessor, motherboard and memory. Microprocessor is basically the
heart of the computer. A is a computer processor on a small
microchip. When you turn your computer on, it is the microprocessor, which
performs some operations. The microprocessor gets the first instruction from the
(BIOS), which is a part of its memory. BIOS actually
loads the operating system into random access memory (RAM). A is a
device in the computer that contains the computer's basic circuitry and other
components. Motherboard contains computer components like microprocessor,
memory, basic input/output system (BIOS), expansion slots and interconnecting
circuitry. You can add additional components to a motherboard through its
expansion slot.
RAM (random access memory), also called primary memory, locates the operating
system, application programs, and data in current use so that the computer's
processor reaches them quickly. RAM is called "random access" because any
storage location can be accessed randomly or directly. RAM is much faster than the
hard disk; the floppy disk and the CD-ROM. RAM can be taken as short-term
memory and the hard disk as the long-term memory of a computer. However, RAM
might get slow when used to its limit. That is why, you need more memory to work on
multimedia. Today's personal computers come with 128 or more of RAM.
System devices, Memory and storage devices, Input
devices, Output devices, and Communication devices.
microprocessor
Basic Input/Output System
motherboard
megabytes
System devices
Memory and Storage devices
40 GB Hard Disk
1.44 MB Floppy Disk
10
Users of graphic applications usually need 128 plus megabytes of memory.
A stores and provides access to large amounts of data on an electro
magnetically charged surface. Today's computers typically come with a hard disk
that contains several billion bytes (gigabytes) of storage. The popular ones currently
are 40 GB and above. Hard disk contains a part called which is
responsible for improving the time it takes to read from or write to a hard disk. The
disk cache holds data that has recently been read. The other type of hardware cache
inside your computer is cache memory. Cache stores something temporarily e.g.
Temporary Internet files are saved in Cache.
A (CD) is a small medium that can store data pertaining to audio, video,
text, and other information in digital form. Initially, CDs were read-only, but newer
technology allows users to record as well. (Compact Disc, read-only-
memory) can store computer data in the form of text, graphics and sound. To record
data into a CD, you need a . Normally this type of CD is either
(CD-R) or (CD-RW). For the latter you can use the CD
as a floppy disk write, erase and again write data into the same disk. In the CD-R,
once the data recording is completed, it becomes a CD-ROM and nothing can be
deleted.
A is the primary text input device for your computer. It was very popular
when DOS was the popular operating system. After the emergence of Windows, its
role became limited to dealing with text and for some commands only. The keyboard
contains certain standard function keys, such as the
and A mouse is also a primary input device
but it is not suitable for dealing with text.
A is a small device that you move across a pad in order to point to a place on a
display screen and thus execute a command by clicking it. The mouse is an integral
part of any personal computer. A cable connects the mouse to the computer.
is another input device that can interpret dictation and also enable us to
input sound like the keyboard is used for text.
A records and stores photographic images in digital form that can be
fed to a computer as the impressions are recorded or stored in the camera for later
hard disk
disk cache
compact disc
CD-ROM
CD recorder CD-
Recordable CD-Rewritable
keyboard
escape key, tab, cursor
movement keys, and shift control keys.
mouse
Microphone
digital camera
Input devices
11
loading into a computer. The digital cameras are available for still as well as motion
pictures.
A is a device, which on receiving the signal from computer transfers the
information to paper. Earlier the printer was a popular low-cost personal
computer printer; now printers have taken its place. Dot-matrix printer strikes
the paper a line at a time while inkjet sprays ink and laser printer uses a laser beam to
attract ink (also called ). A is a device for display. It is just like a
television set and is measured diagonally from two opposing corners of the picture
tube. The standard monitor size is 14 inches. Very large monitors can measure 21
inches diagonal or greater.
An is an electronic device that increases the power of a signal. Amplifiers
are used in audio equipments. They are also called . Speakers with
built-in amplifiers have become an integral part of the computers today and are
important for any multimedia project.
A modulates going out from a computer or other digital device
to for a telephone line and demodulates the analog signal to convert it
to a digital signal to be inputted in a computer. Most new personal computers come
with 56 Kbps modems. Modems help your computer to connect to a network.
You are now aware of the basic devices on your computer. However, there are a few
more devices that you should know. Video capture is one of the most important
hardwares to be used for multimedia work on a personal computer. Video-capture
results will depend on the performance and capacity of all of the components of your
system working together. from analog devices like video camera
requires a special that converts the analog signals into digital
form and compresses the data. Video-capture card use various components of the
computer to pass frames to the processor and hard disk. For good quality video, a
Output devices
Communication devices
Additional Hardware
printer
dot-matrix
inkjet
toner monitor
amplifier
power amplifiers
modem digital signals
analog signals
Video capture
video capture card
12
video-capture card must be able to capture full-screen video at a good rate. For
example for a full-motion video, the card must be capable of capturing about 35
frames per second at 720 by 480 pixels for digital video and 640 by 480 for analog
video. To determine what settings will produce the best results for your projects, you
must be careful in defining these parameters.
A is a device that attaches to the motherboard to enable the computer to
input, process, and deliver sound. The sound card generates sounds; records sound
from analog devices by converting them to digital mode and reproduce sound for a
speaker by reconverting them to analog mode. is a
standard sound card, to the extent that some people use the name as a generic term.
A provides extended capability to a computer in terms of video. The
better the video adapter, the better is the quality of the picture you see. A high quality
video adapter is a must for you while designing your multimedia project.
A good multimedia system should have a Pentium 1.6 Ghz (or the one with similar
capabilities) onwards processor, at least 256 MB of RAM, 40 GB onwards hard disk
drive, 1.44 MB Floppy drive, 17 inch onwards SVGA monitor, 32MB AGP card, 52 X
CD-ROM drive, a 32 bit sound card, high wattage sub-woofer speakers, 104 PS/2
keyboard, PS/2 mouse and 56K fax data voice modem. If you wish you can add a
CD-recorder, scanner, printer, digital camcorder and a video-capture card.
Remember, there is no set rule to define the exact hardware combination of a good
multimedia computer. The combination is dependent on the nature and contents of
the multimedia project you are dealing with. Fortunately, there exist hardware tools
for performing almost any action; the need is to use only that hardware, which suits
your purpose. For a ready reference, see table-1:
The basic tool set for building a multimedia project can be divided into five
categories:
and The
software in your multimedia toolkit and your ability to use it will determine the quality
of your multimedia work.
sound card
Creative Lab's Sound Blaster
video adapter
Painting and drawing tools, 3-D Modeling and animation tools, Image
editing tools, Sound editing tools, Animation Video Digital Movie tools.
Configuration of a Multimedia Computer
Multimedia design software
13
The Power Supply
The System Board
Central Processing Unit
(CPU)
RAM (The Memory)
The Floppy Drive
Hard Drives
CD Drive (read/write)
Modem
Sound Card
Keyboard
Monitor
Mouse
Printer
Scanner
Digital Camera
Video Capture Card
Graphics Card
movie)(Still/
It converts AC current into DC current as all
computer components operate on DC
current.
All of the parts inside the computer are
assembled on the system board.
The CPU is the brain of the computer.
Pentium is a popular chip presently.
Random Access Memory (RAM) is critical for
multimedia. The more memory the better off
the computer is.
A floppy drive is a storage device for smaller
files (1.44 MB)
Hard disk drive stores software and data.
More storage is better for large projects.
CD drives can store what hundreds of floppy
disks together can. Maximum capacity of CD
is about 800 MB presently.
Modem enables communications between
your computer with other computers, the
Internet and the World Wide Web.
Sound Cards allow conversion of digital
sound to analog sound and vice-versa.
The keyboard sends typed information to the
system board.
Monitor is a display device. Choose how
many colors they can display and about their
resolution.
Mice are used as a pointing device.
Inkjet printers have the ability to turn out
good-looking output, including graphics at a
lower cost than laser printers. Laser printers
produce the best quality, but their cost is high
Scanners are used to digitize photographs,
artwork and documents.
To capture pictures and prepare movie.
To capture analog video and convert into
digital format
To view graphics on the screen clearly.
Component Description Standard
Any standard ATX
Cabinet.
Prefer to buy genuine
board for the processor.
Intel web-site has a
motherboard selection
feature.
Pentium 4 processors,
AMD etc, with 1.5 GHz
speed onwards.
Minimum 256 MB
Buy any 1.44 MB
40 GB onwards
ROM - 52 X
RW 48X x 16X
56 kbps onwards
Sound Blaster e.g.
Creative Live Value Card
Multimedia Key Board
17"
Scroll Mouse
Choose as per your
requirements.
Choose as per your
requirements.
Choose as per your
requirements.
Choose as per your
requirements.
32 MB Minimum
Table-1 : Components of a Multimedia PC
14
Painting and drawing tools
3-D Modeling tools
Graphic impact of your multimedia presentation is very important in influencing the
students. It is the graphics that would create the first impression of your multimedia
project. These tools are, therefore, very useful in giving you the desired capability in
terms of drawing and painting. Painting and drawing tools generally come with a
graphical user interface with pull down menus for quick selection. You can create
almost all kinds of possible shapes and resize them. These tools have the capability
to color with paint and clip arts. One can use brushes of different sizes and shapes
according to the need. One can use layers to give different treatment to each
element. Most of these tools come with built-in plug-ins for performing different
tasks. Once you are done with the drawing it can be imported or exported in many
image formats like .gif, .tif, .jpg, .bmp, etc. We will give a brief description of a good
drawing software known as
With , you can create illustrations from scratch. It has wide-ranging
features to handle text and to create drawing with precision. It can be used to
improve clip art, pictures and photos. It is an ideal tool for any design project like
technical drawings, advertisements, logos, etc. It can be used in creating full-color
illustrations for multifarious drawings and graphics for any designing project. It has
lot of clip arts and high-quality drawings, which can be inserted into your multimedia
project. One can also generate drawing for an animation sequence by using Corel
Draw.
Realism means that you depict things in the way they actually are. With the help of
3-D modeling and animation tools the objects that appear in perception in your
project can look realistic. It has become conventional to use 3-D modeling in
multimedia design. These tools offer features like multiple windows to view your
design in each dimension. They have and menus from where you can drop
shapes into your design and combine them to create complex designs. A good 3-D
modeling tool is 3D Studio Max.
is a tool for making 3D models and designs that can be converted into
3-dimensional animations. You must have seen many websites with animated
symbols. In fact many of such symbols are made by using this tool. You can virtually
lead your imagination to go wild and visualize any symbol easily with the help of this
Corel Draw.
Corel Draw
drag drop
3D Studio Max
15
tool. It has applications in creating web pages; designing advertisements; making
cartoon films and in creating multimedia based training programmes. One can give
special effects to the design especially in terms of sound and animation.
While Painting and Drawing tools let you create a drawing from scratch, Image
editing tools are used to edit existing bitmap images and pictures. However, these
tools are similar to painting and drawing tools as they can also create images from
scratch. They are capable of converting any image data type file format. Image
editing tools are primarily used for reinventing and recreating the image, which make
them an important tool for designing a multimedia project. We will introduce two good
image processing software here:
is a cutting-edge image processing software package that
enables you to create and edit images on computers. is also an
exceptional drawing and painting utility that yields professional-quality effects. With
both these tools you can edit an image in almost any desirable way. One can add
elements in layers; edit text and use effects filter to make the existing image look
even inferior to the edited one. It can mix and manipulate colors at a click of a button.
You can manipulate your images with special effects and techniques. Images can be
imported and exported across programs in any format. These tools have been used
to edit and create images for motion pictures, animations and for artwork. With the
help of these tools, you can master the special effects you've always wanted.
Sound editing tools let you hear sound as well as visualize it. You can cut/copy and paste
sound and edit it with great accuracy. You can integrate sound into your multimedia
project very easily by using sound editing tools. One such software is .
can be used to record your own music, voice, or any other audio. It makes
you a professional as far as handling of sound is concerned. You can edit, mix the
sound with any other audio and add effects to it. can record from a CD,
keyboard, or any other sound played through your sound card. One good feature of
this software is that it can read and write MP3, which is the hot sound format in the
Image editing tools
Sound editing tools
Adobe Photoshop & Paint Shop pro.
Adobe Photoshop
Paint Shop pro
Cool Edit
Cool Edit
Cool Edit
16
present times. Once you are done with your sound file, it can help you in converting
the file to any desired format. In other words, there is a similarity in these editing
tools--what Photoshop can do to images; can do for sound.
is another professional quality sound editing tool that is used in
multimedia work.
Animations are graphic scenes played back sequentially and rapidly. These tools
adopt an object-oriented approach to animation. These tools enable you to edit and
assemble video clips captured from camera, animations and other sources. The
completed clip with added transition and visual effects could be played back. Adobe
Premiere and Media Shop Pro are two good examples of these tools.
is a powerful tool for professional digital video editing. It is primarily
used to produce broadcast quality movies. It has excellent editing tools that enable
you to work with complete flexibility. This software first digitizes the sound and video
and then allows you to edit them to preserve picture quality. It can edit video and
multimedia movies in AVI as well as MPEG format. It can create titles and graphics
and then add them to your multimedia project. It uses digital filtering for incorporating
special effects. This software has applications in film editing and movie making.
also gives you the most complete set of advanced video editing
tools. It can capture the video from VCR, TV or camcorders. It is capable of capturing
a batch of scenes. It brings all the components of a multimedia project like video,
sound, animation and titles together. One can add effects and transitions and finally
save the video in the desired format. It can retouch videos by painting directly over
any frame in a video sequence. It has an audio editor, which can remove background
noise and add another sound to your video.
For creating animations is the industry standard. A file created in
Flash is called a movie. A movie in Flash occupies very less file size, and hence is
more popular for the Web. You can also create presentations and 2D Animations
using Flash.
Cool Edit
Sound Forge
Adobe Premiere
Media Studio Pro
Macromedia Flash
Animation, video and digital movies editing tools
17
Integrated Design Software
Multimedia authoring tools are tools which organize and edit your multimedia
project. These tools are required to design the user interface for presenting the
project to the learner. In other words, these tools are used to assemble various
elements to make a single presentation. You can compose comprehensive videos
and animations with these tools. There are four basic type of authoring tools viz.
(like Tool book, Visual Basic), (like
Authorware), (like Macromedia Director) and
(like Media Forge).
organize elements as pages of a book. These tools are used when
the content of the project consists of elements that can be viewed individually. These
tools organize them in a user-defined sequential form. organize
elements as objects. These tools display the flow diagrams of activities along with
branching paths. organize the elements along a time-line. These
tools play back the sequentially organized graphic frames at user-set speed and
time. organize the elements in a hierarchical order as related
“objects”. These tools make these objects perform according to properties assigned
to them.
We will give here a brief description of two such tools Authorware (Icon based) and
Macromedia Director (Time based).
has a visual interface, which one has to simply drag and
drop icons to create an application. You do not need to be a programmer to use this
software as it has an interactive design. Authorware provides direct support for
graphics and animations made in Flash. Authorware can capture and integrate
animations and video made in different programmes like Flash and QuickTime. It
can integrate sound into your project in order to enhance the effect. It has an anti-
aliasing feature which smoothes out the edges of text and graphics. Authorware has
built-in templates which give you flexibility and convenience while developing your
project. You can learn about basic authoring, editing and publishing ways with the
help of a multimedia tutorial which is built-in with this software.
is a multimedia authoring application capable of producing
animations, presentations and movies. It provides a wide range of possibilities for
integrating different multimedia elements. It supports inputs from programs like
, and . It has applications in building professional
Page based tools Icon based authoring tools
Time based authoring tools Object
Oriented tools
Page-based tools
Icon based tools
Time based tools
Object Oriented tools
Macromedia Authorware
Macromedia Director
Shockwave Photoshop Premiere
18
multimedia presentations. You can also integrate Real Audio and Real Video in
Director projects. Compatibility of Director with other packages means that you can
use your favorite tools and software to create content for your project and then bring
that content into Director for authoring.
Multimedia is making a difference by providing ways of delivering learning materials
that are less expensive and more convenient. The key to any learning process is that
it must be relevant and it must keep the learner engaged. Educational multimedia is
no exception. This can be proved after seeing the growing use of graphics,
illustrations, animations and sound in educational multimedia. It is therefore
essential to choose that software which enables you to execute your project with the
minimum possible effort and maximum possible productivity. Multimedia software
have unlimited features. You can choose among several hundred colors, dozens of
fonts, a wide variety of color-coordinated templates and many other incredible
options. Before starting to select software, one should start with an outline of the
project and decide what is expected from the project. Table-2 gives a ready reckoner
for selecting software.
Hardware is the first thing that you should have to begin your quest with a multimedia
project. Hardware is necessary to interpret your commands, queries and responses
into computer activity. You have read about hardware components viz. system
devices, memory and storage devices, input devices, output devices and
communication devices. Fortunately there is an abundance of good hardware
answers to almost every problem. These areas are fast getting converged. May be
tomorrow you would be able to see some more innovative steps in this direction
which offers you even better c
Similarly in software too, entire suites of integrated production tools are now
available. The need is to use them judiciously to create good projects. Powerful
features are continuously being added to the software that allows developers to work
more smoothly and conveniently between applications. Emergence of these
integration features has resulted in collaboration and unison of multiple tools. The
integration has enabled us to use your graphics from a previous work and save time
on rebuilding it.
In short, the options available are enormous. All that you have to do is to choose the
right hardware and software to complete your multimedia projects.
In the next section we will discuss about learner characteristics in order to develop
good programme for them.
Choosing Multimedia Software
apabilities.
Features Description
Usability Should have a capability to deal
with a variety of text, images
video and sound formats with
precision and ease.
Animations Should have wide ranging
capabilities in terms of
interactive simulations, media
support, animated buttons,
illustrations,maps,etc.
Smoothness Should have anti-aliasing
feature, meaning that all letter
and image edges are smooth.
Integration Should have integration
capabilities with a wide range
of software used for different
jobs like Real, ActiveX,
Shockwave, Flash, QuickTime,
Photoshop and other
applications .
Delivery Should be able to develop one
piece of content for delivery on
different media types.
User freindliness Should be the easiest, most
versatile, and have the most
pre-built models .
Clientele Should have applications for
instructional designers,
subject matter experts,
training developers and others.
Table-2 : Choosing software
19

