AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 1
COMPUTERS IN BIOLOGY AND MEDICINE
An International Journal
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK
TABLE OF CONTENTS
.
XXX
.
•       Description
•       Audience
•       Impact Factor
•       Abstracting and Indexing
•       Editorial Board
•       Guide for Authors
p.1
p.1
p.1
p.2
p.2
p.4
ISSN: 0010-4825
DESCRIPTION
.
Computers in Biology and Medicine is a medium of international communication of the revolutionary
advances being made in the application of the computer to the fields of bioscience and medicine.
The Journal encourages the exchange of important research, instruction, ideas and information on
all aspects of the rapidly expanding area of computer usage in these fields. The Journal will focus on
such areas as (1) Analysis of Biomedical Systems: Solutions of Equations; (2) Synthesis of Biomedical
Systems: Simulations; (3) Special Medical Data Processing Methods; (4) Special Purpose Computers
and Clinical Data Processing for Real Time, Clinical and Experimental Use; and (5) Medical Diagnosis
and Medical Record Processing. Also included are the fields of (6) Biomedical Engineering; and
(7) Medical Informatics as well as Bioinformatics. The journal is expanding to include (8) Medical
Applications of the Internet and World Wide Web; (9) Human Genomics; (10) Proteomics; and (11)
Functional Brain Studies.
The publication policy is to publish (1) New, original articles that have been appropriately reviewed
by competent scientific people, (2) Surveys of developments in the fields, (3) Pedagogical papers
covering specific areas of interest, and (4) Book reviews pertinent to the field.
Articles which examine the following topics of special interest are being featured in Computers in
Biology and Medicine: Computer aids to the analysis of biochemical systems, computer aids to
biocontrol-systems engineering, neuronal simulation by digital-computer gating components,
automatic computer analysis of pictures of biological and medical importance, use of computers
by commercial pharmaceutical and chemical organizations, radiation-dosage computers, and
accumulating and recalling individual medical records, real-time languages, interfaces to patient
monitors, clinical chemistry equipment, data handling and display in nuclear medicine and therapy.
AUDIENCE
.
Physicians, Surgeons, Physiologists, Bacteriologists.
IMPACT FACTOR
.
2016: 1.836 © Thomson Reuters Journal Citation Reports 2017
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 2
ABSTRACTING AND INDEXING
.
Aerospace Database
BIOBASE
BIOSIS
BioEngineering Abstracts
Elsevier BIOBASE
Cancerlit
Chemical Abstracts
Compendex
Computer Contents
Computer and Information Systems Abstract
Current Contents
Current Contents/Engineering, Computing & Technology
Current Contents/Health Services Administration
Current Contents/Life Sciences
Current Index to Statistics
MEDLINE®
International Nursing Index
LISA (Library and Information Science Abstracts)
MathSci
EMBASE
Engineering Index
INSPEC
PASCAL/CNRS
Science Citation Index
Social SciSearch
Telegen
UnCover
Excerpta Medica
Biological Abstracts
Current Awareness in Biological Sciences
CompuMath Citation Index
TOXFILE
BIOSIS Previews
Ei Compendex
Scopus
EMBiology
CSA Technology Research Database
Biotechnology and Bioengineering Abstracts
Abstracts of Mycology
Computer Database
Computer Science Index
BIOSIS Toxicology
CSA Life Sciences Abstracts
EMBASE Alert
EMCARE
Gale Group Computer DB
Science Search
Time Technology
EDITORIAL BOARD
.
Editor-in-Chief
Edward Ciaccio, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA
Atrial fibrillation, biomedical engineering, celiac disease, computational biology, image processing,
signal processing, ventricular tachycardia.
Founding Editor
Robert S. Ledley
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 3
Associate Editors
U Rajendra Acharya, Ngee Ann Polytechnic, Singapore, Singapore
Biomedical signal processing, heart rate variability, EEG, medical imaging
Huanyu Cheng, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA
Arkadiusz Gertych, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, USA
Image processing, computer assisted-diagnosis, and bio-image informatics
Suparerk Janjarasjitt, Ubon Ratchathani University, Ubon Ratchathani, Thailand
Biomedical signal processing, complex systems analysis, computational neuroscience
Zhanpeng Jin, Binghamton University, Binghamton, New York, USA
Tryphon Lambrou, University of Lincoln, Lincoln, England, UK
Image processing and analysis
Abhilash Ponnath, Louisiana State University (LSU) Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA
Fengfeng Zhou, Jilin University, Jilin, China
Bioinformatics, comparative genomics, disease biomarker detection, heterogeneous big data fusion,
data mining.
Editorial Board
Ulas Bagci, University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA
Alex Bui, University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA), Los Angeles, California, USA
Candido Cabo, New York City College of Technology/CUNY, New York, New York, USA
Rodrigo Capobianco Guido, Universidade Estadual Paulista (UNESP), São Paolo, Brazil
Lingqian Chang, The Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio, USA
Shubhajit Roy Chowdhury, IIIT Hyderabad, Hyderabad, India
Giuseppe Coppini, CNR Institute, Pisa, Italy
Timothy Ellmore, City College of New York, New York, New York, USA
Shankaracharya , The University of Texas, Houston, Texas, USA
Dimitrios Fotiadis, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece
Hao Han, Stanford, California, USA
Yipeng Hu, University College London (UCL), London, England, UK
Yalcin Isler, Izmir Katip Celebi University, Izmir, Turkey
Bing Nan Li, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
Cliff Lieberman, Association for Computing Machinery, Boynton Beach, Florida, USA
Feng Liu, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
Jie Liu, Altamira LLC, Columbus, Ohio, USA
Awais Mansoor, National Institutes of Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, USA
Sara R.F. Marceglia, Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy
George Matsopoulos, National Technical University of Athens (NTUA), Athens, Greece
Fatima Merchant, University of Houston, Houston, Texas, USA
Hamidreza Namazi, Amikabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
Eddie Y. K. Ng, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, Singapore
Alessia Paglialonga, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche (CNR), Milan, Italy
Jincheng Pang, Pfizer Global Research and Development, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Gang Peng, University of Texas, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, USA
R.P.Channing Rodgers, University of California at San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA
Gang Su, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA
Jafar Toussy, Semnan University of Medical Sciences, Semnan, Iran
Ali Vahdati, Becton Dickinson, Durham, North Carolina, USA
Mengchi Wang, University of California at San Diego (UCSD), La Jolla, California, USA
Yuanyuan Wang, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, Tennessee, USA
Lisheng Xu, Shenyang, China
Zhan (Harold) Ye, Marshfield Clinic Research Foundation, Marshfield, Wisconsin, USA
Nianyin Zeng, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
Qing Zhang, Caris Life Technology, Phoenix, Arizona, USA
Ying Zhang, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California, USA
Zhiguo Zhou, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA
Past Editor
R.P. Channing Rodgers, University of California at San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 4
GUIDE FOR AUTHORS
.
Your Paper Your Way
We now differentiate between the requirements for new and revised submissions. You may choose to
submit your manuscript as a single Word or PDF file to be used in the refereeing process. Only when
your paper is at the revision stage, will you be requested to put your paper in to a 'correct format'
for acceptance and provide the items required for the publication of your article.
To find out more, please visit the Preparation section below.
Please direct any technical queries regarding submission to the journal to cbm@elsevier.com.
Submission checklist
You can use this list to carry out a final check of your submission before you send it to the journal for
review. Please check the relevant section in this Guide for Authors for more details.
Ensure that the following items are present:
One author has been designated as the corresponding author with contact details:
• E-mail address
• Full postal address
All necessary files have been uploaded:
Manuscript:
• Include keywords
• All figures (include relevant captions)
• All tables (including titles, description, footnotes)
• Ensure all figure and table citations in the text match the files provided
• Indicate clearly if color should be used for any figures in print
Graphical Abstracts / Highlights files (where applicable)
Supplemental files (where applicable)
Further considerations
• Manuscript has been 'spell checked' and 'grammar checked'
• All references mentioned in the Reference List are cited in the text, and vice versa
• Permission has been obtained for use of copyrighted material from other sources (including the
Internet)
• Relevant declarations of interest have been made
• Journal policies detailed in this guide have been reviewed
• Referee suggestions and contact details provided, based on journal requirements
For further information, visit our Support Center.
BEFORE YOU BEGIN
Ethics in publishing
Please see our information pages on Ethics in publishing and Ethical guidelines for journal publication.
Human and animal rights
If the work involves the use of human subjects, the author should ensure that the work described has
been carried out in accordance with The Code of Ethics of the World Medical Association (Declaration
of Helsinki) for experiments involving humans; Uniform Requirements for manuscripts submitted to
Biomedical journals. Authors should include a statement in the manuscript that informed consent
was obtained for experimentation with human subjects. The privacy rights of human subjects must
always be observed.
All animal experiments should comply with the ARRIVE guidelines and should be carried out in
accordance with the U.K. Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act, 1986 and associated guidelines, EU
Directive 2010/63/EU for animal experiments, or the National Institutes of Health guide for the care
and use of Laboratory animals (NIH Publications No. 8023, revised 1978) and the authors should
clearly indicate in the manuscript that such guidelines have been followed.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 5
At the end of the text, under a subheading of "Conflict of interest statement", all authors must
disclose any financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could
inappropriately influence (bias) their work. Examples of potential conflicts of interest include
employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, paid expert testimony, patent applications/
registrations, and grants or other funding. See also http://www.elsevier.com/conflictsofinterest.
Further information and an example of a Conflict of Interest form can be found at:
http://service.elsevier.com/app/answers/detail/a_id/286/supporthub/publishing.
Submission declaration and verification
Submission of an article implies that the work described has not been published previously (except
in the form of an abstract or as part of a published lecture or academic thesis or as an electronic
preprint, see 'Multiple, redundant or concurrent publication' section of our ethics policy for more
information), that it is not under consideration for publication elsewhere, that its publication is
approved by all authors and tacitly or explicitly by the responsible authorities where the work was
carried out, and that, if accepted, it will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in English or
in any other language, including electronically without the written consent of the copyright-holder. To
verify originality, your article may be checked by the originality detection service CrossCheck.
Contributors
Each author is required to declare his or her individual contribution to the article: all authors must have
materially participated in the research and/or article preparation, so roles for all authors should be
described. The statement that all authors have approved the final article should be true and included
in the disclosure.
Authorship
All authors should have made substantial contributions to all of the following: (1) the conception and
design of the study, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of data, (2) drafting the
article or revising it critically for important intellectual content, (3) final approval of the version to
be submitted.
All contributors who do not meet the criteria for authorship as defined above should be listed in an
acknowledgements section. Examples of those who might be acknowledged include a person who
provided purely technical help, writing assistance, or a department chair who provided only general
support. Authors should disclose whether they had any writing assistance and identify the entity that
paid for this assistance.
Changes to authorship
Authors are expected to consider carefully the list and order of authors before submitting their
manuscript and provide the definitive list of authors at the time of the original submission. Any
addition, deletion or rearrangement of author names in the authorship list should be made only
before the manuscript has been accepted and only if approved by the journal Editor. To request such
a change, the Editor must receive the following from the corresponding author: (a) the reason
for the change in author list and (b) written confirmation (e-mail, letter) from all authors that they
agree with the addition, removal or rearrangement. In the case of addition or removal of authors,
this includes confirmation from the author being added or removed.
Only in exceptional circumstances will the Editor consider the addition, deletion or rearrangement of
authors after the manuscript has been accepted. While the Editor considers the request, publication
of the manuscript will be suspended. If the manuscript has already been published in an online issue,
any requests approved by the Editor will result in a corrigendum.
Clinical trial results
In line with the position of the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors, the journal will not
consider results posted in the same clinical trials registry in which primary registration resides to be
prior publication if the results posted are presented in the form of a brief structured (less than 500
words) abstract or table. However, divulging results in other circumstances (e.g., investors' meetings)
is discouraged and may jeopardise consideration of the manuscript. Authors should fully disclose all
posting in registries of results of the same or closely related work.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 6
Reporting clinical trials
Randomized controlled trials should be presented according to the CONSORT guidelines. At manuscript
submission, authors must provide the CONSORT checklist accompanied by a flow diagram that
illustrates the progress of patients through the trial, including recruitment, enrollment, randomization,
withdrawal and completion, and a detailed description of the randomization procedure. The CONSORT
checklist and template flow diagram are available online.
Registration of clinical trials
Registration in a public trials registry is a condition for publication of clinical trials in this journal
in accordance with International Committee of Medical Journal Editors recommendations. Trials
must register at or before the onset of patient enrolment. The clinical trial registration number
should be included at the end of the abstract of the article. A clinical trial is defined as any
research study that prospectively assigns human participants or groups of humans to one or more
health-related interventions to evaluate the effects of health outcomes. Health-related interventions
include any intervention used to modify a biomedical or health-related outcome (for example drugs,
surgical procedures, devices, behavioural treatments, dietary interventions, and process-of-care
changes). Health outcomes include any biomedical or health-related measures obtained in patients or
participants, including pharmacokinetic measures and adverse events. Purely observational studies
(those in which the assignment of the medical intervention is not at the discretion of the investigator)
will not require registration.
Article transfer service
This journal is part of our Article Transfer Service. This means that if the Editor feels your article is
more suitable in one of our other participating journals, then you may be asked to consider transferring
the article to one of those. If you agree, your article will be transferred automatically on your behalf
with no need to reformat. Please note that your article will be reviewed again by the new journal.
More information.
Copyright
Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' (see
more information on this). An e-mail will be sent to the corresponding author confirming receipt of
the manuscript together with a 'Journal Publishing Agreement' form or a link to the online version
of this agreement.
Subscribers may reproduce tables of contents or prepare lists of articles including abstracts for internal
circulation within their institutions. Permission of the Publisher is required for resale or distribution
outside the institution and for all other derivative works, including compilations and translations. If
excerpts from other copyrighted works are included, the author(s) must obtain written permission
from the copyright owners and credit the source(s) in the article. Elsevier has preprinted forms for
use by authors in these cases.
For open access articles: Upon acceptance of an article, authors will be asked to complete an
'Exclusive License Agreement' (more information). Permitted third party reuse of open access articles
is determined by the author's choice of user license.
Author rights
As an author you (or your employer or institution) have certain rights to reuse your work. More
information.
Elsevier supports responsible sharing
Find out how you can share your research published in Elsevier journals.
Role of the funding source
You are requested to identify who provided financial support for the conduct of the research and/or
preparation of the article and to briefly describe the role of the sponsor(s), if any, in study design; in
the collection, analysis and interpretation of data; in the writing of the report; and in the decision to
submit the article for publication. If the funding source(s) had no such involvement then this should
be stated.
Funding body agreements and policies
Elsevier has established a number of agreements with funding bodies which allow authors to comply
with their funder's open access policies. Some funding bodies will reimburse the author for the Open
Access Publication Fee. Details of existing agreements are available online.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 7
After acceptance, open access papers will be published under a noncommercial license. For authors
requiring a commercial CC BY license, you can apply after your manuscript is accepted for publication.
Open access
This journal offers authors a choice in publishing their research:
Open access
• Articles are freely available to both subscribers and the wider public with permitted reuse.
• An open access publication fee is payable by authors or on their behalf, e.g. by their research funder
or institution.
Subscription
• Articles are made available to subscribers as well as developing countries and patient groups through
our universal access programs.
• No open access publication fee payable by authors.
Regardless of how you choose to publish your article, the journal will apply the same peer review
criteria and acceptance standards.
For open access articles, permitted third party (re)use is defined by the following Creative Commons
user licenses:
Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs (CC BY-NC-ND)
For non-commercial purposes, lets others distribute and copy the article, and to include in a collective
work (such as an anthology), as long as they credit the author(s) and provided they do not alter or
modify the article.
The open access publication fee for this journal is USD 2500, excluding taxes. Learn more about
Elsevier's pricing policy: http://www.elsevier.com/openaccesspricing.
Green open access
Authors can share their research in a variety of different ways and Elsevier has a number of
green open access options available. We recommend authors see our green open access page for
further information. Authors can also self-archive their manuscripts immediately and enable public
access from their institution's repository after an embargo period. This is the version that has been
accepted for publication and which typically includes author-incorporated changes suggested during
submission, peer review and in editor-author communications. Embargo period: For subscription
articles, an appropriate amount of time is needed for journals to deliver value to subscribing customers
before an article becomes freely available to the public. This is the embargo period and it begins from
the date the article is formally published online in its final and fully citable form. Find out more.
This journal has an embargo period of 12 months.
Elsevier Publishing Campus
The Elsevier Publishing Campus (www.publishingcampus.com) is an online platform offering free
lectures, interactive training and professional advice to support you in publishing your research. The
College of Skills training offers modules on how to prepare, write and structure your article and
explains how editors will look at your paper when it is submitted for publication. Use these resources,
and more, to ensure that your submission will be the best that you can make it.
Language (usage and editing services)
Please write your text in good English (American or British usage is accepted, but not a mixture of
these). Authors who feel their English language manuscript may require editing to eliminate possible
grammatical or spelling errors and to conform to correct scientific English may wish to use the English
Language Editing service available from Elsevier's WebShop.
Informed consent and patient details
Studies on patients or volunteers require ethics committee approval and informed consent, which
should be documented in the paper. Appropriate consents, permissions and releases must be obtained
where an author wishes to include case details or other personal information or images of patients
and any other individuals in an Elsevier publication. Written consents must be retained by the author
and copies of the consents or evidence that such consents have been obtained must be provided to
Elsevier on request. For more information, please review the Elsevier Policy on the Use of Images or
Personal Information of Patients or other Individuals. Unless you have written permission from the
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 8
patient (or, where applicable, the next of kin), the personal details of any patient included in any
part of the article and in any supplementary materials (including all illustrations and videos) must
be removed before submission.
Submission
Our online submission system guides you stepwise through the process of entering your article
details and uploading your files. The system converts your article files to a single PDF file used in
the peer-review process. Editable files (e.g., Word, LaTeX) are required to typeset your article for
final publication. All correspondence, including notification of the Editor's decision and requests for
revision, is sent by e-mail.
Submit your article
Please submit your article via http://ees.elsevier.com/cbm/default.asp.
Refereeing Procedure
To ensure fairness, each manuscript will be assessed anonymously by at least two independent
reviewers. Constructive criticism provided by the assessors will be forwarded to the author.
PREPARATION
NEW SUBMISSIONS
Submission to this journal proceeds totally online and you will be guided stepwise through the creation
and uploading of your files. The system automatically converts your files to a single PDF file, which
is used in the peer-review process.
As part of the Your Paper Your Way service, you may choose to submit your manuscript as a single file
to be used in the refereeing process. This can be a PDF file or a Word document, in any format or lay-
out that can be used by referees to evaluate your manuscript. It should contain high enough quality
figures for refereeing. If you prefer to do so, you may still provide all or some of the source files at
the initial submission. Please note that individual figure files larger than 10 MB must be uploaded
separately.
References
There are no strict requirements on reference formatting at submission. References can be in any style
or format as long as the style is consistent. Where applicable, author(s) name(s), journal title/book
title, chapter title/article title, year of publication, volume number/book chapter and the pagination
must be present. Use of DOI is highly encouraged. The reference style used by the journal will be
applied to the accepted article by Elsevier at the proof stage. Note that missing data will be highlighted
at proof stage for the author to correct.
Formatting requirements
There are no strict formatting requirements but all manuscripts must contain the essential elements
needed to convey your manuscript, for example Abstract, Keywords, Introduction, Methods, Results,
Discussion, Limitations, Conclusions, Tables, and Figures with legends.
If your article includes any Videos and/or other Supplementary material, this should be included in
your initial submission for peer review purposes.
Divide the article into clearly defined sections.
Figures and tables embedded in text
Please ensure the figures and the tables included in the single file are placed next to the relevant text
in the manuscript, rather than at the bottom or the top of the file. The corresponding caption should
be placed directly below the figure or table.
Peer review
This journal operates a single blind review process. All contributions will be initially assessed by the
editor for suitability for the journal. Papers deemed suitable are then typically sent to a minimum of
one independent expert reviewer to assess the scientific quality of the paper. The Editor is responsible
for the final decision regarding acceptance or rejection of articles. The Editor's decision is final. More
information on types of peer review.
REVISED SUBMISSIONS
LaTeX
You are recommended to use the Elsevier article class elsarticle.cls to prepare your manuscript and
BibTeX to generate your bibliography.
Our LaTeX site has detailed submission instructions, templates and other information.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 9
Summary
A summary at the end of the paper (not exceeding 500 words) can accompany the manuscript on a
separate sheet but please note that this is not mandatory.
Appendices
If there is more than one appendix, they should be identified as A, B, etc. Formulae and equations in
appendices should be given separate numbering: Eq. (A.1), Eq. (A.2), etc.; in a subsequent appendix,
Eq. (B.1) and so on. Similarly for tables and figures: Table A.1; Fig. A.1, etc.
Essential title page information
• Title. Concise and informative. Titles are often used in information-retrieval systems. Avoid
abbreviations and formulae where possible.
• Author names and affiliations. Please clearly indicate the given name(s) and family name(s)
of each author and check that all names are accurately spelled. Present the authors' affiliation
addresses (where the actual work was done) below the names. Indicate all affiliations with a lower-
case superscript letter immediately after the author's name and in front of the appropriate address.
Provide the full postal address of each affiliation, including the country name and, if available, the
e-mail address of each author.
• Corresponding author. Clearly indicate who will handle correspondence at all stages of refereeing
and publication, also post-publication. Ensure that the e-mail address is given and that contact
details are kept up to date by the corresponding author.
• Present/permanent address. If an author has moved since the work described in the article was
done, or was visiting at the time, a 'Present address' (or 'Permanent address') may be indicated as
a footnote to that author's name. The address at which the author actually did the work must be
retained as the main, affiliation address. Superscript Arabic numerals are used for such footnotes.
General Form
The entire manuscript should be typed double-spaced, including the abstract, footnotes, references,
legends and tables, with 3-cm margins. An accompanying letter should be included, indicating the
name, address, telephone and fax number of the corresponding author. The title of the paper and the
author's name, address, fax number and/or telephone number should be given. Manuscripts may not
exceed 35 double-spaced pages, including figures, references, etc. Figures and tables should appear
at the end of the manuscript, following all text. The publication language is English.
Summary: A summary at the end of the paper (not exceeding 500 words) should accompany the
manuscript on a separate sheet.
Abstract
A short abstract in English (not exceeding 250 words) should immediately precede the introduction.
Structured headings may be used, as follows: Background, Method, Results, and Conclusions. The
abstract should stand alone from the text, therefore no references should be included.
Graphical abstract
Although a graphical abstract is optional, its use is encouraged as it draws more attention to the online
article. The graphical abstract should summarize the contents of the article in a concise, pictorial form
designed to capture the attention of a wide readership. Graphical abstracts should be submitted as a
separate file in the online submission system. Image size: Please provide an image with a minimum
of 531 × 1328 pixels (h × w) or proportionally more. The image should be readable at a size of 5 ×
13 cm using a regular screen resolution of 96 dpi. Preferred file types: TIFF, EPS, PDF or MS Office
files. You can view Example Graphical Abstracts on our information site.
Authors can make use of Elsevier's Illustration Services to ensure the best presentation of their images
and in accordance with all technical requirements.
Highlights
Highlights are mandatory for this journal. They consist of a short collection of bullet points that
convey the core findings of the article and should be submitted in a separate editable file in the
online submission system. Please use 'Highlights' in the file name and include 3 to 5 bullet points
(maximum 85 characters, including spaces, per bullet point). You can view example Highlights on
our information site.
Keywords
Enclose with each manuscript, at the end of the abstract, from five to ten key words. These
terms should be relatively independent (coordinate index terms), and as a group should optimally
characterize the paper.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 10
Formatting of funding sources
List funding sources in this standard way to facilitate compliance to funder's requirements:
Funding: This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [grant numbers xxxx, yyyy];
the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Seattle, WA [grant number zzzz]; and the United States Institutes
of Peace [grant number aaaa].
It is not necessary to include detailed descriptions on the program or type of grants and awards. When
funding is from a block grant or other resources available to a university, college, or other research
institution, submit the name of the institute or organization that provided the funding.
If no funding has been provided for the research, please include the following sentence:
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or
not-for-profit sectors.
Embedded math equations
If you are submitting an article prepared with Microsoft Word containing embedded math equations
then please read this (related support information).
Footnotes
Footnotes should be used sparingly. Number them consecutively throughout the article. Many word
processors build footnotes into the text, and this feature may be used. Should this not be the case,
indicate the position of footnotes in the text and present the footnotes themselves separately at the
end of the article.
Artwork
Image manipulation
Whilst it is accepted that authors sometimes need to manipulate images for clarity, manipulation for
purposes of deception or fraud will be seen as scientific ethical abuse and will be dealt with accordingly.
For graphical images, this journal is applying the following policy: no specific feature within an image
may be enhanced, obscured, moved, removed, or introduced. Adjustments of brightness, contrast,
or color balance are acceptable if and as long as they do not obscure or eliminate any information
present in the original. Nonlinear adjustments (e.g. changes to gamma settings) must be disclosed
in the figure legend.
Electronic artwork
General points
• Make sure you use uniform lettering and sizing of your original artwork.
• Preferred fonts: Arial (or Helvetica), Times New Roman (or Times), Symbol, Courier.
• Number the illustrations according to their sequence in the text.
• Use a logical naming convention for your artwork files.
• Indicate per figure if it is a single, 1.5 or 2-column fitting image.
• For Word submissions only, you may still provide figures and their captions, and tables within a
single file at the revision stage.
• Please note that individual figure files larger than 10 MB must be provided in separate source files.
A detailed guide on electronic artwork is available.
You are urged to visit this site; some excerpts from the detailed information are given here.
Formats
Regardless of the application used, when your electronic artwork is finalized, please 'save as' or
convert the images to one of the following formats (note the resolution requirements for line drawings,
halftones, and line/halftone combinations given below):
EPS (or PDF): Vector drawings. Embed the font or save the text as 'graphics'.
TIFF (or JPG): Color or grayscale photographs (halftones): always use a minimum of 300 dpi.
TIFF (or JPG): Bitmapped line drawings: use a minimum of 1000 dpi.
TIFF (or JPG): Combinations bitmapped line/half-tone (color or grayscale): a minimum of 500 dpi
is required.
Please do not:
• Supply files that are optimized for screen use (e.g., GIF, BMP, PICT, WPG); the resolution is too low.
• Supply files that are too low in resolution.
• Submit graphics that are disproportionately large for the content.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 11
Color artwork
Please make sure that artwork files are in an acceptable format (TIFF (or JPEG), EPS (or PDF), or
MS Office files) and with the correct resolution. If, together with your accepted article, you submit
usable color figures then Elsevier will ensure, at no additional charge, that these figures will appear
in color online (e.g., ScienceDirect and other sites) regardless of whether or not these illustrations
are reproduced in color in the printed version. For color reproduction in print, you will receive
information regarding the costs from Elsevier after receipt of your accepted article. Please
indicate your preference for color: in print or online only. Further information on the preparation of
electronic artwork.
Figure captions
Ensure that each illustration has a caption. A caption should comprise a brief title (not on the figure
itself) and a description of the illustration. Keep text in the illustrations themselves to a minimum but
explain all symbols and abbreviations used.
References
Citation in text
Please ensure that every reference cited in the text is also present in the reference list (and vice
versa). Any references cited in the abstract must be given in full. Unpublished results and personal
communications are not recommended in the reference list, but may be mentioned in the text. If these
references are included in the reference list they should follow the standard reference style of the
journal and should include a substitution of the publication date with either 'Unpublished results' or
'Personal communication'. Citation of a reference as 'in press' implies that the item has been accepted
for publication.
Reference links
Increased discoverability of research and high quality peer review are ensured by online links to
the sources cited. In order to allow us to create links to abstracting and indexing services, such as
Scopus, CrossRef and PubMed, please ensure that data provided in the references are correct. Please
note that incorrect surnames, journal/book titles, publication year and pagination may prevent link
creation. When copying references, please be careful as they may already contain errors. Use of the
DOI is encouraged.
A DOI can be used to cite and link to electronic articles where an article is in-press and full citation
details are not yet known, but the article is available online. A DOI is guaranteed never to change,
so you can use it as a permanent link to any electronic article. An example of a citation using DOI
for an article not yet in an issue is: VanDecar J.C., Russo R.M., James D.E., Ambeh W.B., Franke M.
(2003). Aseismic continuation of the Lesser Antilles slab beneath northeastern Venezuela. Journal
of Geophysical Research, https://doi.org/10.1029/2001JB000884. Please note the format of such
citations should be in the same style as all other references in the paper.
Web references
As a minimum, the full URL should be given and the date when the reference was last accessed. Any
further information, if known (DOI, author names, dates, reference to a source publication, etc.),
should also be given. Web references can be listed separately (e.g., after the reference list) under a
different heading if desired, or can be included in the reference list.
Data references
This journal encourages you to cite underlying or relevant datasets in your manuscript by citing them
in your text and including a data reference in your Reference List. Data references should include the
following elements: author name(s), dataset title, data repository, version (where available), year,
and global persistent identifier. Add [dataset] immediately before the reference so we can properly
identify it as a data reference. The [dataset] identifier will not appear in your published article.
References in a special issue
Please ensure that the words 'this issue' are added to any references in the list (and any citations in
the text) to other articles in the same Special Issue.
Reference management software
Most Elsevier journals have their reference template available in many of the most popular reference
management software products. These include all products that support Citation Style Language
styles, such as Mendeley and Zotero, as well as EndNote. Using the word processor plug-ins from
these products, authors only need to select the appropriate journal template when preparing their
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 12
article, after which citations and bibliographies will be automatically formatted in the journal's style.
If no template is yet available for this journal, please follow the format of the sample references and
citations as shown in this Guide.
Users of Mendeley Desktop can easily install the reference style for this journal by clicking the following
link:
http://open.mendeley.com/use-citation-style/computers-in-biology-and-medicine
When preparing your manuscript, you will then be able to select this style using the Mendeley plug-
ins for Microsoft Word or LibreOffice.
Reference formatting
There are no strict requirements on reference formatting at submission. References can be in any style
or format as long as the style is consistent. Where applicable, author(s) name(s), journal title/book
title, chapter title/article title, year of publication, volume number/book chapter and the pagination
must be present. Use of DOI is highly encouraged. The reference style used by the journal will be
applied to the accepted article by Elsevier at the proof stage. Note that missing data will be highlighted
at proof stage for the author to correct. If you do wish to format the references yourself they should
be arranged according to the following examples:
Reference style
Text: Indicate references by number(s) in square brackets in line with the text. The actual authors
can be referred to, but the reference number(s) must always be given.
Example: '..... as demonstrated [3,6]. Barnaby and Jones [8] obtained a different result ....'
List: Number the references (numbers in square brackets) in the list in the order in which they appear
in the text.
Examples:
Reference to a journal publication:
[1] J. van der Geer, J.A.J. Hanraads, R.A. Lupton, The art of writing a scientific article, J. Sci. Commun.
163 (2010) 51–59.
Reference to a book:
[2] W. Strunk Jr., E.B. White, The Elements of Style, fourth ed., Longman, New York, 2000.
Reference to a chapter in an edited book:
[3] G.R. Mettam, L.B. Adams, How to prepare an electronic version of your article, in: B.S. Jones, R.Z.
Smith (Eds.), Introduction to the Electronic Age, E-Publishing Inc., New York, 2009, pp. 281–304.
Reference to a website:
[4] Cancer Research UK, Cancer statistics reports for the UK. http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/
aboutcancer/statistics/cancerstatsreport/, 2003 (accessed 13.03.03).
Reference to a dataset:
[dataset] [5] M. Oguro, S. Imahiro, S. Saito, T. Nakashizuka, Mortality data for Japanese oak wilt
disease and surrounding forest compositions, Mendeley Data, v1, 2015. https://doi.org/10.17632/
xwj98nb39r.1.
Journal abbreviations source
Journal names should be abbreviated according to the List of Title Word Abbreviations.
Video
Elsevier accepts video material and animation sequences to support and enhance your scientific
research. Authors who have video or animation files that they wish to submit with their article are
strongly encouraged to include links to these within the body of the article. This can be done in the
same way as a figure or table by referring to the video or animation content and noting in the body
text where it should be placed. All submitted files should be properly labeled so that they directly
relate to the video file's content. In order to ensure that your video or animation material is directly
usable, please provide the files in one of our recommended file formats with a preferred maximum size
of 150 MB. Video and animation files supplied will be published online in the electronic version of your
article in Elsevier Web products, including ScienceDirect. Please supply 'stills' with your files: you can
choose any frame from the video or animation or make a separate image. These will be used instead
of standard icons and will personalize the link to your video data. For more detailed instructions please
visit our video instruction pages. Note: since video and animation cannot be embedded in the print
version of the journal, please provide text for both the electronic and the print version for the portions
of the article that refer to this content.
AUTHOR INFORMATION PACK 2 Jul 2017 www.elsevier.com/locate/compbiomed 13
Supplementary material
Supplementary material such as applications, images and sound clips, can be published with your
article to enhance it. Submitted supplementary items are published exactly as they are received (Excel
or PowerPoint files will appear as such online). Please submit your material together with the article
and supply a concise, descriptive caption for each supplementary file. If you wish to make changes to
supplementary material during any stage of the process, please make sure to provide an updated file.
Do not annotate any corrections on a previous version. Please switch off the 'Track Changes' option
in Microsoft Office files as these will appear in the published version.
AudioSlides
The journal encourages authors to create an AudioSlides presentation with their published article.
AudioSlides are brief, webinar-style presentations that are shown next to the online article on
ScienceDirect. This gives authors the opportunity to summarize their research in their own words
and to help readers understand what the paper is about. More information and examples are
available. Authors of this journal will automatically receive an invitation e-mail to create an AudioSlides
presentation after acceptance of their paper.
AFTER ACCEPTANCE
As a service to the community, this journal makes available online the accepted manuscripts as soon
as possible after acceptance. At this stage, the author's accepted manuscript (in both full-text and
PDF) is given a Digital Object Identifier (DOI) and is fully citable, and searchable by title, author(s)
name and the full-text. The article also carries a disclaimer noting that it is an unedited manuscript
which has not yet been copyedited, typeset or proofread. When the fully copyedited version is ready
for publication, it simply replaces the author accepted manuscript version.
Online proof correction
Corresponding authors will receive an e-mail with a link to our online proofing system, allowing
annotation and correction of proofs online. The environment is similar to MS Word: in addition to
editing text, you can also comment on figures/tables and answer questions from the Copy Editor.
Web-based proofing provides a faster and less error-prone process by allowing you to directly type
your corrections, eliminating the potential introduction of errors.
If preferred, you can still choose to annotate and upload your edits on the PDF version. All instructions
for proofing will be given in the e-mail we send to authors, including alternative methods to the online
version and PDF.
We will do everything possible to get your article published quickly and accurately. Please use this
proof only for checking the typesetting, editing, completeness and correctness of the text, tables and
figures. Significant changes to the article as accepted for publication will only be considered at this
stage with permission from the Editor. It is important to ensure that all corrections are sent back
to us in one communication. Please check carefully before replying, as inclusion of any subsequent
corrections cannot be guaranteed. Proofreading is solely your responsibility.
Offprints
The corresponding author will, at no cost, receive a customized Share Link providing 50 days free
access to the final published version of the article on ScienceDirect. The Share Link can be used
for sharing the article via any communication channel, including email and social media. For an
extra charge, paper offprints can be ordered via the offprint order form which is sent once the
article is accepted for publication. Both corresponding and co-authors may order offprints at any
time via Elsevier's Webshop. Corresponding authors who have published their article open access do
not receive a Share Link as their final published version of the article is available open access on
ScienceDirect and can be shared through the article DOI link.
AUTHOR INQUIRIES
Visit the Elsevier Support Center to find the answers you need. Here you will find everything from
Frequently Asked Questions to ways to get in touch.
You can also check the status of your submitted article or find out when your accepted article will
be published.
© Copyright 2014 Elsevier | http://www.elsevier.com

