Requirements for a Bioinformatics 
Infrastructure in Germany for future 
Research with bio-economic Relevance
Recommendations of the BioEconomyCouncil 
 
Requirements for a Bioinformatics 
Infrastructure in Germany for future 
Research with bio-economic Relevance
Recommendations of the BioEconomyCouncil 
 
4
Table of Contents
Summary	 6
Introduction	 7
	 Bio-economic	potential	of	modern	biosciences	 7
	 Bioinformatics	topics	 8
Recommendations	 11
	 a)	Infrastructure	 11
	 b)	Optimisation	of	the	use	of	computing	capacities	 14
	 c)	Development	of	long-term	strategies	for	research,	action,	and	funding	 15
Attachment	 16
	 Current	bioinformatics	facilities	–	Examples	of	potential	expertise	centres		 16
	 Glossary	 30
5|4
Summary
Summary 1
In	the	coming	years,	the	application	of	biological	knowledge	and	methods	gleaned	from	
the	biosciences	will	be	of	 increasing	economic	relevance.	 In	this	 regard,	bioinformatics	
will	play	an	important	role.	The	bioinformatics	infrastructure	needs	to	be	expanded	in	or-
der	to	enable	further	research,	as	well	as	the	use	of	research	findings,	to	meet	bio-economic	
requirements.	The	central	topics	in	the	area	of	bioinformatics	are	the	development	of	flex-
ible	pipelines	running	in	parallel	for	input,	provision,	and	analysis	(data	management),	
the	enhancement	of	statistical	methods	of	analysis	(data	analysis),	and	optimisation	of	
predictive	models	(data	processing).	In	order	to	shape	these	topics	as	best	as	possible,	the	
following	action	is	needed:
•	 	Establishment	of	a	bioinformatics	infrastructure	consisting	of	a	number	of	local,	
well-equipped,	and	specialised	centres	of	expertise	and	a	comprehensive	coordinat-
ing	body	with	the	following	responsibilities:
	 •	 	Networking	and	funding	local	centres	of	expertise	for	the	purposes	of	ensuring	the	
development	of	technology
	 •	 	Increasing	knowledge	transfer	between	biology	research	and	bioinformatics
	 •	 	Establishing	standards	for	storing	and	analysing	data	
	 •	 	Making	the	necessary	software	tools	freely	available	and	standardising	interfaces
•	 Development	of	long-term	strategies	for	research,	action,	and	funding,	in	order	to
	 •	 Improve	the	conditions	for	joint	public-private	funding	of	collaborative	projects
	 •	 	Promote	the	sustainability	of	available	data	resources
•	 Optimisation	of	the	use	of	computing	capacities,	in	order	to
	 •	 	improve	the	utilisation	of	local	resources	through	comprehensive	resource	plan-
ning	
	 •	 	improve	the	conditions	for	transferring	data	via	cloud	computing	(costs,	security,	
labour)
	 •	 	provide	supercomputers	for	specific	applications
1	 		The	BioEconomyCouncil	would	like	to	thank	the	members	of	the	Steering	Committee	Alfred	Pühler,	Frank	Oliver	
Glöckner,	Alexander	Goesmann,	Thomas	Hartsch,	Eric	von	Lieres,	Klaus	Mayer,	Norbert	Reinsch,	Chris-Carolin	Schön,	
Wolfgang	Wiechert,	and	Ralf	Zimmer,	as	well	all	those	who	participated	in	the	workshop	“Bioinformatics”,	all	of	
whom	made	a	vital	contribution	to	developing	these	Recommendations.	
6
Introduction
Bio-economic potential of modern biosciences
Biology	in	flux
With	the	emergence	of	a	broad	spectrum	of	new	methods	and	technologies,	biology	re-
search	 has	 in	 recent	 years	 become	 a	 science	 generating	 massive	 amounts	 of	 data.	 The	
simultaneous	development	of	bioinformatics	constitutes	the	prerequisite	for	the	storage,	
global	exchange,	and	analysis	of	this	data	volume.	The	combination	of	new	research	tech-
nologies	–	such	as	next-generation	sequencing,	high-throughput	precision	phenotyping,	
and	so-called	OMICS	technologies	–	and	bioinformatics	tools	for	linking	and	analysing	the	
generated	data	enable	a	deep	understanding	of	biological	interrelationships.	This	ranges	
from	detailed	knowledge	of	the	genetic	make-up	of	 individual	species	or	 individual	or-
ganisms,	to	mechanisms	for	expressing	their	phenotypic	characteristics,	to	complex	in-
teractions	that	take	place	within	an	ecosystem.
From	basic	research	to	applied	science
The	growing	understanding	of	the	mechanisms	underlying	the	expression	of	characteris-
tics	in	organisms	is	generating	new	possibilities	for	sustainable,	economic	use	of	biologi-
cal	resources.	This	includes,	inter	alia,	the	development	of	new	and	useful	biotechnology	
processes,	the	targeted	improvement	in	the	breeding	of	agricultural	crops	and	farm	ani-
mals,	and	more	accurate	orientation	of	crop	protection	and	veterinary	medicine.	In	addi-
tion,	a	deeper	understanding	of	evolutionary	interrelationships	also	will	contribute	to	the	
discovery	and	use	of	new	biological	potentials	with	the	aid	of	biodiversity	research.	This	
permits	 the	 development	 of,	 for	 instance,	 systems	 biology	 approaches	 for	 the	 targeted	
supplementation	and	optimisation	of	current	breeding	processes.	Sustainable	economic	
concepts	for	extracting	biocatalysts	and	bioactive	agents	from	various	organisms	can	also	
be	developed	by	exploiting	the	recently	created	possibilities	for	directly	accessing	the	ge-
netic	material	of	microorganisms	not	able	to	be	cultivated	on	a	laboratory	scale.	The	data	
available	today	and	in	the	future	increasingly	permit	a	comprehensive	modelling	of	both	
the	process	of	central	metabolism	and	select	individual	synthesis	pathways.	In	so-called	
“synthetic	biology”,	such	models	can	serve	as	the	basis	for	the	targeted	redesign	of	entire	
metabolic	pathways	in	technologically	useful	organisms.
The	bioinformatics	infrastructure,	which	is	currently	insufficient	for	meeting	the	needs	
of	research,	is	increasingly	emerging	as	the	limiting	factor	for	the	optimal	future	use	of	
the	entire	bio-economic	potential	of	modern	biosciences.	The	various	fields	of	biology	re-
search	–	from	basic	research	to	applied	research	–	show	a	similar	need	for	action	in	the	
area	of	bioinformatics.
7|6
Introduction
The	 trend-setting	 significance	 of	 bioinformatics	 has	 already	 been	 recognised	 in	 many	
European	and	non-European	countries.	Some	countries,	such	as	the	Netherlands	(NBIC),	
Switzerland	(SIB),	and	France	(ReNaBi),	already	have	comprehensive,	well-organised	bio-
informatics	structural	programmes	in	place;	other	countries,	such	as	Sweden	(BILS),	are	
currently	developing	them.	At	the	international	level	as	well,	efforts	are	already	under-
way	to	establish	overarching	infrastructure	programmes	in	order	to	achieve	better	net-
working	and	data	exchange	(e.	g.	ELIXIR	in	Europe).	With	respect	also	to	international	ex-
change,	but	in	particular	to	the	competitiveness	of	German	research,	this	makes	it	all	the	
more	urgent	to	push	forward	the	development	of	a	German	bioinformatics	infrastructure.
Bioinformatics topics
The	bioinformatics	spectrum	ranges	from	the	fundamental	problematic	of	data	manage-
ment,	which	comprises,	in	particular,	data	maintenance	and	structuring,	to	data	analysis.	
Examples	of	this	include	statistical	and	quantitative	genetics,	population	genetics,	over-
arching	meta-analyses,	biometric	analysis	of	data,	integration	of	disparate	data	types,	and	
the	transformation	of	findings	and	techniques	from	basic	research	into	applied	research	
and	development.	In	particular,	modelling	and	simulation	of	complex	systems	are	playing	
an	increasingly	important	role.
Data	management
In	the	area	of	data	management,	it	is	essential	that	systems	be	created	not	just	for	storing	
and	structuring	the	generated	data	but	also	for	making	such	data	available	for	analysis	
and	interpretation.	In	this	regard,	the	challenge	is	not	only	to	manage	the	exponentially	
growing	amount	of	data	but	also	to	take	into	account	the	great	heterogeneity	of	primary	
data.	In	order	to	meet	these	challenges,	it	is	necessary	to	develop	flexible	pipelines	run-
ning	in	parallel	for	input,	provision,	and	analysis.	Intuitive	tools	are	needed	for	visualising	
and	examining	the	data.	In	view	of	the	enormous	amount	of	data,	the	main	challenge	is	to	
develop	efficient	strategies	for	reducing	the	complexity	and	volume	of,	e.	g.,	primary	data	
from	sequencing	analysis	by	using	suitable	methods	for	data	reduction	and	compression.	
8
Data	analysis
New,	efficient,	statistical	approaches	for	data	analysis	have	to	be	developed	in	parallel	with	
data	management.	The	genetic	analysis	of	complex	features,	such	as	yield	and	resource	
efficiency,	using	genome	analysis	and	precision	phenotyping	produces	high-dimensional	
data	volumes,	whose	optimal	use	requires	the	continual	refinement	of	statistical	methods	
of	 analysis.	 The	 integration	 and	 comparative	 analysis	 of	 data	 and	 results	 from	 various	
research	and	application	areas	(e.	g.	molecular	biology,	physiology,	biodiversity	research,	
biotechnology,	and	breeding,	as	well	as	sensor,	process,	and	analysis	data	from	plant	and	
animal	 research)	 form	 the	 basis	 for	 interdisciplinary	 and	 translational	 research.	 Today,	
there	are	already	a	number	of	individual	data	sets	containing	molecular	and	phenotypic	
information,	as	well	as	biological	resources	and	analysis	tools,	whose	optimal	use	can	be	
ensured	only	by	bringing	together	all	existing	information.	This	requires	innovative	bio-
informatics	concepts	designed	to	establish	knowledge	bases	 that	ensure	the	 linking	of	
individual	databases	and	thus	the	integration	of	heterogeneous	data	as	well.	They	are	es-
sential	for	the	creation	of	functional	models	and	simulation	approaches,	which	constitute	
a	fundamental	building	block	for	future	bio-economic	action.	
Data	processing
The	rational	and	data-driven	selection,	 identification,	and	validation	of	suitable	models	
similarly	require	the	availability	of	local	and	central	computer	resources,	as	well	as	the	
development	of	customised,	scalable	software	for	their	efficient	use.	Both	aspects	are	of	
fundamental	 significance	 for	 the	 combination	 of	 two	 especially	 relevant	 optimisation	
strategies:	Necessary	for	the	optimal	planning	of	new	experiments	or	the	targeted	perfor-
mance	optimisation	of,	e.	g.,	biotechnological	processes	governing	conversion	of	materi-
als,	are,	on	the	one	hand,	statistically	valid	estimates	about	propagated	data	uncertainties	
and,	on	the	other,	robust	predictions	about	new	measurements.
Existing	expertise	centres	
Some	 of	 the	 problems	 discussed	 here	 are	 currently	 being	 worked	 on,	 and	 in	 other	 are-
as,	sophisticated	solutions	and	systems	are	already	in	place.	In	the	area	of	microbiology,	
such	 research	 initiatives	 as	 GenoMik/PathoGenoMik	 and	 the	 European	 excellence	 net-
work	“Marine	Genomics	Europe”	have	 in	recent	years	made	an	 important	contribution	
to	the	successful	development	of	microbial	genome	research	in	Germany	and	Europe.	In	
the	area	of	plant	research,	the	initiative	“GABI	/	Plant	Biotechnology	of	the	Future”	has	
already	resulted	in	the	development	of	outstanding,	internationally	recognised	expertise	
in	a	number	of	areas	in	green	bioinformatics.	This	has	created	excellent	conditions	for	es-
tablishing	a	multi-tiered	green	bioinformatics	platform.	Worthy	of	mention	in	the	area	of	
animal	research	are	the	projects	of	the	FUGATO	(Functional	Genome	Analysis	in	Animal	
Organisms)	initiative.	In	the	competence	networks	for	agricultural	research	(CROP.SENSe.
net,	PHENOMICS,	and	Synbreed),	bioinformatics	has	already	been	successfully	integrated	
in	 agricultural	 and	 biosciences	 research	 collaborations.	 Moreover,	 Germany	 has	 imple-
mented	 a	 recognised,	 exemplary	 university	 system	 for	 training	 young	 bio-informatics	
researchers.		
9|8
Introduction
Therefore,	with	regard	to	the	development	of	expertise	centres,	it	seems	appropriate	that,	
first,	existing	bioinformatics	facilities	be	strengthened	and	then,	where	needed,	the	devel-
opment	of	new	centres	be	promoted.	
In	the	field	of	plant	research,	there	are	already	five	potential	expertise	centres:	the	Munich	
Bioinformatics	 Centre,	 the	 institutes	 of	 the	 so-called	 “ABCD/J”	 region	 (Aachen,	 Bonn,	
Cologne,	Düsseldorf,	Jülich),	Plant	Bioinformatics	at	Gatersleben-Halle,	Tübingen-Hohen-
heim	 region,	 and	 the	 Max	 Planck	 Institute	 of	 Molecular	 Plant	 Physiology	 in	 Golm.	 The	
Center	for	Biotechnology	(CeBiTec)	at	the	University	of	Bielefeld	would	make	a	suitable	
expertise	centre	in	the	field	of	biotechnology.	In	the	field	of	the	modelling	of	biochemi-
cal	 networks	 and	 supercomputing	 applications	 in	 systems	 biology,	 the	 Jülich	 Research	
Centre	 likewise	 has	 an	 international	 reputation.	 The	 Bremen	 region	 –	 with	 the	 Max	
Planck	 Institute	 for	 Marine	 Microbiology,	 the	 Jacobs	 University,	 the	 Center	 for	 Marine	
Environmental	 Sciences	 at	 the	 University	 of	 Bremen,	 and	 the	 Alfred	 Wegener	 Institute	
for	Polar	and	Marine	Research	in	Bremerhaven	–	constitutes	a	potential	expertise	centre	
for	the	field	of	environmental	microbiology	and	biodiversity	research.	In	the	field	of	ani-
mal	research,	mention	should	be	made	of	the	data	centres	Vit	Verden,	the	Bavarian	State	
Research	 Center	 for	 Agriculture	 in	 Grub,	 the	 Leibniz	 Institute	 for	 Farm	 Animal	 Biology	
in	 Dummerstorf,	 and	 the	 Animal	 Breeding	 and	 Genetics	 Department	 at	 the	 University	
of	Göttingen.	
10
Recommendations
a) Infrastructure
In	order	to	ensure	that	biological	data	has	the	most	efficient,	long-term,	and	sustainable	
use	for	research	and	commercial	application,	a	coordinated,	networked	bioinformatics	in-
frastructure	should	be	developed,	which	also	takes	into	account	the	aspect	of	translating	
research	results	from	basic	research	to	application.	Close	collaboration	between	experi-
mental	and	data-generating	structures,	along	with	development	of	bioinformatics	com-
petence,	is	already	proving	to	be	an	important	structural	component.	
The	key	to	developing	a	modern,	evolving,	and	efficient	bioinformatics	infrastructure	lies	
in	the	establishment	of	a	two-track	organisational	structure,	which,	on	the	one	hand,	has	
a	number	of	local,	well-equipped,	and	specialised	expertise	centres	and,	on	the	other,	pro-
vides	for	a	comprehensive	body	for	networking	and	coordinating	these	centres.	It	should	
be	noted	here	that	the	planned	bioinformatics	infrastructure	is	not	to	be	reserved	strictly	
for	tasks	with	bio-economic	relevance.	Rather,	it	needs	to	be	investigated	to	what	extent	
cross-networking	with	other	fields	of	life	sciences	might	be	expedient.
Local	expertise	centres
By	bundling	know-how	and	technical	facilities,	local	expertise	centres	ensure	the	devel-
opment	of	bioinformatics	approaches	to	solving	specific	problems.	They	provide	the	nec-
essary	computing	capacities,	locally	where	possible.	In	addition,	supercomputing	capaci-
ties	should	be	set	up	for	special	applications	and	issues.	
Potential	 locations	 for	 expertise	 centres	 would	 be	 those	 that	 (i)	 already	 have	 an	 estab-
lished	 reputation	 in	 their	 field,	 (ii)	 have	 available,	 in	 addition	 to	 bioinformatics	 tools,	
such	 as	 software	 and	 databases,	 sufficient	 computing	 resources	 and	 professionals,	
(iii)	are	firmly	embedded	in	the	research	environment	through	national	and	international	
collaborations,	and	(iv)	have	permanent	structures	for	educating	young	researchers	and	
training	users	(see	Attachment).	
Through	long-term	support	for	and	networking	of	local	expertise	centres,	bioinformatics	
technologies	used	on	a	wide	basis	are	to	be	maintained,	enhanced,	and	made	available	for	
broad	use	in	research	projects.	In	addition,	with	regard	to	technical	equipment,	it	must	be	
taken	into	account	that	specialised	individual	solutions	are	often	required	in	light	of	the	
fact	that	highly	specialised	analyses	are	sometimes	undertaken.	In	particular,	through	the	
centralised	provision	of	bioinformatics	knowledge	and	services,	smaller	research	groups	
and	newcomers	to	the	field	can	immediately	be	put	into	a	position	to	generate	new	bio-
logical	knowledge	from	the	data,	without	themselves	first	needing	to	create	their	own	
bioinformatics	infrastructure.	
The	tasks	of	the	expertise	centres	would	furthermore	include	the	broad	creation	of	com-
petences	in	the	bioinformatics	analysis	of	genomic	and	postgenomic	data.	In	various	net-
works,	joint	training	units	have	proved	to	be	a	superb	means	of	transferring	knowledge	
between	the	institutions	involved.	In	addition,	they	strengthen	the	network	between	the	
institutions.	This	leads	to	a	long-lasting	strengthening	of	genome	research	in	Germany.	
11|10
Recommendations
In	addition,	the	training	and	fostering	of	young	researchers	should	be	expanded,	for	in-
stance,	in	graduate	schools.	This	will	make	it	easier	to	create	ties	between	experts	in	ge-
nome	research	and	bioinformatics.
The	comprehensive	coordinating	body
The	comprehensive	body	acts	as	the	coordination,	contact,	and	information	interface	be-
tween	expertise	centres,	biology	and	bioinformatics	research	institutions,	and	other	us-
ers	and	interest	groups.	By	promoting	the	exchange	of	information	between	the	various	
centres,	as	well	as	between	these	and	other	national	and	international	points	of	contact	
from	research	and	industry,	a	common	foundation	is	created	for	addressing	the	variety	of	
bioinformatics	issues	and	tasks.	
By	networking	local	bioinformatics	expertise	centres,	it	is	possible	to	promote	in	a	target-
ed	manner	the	development	of	technology	in	the	various	fields	of	applied	biology,	as	well	
as	in	basic	research,	to	develop	standards	for	storing	and	analysing	data,	and	to	develop	
concepts	for	the	sustainability	of	available	data	resources.	
While	the	main	task	of	the	expertise	centres	is	providing	specific	tools	for	analysing	re-
search	data	from	various	fields	of	the	biosciences,	the	overarching	body	promotes	the	de-
velopment	and	use	of	jointly	needed	tools	and	standards.	As	coordinated	by	the	compre-
hensive	body,	all	expertise	centres	take	part	in	the	development	of	mutual	foundations	of	
bioinformatics	and	moreover	serve	as	a	point	of	contact	for	specific	issues.	
The	 development	 of	 standard	 operating	 procedures,	 uniform	 interfaces,	 and	 conscien-
tious	data	documentation	by	the	excellence	centres	are	to	be	coordinated	by	the	compre-
hensive	body.	This	will	speed	up	comparative	analyses	and	ensure	the	quality	of	analyses	
on	a	lasting	basis.	The	same	applies	for	the	provision	of	specialised	databases	and	tools	
for	genome	and	biodiversity	research.	Access	to	reference	data	sets	that	have	been	verified	
by	experts	(biocuration)	is	increasingly	proving	to	be	the	key	technology	for	high-quality	
analysis	of	biological	data,	as	well	as	the	search	for	new	enzymes	and	processes	for	bio-
technological	applications.	
12
In	addition,	the	comprehensive	body	will	act	as	the	initial,	intermediary	point	of	contact	
for	bioinformatics	issues.	In	this	way,	in	the	field	of	science,	it	can	contribute	to	strength-
ening	the	transfer	of	knowledge	between	biology	research	and	bioinformatics.	A	single	
point	of	contact	such	as	this	would	also	be	capable	of	promoting	exchange	and	collabora-
tion	with	companies	and	public	research	institutions.
In	establishing	the	comprehensive	body,	the	first	step	should	be	to	develop	a	“lean”	coordi-
nation	structure,	which	initially	establishes	the	necessary	network	between	the	existing	
centres.	This	could	be	achieved	by	setting	up	an	oversight	group,	whose	members	would	
coordinate	the	activities	of	the	various	centres	and	oversee	further	development.	The	ac-
tivity	of	this	group	should	initially	focus	on	the	development	of	a	network	structure	and	
the	coordination	of	development	and	standardisation	projects,	as	well	as	the	necessary	re-
sources	for	the	expertise	centres.	Similar	to	the	way	this	is	currently	being	practiced	in	the	
Netherlands	(NBIC)	and	Sweden	(BILS),	close	ties	between	the	overarching	authority	and	
the	bioinformatics	centres	could	be	achieved	by	having	the	members	from	the	expertise	
centres	form	the	core	of	the	oversight	group.	In	the	long	term,	transfer	to	a	broader-based	
institution	with	a	permanent	staff	should	be	sought,	in	order	to	be	able	to	ensure	support	
for	researchers,	a	high	standard	of	education	in	bioinformatics,	and	communication	to	the	
public	at	a	high	level.
In	order	to	set	up	a	coordinated	structure,	it	is	first	necessary	at	the	organisational	level	
to	have	a	small	circle	of	persons	declare	 themselves	willing	to	 take	on	the	responsibil-
ity	of	developing	the	concept	of	the	comprehensive	body	and	to	create	the	requisite	net-
working	with	the	research	institutions	that	are	potential	candidates	for	expertise	centres,	
with	companies,	and	with	international	institutions.	Moreover,	a	funding	model	has	to	
be	found	that	permits	an	institution	such	as	this	to	be	promoted	in	the	long	term.	Initial	
funding	is	to	be	sought	from	BMBF.	
	
13|12
Recommendations
b) Optimisation of the use of computing capacities
The	rapidly	accelerating	generation	of	data	in	recent	years	and	the	resulting	requirements	
in	the	area	of	data	analysis,	particularly	for	sequencing	analyses	and	for	statistical	com-
parisons	of	genotypes	and	phenotypes,	cannot	be	managed	with	standalone	computers.	
Analogous	developments	are	to	be	observed	with	simulation	methods	for	model-based	
data	analysis	and	experiment	planning	in	statistical	genetics	and	systems	biology.	In	ad-
dition,	the	typical	computing	needs	of	individual	working	groups	are	not	continuous	but	
rather	characterised	by	peak	loads	with	regard	to	time.	
Use	of	local	resources
Local	servers	or	computer	clusters	make	sense	for	covering	basic	needs	and	are	very	com-
mon.	The	use	of	 local	resources	is	especially	advantageous	where	the	data	is	to	be	pro-
cessed	interactively.	The	capacity	of	local	computer	clusters	can	essentially	be	improved	
through	alternating	or	simultaneous	performance	of	tasks	from	other	fields	that	require	
significant	computing	power.	However,	this	means	that	all	involved	working	groups	need	
to	carry	out	comprehensive	resource	planning.	
Use	of	external	resources	–	cloud	computing
In	order	to	be	able	to	manage	peak	loads	that	occur	irregularly,	it	often	is	advantageous	
to	use	the	capacities	of	central	computing	centres.	Today,	large	amounts	of	external	com-
puting	capacity	can	be	leased	(cloud	computing).	However,	in	comparison	to	local	servers	
and	clusters,	this	triggers	higher	costs,	and	the	security	of	confidential	data	normally	can-
not	be	ensured,	or	only	at	great	effort.	The	lack	of	data	security	is	considered	to	be	highly	
problematic,	in	particular,	where	collaborations	with	private	companies	are	involved.	In	
addition,	the	necessity	of	having	to	repeatedly	transfer	large	amounts	of	data	to	the	cloud	
creates	considerable	added	efforts.	From	the	standpoint	of	bioinformatics,	the	continual	
enhancement	of	cloud	technologies	with	respect	to	security	and	performance	has	a	high	
priority.
Use	of	external	resources	–	supercomputers
In	the	research	environment,	memory	and	computing	capacities	for	complex	calculations	
are	 widely	 available	 through	 time	 slots	 on	 supercomputers.	 However,	 supercomputers	
are	only	partially	suitable	for	unplanned	peak	loads,	since	slots	have	to	be	accessed	dur-
ing	specific	time	windows.	Therefore,	supercomputer	centres	can	be	seen	as	a	very	good	
complement	to	 the	necessary	management	and	expansion	of	bioinformatics	hardware	
capacities,	but	not	as	a	technical	solution	in	and	of	themselves.	
In	order	to	be	able	to	use	not	only	local	computers	and	computer	clusters	but	also	central	
supercomputers,	 the	 needed	 software	 tools	 must	 be	 freely	 available	 and	 the	 interfaces	
must	be	standardised.	
14
c)  Development of long-term strategies for research, action,  
and funding
Bringing	academic	research	together	with	private	companies
With	respect	to	the	future	role	that	bioinformatics	will	play	in	the	bio-economy,	efforts	
must	be	made	to	secure	increased	joint	public-private	funding	of	collaborative	projects.	
Currently,	however,	there	are	still	numerous	obstacles	standing	in	the	way	of	collabora-
tion	between	academic	research	and	private	companies.	These	range	from	the	problem-
atic	of	publication	of	research	data	from	public-private	partnerships	to	patent	issues.
Sustainability	of	data	resources
The	concepts	regarding	the	sustainability	of	available	data	resources	are	of	fundamen-
tal	 importance	 for	 all	 downstream	 analytical	 and	 knowledge-generating	 processes.	 In	
addition	to	data	generated	through	experiments,	these	include	their	metadata,	such	as	
the	description	of	the	experiment,	origin	and	nature	of	the	biological	material	used,	and	
the	analytical	methods	used.	In	order	to	make	such	a	description	uniform	and	more	eas-
ily	 accessible	 for	 analytical	 methods,	 it	 is	 possible	 to	 employ	“controlled	 vocabularies”	
or	 ontologies	 yet	 to	 be	 created.	 For	 instance,	 in	 addition	 to	 ensuring	 researcher	 access	
to	state-of-the-art	equipment	and	the	technologies	needed	to	generate	data,	such	as	for	
high-throughput	 sequencing,	 transcriptomics,	 proteomics,	 and	 metabolomics,	 it	 must	
also	be	ensured	that	the	acquired	data	are	available	for	a	wide	spectrum	of	applications	
and	for	long	periods	and	are	retrievable.
15|14
Attachment
Munich	Bioinformatics	Centre
Involved institutions Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology at the Helmholtz Centre in Munich 
(HMGU)
Technical University of Munich (TUM)
Specialisation Inter alia, comprehensive expertise in analysing, depicting, and providing genomes 
of classic plant model organisms (arabidopsis, medicago, brachypodium), as well as 
cultivated plants (rice, tomato, barley, wheat, rye, corn, sunflower). Analysis of next-
generation sequencing data and their correlation with genomic, evolutionary, and 
biologically functional issues with regard to model organisms and agricultural crops 
and farm animals. Development of statistical methods for the analysis of quantita-
tive characteristics, for the functional analysis of biodiversity, and for the resolution 
of important yield-determining mechanisms.
Extensive expertise in the fields of statistical genetics, plant and animal breeding, 
and molecular biology, ongoing appointment procedure for population genetics and 
biostatistics.
Networking Coordination/participation in two long-term research collaborations: AgroClustEr 
Synbreed, sponsored by BMBF, and the DFG special research field “Molecular mecha-
nisms regulating yield and yield stability in plants”.
The participating groups are closely networked with national and international 
consortiums and initiatives in Europe and the US, such as the International Wheat 
Genome Sequencing Consortium (IWGSC), the International Barley Genome 
Sequencing Consortium (IBSC), and the European plant genome infrastructure plat-
form transPlant. Comprehensive participation in projects of GABI / Plant Biotech-
nology of the Future initiative. Collaboration with companies under public-private 
partnerships.
Education The two institutions together ensure the education of talented young scientists 
through the TUM courses of study in bioinformatics, agricultural sciences, biology, 
and molecular biotechnology. In order to develop interface competence between 
undergraduate and graduate students and ensure interdisciplinary networking 
between various departments, both institutions take part jointly in seminar series 
and summer schools.
Staff About 45 individuals in the fields of bioinformatics, quantitative genetics, animal 
and plant breeding, expanded by ongoing appointment procedures for population 
genetics (W2) and biostatistics (W3).
Software R package synbreed for genomic prediction of complex phenotypes 
Databases No information
Computer infrastructure Powerful computer cluster at HMGU, Leibniz computing centre, and Munich Center 
of Advanced Computing
Attachment
Current bioinformatics facilities – Examples of potential expertise  
centres 
a)	Plants
16
Plant	Bioinformatics	at	Gatersleben-Halle
Involved institutions Institute of Computer Science at the Martin Luther University (MLU) in Halle-
Wittenberg
Leibniz Institute of Plant Biochemistry (IPB) in Halle
Leibniz Institute of Plant Genetics and Crop Plant Research (IPK) in Gatersleben
Specialisation Analysis of next-generation sequencing data (assembly, diversity studies, RNA-
Seq, and ChIP-Seq); development of databases, data integration, and information 
retrieval; analysis of biological networks; image analysis (microscopy images, DNA 
signals, high-throughput phenotyping of plants); applied informatics in the fields of 
metabolomics and mass spectrometry; systems biology (modelling of metabolism 
and flow analyses); visualisation and visual data analysis of biological data; molecu-
lar phylogeny.
Networking Numerous national and international collaborations with countries such as Greece, 
the UK, Turkey, Sweden, Switzerland, Spain, Finland, France, Austria, the Netherlands, 
Japan, Australia, the US, Israel, Canada, Russia, Iran. There are also collaborations 
with industry (BASF Plant Sciences, Bayer Crop Sciences, Boehringer, KWS, and many 
other companies involved in plant breeding).
Education Neben dem seit 1999 existierenden, nun auslaufenden Diplomstudiengang Bio-
informatik (MLU Halle) gibt es einen Bachelor- und Masterstudiengang Bioinfor-
matik (MLU Halle), Promotionen in Bioinformatik (MLU Halle) sowie umfangreiche 
Lehrtätigkeiten für Bioinformatik-Module (Uni Kiel), den Bachelor- und Masterstudi-
engang Biotechnologie (Hochschule Anhalt, Standort Köthen) und den Bachelorstu-
diengang Informatik (Hochschule Harz, Standort Wernigerode).
Staff MLU: 3 professorships, with an additional 4 budgeted (HH) and 3 outside-funded 
(DM) researcher positions
IPB: a group with four researchers (group head, 2 HH and 1 DM position)
IPK:	working	groups	(of	which	2	are	purely	DM-funded)	in	the	field	of	plant	bioin-
formatics,	with	a	total	of	29	researchers	(7	HH	and	22	DM)
Software The	following	tools,	inter	alia,	have	been	developed:	
Alida	(Documentation	of	data	analyses);	MiToBo	(Microscope	Image	Analysis	
Toolbox);	Vanted	(analysis	of	OMICS	data	in	the	network	context);	SBGN-ED	(Sys-
tems	Biology	Graphical	Notation	Editor);	LAILAPS	(search	engine	for	information	
retrieval	for	user-specific	relevance	analysis);	databases	and	data	integration	of	
laboratory	data	management,	including	cross-domain	data	analysis;	bioconduc-
tor	packages	(xcms,	CAMERA,	Rdisop,	mzR);	tools	for	metabolite	identification;	
IAP	(image	analysis	of	high-throughput	phenotyping	data);	HIVE	(integrative	
analysis	of	multimode	data);	FBASimVis	(flux	balance	analysis);	KGML-ED	(KEGG	
pathway	editor);	CentiBin/CentiLin	(centrality	analyses	in	networks);	Jstacs	(li-
brary	for	statistical	analyses	and	sequence	classification);	MotifAdjuster/MiMB/
Dispom	(transcription	factor	binding	sites	annotation	and	prediction);	and	
PHHMM	(analysis	of	array-CGH	data).
Databases Participation	in	the	development	of	public	databases	in	the	field	of	plant	bioin-
formatics	(selection):	
GBIS	(Federal	central	genebank	information	system);	MetaCrop	(information	
system	for	metabolism	in	plants)	and	MassBank	(mass	spectrometry	refer-
ence	data).	In	addition,	active	collaborative	work	is	continuing	for	standards	in	
systems	biology	(SBML,	SBGN);	the	citability	of	(primary)	research	data	(DataCite	
-	DOI);	the	proteomics	initiative	(mzML,	TraML)	and	the	representation	of	biologi-
cal	and	experimental	meta-	and	primary	data	(ISA-TAB).
17|16
Attachment
Computer	infrastructure High-performance	cluster	(90	nodes/200	gigabyte	main	memory);	SMP	comput-
er	(8x4-core	Opteron/256	gigabyte	main	memory);	hierarchical	storage	manage-
ment	(HSM)	system	(~65	terabyte/9	terabyte	online	access);	high-performance	
cluster	(1840	cores/~2.17	TB	RAM);	3D	visualisation	station;	and	IPB	computing	
cloud	(650	CPU	cores,	central	SAN	memory	network)
Bioinformatics	activities	in	Tübingen	and	Hohenheim
Involved institutions Interdisciplinary Center for Bioinformatics Tübingen (ZBIT): Eberhard Karls Univer-
sity in Tübingen, University Hospital in Tübingen, Max Planck Institute for Devel-
opmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Friedrich Miescher 
Laboratory 
Friedrich-Miescher-Laboratorium Hohenheim: University of Hohenheim (Agricul-
tural Sciences faculty), State Research Centre for Plant Breeding
Specialisation ZBIT: Various areas of bioinformatics
Hohenheim: Statistical genomics
Networking Hohenheim: Various international collaborations in connection with GABI/
PLANT2030 and SYNBREED. There is a research collaboration between the Institute 
of Plant Breeding (Schmid) and the Max Planck Institute in Tübingen (Weigel).
Education ZBIT: In 1998 the University of Tübingen established the first course of study in 
Germany for bioinformatics. Today, education in bioinformatics consists of BSc/
MSc/PhD programmes. There are currently about 220 undergraduate and graduate 
students and 50 PhD candidates studying at various schools. 
Hohenheim: In Hohenheim, education in bioinformatics and statistical genomics 
consists of the BSc and MSc programmes “Agricultural Science”, with emphasis on 
plant and animal breeding, the MSc programme “Crop Sciences”, with emphasis on 
plant breeding, and PhD programmes. There are currently about 100 undergraduate 
and graduate students and 20 PhD candidates in this field.
Staff ZBIT: 14 working groups in various areas of bioinformatics
Software ZBIT: Numerous software packages for use in green bioinformatics are being devel-
oped in Tübingen, including: 
Metagenomics (MEGAN package), phylogenies (SplitsTree), Galaxy server (gene 
prediction, cis-elements, etc.), short-read assembly (LOCAS), molecular modelling 
(BALL), proteomics (OpenMS), systems biology (BN++ [BioMiner], integrated next-
generation sequencing analysis (SHORE package), NGS aligner (QPALMA, PALMapper, 
GenomeMapper), and NGS transcriptome analysis (rQUANT).
Hohenheim: A number of software packages for statistical genomics were devel-
oped in Hohenheim. Examples include: 
Genetic mapping (PLABQTL), simulation of geno- and phenotypes (phenosim, R-hy-
pred) an analysis of breeding programmes (PLABSTAT, R-selectiongain, R-mvngGrAd)
Databases No information
Computer infrastructure ZBIT: In Tübingen, there is one cluster at the University and one at the Max Planck 
campus, which is maintained by staff with permanent positions. 
Hohenheim: In Hohenheim, the departments within the Institute of Plant Breeding 
operate a cluster with more than 100 nodes, which, beginning in 2012, will be main-
tained by an employee with a permanent position. Additional external computing 
capacities are used via collaborations.
18
Max	Planck	Institute	of	Molecular	Plant	Physiology	in	Golm
Involved institutions Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology (MPIMP, Golm, central bioinfor-
matics infrastructure group), 
University of Potsdam Golm, bioinformatics group, chair Prof. Selbig)
Specialisation OMICS data management and analysis: Development of databases to manage 
OMICS data, specifically, metabolomics data and next-generation sequencing data, 
marker identification, e. g., in the context of breeding, development and application 
of statistical methods of OMICS data analysis; 
Systems biology: Analysis of OMICS data against the backdrop of signalling and 
metabolic pathways, network reconstruction from OMICS data; 
Genome-wide association studies: Development of tools for detecting genotype-
phenotype associations; 
RNA: Studies of sequence-structure-function relationships of RNA molecules, in 
particular, non-coding RNA (miRNA), development and provision of methods for 
functional classification of RNA 
Networking With working groups of MPIMP and the University of Potsdam that are conducting 
experiments;
Exchange with the region’s bioinformatics groups (Leibniz Institute of Plant Bio-
chemistry in Halle, Humboldt University in Berlin, MPIMB in Berlin-Dahlem);
Numerous national and international contacts via projects: MPIMP: inter alia, Uni-
versity of Erlangen, the IMB in Aachen, University of Vienna, Aberdeen University;
Uni Potsdam: U. a. IPK Gatersleben, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, 
National Institute of Biology Ljubljana, 8 Europäische Partner eines EU-MC-ITN
Education University of Potsdam: inter alia, the IPK in Gatersleben, Ludwig Maximilians Uni-
versity in Munich, the National Institute of Biology in Ljubljana, 8 European partners 
of a EU-MC-ITN
Staff MPIMP: About 300 employees, including: MPIMP bioinformatics: 9 employees (1 
group leader, 4 postdocs, 2 programmers, 2 PhD candidates), as well as bioinformat-
ics-oriented employees in numerous working groups; 
University of Potsdam: Bioinformatics working group (Prof. Selbig): 10+ employees 
(1 chair, 6 postdocs, 2 PhD candidates, 1 system administrator, student employees); 
bioinformatics-oriented employees in the Mathematical Modelling and Systems 
Biology working group (Prof. Huisinga); several bioinformatics-oriented employees 
in other working groups
Software A variety of self-developed standalone and Web-based software tools for OMICS 
data analysis (MetaGeneAlyse and pcaMethods for statistical data analysis;
Specialised software for analysing proteomics (IOMACS) and metabolomics (inter 
alia, TagFinder, GoBioSpace) experiments; 
Commercial software (CLC, Statistica, Matlab, Mathematica), public domain soft-
ware (R, MeV, etc.);
Operating systems: Linux, Windows; programming languages/environments: 
Python, Perl, Java, C,.Net, C#, R, MATLAB; Web programming, databases: SQL, MySQL, 
Postgres
19|18
Attachment
Databases Golm metabolome database (GMD, GC/MS data), ChlamyCyc (Chlamydomonas 
metabolic pathways, genes, and proteins), RLooM (RNA loop structures), NGS Small-
Reads-DB, TROST (potato water-stress data), ChlExDa (Chlamydomonas experimen-
tal data), AraNet (expression correlation networks in model plants);
GABI-PD, GABI primary database;
Computer infrastructure MPIMP: 12 servers, 40TB disk space, number of cores: 88
Uni-Potsdam: 10 host computers with 96 computing cores, 10 workstation comput-
ers, 48TB central hard-drive memory 
b)	Animals
Vit	Verden
Involved institutions VIT is a service computer centre for organised animal breeding
(e. g. state inspection associations, breeding organisation for cattle, horses, sheep, 
and pigs, genotyping laboratories) 
Specialisation Computer applications and genetically statistical analyses in the area of animal 
husbandry and animal breeding
Networking German university institutes and research facilities in the area of animal breeding
Other national and international computing centres and research institutions in the 
area of animal breeding
Education Engineering degrees (specialisation in animal breeding), Programmers, database 
experts, Bioinformatics researchers
Staff About 120 employees (departments, programmers, system maintenance)
Software Proprietary software development (JAVA, Fortran, SAS)
Databases Oracle
Computer infrastructure Dispersed server systems, Linux clusters
Georg	August	University	in	Göttingen,	Animal	Breeding	and	Genetics	Department
Involved institutions Georg August University in Göttingen, Research Data Processing Company (Gesells-
chaft für wissenschaftliche Datenverarbeitung mbh, GWDG) in Göttingen 
Specialisation Scientific computing with diverse data structures, processing of animal breeding-
specific data, processing of data from high-throughput genotyping, high-through-
put phenotyping, and next-generation sequencing, genomic models, association 
mapping, population genetics
Networking Synbreed, FUGATO projects, DFG-GRK 1664 “Scaling Problems in Statistics”, Centre 
for Statistics at the University of Göttingen
20
Education PhD researchers in agricultural science, graduate researchers in agricultural science, 
mathematics, and physics
Staff Department head, 2 research associates, 2 postdocs, 10 PhD candidates, 2 program-
mers
Software Mathematic software (Mathematica, Maple) 
Common statistics software (Statistica, SPSS, SAS, R, etc.) 
Animal breeding-specific software (e. g. ASReml, VCE, PEST, ZPLAN+, …)
Software for sequencing data; processing of raw data (e. g. PHRAP, PHRED) sequenc-
ing comparisons and multi-alignment (e. g. BLAST, bwa, Phylip, SAMtools)
Sequencing databases (e. g. EMBL)
Programming languages R, C++, Python, Fortran
Databases MySQL and Oracle databases at GWDG
Computer infrastructure GGWDG: Cluster with several parallel computers (Intel Xeon and AMD Opteron 
systems) with batch systems, a total of more than 5,000 cores and more than 
18,000GB RAM 
GWDG systems for data security and server administration
Various department-based servers, e. g. AMD Opteron with 24 cores, 2.1 GHz clocking, 
128GB RAM 
Leibniz	Institute	for	Farm	Animal	Biology
Involved institutions Leibniz Institute for Farm Animal Biology (FBN), Wilhelm-Stahl-Allee 2,  
18196 Dummerstorf
Specialisation ntegrative bioinformatics with farm animals (cow, pig) specifically for performance 
characteristics, functional characteristics, and behavioural characteristics
Statistical genomics, genetic statistics, evaluation of genetic parameters, evaluation 
of breeding potential, breeding planning, populations genetics in breeding
Ontology for behavioural characteristics
Networking Phenomics competence network
University of Rostock, Chair for Systems Biology and Bioinformatics
Institute for Neuro- and Bioinformatics, University of Lübeck and Institute for  
Animal Breeding and Husbandry, Christian Albrechts University in Kiel
Institute for Bioengineering and Food Science, Biostatistics Group, University of Life 
Sciences, Aas, Norway
Vit Verden, breeding associations, performance testing organisations, and other 
partners in the field
Education R courses for the International Leibniz Graduate School DiVa and FBN PhD candidates
Biomarker lab for students in molecular biotechnology and computer science at the 
University of Rostock 
Gene set enrichment as part of the course Molecular Bioinformatics II under the 
master’s courses of study Molecular Life Sciences and Computer Science at the 
University of Lübeck
Linear module and mixed linear models in the master’s course of study Animal Sci-
ences at the University of Rostock
21|20
Attachment
Staff Working group Biomathematics and Bioinformatics with four researchers
Working group Animal Breeding and Genetics with four researchers
Junior working group Integrative Bioinformatics for Cattle (2 DM positions for  
five years)
Post-doctoral position for ontology development (1 DM position for five years)
Software Simulation of genotype distributions and phenotypes typical for farm animals
Algorithm development for integrative bioinformatics for farm animals
Ontology development with emphasis on animal behaviour
Databases Project database for the phenomics competence network 
Project data bank for integrative bioinformatics for cattle
Computer infrastructure FBN currently has five computer servers with a total of 124 nodes. In addition, it 
is possible to use external computer capacities (2 clusters with 30 and 10 nodes, 
respectively) at the University of Rostock (collaboration agreement)
Bavarian	State	Research	Center	for	Agriculture	in	Grub
Involved institutions Bavarian State Research Center for Agriculture in Grub
Specialisation Genomic evaluation of the breeding potential of cattle and pigs 
Genome-wide association studies involving cattle and pigs
Networking Technical University of Munich
Christian Albrechts University in Kiel
University of Hohenheim
ZuchtData GmbH, Vienna
State Office for GeoInformation and Land Development in Kornwestheim
Bavarian State Board of Trustees for Animal Processing Producers
Education No information
Staff 6 researchers, 2 PhD candidates, 2 programmers
Software Software used: R, SAS; Beagle; findhap V2; ASReml, DMU, MiX99,.. 
Software developed in-house: under Fortran and Perl
Databases Genotypes: Alle Genotypen der Rinderrassen, Fleckvieh und Braunvieh in 
Deutschland, ca. 15.000 Genotypen Fleckvieh, ca. 5.000 Genotypen Braunvieh, 
hauptsächlich Illumina 54K Bead-Chip, teilweise Illumina 777K Bead-Chip (ca. 1.500), 
Genotypen von 2.000 Schweinen der Rassen Deutsche Landrasse und Deutsches 
Edelschwein, Illumina 60K Bead-Chip
Phenotypes: LPerformance data for the above-mentioned breeds in 44 characteris-
tics since 1990, Heritage data for the above-mentioned breeds since 1950, Breeding 
value of the above-mentioned breeds in 44 characteristics
Database systems: Oracle mySQL
22
Computer infrastructure Windows workstation computers (standard 4 GB of RAM)5 Linux workstations under 
Debian, Dual-Xeon 4- and 6-core 16, 19 or 64 GB of RAM per computer, Connection to 
4TB hard-drive server, 1 Linux workstation with Oracle-DB, 1 IBM 550Q with 2 Power5 
Quadcore Proz. and 64GB of RAM under AIX5L
c)	Microbiology	and	biotechnology
The	bioinformatics	technology	platform	at	the	Center	for	Biotechnology	(CeBiTec)	at	the	University	
of	Bielefeld
Involved institutions The “Bioinformatics Resource Facility” (BRF) – a research-oriented service and 
development institution resulting from the DFG’s bioinformatics initiative (2001) – 
administers the computers used by CeBiTec units, and it supports various large-scale 
projects in genome research, in particular, through the integration and new develop-
ment of database applications for efficient storage of generated primary data, as 
well as through the implementation of software for analysing larger amounts of 
genome-based data. 
Specialisation The spectrum of research projects, most of which are focused on biotechnology, 
ranges from the analysis of microbial genomes and metagenomes, to the process-
ing of fungi (in particular, yeasts), algae, and plants (wall cress, sugar beets, grape-
vine, rapeseed), to animal cell cultures (e. g. Chinese hamster ovary cells).
Networking In addition to the deployment of developed systems in various genome and post-
genome projects at CeBiTec, numerous external partners also make use of the Biele-
feld infrastructure under national and international collaborations. Currently, a total 
of approximately 500 internal and more than 2,700 external users are registered, 
with approximately 55% of them coming from Germany. Select projects: GenoMik, 
GenoMik-Plus, GenoMik-Transfer, PathoGenoMik, Marine Genomics Europe, Grain 
Legumes, GABI-Kat, NuGGET, AnnoBeet, SysMap, GK Bioinformatik, CLIB Graduate 
Cluster.
Education In the area of teaching, bioinformatics education at the University of Bielefeld 
consists of bachelor’s and master’s courses of study in “Bioinformatics and Genome 
Research” and “Natural Sciences Informatics”, as well as the master’s course of study 
“Genome-Based Systems Biology”. Bioinformatics education is under the auspices of 
4 chairs (E. Baake – Biomathematics & Theoretical Bioinformatics; J. Stoye – Genome 
Informatics; R. Giegerich – Practical Informatics; R. Hofestädt – Bioinformatics & 
Medical Informatics) and other working groups (T. Nattkemper – Biodata Mining & 
Neuroinformatics; A. Sczyrba - Computational Metagenomics & Single Cell Genom-
ics; A. Goesmann – Computational Genomics).
Staff In addition to the director position, the BRF has 6 permanent employee positions for 
system administration, which are all funded by the University. In addition, 3 student 
assistants are continually deployed for routine activities, with this being funded 
from CeBiTec’s budgeted resources. For the purposes of joint representation of the 
interests of the various CeBiTec working groups, a BRF coordinating committee was 
formed for planning and shaping the enhancement of the CeBiTec computer infra-
structure, working closely with the system administrators.
23|22
Attachment
Software In addition to administration and enhancement of the technical infrastructure, the 
BRF works in the field of applied bioinformatics by actively developing software 
solutions for high-throughput analyses in the field of genome and postgenome 
research. The emphasis is on DNA sequencing analysis and genome annotation 
(SAMS, GenDB, EDGAR SARUMAN, Conveyor), including the reconstruction of meta-
bolic pathways (CARMEN), high-throughput analysis in the area of transcriptomics 
(EMMA), proteomics (QuPE), and metabolomics (MeltDB), as well as general data 
management and visualisation (ProMeTra). These systems are connected with one 
another through an integration layer called “BRIDGE”. Other software tools used 
at the Institute for Bioinformatics at CeBiTec: CARMA, CPA, r2cat, Gecko, GISMO, 
REGANOR, QAlign, PASSTA, BACCardI, Genlight, RNAcast, RNAshapes, Genalyzer, 
PathFinder, RNAhybrid, VANESA, PathAligner, TACOA, BIIGLE, etc.
In addition to the above-described Web-based programme packages and the virtual 
work environment, the Bielefeld Bioinformatics Server (BiBiServ) provides further 
bioinformatics applications for anonymous users. With its Web services-based pro-
gramming interfaces, it offers an additional possibility for providing external users 
with newly developed tools on an established platform.
Databases DAWIS-M.D., CardioVINEdb, BioDWH, RAMEDIS, STCDB, Coryne-RegNet, Myco-Reg-
Net, BIOIMAX, etc.
Computer infrastructure CeBiTec’s hardware park today comprises a computing output of approximately 25 
TeraFLOPS (796 CPUs, i. e. 4,024 CPU cores), an online storage capacity of 433TB and a 
gross back-up capacity of approximately 1.4PB. For the purposes of long-term archiv-
ing of raw data and daily data security, BRF deploys three tape systems with a possi-
ble final capacity of 16PB. A computer cluster is available for processing primary data 
and for additional high-throughput analysis. This is used, inter alia, for diverse DNA 
sequencing analyses, such as the annotation of genomes or metagenome analyses. 
For special bioinformatics applications with, e. g., very high memory needs, various 
application servers are available, which have been furnished with up to 96 CPU 
cores and a maximum of 1024GB of RAM. Also worthy of mention here are special 
computers that have been tailored specially to the specific needs of bioinformat-
ics. For instance, 4 servers with a total of 12 TimeLogic DeCypher-FPGA cards are 
deployed to accelerate BLAST analyses. For GPU-based approaches, such as read 
mapping with the software SARUMAN developed in Bielefeld, three IBM iDataPlex 
servers, each with two NVIDIA Tesla M2070-GPU cards, were procured. For the 
independent development of FPGA-based algorithms, a Convey HC-1ex system 
with a full complement of RAM is also available. This equipment corresponds to an 
investment of more than EUR 6 million over the past 10 years from DFG, BMBF, and 
EU projects, as well as from special grants and the University’s own budgeted funds.
Another important component of the Bielefeld bioinformatics infrastructure is the 
virtual work environment based on Sun Ray thin clients. Through the use of energy-
saving and inexpensive terminals, more than 350 bioinformatics workstations are 
provided today with minimal administrative effort. This has enabled BRF to operate 
virtually without interruption and in an extremely stable manner for 12 years. In 
particular, the suitability of this type of virtual workstation for worldwide use was 
proved through successful operation of the terminal in WAN in, inter alia, Europe, 
South America, and Asia.
24
d)	Plants	and	microbiology
Bioinformatics	in	the	ABCD	/	J	Region
Involved institutions Technical University (RWTH) of Aachen
University of Bonn
University of Düsseldorf
Jülich Research Centre
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research in Cologne
Specialisation RWTH Aachen: RWTH Aachen has bolstered itself in the field of white systems 
biology (Prof. Blank), and the medical department has called for the formation of a 
bioinformatics group. 
University of Bonn: With the Institute for Crop Sciences and Protection of Resources 
and Prof. Léon, the University of Bonn has expertise in the field of breeding poten-
tial. Prof. Ewert heads the modelling work for the Agricultural Faculty at the Univer-
sity of Bonn (especially yield modelling). An additional professorship for statistical 
genetics is planned.
Jülich Research Centre: European Plant Phenotyping Network (EPPN). In addition, 
at IBG1 (Prof. Wiechert), there is great expertise in white biotechnology and also in 
modelling of networks and biotechnological processes. 
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research in Cologne: Expertise in the field of 
plant breeding and genetics.
University of Düsseldorf: Metagenomics, metabolic networks
Networking Existing collaborations with, inter alia, INRA France, International Arabidopsis Infor-
matics Consortium, International Plant Phenotyping Network, International Tomato 
Annotation Group, International Medicago Genome Annotation Group, IPK, iPlant, 
MIPS Munich, Max Planck Institutes in Golm and Tübingen, University of Bielefeld, 
University of Toronto: BAR Viewer, Perth Plant Energy Biology Center SUBA, PlantsDB, 
Tomato/potato trait, phenotype and mapping database, Wageningen University, 
Fraunhofer Institute (Aachen Fraunhofer FIT: Life Science Informatics, Bonn: Fraun-
hofer SCAI-Bioinformatics)
Education RWTH Aachen: To date, bioinformatics modules in the biotechnology course of 
study; bioinformatics is now slated to be included in biology. 
University of Bonn: MSc Life Science Informatics, B-IT Center, Bonn; bioinformatics in 
MSc Crop Science.
University of Düsseldorf: An extensive bioinformatics curriculum is available for 
biologists (http://www.molevol.de/~bioinf/).
25|24
Attachment
Staff RWTH Aachen: Beginning in mid-2012, a position as research associate/professor is 
to be filled 
University of Bonn: Junior researcher group leader as research associate, system 
administrator, permanent
University of Düsseldorf: Two bioinformatics chairs within the Computer Sciences 
course of study
Jülich Research Centre: For the planned successor to the Gabi primary database: 
follow-up funding of 2 FTE through the research centre in connection with the 
appointment commitment to Prof. Usadel. The working group of Prof. Usadel at FZJ 
will likewise comprise additional staff from basic funding. 
In connection with the DPPN (German Plant Phenotyping Network): access to the 
IT structure at IBG2 (Prof. Schurr), capacities at the Jülich Plant Phenotyping Center 
(JPPC) are to be expanded further.
At IBG1: a modelling department (biochemical networks and biotechnology pro-
cesses)
At IBG2: a modelling group (structure-function models root and sprout) 
Associated with BioSC: The Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research in 
Cologne with three groups with direct access to green bioinformatics (Dr. Schnee-
berger (NGS mapping), Dr. Jimenez-Gomez (adaptive genomics and genetics), and 
Dr. Stich (quantitative crop genetics) as well as with Prof. Koornneef).
Software RWTH Aachen: Mercator (MapMan annotation), Robin (microarray analysis), R-Robin 
(RNA seq analyses), MapMan, PageMan (visualisation of OMICS data), Corto
University of Bonn: Function annotation: PhyloFun, AHRD, R packages for ChIP-chip/
ChIP-Seq (ChipR), aggregators/workflow tools for Web services 
University of Düsseldorf: PhlyoPythiaS
Jülich Research Centre: OMIX (network editor), 13CFLUX (substance flow analysis), 
CADET (chromatography)
Databases RWTH Aachen: MapMan (functional classes), CSB.DB (correlation databases)
University of Köln: Aramemnon database (group of Prof. Flügge)
University of Bonn: AFAWE, function predictions http://afawe.mpipz.mpg.de
Jülich Research Centre: Gabi primary database successor; phenotype databases, 
coupling of phenotype-genotype databases
Computer infrastructure Jülich Research Centre: Supercomputing center, as well as clusters at IBG1 and IBG2
26
e)	Environmental	microbiology	and	biodiversity	research
Bremen	infrastructure	for	environmental	microbiology	and	biodiversity	research
Involved institutions Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology in Bremen
Jacobs University in Bremen
Center for Marine Environmental Sciences (MARUM) at the University of Bremen
Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research (AWI) in Bremerhaven
Specialisation Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs University: The bioinformat-
ics focus of the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs University 
is microbial diversity and genome research. In addition to sequencing analysis 
and classification (binning), the emphasis is particularly on the development and 
operation of reference databases (SILVA project) and the integration of diversity and 
function data with environmental parameters (Megx project). In addition, the Max 
Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs University plays an active role in the 
development of metadata standards, exchange formats, and ontologies, in order to 
improve the exchange of data and the interoperability of data and databases.
AWI / MARUM: Long-term archiving and publication of biological environment data. 
In addition, PANGAEA has played an active role in recent years in developing geodata 
infrastructures and relevant standards. Data are typically made available via central 
portal services, with PANGAEA® acting, on the one hand, as “data and metadata dis-
tributor” and, on the other, as central network architect, portal operator, and broker 
between various e-infrastructures. Using various metadata standards and protocols 
(OGC-CS, OAI-PMH, DiGIR, ABCD), various portals and search engines are provided 
with content from PANGAEA®. PANGAEA played a critical role in the development 
of the citability of data and the creation of DataCite. Since 2009 services have been 
provided that enable dynamic cross-referencing of data and article, including from 
Science Direct (e. g.: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2010.04.009). 
AWI: Current bioinformatics applications at AWI include the modelling of ecologi-
cal niches for diatoms (project of the Hustedt diatom collection), the recording of 
time variations of microplankton algae communities in the face of global changes, 
and the breakdown of toxic pathways in dinoflagellates (shellfish poisoning, e. g. 
Azadinium spinosum), as well as molecular characterisation of ecosystems in sea 
ice (MacSeaIce project) and biotechnology applications of cold-adapted in-situ 
oil-degrading marine bacteria. Also deserving of mention: Participation in genome 
sequencing projects for key organisms, transcriptomics studies of adaption/acclima-
tion in higher organisms, as well as at the ecosystem level.
Networking Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs University: With its bio-
informatics expertise, the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs 
University is involved in a number of current research projects: BMBF project 
MIMAS (Microbial Interactions in MArine Systems), SAW-Leibniz project ATKIM 
(degradability of arctic, terrigenous carbon in the sea), EU projects MAMBA (Marine 
Metagenomics for New Biotechnological Applications), EuroMarine (Integration of 
European Marine Research Networks of Excellence), and BioVeL (Biodiversity Virtual 
e-Laboratory). It also coordinates the EU project Micro B3 (Biodiversity, Bioinformat-
ics, Biotechnology). In addition, the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/
Jacobs University is involved in various national and European infrastructure pro-
jects: DFG project CIBAS (Center for integrative Biodiversity Analysis and Synthesis), 
EU projects EuroFleets (Towards an alliance of European research fleets), EMBRC 
(European Marine Biological Resource Centres), and MIRRI (Microbial Resource Re-
search Infrastructure). In addition, close contacts have been created to the European 
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) and, in particular, to the ELIXIR project (European Life 
Sciences Infrastructure for Biological Information).
27|26
Attachment
Networking AWI / MARUM: PANGAEA is an accredited world data centre in both the ICSU World 
Data System (WDS) and the WMO Information System (WIS), and in the past 15 
years, it was actively involved in more than 140 national, European, and international 
projects (currently IODP (NSF), EUR-OCEANS and EUROMARIN, ESONET (NoE), EMSO 
(CP), EPOCA (CP), CoralFish (CP), EUROBASIN (IP), HYPOX (CP), EMODNET Bio and Tara-
Oceans, as well as, on a national level, BIOACID, INTERDYNAMIK and SOPRAN – for a 
complete list, see www.pangaea.de/projects). In addition, PANGAEA maintains broad 
collaborations with scientific publishers (Elsevier, Springer, Wiley, AGU, and others)
AWI: In recent years, AWI has developed and expanded an extensive research and 
applications profile in modern OMICS methods (today, primarily next-generation 
sequencing and microarrays), inter alia, through research collaborations (e. g. 
Marine Genomics Europe Network of Excellence), genome sequencing consortiums 
(Micromonas, Th. pseudonana, E. siliculosus, F. cylindrus, E. huxleyi, Ch. Crispus, 
Glaciecola), and transcriptome sequencing projects (Krill, P. brachycara, Hyas, S. 
latissima, sea ice meta-transcriptome), as well as through programme research (e. g. 
coastline research, harmful algal blooms, ecological chemistry) and junior researcher 
groups (PLANKTOSENS).
Education Bachelor’s course of study in applied computational mathematics with specialisa-
tion in bioinformatics at Jacobs University. Bioinformatics course and internship at 
the University of Bremen, and a master’s course of study in marine microbiology at 
the International Max Planck Research School. Periodic bioinformatics workshops 
and on-site training of users, online tutorials. Collaboration by students on projects 
in connection with internships, guided research modules, and student assistants.
Staff Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs University: 9 postdocs, 9 PhD 
candidates, 2 master’s students, 2 technicians, 1 team assistant, 1 group leader
AWI / MARUM: 5 postdocs, 2 technicians, 3 data managers, 1 group leader
AWI Computing Centre/Bio/Bioinformatics: 4 Postdocs
Software Diversity and phylogeny (ARB/SILVA), classification, binning (TETRA, TaxSOM, TaxoM-
eter), standardisation (MetaBar, CDinFusion), annotation (JCoast), data integration 
(Megx.net)
AWI / MARUM: In recent years, the PANGAEA® group has developed open-source 
software (Schindler & Diepenbroek 2008) for building portals and connecting data 
providers, and because of its modularity, it can support any number of metadata 
standards (ISO19xxx, DIF, Dublin Core, Darwin Core etc.). The software is used for 
various projects (inter alia, IODP, CARBOCHANGE, EPOCA, ESONET/EMSO, HYPOX, 
C3-GRID). In addition, PANGAEA employs the data warehouse software from Sybase 
(IQ), which is primarily used as a preliminary step in compiling data products.
AWI: Comparative genomics (Phylogena), microalgae communities (Pyloassigner), 
comparative metagenomics (MGMCMC), micro-satellite marker design (STAMP) 
Databases Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs University: SILVA: The Euro-
pean database for ribosomal RNA sequences (www.arb-silva.de) 
Microbial biodiversity research is principally based on the analysis of marker genes. 
In this regard, ribosomal RNA has become the gold standard, and for years the num-
ber of publicly available rDNA sequences has been growing exponentially, doubling 
every 12 – 18 months (currently, roughly 2.7 million sequences as of January 2012). In 
order to be able to analyse this flood of data, specialised reference databases and 
software tools are of critical importance. The ARB and SILVA database project was 
established more than 20 years ago in order to meet this challenge. ARB and SILVA 
are internationally recognised tools for processing, curating, and analysing rDNA 
sequences in biodiversity research and for industrial quality control and medical 
diagnostics. 
28
Megx.net (www.megx.net): Megx.net was developed in 2005 as the first integrated 
database in the field of environmental microbiology, and it permits concentrated 
access to microbial genome information and biodiversity in the context of the 
environment. In this regard, global environmental parameters are generated on 
the fly from oceanographic data sources. The close networking of Megx.net with 
public sequencing and environmental data repositories, such as EMBL-EBI/ENA and 
PANGAEA, in combination with intuitive visualisation of results, provides users with 
a dynamic look at biodiversity and function in the context of the environment.
AWI / MARUM: PANGAEA® – Publisher for Earth & Environmental Science (ICSU 
World Data Center) (www.pangaea.de)
The broad spectrum of WDC-MARE databases, which are distributed across the 
entire gamut of geo-, bio- and environmental sciences, aid in the research of global 
environmental changes. The focus is on geo-referenceable data from the fields 
of oceanography, marine geology, paleoceanography, and marine biology. The 
operational platform is the information system PANGAEA. The system currently 
contains approximately 450,000 data sets with more than 6.5 billion data points 
on approximately 40,000 different parameters from all of the world’s seas and 
continents, receiving the majority of its funding from project data management and 
the development of geodata infrastructures. 
AWI: PLANKTONNET biodiversity platform, Hustedt Diatom Research Centre (collec-
tion data) 
Standardisation and  
ontologies
MPI-Bremen / Jacobs University: Genomic Standards Consortium (www.gensc.org)
Founded in 2005 in Oxford, the Genomic Standards Consortium (GSC), composed 
of international researchers, took it upon itself to draft guidelines for a compact yet 
representative number of desirable additional data for sequencing information. This 
resulted first in the MIGS (Minimum Information about a Genome Sequence) and 
the MIMS (Minimum Information about a Metagenome Sequence) standards for 
genome and metagenome information. After several more years of development, 
the Consortium was recently able to publish the MIMARKS (Minimum Information 
about a MArker gene Sequence) standard and the MIxS (Minimum Information 
about any (x) Sequence) specifications. The GSC also oversees the development of 
ontologies, e. g. for habitat classification, through its Environment Ontology. The 
Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology/Jacobs University is in charge of the 
GSC and administers the central databases for the standards and specifications 
issued to date and a GSC reference implementation in XML. 
Computer infrastructure Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology: 500 Cores als Cluster mit 60Tb Stor-
age (ausfallsicher, permanent überwacht), Webserver, Archivspeicher für Sequen-
zanalyse, Phylogenie, Annotation, Datenbanken und Services.
AWI: 12-node vector computer NEC SX8R, 3.3 TFlop/s, 56TB GFS file system, ocean/
sea ice/paleoclimate models. 24-core dual-Opteron cluster, genome annotation, 
phylogeny, and transcriptomics. 1 SMP nodes 16-core Opteron, 32GB RAM, assembly/
mapping 454-ILLUMINA genomics/transcriptomics, phylogenetic placement of 454 
sequencing data, large-scale niche modelling, metagenomic Markov chain Monte 
Carlo Bayesian statistics. 1 SGI UV100 20-blade, 160-core Intel E7-883, 2.56TB RAM, 
96TB file system with InfiniteStorage, ocean modelling, data assimilation, transcrip-
tomics annotation and mapping, genome assembly, high-throughput phylogenetic 
placement of 454 sequencing data, metagenomic annotations. 2PB archive storage 
SL8500 (LTO/3), netapp scalable storage systems.
Use of services: Internationally via Web pages and Web services. Sun (Oracle) Secure 
Global Desktop (Web-based) and Sun-Ray thin clients for distributed work on virtual 
workstations. Collaboration with companies via Bremen-based Ribocon GmbH 
(spun off in 2005 by the Max Planck Institute). In addition, Galaxy workflows are 
used at AWI.
29|28
Attachment
Glossary
BILS	:	Bioinformatics	Infrastructure	for	Life	Sciences.	Decentralised	national	research	in-
frastructure	for	bioinformatics	in	Sweden,	which	is	supported	by	the	Swedish	Research	
Council.	
Biocatalysts	:	Biocatalysts	are	polymer	biomolecules	that	accelerate	biochemical	reactions	
in	organisms	by	lowering	or	(less	frequently)	raising	the	activation	energy	in	reactions.
Biocuration	:	Comprises	the	translation	and	integration	of	biological	data	in	a	database,	
enabling	the	data	to	be	linked	with	scientific	literature	and	other	data	sets.
Biodiversity	:	Concept	that	describes	the	diversity	of	life	on	the	three	levels	of	ecosystems,	
species,	and	genes.	A	fourth	 level	 is	considered	to	be	the	diversity	of	 interrelationships	
within	and	between	the	other	three	levels,	which	is	termed	functional	biodiversity.	
Cloud	computing	:	Cloud	computing	describes	the	approach	of	making	abstracted	IT	in-
frastructures	(e.	g.	computing	capacity,	data	storage,	network	capacities,	or	even	finalised	
software)	available	via	a	network	in	a	manner	that	is	dynamically	adapted	to	needs.
Computer	cluster	:	A	number	of	networked	computers.	The	objective	of	“clustering”	is	usu-
ally	to	increase	computing	capacity	or	availability	as	compared	with	individual	computers.
Cropsense	:	Network	for	complex	sensor	technology	for	crop	research,	breeding,	and	data	
management.
Data	integration	:	Bringing	together	of	data	from	a	variety	of	different	sources.
ELIXIR	:	European	Life	Sciences	Infrastructure	for	Biological	Information,	a	pan-European	
initiative	to	develop	a	permanent	European	bioinformatics	infrastructure.
FUGATO	:	Research	programme	on	functional	genome	analysis	in	animal	organisms	spon-
sored	by	the	German	Federal	Ministry	of	Education	and	Research	(BMBF).
GABI/Plant	Biotechnology	of	the	Future	:	Research	programme	in	the	field	of	future-ori-
ented	plant	biotechnology	sponsored	by	the	German	Federal	Ministry	of	Education	and	
Research	(BMBF)	and	private	companies.
Genome	:	The	entirety	of	an	organism’s	genetic	information.
Genomics	:	Field	of	research	that	looks	at	organisms	at	the	level	of	their	genome	data.
GenoMik	:	Research	and	sponsorship	initiative	“Genome	Research	on	Microorganisms	–	
GenoMik”	launched	in	2001	by	the	German	Federal	Ministry	of	Education	and	Research	
(BMBF)	in	order	to	create	the	structural	and	substantive	conditions	for	the	use	of	the	po-
tential	of	microorganisms	by	way	of	global,	genome-based	research	approaches.	
High-throughput	precision	phenotyping	:	Automated	methods	by	which	a	large	number	
of	phenotypings	are	performed	with	high	throughput.
30
Knowledge	bases	:	Special	databases	for	knowledge	management.
Metabolome	:	The	entirety	of	an	organism’s	metabolites.
Metabolomics	:	Field	of	research	that	looks	at	organisms	at	the	level	of	their	metabolites.
Metadata	:	Data	that	contain	information	about	other	data.
Model-based	data	analysis	:	Statistical	data	analysis	using	models	that	are	tailored	to	the	
respective	problem	and	that	seek	to	identify	possible	mechanisms	of	the	underlying	pro-
cesses.
NBIC	:	Netherlands	Bioinformatics	Centre,	a	Dutch	bioinformatics	network	with	expertise	
in	the	areas	of	research,	teaching,	and	support.	
Next-generation	sequencing	:	New	methods	for	DNA	sequencing,	which	make	increased	
throughput	possible.
OMICS	technologies	:	All-encompassing	description	of	technologies	used	to	analyse	the	
entirety	of	an	organism’s	particular	system	level,	e.	g.	all	genes	(genomics),	all	transcripts	
(transcriptomics),	all	proteins	(proteomics),	or	all	metabolites	(metabolomics).
Ontology	:	Formally	structured,	linguistic	depictions	of	a	set	of	terms	and	the	relationships	
between	them	in	a	given	subject	matter.	They	are	used	to	exchange	“knowledge”	in	digital	
and	formal	form	between	application	software	and	services.
PathoGenoMik	:	 Guideline	 of	 the	 German	 Federal	 Ministry	 of	 Education	 and	 Research	
for	the	funding	of	research	projects	within	the	ERA-NET	PathoGenoMics	“Transnational	
Pathogenomics:	Prevention,	Diagnosis,	Treatment,	and	Monitoring	of	Human	Infectious	
Diseases”	as	part	of	the	framework	programme	“Biotechnology	–	Using	and	Shaping	Op-
portunities”.
Phenomics	:	 Competence	 network	 for	 agricultural	 and	 nutrition	 research	 sponsored	 by	
the	German	Federal	Ministry	of	Education	and	Research.	It	represents	a	systems-biolog-
ical	approach	to	the	genotype-phenotype	depiction	of	the	farm	animals	cattle	and	pigs.
Phenotyping	:	Quantitative	analysis	of	key	functions	and	structures	of	organisms	and	bio-
logical	systems	and	the	underlying	physiological,	molecular,	and	genetic	mechanisms.
Postgenomic	 data	:	 Biological	 data	 that	 analyse	 cellular	 activities	 in	 their	 entirety	 and	
thus	go	beyond	the	purely	genetic	level	of	data	collection.
Primary	data	:	Sequencing	data	of	DNA,	RNA,	and	protein	molecules.
Proteome	:	The	entirety	of	all	proteins	expressed	in	an	organism	at	a	certain	time.
Proteomics	:	Field	of	research	that	looks	at	organisms	at	the	level	of	their	proteins.
31|30
Attachment
ReNaBi	:	 Réseau	 National	 des	 plates-formes	 Bioinformatiques,	 a	 French	 bioinformatics	
network	structure.
SIB	:	Swiss	Institute	of	Bioinformatics,	a	federation	of	bioinformatics	research	groups	of	
leading	Swiss	universities	and	the	Swiss	Federal	Institute	of	Technology.
Standard	operating	procedures	:	Procedures	describing	what	happens	during	a	process.
Supercomputer	:	The	fastest	computer	of	 its	 time.	A	typical	 feature	of	a	modern	super-
computer	is	its	large	number	of	processors,	which	can	access	shared	periphery	equipment	
and	a	partially	shared	main	memory.	Supercomputers	are	often	employed	for	computer	
simulations	in	the	area	of	high-performance	calculations.
Synbreed	:	Competence	network	sponsored	by	the	German	Federal	Ministry	of	Education	
and	Research	for	establishing	an	interdisciplinary	centre	for	genome-based	breeding	re-
search	 involving	 crops	 and	 farm	 animals.	 Group	 of	 researchers	 from	 plant	 and	 animal	
breeding,	molecular	biology,	bioinformatics,	and	human	medicine,	together	with	the	in-
volvement	of	university,	institutional	and	industrial	collaboration	partners.	
Synthetic	Biology	:	Field	bordering	on	molecular	biology,	organic	chemistry,	engineering,	
nano-biotechnology,	and	information	technology,	with	the	objective	of	constructing	bio-
logical	systems	and	microorganisms	with	the	aid	of	standardised	building	blocks.	
Systems	biology	:	Bioscience	whose	objective	is	understanding	the	complex	and	dynamic	
biological	processes	of	cells	and	organisms	in	their	entirety.	
Transcriptome	:	The	entirety	of	all	transcripts	expressed	in	an	organism	at	a	certain	time.
Transcriptomics	:	Field	of	research	that	looks	at	organisms	at	the	level	of	their	transcripts.
32
 Members of the “Bioinformatics Workshop” Steering Committee
Prof.	Dr.	Frank	Oliver	Glöckner		
Max	Planck	Institute	for	Marine	Microbiology/Jacobs	University	in	Bremen
Dr.	Alexander	Goesmann		
CeBiTec	/	University	of	Bielefeld
Dr.	Thomas	Hartsch		
GeneData	AG
Dr.	Eric	von	Lieres		
Jülich	Research	Centre
Dr.	Klaus	Mayer		
Munich	Information	Centre	for	Protein	Sequences	(MIPS)	/	Helmholtz	Centre	in	Munich
Prof.	Dr.	Alfred	Pühler	(Chairman)		
CeBiTec	/	University	of	Bielefeld
Prof.	Dr.	Norbert	Reinsch		
Leibniz	Institute	for	Farm	Animal	Biology	(FBN)	in	Dummerstorf
Prof.	Dr.	Chris-Carolin	Schön		
Technical	University	of	Munich
Prof.	Dr.	Wolfgang	Wiechert		
Jülich	Research	Centre	
Prof.	Dr.	Ralf	Zimmer		
Ludwig	Maximilians	University	in	Munich
33|32
Members of the Bio-economy Research and Technology Council
Prof.	Dr.	Dr.	h.c.	Reinhard	F.	Hüttl	(chairman)		
Scientific	Executive	Director	of	the	German		
Research	Centre	for	Geosciences	at	the	Helmholz	
Centre	in	Potsdam;	President	of	the	National	
Academy	of	Science	and	Engineering	(acatech);	
Professor	of	Soil	Protection	and	Recultivation	at	the	
Brandenburg	University	of	Technology	in	Cottbus
Dr.	Dr.	h.c.	mult.	Andreas	J.	Büchting		
(deputy	chairman)		
Chairman	of	the	Supervisory	Board	of		
KWS	SAAT	AG
Prof.	Dr.	Bernd	Müller-Röber		
(deputy	chairman)	
Professor	of	Molecular	Biology,	Max	Planck	
Institute	of	Molecular	Plant	Physiology	and	the	
University	of	Potsdam
Prof.	Dr.	Dr.	h.c.	Joachim	von	Braun		
(deputy	chairman)	
Director	at	the	Center	for	Development	Research	
(ZEF)	at	the	University	of	Bonn
Prof.	Dr.	Achim	Bachem	
Chairman	of	the	Executive	Board	of	the	Jülich	
Research	Centre
Dr.	Helmut	Born	
Secretary	General	of	the	Deutscher	Bauern-
verband	e.	V.	(German	Farmers	Association)
Prof.	Dr.	Hannelore	Daniel	
Technical	University	of	Munich,		
Chair	for	Nutrition	Physiology
Prof.	Dr.	Utz-Hellmuth	Felcht	
Managing	Director,	One	Equity	Partners	Europe,	
Munich;	member	of	the	Senate	of	the	National	
Academy	of	Science	and	Engineering	(acatech)
Prof.	Dr.	Thomas	Hirth	
Head	of	the	Fraunhofer	Institute	for	Interfacial	
Engineering	and	Biotechnology	and	the	Institute	
for	Interfacial	Engineering	at	the	University	of	
Stuttgart.
Prof.	Dr.	Folkhard	Isermeyer	
President	of	the	Johann	Heinrich	von	Thünen	In-
stitute,	Federal	Research	Institute	for	Rural	Areas,	
Forestry,	and	Fisheries	in	Braunschweig
Dr.	Stefan	Marcinowski	
Member	of	the	Board	of	Executive	Directors	of	
BASF	SE;	Chairman	of	the	Management	Board	of	
the	German	Biotechnology	Industry	Association	
(Deutsche	Industrievereinigung	Biotechnologie)	
(DIB)
Prof.	Dr.	Dr.	h.c.	Thomas	C.	Mettenleiter	
President	of	the	Friedrich	Loeffler	Institute,	
Federal	Research	Institute	for	Animal	Health,	on	
Riems	Island	
Dr.	Dr.	h.c.	Christian	Patermann	
Advisor	on	knowledge-based	bio-economics	to	
the	State	of	North	Rhine-Westphalia
Prof.	Dr.	Alfred	Pühler	
Centre	for	Biotechnology	/	University	of	Bielefeld
Prof.	Dr.	Manfred	Schwerin	
Professor	of	Animal	Breeding	at	the	University	
of	Rostock;	Chairman	of	the	Leibniz	Institute	for	
Farm	Animal	Biology	(FBN)	in	Dummerstorf
Prof.	Dr.	Wiltrud	Treffenfeldt	
R&D	Director	for	Europe,	Middle	East	and	Africa,	
Dow	Europe,	Horgen,	Switzerland
Prof.	Dr.	Fritz	Vahrenholt	
CEO	of	RWE	Innogy	GmbH
Dr.	Holger	Zinke	
Chairman	of	BRAIN	AG
Prof.	Dr.	Alexander	Zehnder		
(permanent	guest)	
Director	of	the	Water	Research	Institute	at	the	
University	of	Alberta	in	Edmonton,	Canada
34
The BioEconomyCouncil would like to thank the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research for its fund-
ing, as well as the National Academy of Science and Engineering (acatech) for administrative support. 
Special thanks are owed to the outside experts who provided valuable information for this paper. The BioEconomy-
Council is solely responsible for the content of the recommendations.  
The BioEconomyCouncil ’s work is supported by an administrative office : 
Dr. Claus Gerhard Bannick ( Head )
Dr. Andrea George ( academic research assistant )
Dr. Katja Leicht ( academic research assistant )
Petra Ortiz Arrebato ( assistant )
Ulrike von Schlippenbach ( academic research assistant )
Dr. Elke Witt ( academic research assistant )
Dr. Eva Wendt ( academic research assistant )
Julian Braun, Martin Schmidt (student research assistants) 
PUBLICATION DETAILS
Publisher 
Published by the BioEconomy Research and Technology Council ( BÖR )
© BÖR, Berlin ( 2012 )
Registered address
Charlottenstraße 35	–	36
10117 Berlin 
Design and layout by	
Oswald + Martin Werbeagentur, Berlin 
Printed by	
Brandenburgische Universitätsdruckerei
ISSN 1869-1404, ISBN 978-3-942044-66-0, (print edition), ISBN 978-3-942044-67-7 (online version)
The German National Library lists this publication in the National Bibliography.
Detailed bibliographic data can be found at http://dnb.d-nb.de. 
35|34
Publisher
Forschungs-	und	Technologierat	Bioökonomie	(	BÖR	)
©	BÖR,	Berlin	(	2012	)
Contact	
Geschäftsstelle	des	BioÖkonomieRats
Charlottenstraße	35	–	36
10117	Berlin
Tel.:	030	767718911
Fax:	030	767718912
E-Mail:	info@biooekonomierat.de
Internet:	www.biooekonomierat.de
36

