BIOINFORMATICS APPLICATIONS NOTE Vol. 21 no. 2 2005, pages 263–265doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bth457
Haploview: analysis and visualization of LD and
haplotype maps
J. C. Barrett1,∗, B. Fry2, J. Maller1 and M. J. Daly1,3
1Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA,
2MIT Media Lab, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA and 3Broad Institute of Harvard
and MIT, Cambridge, MA, USA
Received on June 23, 2004; revised and accepted on July 23, 2004
Advance Access publication August 5, 2004
ABSTRACT
Summary: Research over the last few years has revealed
significant haplotype structure in the human genome. The
characterization of these patterns, particularly in the con-
text of medical genetic association studies, is becoming
a routine research activity. Haploview is a software pack-
age that provides computation of linkage disequilibrium
statistics and population haplotype patterns from primary
genotype data in a visually appealing and interactive
interface.
Availability: http://www.broad.mit.edu/mpg/haploview/
Contact: jcbarret@broad.mit.edu
INTRODUCTION
Knowledge of local linkage disequilibrium (LD) and common
haplotype patterns in disease association and positional clon-
ing studies is becoming increasingly widespread since it has
become clear (Van Eerdewegh et al., 2002; Rioux et al., 2001;
Geesaman et al., 2003; Stoll et al., 2004) that intelligent use
of this information has the potential to make them much more
comprehensive and efficient. Early studies identifying unex-
pected extent of correlation and structure in haplotype patterns
(Reich et al., 2001; Daly et al., 2001; Gabriel et al., 2002) have
led to the initiation of the Human Haplotype Map project
(HapMap) to make this information available to all med-
ical genetics researchers (International HapMap Consortium,
2003). Given the dramatic increase in the size and number
of disease association studies worldwide and the enormous
amount of public genotype data from HapMap, tools for ana-
lyzing, interpreting and visualizing these data are of critical
importance to researchers everywhere.
Haploview is designed to provide a comprehensive suite
of tools for haplotype analysis for a wide variety of data-
set sizes. Haploview generates marker quality statistics, LD
information, haplotype blocks, population haplotype frequen-
cies and single marker association statistics in a user-friendly
∗To whom correspondence should be addressed.
format. All the features are customizable and all computa-
tions performed in real time, even for datasets with hundreds
of individuals and hundreds of markers.
FEATURES
Haploview accepts input in a variety of formats. Pedigree
data can be loaded as either partially or fully phased chro-
mosomes or as unphased diplotypes in the standard Linkage
format. The latter format also allows the user to specify
family structure information as well as disease affection or
case/control status. Marker information, including name and
location is loaded separately. Haploview also directly accepts
genotype data dumped from the Human HapMap website
(http://www.hapmap.org). A graphical genome browser main-
tained at that site allows researchers to navigate to a particular
region of the genome and dump HapMap genotype data for all
genotyped markers in the selected region in a format accepted
by Haploview.
Upon loading a dataset, the software presents to the user
a series of marker genotyping quality metrics. These include
a check for conformance with Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium,
a tally of Mendelian inheritance errors and the percentage
of individuals successfully genotyped for that marker. The
program filters out markers which fall below a preset threshold
for these tests. The user can adjust these thresholds as well
as handpick markers to add or remove from the subsequent
steps. At any time later in the process, the user may return to
this quality control panel, add or remove additional markers,
and have the changes immediately reflected in the ongoing
analyses.
Haploview calculates several pairwise measures of LD,
which it uses to create a graphical representation (Fig. 1). The
user has the option to select one of several commonly used
block definitions (Gabriel et al., 2002; Wang et al., 2002) to
partition the region into segments of strong LD. Alternatively,
the user may manually select groups of markers for sub-
sequent haplotype analysis. This view also allows a number
of different color schemes to represent the LD relationships.
Bioinformatics vol. 21 issue 2 © Oxford University Press 2004; all rights reserved. 263
J.C.Barrett et al.
Fig. 1. Haploview LD display with recombination rate plotted above (left) and haplotypes display (right). Interface developed at MIT Media
Lab by B.Fry (http://acg.media.mit.edu/people/fry/).
Further, the program allows the display of an ‘analysis track’
above the LD plot, to display continuous variables such as
recombination rate estimates (McVean et al., 2004) (Fig. 1).
Once groups of markers are selected (either automatically
or manually), the program generates haplotypes and their
population frequencies (Fig. 1). This display shows lines to
indicate transitions from one block to the next with frequency
corresponding to the thickness of the line and also presents
Hedrick’s multiallelic D′, which represents the degree of LD
between two blocks, treating each haplotype within a block
as an ‘allele’ of that region. Again, customization is avail-
able for nearly all aspects of the display, including displaying
alleles as letters, numbers or colored boxes and displaying
only those haplotypes above an adjustable threshold in the
population.
If affection status is included in the input file, Haplo-
view also calculates the standard TDT statistic (for trio
data) or simple χ2 (for case/control data) for each marker
that can be used for association studies. Future versions
will include several haplotype-tag SNP selection methods as
well as haplotype-based association testing and evaluation
of significance using permutation testing. These final fea-
tures allow the user to go from raw genotype data through
exploring genetic associations in one easy to use soft-
ware package. Haploview is maintained as an open source
project (http://sourceforge.net/projects/haploview/), which
allows external parties to add their own methods in addition
to the continuing development by the authors.
Each of these views of the data is shown on a separate
tab (Fig. 1), allowing the user to move from one to the next,
with interactive modifications made by the user in any panel
reflected in all the others. For example, one can return at any
time to the review of marker quality and manually include
or exclude individual markers—these changes are instantly
reflected in the LD and haplotype panels. This provides the
ability to analyze the data in real-time. The information on
each panel is also able to be exported to a PNG for use in
presentations or publications or dumped to a text file. Addi-
tionally, the program has a fully functional command-line
mode, which allows users to run all the analyses without
opening the GUI on one or more files at once.
IMPLEMENTATION
Haploview is written entirely in Java, which means it is usable
on any platform with Java 1.3 or later installed. Running on a
1.8 GHz Pentium 4 with 1 GB of RAM, Haploview can dis-
play a dataset with 200 markers genotyped in 400 individuals
and adjust parameters with no noticeable delay. The program
is also able to be used (from the command line) to do the
LD calculations on very large datasets in comparatively small
amounts of time. Haploview was able to compute 3.3 million
pairwise LD values (comparisons of all markers closer than
500 KB in a 45 500 marker dataset) in 30 min.
Haploview uses a two marker EM (ignoring missing data)
to estimate the maximum-likelihood values of the four gam-
ete frequencies, from which the D′, LOD and r2 calcula-
tions derive. Haplotype phase and population frequency are
inferred using a standard EM algorithm with a partition–
ligation approach for blocks with greater than 10 markers.
Conformance with Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium is computed
using an exact test (G.Abecasis and J.Wigginton, personal
communication).
REFERENCES
Daly,M.J. Rioux,J.D., Schaffner,S.F., Hudson,T.J. and Lander,E.S.
(2001) High-resolution haplotype structure in the human genome.
Nat. Genet., 29, 229–232.
264
Haploview
Gabriel,S.B. Schaffner,S.F., Nguyen,H., Moore,J.M., Roy,J.,
Blumenstiel,B., Higgins,J., Defelice,M., Lochner,A., Faggart,M.
et al. (2002) The structure of haplotype blocks in the human
genome. Science, 296, 2225–2229.
Geesaman,B.J., Benson,E., Brewster,S.J., Kunkel,L.M., Blanche,H.,
Thomas,G., Perls,T.T., Daly,M.J. and Puca,A.A. (2003)
Haplotype-based identification of a microsomal transfer protein
marker associated with the human lifespan. Proc. Natl Acad. Sci.,
USA, 100, 14115–20.
The International HapMap Consortium (2003) The International
HapMap Project. Nature, 18, 789–796.
McVean,G.A., Myers,S.R., Hunt,S., Deloukas,P., Bentley,D.R. and
Donnelly,P. (2004) The fine-scale structure of recombination rate
variation in the human genome. Science, 304, 581–584.
Reich,D.E., Cargill,M., Bolk,S., Ireland,J., Sabeti,P.C., Richter,D.J.,
Lavery,T., Kouyoumjian,R., Farhadian,S.F., Ward,R. and
Lander,E.S. (2001) Linkage disequilibrium in the human genome.
Nature, 411, 199–204.
Rioux,J.D., Daly,M.J., Silverberg,M.S., Lindblad,K., Steinhart,H.,
Cohen,Z., Delmonte,T., Kocher,K., Miller,K., Guschwan,S. et al.
(2001) Genetic variation in the 5q31 cytokine gene cluster confers
susceptibility to Crohn disease. Nat. Genet., 29, 223–228.
Stoll,M., Corneliussen,B., Costello,C.M., Waetzig,G.H.,
Mellgard,B., Kroch,W.A., Rosenstiel,P., Albrecht,M.,
Croucher,P.J., Seegert,D. et al. (2004) Genetic variation in
DLG5 is associated with inflammatory bowel disease. Nat.
Genet., 36, 476–480.
Van Eerdewegh,P., Little,R.D., Dupuis,J., Del Mastro,R.G., Falls,K.,
Simon,J., Jorrey,D., Pandit,S., McKenny,J., Braunschweiger,K.
et al. (2002) Association of the ADAM33 gene with
asthma and bronchial hyperresponsiveness. Nature, 418,
426–430.
Wang,N., Akey,J.M., Zhang,K., Chakraborty,R. and Jin,L. (2002)
Distribution of recombination crossovers and the origin of hap-
lotype blocks: the interplay of population history, recombination,
and mutation. Am. J. Hum. Genet., 71, 1227–1234.
265

