 1 
Inscribing a Discipline: Tensions in the field of Bioinformatics 
 
     Jamie Lewis and Andrew Bartlett 
Published in New Genetics and Society 
 
Abstract 
Bioinformatics, the application of computer science to biological problems, is a 
central feature of post-genomic science which grew rapidly during the 1990s and 
2000s. Post-genomic science is often high-throughput, involving the mass production 
of inscriptions (Latour and Woolgar, 1986). In order to render these mass inscriptions 
comprehensible, bioinformatic techniques are employed, with bioinformaticians 
producing what we call ‘secondary inscriptions’. However, despite bioinformaticians 
being highly skilled and credentialed scientists, the field struggles to develop 
disciplinary coherence. This paper describes two tensions mitigating against 
disciplinary coherence. The first arises from the fact that bioinformaticians as 
producers of secondary inscriptions are often institutionally dependent, subordinate 
even, to biologists. With bioinformatics positioned as service, it cannot determine its 
own boundaries but has them imposed from the outside. The second tension is a result 
of the inter-disciplinary origin of bioinformatics – computer science and biology are 
disciplines with very different cultures, values and products. The paper uses interview 
data from two different UK projects to describe and examine these tensions by 
commenting on Calvert’s notion of individual and collaborative interdisciplinarity and 
McNally’s (2008) distinction between ‘black box optimists’ and ‘black box 
pessimists’.  
 
Key Words 
Bioinformatics, Secondary Inscriptions, Technical Work, Genomics, Disciplines 
 
Introduction 
‘You then reached a point where you suddenly had something awfully like the 
Amalgamated Union of Bioinformaticists starting to say ‘no we do [bioinformatics], 
you don’t’ (Dr Harrison).   
 
 2 
Science, argued Latour and Woolgar (1986), is a process of inscription; laboratory 
apparatus are ‘inscription devices’ that “transform a material substance into a figure 
or a diagram” (p51). Since the beginning of the Human Genome Project (HGP), 
biology has increasingly become high-throughput, a process of mass inscription, 
dependent on computers and mathematics to manage and interpret an unprecedented 
amount of data (Bayat, 2002). The Information Age has come to biology (Hood, 
1992; Castells, 2000; Kay, 2000; Zweiger, 2001; Moody, 2004; Diamond and 
Woodgate 2005; Garcia-Sancho, 2012). The earlier successes of molecular biology, 
however, used apparatus such as microscopes, gels, mass spectrometers, and 
bioassays to achieve direct access to the components of life. This led some biologists 
to feel that an understanding of statistics and computing was irrelevant (Shrager, 
2010). Our interviews with biologists in the UK confirm that many feel that their 
training as biologists has left them without the skills and knowledge required by this 
new era.  
 
Since the mid-1990s, we have seen the rapid growth of bioinformatics as a central 
part of the post-HGP life science landscape (Boguski and McIntosh; Moody 2004; 
Diamond and Woodgate 2005). Bioinformatics – in its broadest sense, the application 
of computer science to biological problems – has been called on to clean, store, 
manage, and analyse the vast amounts of data produced by the high-throughput 
inscription devices of –omic, particularly genomic, science. This is especially true in 
the genetic dissection of complex disease by methods such as Genome Wide 
Association Studies (GWAS), which involves the genotyping of thousands of cases 
and controls at hundreds of thousands of genetic markers (Arribas-Ayllon, Bartlett 
and Featherstone (2010). 
 
It is difficult – if at all possible – to identify the beginning of a historical process. It is 
equally difficult to refrain from presenting these processes as linear, purposeful 
developments punctuated by moments of scientific accomplishment and acclaim. 
Nevertheless, despite its significant growth since the 1990s, bioinformatics has a 
history that extends further into the past, and incorporates more than simply the 
analysis of genomic-era high-throughput data. Historians point towards independent 
developments in computing and DNA sequencing in the 1970s as precursors to the 
emergence of today’s genome-orientated bioinformatics (Suarez-Diaz, 2010: Garcia-
 3 
Sancho, 2012). Others identify pioneering work in protein research in the 1960s as a 
starting point (Smith, 1990). In particular, the protein sequencing work of Margaret 
Dayhoff is celebrated as the first attempt to use computers to solve biological 
problems (Dayhoff, 1969; Persidis, 1999; Strasser 2010). The late 1960s and 1970s 
also saw significant developments in the ARPAnet project – the precursor to the 
Internet. In 1973, Cerf and Kahn began linking the ARPAnet to other networks to 
create an ‘inter-network’ (Abbate, 2001). While early attempts to use the network to 
share biological databases were curtailed because ARPAnet was, primarily, a defence 
project, these developments in computer networking brought new ideas of 
interconnectivity and of data curation and storage; ideas which bioinformatics would 
put to use.  
 
By the early-1980s, several groups were working on molecular biology databases. In 
April 1982, the publicly funded European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL) 
was founded in Heidelberg, Germany, to co-ordinate molecular biology research in 
Europe. During the same period, the National Institute of Health (NIH) funded a US 
DNA sequence database, which became the Genetic Sequence Data Bank (GenBank) 
(Moody 2004).  Towards the end of the 1980s, the institutional growth of biological 
information databases was solidified.  In 1988, the European Molecular Biology 
Network (EMBnet) was established (EMBnet, 2006) producing a network linking 
local nodes - European laboratories using bio-computing, bio-statistics and bio-
informatics - to a centralised international facility (Attwood and Parry-Smith, 1999). 
In the US, the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) was created at 
the National Institute of Health (NIH). Today, the NCBI produces cutting-edge 
research in computational biology, while developing and promoting standardised 
computer software tools for genomic and post-genomic data analysis (NCBI, 2005).   
 
This short version of a long history shows bioinformatics and big biology as being 
epistemologically and institutionally tied together. In 1994, the European 
Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) was opened at the site of the Wellcome Trust Sanger 
Centre in Cambridgeshire, establishing an infrastructural resource for bioinformatics 
services and research in Europe at the home of ‘big biology’. High-throughput 
molecular biology has transformed biological objects into a mass of primary 
 4 
inscriptions. It is the task of bioinformatics to make sense of this data by producing 
comprehensible secondary inscriptions. 
 
Social scientists have shown an interest in the episteme that emerges when computer 
science plays an increasing role in the life sciences (see Hine, 2006; Leonelli, 2009), 
in technology as a boundary object or meeting zone (Cook-Deegan, 1994; Leonelli, 
2010; Heeney and Smart, 2012), and in institutional and infrastructural aspects of 
bioinformatics and data curation (Wouters and Beaulieu, 2006; Baker and Millerand, 
2010). We, however, are interested in the social tensions apparent as the field of 
bioinformatics stabilises. This paper describes the ways in which people working in 
bioinformatics understand their disciplinary identities; what it is to do bioinformatics, 
and to be a bioinformatician. We find that for some bioinformaticians, the fact that 
their work is dependent on the data produced by biologists, who have an established, 
powerful, disciplinary identity, places them in a subordinate position. This produces a 
situation which recalls Keefe and Potosky’s (1997) description of technicians, for 
whom “professional career expectations formed in educational programs have rarely 
conformed to their job experiences” (p55). And, as with technicians (Shapin, 1989; 
Iliffe, 2008), the work of bioinformaticians, while essential, often takes place in the 
background. We document the variegated ways in which bioinformatics is understood 
by those working in the field, and those outside, and the effects that these judgements 
have on those who practise bioinformatics. There are tensions within bioinformatics; 
there are different ideas about the present and future of bioinformatics, and about the 
role of bioinformaticians.  
 
The paper concludes by discussing the implications that such tensions might have for 
those working in the field. We remark on the possible trajectories of field, and of 
those working in it; trajectories which are a product of contrasting aspirations, 
epistemologies, and practices. 
 
 
Defining (and Disciplining) Bioinformatics 
Bioinformatics, as an inter-discipline, combines the skills and techniques of biology, 
computer science and statistics. For definitions of this kind, ‘bioinformatics is broad, 
covering anything from epidemiology, the modelling of cell dynamics, to its now 
 5 
more common focus, the analysis of sequence data of various kinds (genomic, 
transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic)’ (Harvey and McMeekin, 2002).  
 
These descriptions leave bioinformatics as a broad field of practices. Turner argues 
that one of the most important processes in disciplinary formation is the acceptance of 
a definition – the establishment of edges, of an inside and an outside – by the 
community in question (Turner, 2000). Scientists working in bioinformatics, however, 
present themselves in many guises; not only as bioinformaticians, but as biologists, 
computer scientists, statisticians, etc. The establishment of the National Institute of 
Health Bioinformatics Definition Committee (NIH BDC) in 2000 was an attempt to 
bureaucratically close the question ‘what is bioinformatics’? Opting for an inclusive 
definition, they did not produce the boundaries that might produce disciplinary 
coherence. Bioinformatics was categorized as any… 
 
…research development or application of computational tools and approaches 
for expanding the use of biological, medical, behavioural or health data 
including those to acquire, store, organize, archive, analyze or visualize data. 
(Huerta et al. 2000). 
 
The broad nature of definitions such as this creates a space in which there are a 
variety of understandings and ambitions for bioinformatics, inevitably accompanied 
by tensions. The question of what bioinformatics encompasses, or perhaps more 
importantly, what it excludes, has simply not been answered. Indeed, Harvey and 
McMeekin argue that we ‘should expect to find all kinds of different things going on 
under the rubric of bioinformatics, a fair amount of lack of integration between them, 
and no clear boundaries’ (Harvey and McMeekin, 2002, p. 11). Fenstermacher (2004) 
has noted a similar proliferation of sub-divisions within bioinformatics1.  
 
What is bioinformatics, then? Or, more importantly, what will it be? Will it simply be 
a description of a heterogeneous collection of practices involved in the application of 
computing to biological research? Or will bioinformatics become something with a 
                                                 
1 This is not the same as the general fissiparous tendency noted by scholars of higher education such as 
Delamont, Atkinson, and Parry (2000), in which an established discipline develops sub-fields, the 
boundaries of which harden over time.  
 
 6 
coherent set of practices, and perspectives? If the latter, from where will 
bioinformatics draw its practice and perspective? Is it an application of computer 
science, or is it a biological discipline? What will its relationship with biology be? Is 
it to adopt the peculiar reward system and ethos of academia, or is it to be a specialist, 
technical service to biology?  
 
The answers to these questions are inseparable from the social process of disciplining 
bioinformatics. Social scientists have long been interested in disciplinary formation 
and demarcation (cf. Merton, 1970; Lemaine et al., 1976; Gieryn, 1983, 1999; 
Calhoun, 1992; Weingart and Stehr, 2000; Delamont, et al., 2000). Their work 
highlights the way in which scientific boundaries are the product of social processes, 
rather than an organisational mirror to divisions in nature. Disciplines are not defined 
by their ideas, their intellectual coherence, or even their practices, but by institutional 
power. They are social and intellectual arrangements that shape our scientific and 
educational practices as well as our understandings of the world (Weingart and Stehr, 
2000).  Disciplinary identities are therefore understood as resemblances that are made 
object by funding agencies and assessment exercises that allocate resources on the 
basis of disciplinary membership (Turner, 2000). A bioinformatics that is not able to 
define and discipline itself will struggle to make the case for the allocation of research 
council funds, the appointment of bioinformaticians to senior positions, and the 
establishment of higher education programmes geared to producing academics. It will 
be defined from the outside, in a way akin to the manner in which the nature of 
technical work is determined not by its practitioners, but by the professional field 
from which technical work is ‘hived off’ (Keefe and Potosky, 1997).   
 
Within the accounts that we collected, we found a kind of ‘boundary-work’ (Gieryn 
1983) in operation, as scientists mark the intellectual activities of science as different 
from the technical and mechanical activities. As a fledgling inter-discipline, 
bioinformatics contains internal tensions as practitioners arrive at the field with 
different epistemes, interests, and expectations. As a producer of secondary 
inscriptions, bioinformatics is sometimes positioned subordinate to biology, seen as a 
service rather than a research discipline.  
 
 
 7 
Methods 
The paper draws on empirical evidence from two research projects conducted 
between 2004 and 2008, providing a snap-shot of post-HGP bioinfomatics. The first 
project (2004) was a small-scale qualitative examination (10 interviews) of scientists 
working in the field of bioinformatics at one UK institution. These included 
interviews with respondents who identified themselves as biologists, as computer 
scientists, and as bioinformaticians. The majority worked on genomics and related 
research, but one interviewee was a biologist with a broader interest in the application 
of computing to biological problems. Most respondents were mid-career researchers, 
though one PhD student in bioinformatics was interviewed. All respondents were 
working in bioinformatics at a single research intensive university; the research 
focused on the disciplining of bioinformatics within that institution.  
 
The second project (2004-2008), was a qualitative study of genomic scientists 
working at a number of UK universities. 31 interviews were supplemented with 
fieldnotes taken during conferences, workshops, bioinformatics courses, and informal 
meetings. Interviews were conducted with researchers from five different research-
based UK universities working in the area of bioinformatics and proteomics. 
Respondents were a mixture of mid and later career researchers, with the exception of 
two PhD students.  A senior manager involved in distributing bioinformatics funds 
was also interviewed. The perspective of bioinformatics presented in this paper is 
therefore from academic bioinformaticians in research-intensive universities working 
on the prominent branch of bioinformatics that deals with data from genomic and 
genomic-related data. The institutional background of the interviewee and the year in 
which the interview was conducted are provided after each extract to provide the 
reader with additional context. 
 
Interviews and fieldnotes were analysed by content for emergent themes (Weber, 
1990). Extracts used in this paper have been anonymised. 
 
 
The Amalgamated Union of Bioinformaticists 
The ‘boundary-work’ (Gieryn, 1982) in these accounts is practical as well as 
rhetorical. In order to become a discipline, boundaries must be established. From an 
 8 
open, heterogeneous beginning, the boundaries of the field have hardened, according 
to Dr Harrison, a biologist and senior manager at a UK funding council: 
 
When you have something very new that comes along, there is a sort of 
process of growth which is quite interesting [...] When bioinformatics first 
started, people started saying this is all very interdisciplinary [and] we have 
got to have no boundaries, we are drawing on skills from all sorts of people, 
we are terribly eclectic and it is open to all-comers and it is a very new field.  
It then starts to attract funding and then starts to develop a professional 
infrastructure of its own where people go to conferences, and they meet one 
another, and they start forming ideas of whether the people they are meeting 
are the same as them or not.   
 
You then reached a point where you suddenly had something awfully like the 
‘Amalgamated Union of Bioinformaticists’ starting to say ‘no we do it, you 
don’t’.  They put up little barriers and try to make sure they are fighting for 
their own corner, their own money and their own professional identity [...] The 
problem with bioinformatics is that it is not essentially biology so these were 
people in a field where they weren’t doing the things that biologists did, they 
weren’t doing experiments, not in the sense that biologists see experiments.  
So they were fighting the fact that they were up on the peer review panels so 
we would look at what they were doing and say this isn’t biology, why are we 
paying for it? And other bizarre things like that (2005).  
 
Dr Harrison describes the transition of bioinformatics from a field in which early 
inter-disciplinary idealism ruled, to one in which the need for coherency and strong 
self-identity has risen to the fore. The development of a disciplinary identity and a 
disciplinary infrastructure go hand-in-hand. A ‘tribe’ forms, which competes with 
others for the resources, material and otherwise, of academic society (Cook-Deegan 
1994). This is a normal feature of the disciplining of research fields; staking out 
territory and building defences in order to keep others out (Becher, 1990). This 
disciplinary distinction is important as it feeds into university systems of reward and 
recognition (Bourdieu, 1988).  
 
 9 
Dr Harrison, a biologist, describes bioinformatics as ‘not essentially biology’. His 
logic is based on the practices involved; bioinformaticians do not perform 
experiments, at least not in the way that biologists do. Their practice involves the 
manipulation of the primary inscriptions produced by biologists, rather than the 
transformation of the natural world into inscriptions. According to Dr Harrison, peer 
review panels conclude that many bioinformatics proposals should not be a priority 
for resources allocated to biological research, as they are not biology. A 
bioinformatician might read this as an argument for the development of an even 
stronger disciplinary identity – an Amalgamated Union of Bioinformaticians perhaps. 
For a biologist, the development of hard boundaries and a strong self-identity is 
unwelcome; rather than an autonomous discipline with an independent set of interests 
and perspectives, bioinformatics should remain in a symbiotic, subsidiary relationship 
to biology.  
 
The suggestion that bioinformatics is not biology rests, in part, on the distinction 
between the ‘wet lab’ and the ‘dry lab’ (Penders, Horstman and Vos, 2008). As the 
labels suggest, the difference is not only one of location, but also one of practice. Both 
deal with biological problems, but they have different methods and approaches to 
biological objects. Bioinformatics work is often conducted away from traditional 
laboratories; at computers requiring no physical co-location with the biological 
objects under study. This entails a cultural, epistemic, and practical shift in the way of 
doing biology, from the manipulation of the material to produce inscriptions, to the 
manipulation of the symbolic; transforming existing primary inscriptions (Latour and 
Woolgar, 1986) into secondary inscriptions - a shift that mirrors wider changes in 
work in the Information Age (Castells, 2000). 
 
Bioinformatics can be seen as a field of practice dependent on ‘wet lab’ biological 
sciences. Many participants questioned the idea that bioinformatics was, or could be, 
an autonomous discipline. Dr Woodbridge, a bioinformatician based in a biology 
department, thought of bioinformatics as a field of practice within biology: 
 
I’ve got a slight problem with thinking of bioinformatics as this sort of 
separate, discrete subject in itself anyway.  I think it’s an aspect of biology. 
(2004)  
 10 
 
Kirk, a research fellow in bioinformatics, also argues that bioinformatics is not an 
autonomous discipline. For Kirk, as with Dr Woodbridge, bioinformatics is a 
subordinate discipline, dependent on the existence of laboratory-based science to 
provide it with the material for its own explorations – data; the inscriptions of the wet 
lab. 
 
I do not see bioinformatics to be a separate discipline […] [It] has been 
hooking its nose into every discipline […] I mean, it cannot be a separate 
discipline; it is a subset of every discipline. (2004) 
 
The wet lab and the dry lab are very different places, in which very different forms of 
work are practised. The dependent, subsidiary, but essential nature of bioinformatics 
places it both at the epistemic centre of contemporary life sciences, and at the 
institutional edge. 
 
While interested outside observers, such as Dr Harrison, have seen the boundaries of 
bioinformatics harden, this does not translate into a definition that every 
bioinformatician can share. Dr Hopper, a senior lecturer in bioinformatics based in a 
school of medicine, provided a typical response: 
 
[I]t’s a difficult question. I’m not really sure what the answer is […] it’s 
developing into a discipline, but it’s not one specific thing, it’s very wide-
ranging (2006). 
 
Importantly, when Kirk answered a similar question, he transformed it into a question 
bounded by practice. 
  
[T]hen the second question comes, if you’re doing bioinformatics, what are 
you doing? (2004) 
 
The development of shared definitions and understandings helps new disciplines to 
form.  This not only enables the sharing of concepts, data, and techniques, but also 
aligns ideas about the organization, trajectory, and self-identity of the emerging 
 11 
discipline. If bioinformatics is to be a discipline, some degree of collective 
understanding of what the practice of the field entails is necessary. We found that the 
answer to the question, ‘what is bioinformatics?’ depends, to some degree, on the 
disciplinary hinterland of the bioinformatician. This background determines the value 
that they place on different kinds of data, knowledge, outputs, and practice, but also 
introduces tensions into the field. 
 
Different camps coming from different directions 
“[B]ioinformatics [is…] the progeny of the shotgun marriage between molecular 
biology and computer science” (Marijuán, 2002, p111). It is an ‘inter-discipline’. 
Bioinformatics, therefore, involves scientists from quite different backgrounds, who 
carry with them different interests, ambitions and perspectives. Or, as Heaton, then a 
PhD student in bioinformatics, put it, there are: “different camps coming from 
different directions”. Dr Griffiths, a reader in bioinformatics, was asked to define 
bioinformatics. His reply demonstrates how disciplinary background – in this case 
biology – can shape the view of the ‘inter-discipline’: 
 
I always struggle with this one. For me it is a biologically driven problem. 
Essentially, I am a biologist that happens to use computers. I am more of an 
applied rather than a theoretical bioinformatician […] we develop our own 
software and things but I am not a computer scientist, and I would never 
consider myself as one (2006). 
 
Dr Griffiths’ interest in biological problems aligns his brand of bioinformatics with 
the perspectives of biology rather than those of computer science. He distances 
himself from computer science and, though he identifies himself as a 
bioinformatician, from theoretical bioinformatics too. Similar perspectives were 
offered by other bioinformaticians with backgrounds in biology. Jenkins, a PhD 
student in bioinformatics and molecular biology, describes how his disciplinary 
background shapes the way he works: 
 
[O]bviously, coming from a biological background […] I can look at it more 
sensibly by not having to ask trivial questions constantly to people in the 
group because I have the biological awareness (2006). 
 12 
 
To Jenkins, the biological knowledge he has gained by virtue of his background is a 
prerequisite of the job. This perspective holds that, while bioinformatics draws on 
computer science, biology must remain the dominant partner in this ‘shotgun 
marriage’. With biology to the fore, bioinformatics will remain focused on questions 
of biological importance, avoiding ploughing the obscure computational furrows 
described by Dr Harrison.   
 
By contrast, Dr Michaels has a background in mathematics and computer science. 
This brings a different perspective; that bioinformatics should remain an open ‘inter-
discipline’, in which a variety of disciplinary perspectives are welcome:   
 
Then I asked Dr Michaels for her definition of bioinformatics.  20 years ago, 
she said, it was a set of mathematical and statistical approaches to DNA 
analysis.  Now, since the HGP, this has extended to also include data-base 
management and design.  I asked her about the idea of a ‘bioinformatician’ 
identity developing, perhaps more homogenized than the varied group today, 
i.e. an identity where bioinformatician came first, rather than computer 
scientist or biologist.  She remarked that this development might lead to a 
narrowing of outlook and that the beauty of bioinformatics is its differing 
perspectives of which linguistic mathematics is one. (Field Notes2, 2004) 
 
For Dr Michaels, biological data presents interesting computational and mathematical 
problems, aside from their biological significance. Given that a homogeneous 
bioinformatics could only be a bioinformatics closely tied to biological problems, an 
adjunct to biology, a heterogeneous future is one in which computer scientists can 
find academic fulfilment working in a broadly defined field.  
 
Going further, Dr Campbell, a reader in bioinformatics and proteomics who has a 
background in computer science, argues that only a bioinformatics that is closely tied 
to computer science can claim disciplinary autonomy. 
 
                                                 
2 Dr Michaels refused permission for the interview to be recorded, instead offering to speak slowly to 
allow notes to be taken. 
 13 
I think that you can only define [bioinformatics] as a discipline, if you are 
really doing some cutting-edge research and you are using entirely new 
statistical computational or mathematical approaches in the area that hasn’t 
been used before [...] I think then it becomes a discipline. Otherwise, I think it 
is a service or a facilitator for knowledge (2006). 
 
In other words, the potential for bioinformatics to stand outside the control of biology 
lies not in its usefulness to, but in its difference from biology. The question of 
bioinformatics being positioned as a service to biology, and the tension between 
‘service’ and ‘discipline’ conceptions of bioinformatics, is developed in more depth in 
the next section.   
 
These extracts are not intended to persuade the reader that the ‘camps’ in which 
biologists, bioinformaticists and computer scientists pitch their tents are distinct 
intellectual objects with hard boundaries. However, divisions within a field of work 
have material implications. For Dr Campbell, the heterogeneity within bioinformatics 
prevents any one scientist becoming a ‘complete’ bioinformatician.  
 
I don’t think I have ever met people who have been equally interested in both 
[biology and computer science] and equally skilled in both. Almost by 
definition, people come from one discipline or the other. It is quite rare and 
unheard of, certainly in [the] top end of researchers, that they have been 
equally trained in both areas (2006). 
 
For Dr Kennedy, a bioinformatician, the lack of genuine multi-skilled individuals is a 
problem for the specialism. 
 
There are very few people who have got the ability to think biologically and 
also to think in terms of the computing needs. This is a problem (2006). 
 
The existence of two camps demonstrates not just the epistemic problems of 
interdisciplinarity, but also the difference in interests. Dr Fairbrother, a lecturer in 
bioinformatics, argues that, as we found with Dr Michaels, many computer scientists 
 14 
see biological problems as a proving ground for the theories and techniques of 
computer science, rather than interesting problems in their own right.  
 
Let’s say for instance we are supposedly solving these biological problems 
and all these sorts of things. But the computer scientists come in and it is more 
of the case of here is a problem that I can apply my pet technique that I have 
been working on in the past ten years. I can get some money to work on it, but 
it doesn’t actually have to produce anything useful […] It is quite difficult 
because I don’t think the biological community has the expertise to drive 
things forward where it wants to be going. And if you can’t drive yourself and 
you are being pulled by somebody who is not quite doing it for the right 
reasons you end up with this problem with what we are having. I don’t think 
there is an obvious solution (2006). 
 
For Dr Fairbrother, the future of bioinformatics will be determined by the interests of 
those who have the expertise, and power, to drive (or pull) bioinformatics forward.  
The dearth of computing and statistical expertise among ‘wet lab’ biologists results in 
bioinformatics being led by those with an education outside biology. Some biologists 
believe that these bioinformaticians have only a tangential interest in the underlying 
biological problems. Dr Fairbrother suggests that a lack of expertise in the biological 
camp and a lack of understanding or interest in biological problems in the computer 
science camp has led to squandered opportunities; ‘you end up with this problem we 
are having’. 
 
These extracts illustrate some of the difficulties of forming an ‘inter-discipline’. 
Concentrating mostly on what Calvert (2010) terms ‘individual interdisciplinarity’, 
these participants argue that very few, if any, bioinformaticians have mastery of both 
biology and computer science. Two distinct camps of bioinformaticians result and 
members of these camps have differing epistemes, ambitions and interests. The idea 
of being trained equally in biology and computer science, of achieving individual 
inter-disciplinarity, was seen by many as not feasible. We argue that this is 
particularly the case during the early unfoldings of the field, when there was no 
formal bioinformatics education infrastructure. Bioinformatics has depended on 
individuals coming together from different disciplines – collaborative 
 15 
interdisciplinarity (Calvert, 2010) – with all the problems of cooperation that are 
inherent in collaboration3. 
 
Service versus Discipline 
There is a widely accepted hierarchy of esteem in scientific disciplines; physics at the 
top, followed by chemistry and then biology to make up the ‘hard sciences’, which are 
collectively higher in this hierarchy than the ‘soft’ or ‘human’ sciences, which 
themselves have a hierarchy of hard to soft (Storer, 1967; Cole, 1983). However, the 
disciplines lower in this hierarchy are not subordinate to the ‘harder’ disciplines. 
Bioinformatics faces the question of whether it is to be an autonomous, academic, 
research discipline, an independent sub-discipline, or a service subordinate to biology. 
In attempting to establish bioinformatics as an autonomous field of research, 
bioinformaticians are dependent on the weight and value (both esteem and material) 
given to bioinformatics by biologists. People trained in the ‘wet lab’ are the strategic 
research planners, make up peer review panels, and dominate department hierarchies, 
which leads to an understanding of bioinformatics taking hold that is in the interests 
of those who do not work directly in bioinformatics. Perhaps this is why Dr Harrison 
finds something like the Amalgamated Union of Bioinformaticians has (informally) 
formed. We found that the ways in which biologists understand and position 
bioinformatics was a particular concern of bioinformaticians. From their view, 
biologists regard bioinformatics as a highly-skilled technical service. Dr Kennedy was 
asked whether he thought bioinformatics was a service or a discipline. 
  
That is an excellent question. It is both. If you asked the bioinformaticists at 
my level, more often than not they will turn around and tell you it is a 
discipline. If you asked a biologist, they should say it is a service. They 
probably won’t, but they should, because 90% of biologists I deal with or have 
dealt with in the past view, whether they know it or not, bioinformatics as a 
service (2006). 
 
                                                 
3 It should be noted that collaborative interdisciplinarity is not always voluntaristic. It is not always the 
result of the collaboration of (more or less) autonomous scientists, but often a relationship between 
employer and employee, another mirror of the scientist-technician relationship. We prefer to downplay 
the equality implied by idealisation of ‘collaboration’, and instead suggest ‘collective 
interdisciplinarity’. 
 16 
It is of note that Dr Kennedy, a bioinformatician, responded by describing the way in 
which biologists see, or more importantly use, bioinformatics. While a new discipline 
might work to shape itself – as in Dr Harrison’s description of hardening boundaries – 
it is often being positioned by those with existing power. Dr Kennedy suggests that 
even if biologists do describe bioinformatics as a discipline, the way in which they 
interact with bioinformaticians is to treat it as a service.  
 
Dr Kennedy was asked to further describe how he, as a bioinformatician, perceives 
bioinformatics.  
 
I view it as a discipline and it is a discipline because I suppose 
bioinformaticists at this level have their own research and are an interface 
between biology and computer science. So whether they [are] biologists or 
computer scientists, which they tend to be, it is still at that interface. In that 
respect, it is distinct as a research area [...] I mean research needs papers and 
the papers that come out are bioinformatics in nature, and they can be applied. 
They can be computer science in nature or they can be involved in novel 
biological-type data. So, it is cross-disciplinary in that respect (2006). 
 
Dr Kennedy reiterated that bioinformatics is a discipline by virtue of having its own, 
autonomous research area. Bioinformaticians that are able to conduct research 
themselves, rather than offer skilled technical assistance to the research of biologists, 
are able to conduct work that is innovative and creative. Bioinformatics might be 
distinct, but, as Dr Kennedy describes, it is also cross-disciplinary, located at the 
boundary between computer science and biology. Just as bioinformaticians can be 
found in different ‘camps’, so the research papers produced by bioinformatics ‘can be 
computer science in nature or they can be involved in novel biological type data’.  
 
A common feature of our interviews was that our participants did not feel that 
bioinformaticians are a homogenous group. Later in the interview, Dr Kennedy 
expands on his ‘at this level’ comment, constructing a boundary between research-
driven and service-driven bioinformatics. By doing so, he distinguishes himself from 
others involved in bioinformatics-work who occupy a lower level in the hierarchy of 
academic esteem. 
 17 
 
[A] bioinformatician tends to be on the service side as a graduate MSc student 
or maybe a Research Fellow who has gone to work as part of a team, but does 
not come up with their own research. Essentially, they are providing a service; 
a data analysis service. 
  
[Whereas] a bioinformaticist is viewed as, and these definitions are all mine, a 
bioinformaticist tends to be someone who actually carries out the research. So 
there is definitely a distinction. There are bioinformaticians out there and far 
more bioinformaticians than bioinformaticists, if that is how they are termed. 
So yes that distinction does exist (2006). 
 
That there are far fewer ‘bioinformaticists’ – those with a research identity – than 
there are service-orientated ‘bioinformaticians’ might be an ordinary feature of any 
field of human labour – that there are far more ‘doers’ than ‘thinkers’ – but some of 
our interviewees felt that this bias towards service provision in bioinformatics was an 
obstacle to the coherence of bioinformatics as a research discipline. For example, 
could it be that the positioning of bioinformatics as a service denies those working in 
the field the autonomy and opportunities to drive the field forward, to bring the 
biological and computing epistemes closer? The idiosyncratic terminology that Dr 
Kennedy uses has seemingly spread among the local community of bioinformaticians. 
Dr Fairbrother, a lecturer in bioinformatics, also uses ‘bioinformaticist’ and 
‘bioinformatician’ as an ordering device to illuminate distinctions within 
bioinformatics. 
 
I think the one that I am told I should use is bioinformaticist. The last 
definition I heard was that a bioinformatician is someone who uses 
bioinformatics tools, a bioinformaticist is somebody who develops them 
(2006). 
 
Jenkins, a PhD student in bioinformatics and molecular biology, has also adopted 
these terms, as they have spread down the local hierarchy. 
 
 18 
If you speak to my supervisor he would say there is a difference between a 
bioinformaticists and a bioinformatician…I think of myself as more of a 
developer than a service. So I am not necessarily the person that a biologist 
should come to… [even though] it might appear that I am. I actually have 
done that initially in my PhD where people come along and say I want to find 
a gene through an analysis of that. Will you find it please? But [this] is an area 
that I want to move away from and to move towards […] developing 
applications rather than using them and giving people the results. I want them 
to do that rather than me (2006). 
 
Jenkins wants to be viewed as a research bioinformatician, developing new 
applications and programs, rather than using existing ones to provide a technical 
service to biologists. However, he explains that he has been positioned, against his 
interests, perhaps as a product of the way bioinformatics is defined, as a service 
provider to biologists, being asked to conduct work over which he has no control. 
 
The term collaboration implies a voluntary agreement between equals. Service 
bioinformaticians, however, are often not ‘collaborating’, but are contracted. The 
relationship is one of employer and employee, or, at least, service provider and client, 
not that of autonomous scientists collaborating in their mutual interests. Of course, 
few collaborations approach this ideal (Parker, Penders and Vermeulen, 2010), but in 
the case of the service bioinformaticians, the power and economics involved in their 
relationships with biologists is all too apparent. The nature of these relationships, in 
turn, has an impact on the rewards and recognition enjoyed by bioinformaticians. 
 
The positioning of bioinformatics as a service recalls studies of professions and of 
technicians in the sciences. Discussing the professions, Abbott (1988) argues that 
each profession makes claims to all the knowledge and practice within its exclusive 
domain. He might point to a subordinate relationship between the offspring, 
bioinformatics, and the parent, biology (Abbott, 2001). That bioinformatics is 
dependent on the primary inscriptions produced by biologists – who belong to an 
existing, well-established discipline – means that their contribution is often set in the 
background. In the sciences, ‘routine’, but skilled and essential, procedures have long 
been delegated to ‘invisible’ technicians (from Shapin, 1989 through Keefe and 
 19 
Potowsky, 1997, to Iliffe, 2008), and it is professional (or in this case, disciplinary) 
groupings that hold the social power to delegate low esteem tasks to other groups of 
workers. 
 
When bioinformatics provides a service it allows the ‘black boxing’ of large parts of 
the process of making knowledge claims. Dr Nielson, a molecular biologist, describes 
his own relationship with bioinformatics and laments the difficulty of individual 
‘interdisciplinarity’ (Calvert, 2010).   
 
There are two questions there. Am I interested [in bioinformatics]? Yes. Do I 
have the time? No. That is the big problem, I am an amateur bioinformatics 
person… I do want to know how these things are doing. I think it is important 
from the point of view of interpreting papers so you can understand the 
differences, the interpretations of what are happening and what genes are 
being expressed and how they selected these things out. So I think it is very 
important that you understand at least the minimum part of bioinformatics for 
any research so you can understand that.  
 
Do I have enough time and do I understand computing enough? Well, no to 
both of them. I understand a lot more but I don’t have the time to practise on 
them. We buy in a couple of ready-made programmes like Gene Spring and 
we have got Array Assist and… I get ones downloaded… which comes from 
TIGR, the Institute for Genome Research, which is very good, and it is free 
which is even better. It is a matter of playing around with them and making 
sure you know how they work, but I mean how they go through and do all 
these things no [I don’t understand]. The big one I don’t know and what I 
should really know is R or Bioconducter from the R programme, and I feel as 
though somebody else should do that for me. But we don’t really have that 
much bioinformatics support (2007).  
 
Writing in 1990, Leroy Hood stated ‘...the HGP is training a new type of 
interdisciplinary biologist who understands technology as well as biology. I believe 
these multidisciplinary biologists will be among the scientific leaders of the 21st 
century’ (Hood 1990, p13). Nearly twenty years later, Bruun (2007) found that “most 
 20 
bioscientists lack formal competence in bioinformatics, computer science, statistics 
and mathematics” (p190). Dr Neilson suggests that the answer to this is a closer 
relationship with bioinformaticians; a ‘collaborative interdisciplinarity’ rather than 
‘individual interdisciplinarity’ (Calvert, 2010). However, Dr Cherry, another 
molecular biologist, exemplifies the way in which many bioscientists currently 
engage with ‘black boxed’ bioinformatics:  
 
…I will use bioinformatics as a computer. I will use bioinformatics 
programmes, but I don’t know what the algorithms are and how they are 
constructed (2006). 
 
Collaborative interdisciplinarity can involve the use of programmes or the expertise of 
people as black boxes, with buttons pressed and answers demanded, no knowledge of 
the workings required or expected. This is not an inherently bad thing; modern, 
technological society demands black boxing. However, the degree of black boxing 
that is desirable, in a science in which the goal is novelty and understanding, is open 
to debate, as is the feasibility of developing the individual interdisciplinarity 
envisaged by Hood.  
 
While a service-orientated bioinformatics might frustrate the aspirations of some 
bioinformaticians, such a development would not necessarily be harmful to science. 
Service-orientated bioinformatics is, in effect, the black boxing of bioinformatics 
knowledge. McNally (2008) makes a distinction between ‘black box pessimists’ and 
‘black box optimists’. An optimist argues for the benefits of black boxing knowledge 
within technologies and routinised processes. These technologies and processes free 
scientists from the need to be masters of that which can be mechanised or ‘hived off’. 
A black box need not be a techno-fix, but could just as easily be a rearrangement of 
the social. For a black box optimist, the role of bioinformaticians is to take concerns 
over data management, mining, and analysis away from biologists, either by offering 
their skills as a service or by creating routinised, user friendly applications, thus 
allowing biology to proceed apace in the genomic era. Collaborative or collective 
interdisciplinarity is acceptable. On the other hand, black box pessimists believe that 
there is a danger in closing off from scientists the assumptions and hypotheses that are 
contained in black boxes. Understanding the contents of the black box – in the case of 
 21 
bioinformatics, the statistical theory and the specific algorithms that allow scientists to 
make knowledge claims – is necessary in order to do good science. Seen like this, 
individual interdisciplinarity is the ideal4. 
 
 
Discussion 
Canguilhem (1988), writing on the classification of scientific activities, argued that 
the history of science was the victim of ‘accepted’ classifications and that the real 
problem for historians and sociologists of science was to critically unravel why those 
classifications exist in the first place. What is accepted as bioinformatics practice, and 
what is not, determines its trajectory and the size, shape and distinctiveness of its 
contents.  
 
The determination of bioinformaticians to avoid being categorised primarily as 
providers of a service recalls the findings of studies of technicians. Technicians are 
highly educated, but their knowledge is dependent on the discipline within which they 
work. Their knowledge is delegated knowledge. However, the education of 
technicians produces expectations that they ought to be part of a horizontally ordered 
work setting, such as that found in academic life, not that they are positioned in a 
vertically ordered work setting – providing a service (Nelsen, 1997). As Keefe and 
Potosky (1997) write, for technical workers, “professional career expectations formed 
in educational programs have rarely conformed to their job experiences” (p. 55). In 
the terms used by Flecker and Hofbauer (1998), the socialising process of an 
education in science “generates ‘superfluous’ subjectivity, that is, aspirations, desires 
for self-actualisation and so on, which exceed what is required” (p. 121). 
Bioinformaticians, with post-graduate degrees, socialised into the structures of 
academia, will find that their expectations will not match the employer-employee 
relationship of service provision.  
 
Large-scale genomic science has created an increasingly acute division of labour 
(Arribas-Ayllon and Bartlett, in press) within the production of primary inscriptions. 
When we discuss the relationship between bioinformaticians (the producers of 
                                                 
4 Individual interdisciplinarity is a step on a path of infinite regress. Should scientists be able to 
understand the workings of all their own instruments? And the components for those instruments? 
 22 
secondary inscriptions) and biologists (the producers of primary inscriptions), we are 
not discussing their relationship with the laboratory technician running seemingly 
endless genome scans, but with the group that controls this data, and with the senior 
bioscientists that hold authority within that groups. The creators of primary 
inscriptions are groups; the specific individuals doing the wet work are often afforded 
little status or power, but the primary inscriptions produced are scientific capital. It 
might also be noted that large-scale science produces a more instrumental division of 
labour than the cosy, collegial collaboration that is often seen as the scientific ideal 
(Yearly, 1988).  
 
Because technical work is dependent on a body (or bodies, in the case of 
bioinformatics) of knowledge policed by autonomous scientific disciplines (or crafts 
and professions) the construction of the occupation of technicians is largely ‘passive’. 
Professions, crafts, and academic disciplines are ‘active’ with regard to the boundaries 
of their occupations, set through struggles to control the system of knowledge, the 
processes of training and recruitment and so on. In contrast to this, the occupation of 
technicians is shaped by powerful actors from outside. In the case of bioinformatics, 
biologists have the power to build the bioinformatics that suits them, through control 
of departments, funding bodies, peer review, etc. As Keefe and Potosky (1997) write, 
“most technicians work in complex organizations where they neither set the entry and 
performance standards of their occupation, nor control the educational process 
through which new recruits are trained. Most cannot formally self-regulate or self-
govern their work practices. Most important, technicians often operate within an 
established profession’s field of knowledge and competence” (p. 54). Bioinformatics 
depends on the mass inscriptions of post-genomic science. As producers of secondary 
inscriptions, their work might be epistemologically central, but it is also 
institutionally dependent on (subordinate to, even) biology.  The struggle for 
bioinformaticians, as they see it, is to ensure that they are able to build a disciplinary 
identity of their own, rather than an identity determined by biologists: the 
Amalgamated Union of Bioinformaticians, perhaps. 
 
Building a disciplinary identity for an inter-discipline is not straightforward; 
bioinformaticians come from a number of disciplinary backgrounds, primarily from 
the life sciences and computer science. As described, this produces a situation in 
 23 
which bioinformaticians conceive of their emerging discipline in quite different ways. 
Not just philosophically, but socially: which journals are read by their peers, which 
conferences are the focus of the community, what should be the curricula of 
undergraduate and postgraduate education, what sorts of activities are granted 
esteem? The uncomfortable positioning of bioinformaticians as service providers can, 
in part, be explained by the lack of consensus as to what bioinformatics is, but 
bioinformaticians see this as exacerbated by the ignorance of biologists of the 
practices of bioinformatics.  
 
Furthermore, and of interest to an Amalgamated Union of Bioinformaticians, the 
black box pessimist is also concerned that the black boxing of knowledge has a 
deskilling effect, as the range of skills and knowledge required to do work narrows 
(McNally 2008, p223). Black boxed tools might even shield researchers from being 
aware that they lack knowledge of, and expertise in, the very processes that produce 
the knowledge that they publish. In the case of bioinformatics, the ability to perform 
bioinformatics at a distance – working on digitized data – means that biologists 
relying on bioinformaticians as service providers can also be shielded from the fact 
that their research is underwritten by the work of highly skilled interdisciplinary 
experts who are vital to the success of post-genomic projects (Lewis, 2010).  
 
Of course, the possibilities are not limited to two polar opposites; service or 
independent discipline. Within the broad discipline of biology, there are a tremendous 
number of specialisms – divided by technique and subject matter – so, are the 
questions facing bioinformatics simply the same questions that have been faced by 
other biospecialities many times before? The key difference, we maintain, is that the 
majority of these specialisms produce primary inscriptions. In the case of 
bioinformatics though, bioinformaticians are reliant on these primary inscriptions, on 
the labour of biologists in the laboratory or the field, in order to produce secondary 
inscriptions that contribute to biological knowledge. 
 
What then of the position of a discipline such as mathematics in biology, producing 
no inscriptions of its own? Comparison can be drawn. However, the difference here is 
one of institutional and cultural power. Mathematics is an established discipline with 
a solid identity before its tools and expertise are turned to biological problems. It is 
 24 
secure – at least as much as is possible – with departments, courses, and prestigious 
chairs. Bioinformatics, on the other hand, arises out of the demands of biologists. And 
in the case of mathematics, the position in the hierarchy of the sciences (Storer, 1967; 
Cole, 1983) is clear; as the joke runs, “biologists answer only to chemists, chemists 
answer only to physicists, physicists answer only to mathematicians, and 
mathematicians answer only to God.” It seems that without the institutional and 
cultural power derived from centuries of departments, courses, prestigious chairs, and 
propagandists (comedic or otherwise), bioinformaticians must answer to biologists. 
 
To conclude, we have highlighted two main tensions within the fledging field of 
bioinformatics: that between conceptions of bioinformatics as a service or as a 
discipline, and that between bioinformaticians coming to the field from the radically 
different hinterlands of biological science and computer science. The consequences of 
these two tensions are inter-related. The positioning of bioinformatics as a service to 
biology rather than an autonomous academic discipline may deny bioinformaticians 
the opportunities required to make advances, both professionally (by consequence of 
their peripheral access to the traditional reward structures of science) and 
scientifically. The complaint that few people in the field have the ‘individual 
interdisciplinarity’ (a solid grounding in both computer science and biology), is a 
complaint about barriers to scientific advancement. Pushing the boundaries of 
bioinformatics is the privilege of those with some degree of scientific autonomy 
coupled with access to the requisite level of interdisciplinarity (individual, 
collaborative, or collective). Given that bioinformatics is central to the production of 
knowledge in post-genomic science, its positioning on the institutional edges of the 
academy could be seen to be a dis-service, to bioinformatics and, consequently, the 
life sciences in general. 
 
 
References 
Abbate, J. 2001.  Inventing the Internet. London: MIT Press. 
Abbott, A., 1988. The System of Professions: An Essay on the Division of Expert 
Labor.  Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Abbott, A., 2001. Chaos of Disciplines. Chicago: Chicago University Press. 
 25 
Arribas-Ayllon, M. and Bartlett, A. in press Sociological Ambivalence and the Order 
of Scientific Knowledge. Sociology. 
Arribas-Ayllon, M., Bartlett, A. and Featherstone K., 2010. Complexity and 
Accountability: The Witches Brew of Psychiatrics Genetics. Social Studies of Science, 
40 (4), 499-524. 
Attwood, T.K. and Parry-Smith, D.J., 1999. Introduction to Bioinformatics. Harlow: 
Addison Wesley Longman Limited.  
Baker, K.S. and Millerand, F. 2010. Infrastructuring Ecology: Challenges in 
Achieving Data Sharing. In: J.N. Parker, N. Vermeulen and B. Penders, eds. 
Collaboration in the New Life Sciences. Surrey: Ashgate Publishers, 111-138.  
Bayat, A., 2002. Science, Medicine and the Future: Bioinformatics. British Medical 
Journal, 324, 1018-1022.  
Becher, T., 1990. The Counter-Culture of Specialization. European Journal of 
Education, 15 (1), 333-346. 
Bourdieu, P., 1988. Homo Academicus. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Boguski, M.S. and McIntosh, M.W., 2003. Biomedical Informatics for Proteomics. 
Nature, 422, 233-237. 
Bruun, H., 2007. Genomics and the Transformation of Knowledge: The 
Bioinformatics Challenge. In: P. Glasner, P.A. Atkinson and H. Greenslade, eds. New 
Genetics, New Social Formations. London: Routledge, 187-204. 
Calvert, J., 2010. Systems Biology, Interdisciplinarity and Disciplinary Identity. In: 
J.N. Parker, N. Vermeulen and B. Penders, eds. Collaboration in the New Life 
Sciences. Farnham: Ashgate, 201-219. 
Calhoun, C., 1992. Sociology, Other Disciplines and the Project of a General 
Understanding of Social Life. In: T.C. Halliday and M. Janowitz, eds. Sociology and 
Its Publics: The Forms and Fates of Disciplinary Organization. Chicago, IL: Chicago 
University Press, 137-195. 
Canguilhem, G., 1988. Ideology and Rationality in the History of the Life Sciences, 
trans. A. Goldhammer. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Castells, M., 2000. The Rise of the Network Society. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. 
Cole, S., 1983. The Hierarchy of the Sciences. American Journal of Sociology, 89, 
140-165. 
Cook-Deegan, R., 1994. The Gene Wars: Science, Politics and the Human Genome. 
London: W.W. Norton and Company. 
 26 
Dayhoff, M.O., 1969. Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure. (4th ed). Silver 
Springs: National Biomedical Research Foundation. 
Diamond, I. and Woodgate, D., 2005. Genomics research in the UK – the Social 
Science Agenda. New Genetics and Society, 24 (2), 239-252.  
Delamont, S., Atkinson, P.A. and Parry, O., 2000. The Doctoral Experience: Success 
and Failure in Graduate School. London: Falmer Press. 
European Molecular Biological Network (EMBnet). 2006. What is EMBnet? 
Available from: http://www.embnet.org/node/73> [Accessed 10 January 2006]. 
Fenstermacher, D., 2004. Introduction to Bioinformatics. Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology, 56 (5), 440-446. 
Flecker, J. and Hofbauer, J., 1998. Capitalising on Subjectivity: The ‘New Model 
Worker’ and the Importance of Being Useful. In: P. Thompson and C. Warhurst, eds. 
Workplaces of the Future. London: Macmillan, 104-123. 
Garcia-Sancho, M., 2012. Biology, Computing and the History of Molecular 
Sequencing: From Proteins to DNA, 1945-2000. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Gieryn, T.F., 1983. Boundary-work and the Demarcation of Science from Non-
Science: Strains and Interests in Professional Interests of Scientists. American 
Sociological Review, 48, 781-795. 
Gieryn, T.F., 1999. Cultural Boundaries of Science: Credibility on the Line. Chicago: 
University Chicago Press. 
Harvey, M. and McMeekin, A., 2002. UK Bioinformatics: Current Landscapes and 
Future Horizons. London: Department of Trade and Industry. 
Heeney, C and Smart, A., 2012. Enacting Governance – the Case of Access. In: J. 
Kaye, ed. Governing Biobanks: Understanding the Interplay Between Law and 
Practice. Oxford: Hart Publishers, 232-258. 
Hine, C., 2006. Databases as Scientific Instruments and their role in the Ordering of 
Scientific Work. Social Studies of Science, 36, 269-298. 
Hood, L., 1990. Human Genome Project: Is Big Science Bad for Biology? No, and 
anyway the HGP isn’t Big Science. The Scientist, 4 (22), 13-15. 
Hood, L. 1992. Biology and Medicine in the Twenty-First Century. In: D.J. Kevles, 
and L. Hood, L, eds. The Code of Codes: Scientific and Social Issues in the Human 
Genome Project. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,136-163. 
Huerta, M., Haseltine, F., Liu, Y., Downing, G. and Seto, B., 2000. NIH Working 
Definition of  Bioinformatics and Computational Biology [online]. National Institute 
 27 
of Health. Available from: http://www.bisti.nih.gov/docs/CompuBioDef.pdf 
[Accessed 10 January 2006]. 
Iliffe, R., 2008. Technicians. Notes and Records of The Royal Society, 62: 3-26. 
Kay, L.E., 2000. Who Wrote the Book of Life? A History of the Genetic Code. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Keefe, J. and Potosky, D., 1997. Technical Dissonance: Conflicting Portraits of 
Technicians. In: S.R. Barley and J.E. Orr, eds. Between Craft and Science. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 53-81. 
Lemaine, G., Macleod, R., Mulkay, M., and Weingart, P., 1976. Problems in the 
Emergence of New Disciplines. In: G. Lemaine, R. Macleod, M. Mulkay and P. 
Weingart, eds. Perspectives on the Emergence of Scientific Disciplines. Chicago, IL: 
Mouton and Co, 1-23. 
Latour, B. and Woolgar, S., 1986. Laboratory Life: the Construction of Scientific 
Facts.  Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Leonelli, S., 2009. On the Locality of Data and Claims About Phenomena. Philosophy 
of Science, 76 (5), 737-749. 
Leonelli, S., 2010. Documenting the Emergence of Bio-ontologies: or why 
Researching Bioinformatics Requires HPSSB. History and Philosophy of the Life 
Sciences, 32 (1), 105-126. 
Lewis, J., 2010.  Matchmaking Mechanisms: Collaborative Arrangements in 
Proteomics and Bioinformatics. In: J.N. Parker, N. Vermeulen and B. Penders, eds.   
Collaboration   in   the  New  Life  Sciences.  Surrey:  Ashgate Publishers, 179-200 
Marijuán, P.C., 2002. Bioinformatician: Untangling the Networks of Life. Biosystems, 
64, 111-118. 
McNally, R., 2008. Sociomics: CESAGen Multidisciplinary Workshop on the 
Transformation of Knowledge Production in the Biosciences, and its Consequences. 
Proteomics, 8, 222-224. 
Merton, R.K., 1970. Science, Technology and Society in Seventeenth Century 
England. New York, NY: Howard Fertig. 
Moody, G., 2004. Digital Code of Life: How Bioinformatics is Revolutionizing 
Science, Medicine and Business. New Jersey, NJ: John Wiley and Sons. 
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI). 2005. Home Web Page 
[online]. Available from: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ [Accessed 22 October 2005]. 
 28 
Nelsen, B.J., 1997. Work as a Moral Act: how Emergency Medical Technicians 
Understand their Work. In: S. Barley and J. Orr, eds. Between Craft and Science: 
Technical work in US Settings. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 154-184. 
Parker, J.N., Vermeulen, N and Penders, B., 2010. Collaboration in the New Life 
Sciences. Farnham: Ashgate.  
Penders, B., Horstman, K. and Vos, R., 2008. Walking the Line Between Lab and 
Computation:  The Moist Zone. Bioscience, 58 (8), 747-755. 
Persidis, A. 1999. Bioinformatics. Nature Biotechnology, 17, 828-830. 
Shapin, S., 1989. The Invisible Technician. American Scientist, 77, 554-563. 
Shrager, J., 2010. From Wizards to Trading Zones: Crossing the Chasm of Computers 
in Scientific Collaboration. In: M.E. Gorman, ed. Trading Zones and Interactional 
Expertise: Creating New Kinds of Collaboration. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 
107-124. 
Smith, T.F., 1990. The History of Genetic Sequence Databases. Genomics, 6, 701-
707. 
Storer, N.W., 1967. The Hard Sciences and the Soft: Some Sociological Observations. 
Bulletin of the Medical Library Association, 55 (1), 75-84. 
Strasser, B., 2010. Collecting, Comparing and Computing Sequences: The Making of 
Margaret O. Dayhoff’s Atlas of Protein Sequence and Structure, 1954-1965. Journal 
of the History of Biology, 43, 623-660. 
Suarez-Diaz, E., 2010. Making Room for New Faces: Evolution, Genomics and the 
growth of Bioinformatics. History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences, 32, 65-90. 
Turner, S., 2000. What Are Disciplines? And How Is Interdisciplinarity Different? In: 
P. Weingart and N. Stehr, eds. Practising Interdisciplinarity. Toronto: University of 
Toronto Press, 46-65. 
Weber, R., 1990. Basic Content Analysis. London: Sage. 
Weingart, P. and Stehr, N., 2000. Practising Interdisciplinarity. Toronto: University 
of Toronto Press. 
Wouters, P and Beaulieu, A., 2006. Imagining E-science Beyond Computation. In: C. 
Hine, ed. New Infrastructures for Knowledge Production: Understanding E-Science. 
London: Information Science Publishing, 48-70.  
Yearly, S. 1988. Science, Technology and Social Change. London: Unwin Hyman. 
Zweiger, G., 2001. Transducing the Genome: Information, Anarchy and Revolution in 
the Biomedical Sciences. New York, NY: McGraw Hill. 
 29 
 
Acknowledgement 
 
The support of the ESRC is gratefully acknowledged. This work is part of the 
research programme of the ESRC Genomics Network at Cesagen. 

