Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 1
582606 Introduction to bioinformatics
Autumn 2007
Esa Pitkänen
Master's Degree Programme in Bioinformatics (MBI)
Department of Computer Science, University of Helsinki
http://www.cs.helsinki.fi/mbi/courses/07-08/itb/
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 2
Administrative issues
l Master level course
l Obligatory course in the Master’s Degree Programme in
Bioinformatics
l 4 credits
l Prerequisites: basic mathematical skills
l Lectures: Tuesdays and Fridays 14-16 in Exactum C222
l Exercises: Wednesday 14-16 in Exactum C221
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 3
Teachers
l Esa Pitkänen, Department of Computer Science, University of
Helsinki
l Prof. Elja Arjas, Department of Mathematics and Statistics,
University of Helsinki
l Prof. Samuel Kaski, Laboratory of Computer and Information
Science, Helsinki University of Technology
l Lauri Eronen, Department of Computer Science, University of
Helsinki
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 4
How to enrol for the course?
l Use the registration system of the Computer Science
department: https://ilmo.cs.helsinki.fi
l If you don’t have a student number or Finnish id yet, don’t
worry: attend the lectures and exercises, and register when you
have the id
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 5
How to successfully pass the course?
l You can get a maximum of 60 points
− Course exam: maximum of 50 points
− Exercises: maximum of 10 points
l 0% completed assignments gives you 0 points, 80% gives 10
points, the rest by linear interpolation
l “A completed assignment” means that you are willing to
present your solution to the class in the exercise session
l Course will be graded on the scale 0-5
− To get the lowest passing grade 1/5, you need to have at least 30
points
l Course exam: Wednesday 17.10. at 16.00-19.00 in A111
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 6
Course material
l Course book: Richard C. Deonier, Simon
Tavare & Michael S. Waterman:
Computational Genome Analysis – an
Introduction, Springer 2005
l Available at Kumpula and Viikki science
libraries; book stores (Amazon.com ~$56,
Akateeminen kirjakauppa ~75€,
Yliopistokirjakauppa 71€)
l It is recommended that you have access to
the course book!
l Slides for some lectures will be available on
the course web page (copies in room C127)
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 7
Additional material
• Check the course web site
• N. C. Jones & P. A.
Pevzner: An introduction to
bioinformatics algorithms
• Alberts et al.: Molecular
biology of the cell
• Lodish et al.: Molecular cell
biology
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 8
Course contents
• Biological background (book chapter 1)
• Probability calculus (chapters 2 and 3)
• Sequence alignment (chapter 6)
• Rapid alignment methods: FASTA and
BLAST (chapter 7)
• Phylogenetic trees (chapter 12)
• Expression data analysis (chapter 11)
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 9
Master's Degree Programme in
Bioinformatics (MBI)
l Two-year MSc programme
l Admission for 2008-2009 in January 2008
− You need to have your Bachelor’s degree ready by August 2008
www.cs.helsinki.fi/mbi
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 10
MBI programme
• MBI educates
bioinformatics
professionals who
– Specialise in computational
and statistical methods
– Work in R&D tasks in
biology and medicine
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 11
MBI programme
• Two-year masters programme
(120 cr)
• Offered jointly by the
University of Helsinki (HY)
and Helsinki University of
Technology (TKK)
• Began in 2006 as a national
programme, 2007
international admission
• Students 8 + 7 (2006 + 2007)
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 12
MBI programme organizers
Department of Computer
Science, Department of
Mathematics and Statistics,
HY
Laboratory of Computer and
Information Science, TKK
Faculty of Medicine, HY
Faculty of Biosciences,
Faculty of Agriculture and
Forestry, HY
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 13
Bioinformatics courses at the University of
Helsinki
l Department of Computer Science
− Practical course in biodatabases (II period): techniques for
accessing and integrating data in biology databases.
− Biological sequence analysis (III period): basic probabilistic
methods for modelling and analysis of biological sequences.
− Modeling of vision (III period): mechanisms and modeling of
human perception.
− Seminar: Regulatory networks (I & II periods)
− Seminar: Management of biological databases (III & IV
periods)
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 14
Bioinformatics courses at the University of
Helsinki
l Department of Mathematics and Statistics
− Statistical methods in genetic epidemiology and gene
mapping (I period)
− Mathematical modelling (I & II periods)
− Practical course on phylogenetic analysis (IV period):
recommended to take also Biological sequence analysis
− Adaptive dynamics (III & IV periods)
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 15
Bioinformatics courses at Helsinki University of
Technology
l Laboratory of Computer and Information Science
− Computational genomics (I & II periods): Algorithms and
models for biological sequences and genomics
− Signal processing in neuroinformatics (I and II periods):
overview of some of the main biomedical signal processing
techniques
− High-throughput bioinformatics (III and IV periods):
computational and statistical methods for analyzing modern
high-throughput biological data
− Image analysis in neuroinformatics (III and IV periods):
biomedical image processing techniques
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 16
Biology for methodological scientists (8 cr)
l Course organized by the Faculties of Bioscience and Medicine
for the MBI programme
l Introduction to basic concepts of microarrays, medical genetics
and developmental biology
l Book exam in I period (2 cr)
l Organized in three lectured modules, 2 cr each
l Each module has an individual registration so you can
participate even if you missed the first module
l www.cs.helsinki.fi/mbi/courses/07-08/bfms/
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 17
Bioinformatics courses
l Visit the website of Master's Degree Programme in
Bioinformatics for up-to-date course lists:
http://www.cs.helsinki.fi/mbi
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 18
An introduction to bioinformatics
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 19
What is bioinformatics?
l Solving biological problems with computation?
l Collecting, storing and analysing biological data?
l Informatics - library science?
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 20
What is bioinformatics?
l Bioinformatics, n. The science of information and information
flow in biological systems, esp. of the use of computational
methods in genetics and genomics. (Oxford English Dictionary)
l "The mathematical, statistical and computing methods that aim
to solve biological problems using DNA and amino acid
sequences and related information."
-- Fredj Tekaia
l "I do not think all biological computing is bioinformatics, e.g.
mathematical modelling is not bioinformatics, even when
connected with biology-related problems. In my opinion,
bioinformatics has to do with management and the subsequent
use of biological information, particular genetic information."
-- Richard Durbin
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 21
What is not bioinformatics?
l Biologically-inspired computation, e.g., genetic algorithms and
neural networks
l However, application of neural networks to solve some
biological problem, could be called bioinformatics
l What about DNA computing?
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 22
Related concepts
l Computational biology
− Application of computing to biology (broad definition)
− Often used interchangeably with bioinformatics
l Biometry: the statistical analysis of biological data
l Biophysics: "an interdisciplinary field which applies techniques from the
physical sciences to understanding biological structure and function" --
British Biophysical Society
l Mathematical biology “tackles biological problems, but the methods it uses to
tackle them need not be numerical and need not be implemented in software
or hardware.” -- Damian Counsell
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 23
Related concepts
• Systems biology
– “biology of networks”
– integrating different levels
of information to
understand how biological
systems work
• Computational systems
biology
Overview of metabolic pathways in KEGG
database, www.genome.jp/kegg/
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 24
Why is bioinformatics important?
l New measurement techniques produce huge
quantities of biological data
− Advanced data analysis methods are needed to make sense
of the data
− Typical data sources produce noisy data with a lot of missing
values
l Paradigm shift in biology to utilise bioinformatics in
research
l To give you a glimpse of a typical situation in
bioinformatics…
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 25
DNA microarray data
Outi Monni, Biochip Center, Biomedicum
Introduction to bioinformatics, Autumn 2007 26
Biological background
l Molecular Biology Primer: www.bioalgorithms.info

