 3
Chapter 1 
KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT, DATA 
MINING, AND TEXT MINING IN 
MEDICAL INFORMATICS 
Hsinchun Chen1, Sherrilynne S. Fuller2, Carol Friedman3, and William 
Hersh4 
1Management Information Systems Department, Eller College of Management, University of 
Arizona, Tucson, Arizona  85721; 2University of Washington, Biomedical and Health 
Informatics, Seattle, Washington  98195-7155; 3Columbia University, Department of 
Biomedical Informatics New York, New York  10032; 4Oregon Health and Science University, 
Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology, Portland, Oregon  97239-3098 
Chapter Overview  
In this chapter we provide a broad overview of selected knowledge 
management, data mining, and text mining techniques and their use in 
various emerging biomedical applications. It aims to set the context for 
subsequent chapters. We first introduce five major paradigms for machine 
learning and data analysis including: probabilistic and statistical models, 
symbolic learning and rule induction, neural networks, evolution-based 
algorithms, and analytic learning and fuzzy logic. We also discuss their 
relevance and potential for biomedical research. Example applications of 
relevant knowledge management, data mining, and text mining research are 
then reviewed in order including: ontologies; knowledge management for 
health care, biomedical literature, heterogeneous databases, information 
visualization, and multimedia databases; and data and text mining for health 
care, literature, and biological data. We conclude the paper with discussions 
of privacy and confidentiality issues of relevance to biomedical data mining. 
 
 
Keywords 
knowledge management; data mining; text mining 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
4 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
5
1. INTRODUCTION 
The field of biomedical informatics has drawn increasing popularity and 
attention, and has been growing rapidly over the past two decades. Due to 
the advances in new molecular, genomic, and biomedical techniques and 
applications such as genome sequencing, protein identification, medical 
imaging, and patient medical records, tremendous amounts of biomedical 
research data are generated every day. Originating from individual research 
efforts and clinical practices, these biomedical data are available in hundreds 
of public and private databases, which have been made possible by new 
database technologies and the Internet. The digitization of critical medical 
information such as lab reports, patient records, research papers, and 
anatomic images has also resulted in large amounts of patient care data. 
Biomedical researchers and practitioners are now facing the “info-glut” 
problem. Currently, the rate of data accumulation is much faster than the rate 
of data interpretation. These data need to be effectively organized and 
analyzed in order to be useful.  
New computational techniques and information technologies are needed 
to manage these large repositories of biomedical data and to discover useful 
patterns and knowledge from them. In particular, knowledge management, 
data mining, and text mining techniques have been adopted in various 
successful biomedical applications in recent years. Knowledge management 
techniques and methodologies have been used to support the storing, 
retrieving, sharing, and management of multimedia and mission-critical tacit 
and explicit biomedical knowledge. Data mining techniques have been used 
to discover various biological, drug discovery, and patient care knowledge 
and patterns using selected statistical analyses, machine learning, and neural 
networks methods. Text mining techniques have been used to analyze 
research publications as well as electronic patient records. Biomedical 
entities such as drug names, proteins, genes, and diseases can be 
automatically extracted from published documents and used to construct 
gene pathways or to provide mapping into existing medical ontologies.  
In the following sections, we first survey the background of knowledge 
management, data mining, and text mining research. We then discuss the use 
of these techniques in emerging biomedical applications. 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
6 
2. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT, DATA MINING, 
AND TEXT MINING: AN OVERVIEW 
Knowledge management, data mining, and text mining techniques have 
been widely used in many important applications in both scientific and 
business domains in recent years.  
Knowledge management is the system and managerial approach to the 
gathering, management, use, analysis, sharing, and discovery of knowledge 
in an organization or a community in order to maximize performance (Chen, 
2001). Although there is no universal definition of what constitutes 
knowledge, it is generally agreed there is a continuum of data, information, 
and knowledge. Data are mostly structured, factual, and oftentimes numeric, 
and reside in database management systems. Information is factual, but 
unstructured, and in many cases textual. Knowledge is inferential, abstract, 
and is needed to support decision making or hypothesis generation. The 
concept of knowledge has become prevalent in many disciplines and 
business practices. For example, information scientists consider taxonomies, 
subject headings, and classification schemes as representations of 
knowledge. Consulting firms also have been actively promoting practices 
and methodologies to capture corporate knowledge assets and organizational 
memory. In the biomedical context, knowledge management practices often 
need to leverage existing clinical decision support, information retrieval, and 
digital library techniques to capture and deliver tacit and explicit biomedical 
knowledge. 
Data mining is often used during the knowledge discovery process and is 
one of the most important subfields in knowledge management. Data mining 
aims to analyze a set of given data or information in order to identify novel 
and potentially useful patterns (Fayyad et al., 1996). These techniques, such 
as Bayesian models, decision trees, artificial neural networks, associate rule 
mining, and genetic algorithms, are often used to discover patterns or 
knowledge that are previously unknown to the system and the users 
(Dunham, 2002; Chen and Chau, 2004). Data mining has been used in many 
applications such as marketing, customer relationship management, 
engineering, medicine, crime analysis, expert prediction, Web mining, and 
mobile computing, among others.  
Text mining aims to extract useful knowledge from textual data or 
documents (Hearst, 1999; Chen, 2001). Although text mining is often 
considered a subfield of data mining, some text mining techniques have 
originated from other disciplines, such as information retrieval, information 
visualization, computational linguistics, and information science. Examples 
of text mining applications include document classification, document 
clustering, entity extraction, information extraction, and summarization. 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
7
Most knowledge management, data mining, and text mining techniques 
involve learning patterns from existing data or information, and are therefore 
built upon the foundation of machine learning and artificial intelligence. In 
the following, we review several major paradigms in machine learning, 
important evaluation methodologies, and their applicability in biomedicine. 
2.1 Machine Learning and Data Analysis Paradigms 
Since the invention of the first computer in the 1940’s, researchers have 
been attempting to create knowledgeable, learnable, and intelligent 
computers. Many knowledge-based systems have been built for various 
applications such as medical diagnosis, engineering troubleshooting, and 
business decision-making (Hayes-Roth and Jacobstein, 1994). However, 
most of these systems have been designed to acquire knowledge manually 
from human experts, which can be a very time-consuming and labor-
intensive process. To address this problem, machine learning algorithms 
have been developed to acquire knowledge automatically from examples or 
source data. Simon (1983) defined machine learning as “any process by 
which a system improves its performance.” Mitchell (1997) gives a similar 
definition, which considers machine learning to be “the study of computer 
algorithms that improve automatically through experience.” Although the 
“machine learning” term has been widely adopted in the computer science 
community, in the context of medical informatics, “data analysis” is more 
commonly used to represent “the study of computer algorithms that improve 
automatically through the analysis of data.” Statistical data analysis has long 
been adopted in biomedical research. 
In general, machine learning algorithms can be classified as supervised 
learning or unsupervised learning. In supervised learning, training examples 
consist of input/output pair patterns. Learning algorithms aim to predict 
output values of new examples based on their input values. In unsupervised 
learning, training examples contain only the input patterns and no explicit 
target output is associated with each input. The unsupervised learning 
algorithms need to use the input values to discover meaningful associations 
or patterns. 
Many successful machine learning systems have been developed over the 
past three decades in the computer science and statistics communities. Chen 
and Chau (2004) categorized five major paradigms of machine learning 
research, namely probabilistic and statistical models, symbolic learning and 
rule induction, neural networks, evolution-based models, and analytic 
learning and fuzzy logic. We will briefly review research in each of these 
areas and discuss their applicability in biomedicine. 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
8 
2.1.1 Probabilistic and Statistical Models 
Probabilistic and statistical analysis techniques and models have the 
longest history and strongest theoretical foundation for data analysis. 
Although it is not rooted in artificial intelligence research, statistical analysis 
achieves data analysis and knowledge discovery objectives similar to 
machine learning. Popular statistical techniques, such as regression analysis, 
discriminant analysis, time series analysis, principal component analysis, 
and multi-dimensional scaling, are widely used in biomedical data analysis 
and are often considered benchmarks for comparison with other newer 
machine learning techniques. 
One of the more advanced and popular probabilistic models in 
biomedicine is the Bayesian model. Originating in pattern recognition 
research (Duda and Hart, 1973), this method was often used to classify 
different objects into predefined classes based on a set of features. A 
Bayesian model stores the probability of each class, the probability of each 
feature, and the probability of each feature given each class, based on the 
training data. When a new instance is encountered, it can be classified 
according to these probabilities (Langley et al., 1992). A variation of the 
Bayesian model, called the Naïve Bayesian model, assumes that all features 
are mutually independent within each class. Because of its simplicity, the 
Naïve Bayesian model has been adopted in different domains (Fisher, 1987; 
Kononenko, 1993). Due to its mathematical rigor and modeling elegance, 
Bayesian learning has been widely used in biomedical data mining research, 
in particular, genomic and microarray analysis. 
A machine learning technique gaining increasing recognition and 
popularity in recent years is the support vector machines (SVMs). SVM is 
based on statistical learning theory that tries to find a hyperplane to best 
separate two or multiple classes (Vapnik, 1998). This statistical learning 
model has been applied in different applications and the results have been 
encouraging. For example, it has been shown that SVM achieved the best 
performance among several learning methods in document classification 
(Joachims, 1998; Yang and Liu, 1999). SVM is also suitable for various 
biomedical classification problems, such as disease state classification based 
on genetic variables or medical diagnosis based on patient indicators. 
2.1.2 Symbolic Learning and Rule Induction 
Symbolic learning can be classified according to its underlying learning 
strategy such as rote learning, learning by being told, learning by analogy, 
learning from examples, and learning from discovery (Cohen and 
Feigenbaum, 1982; Carbonell et al., 1983). Among these, learning from 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
9
examples appears to be the most promising symbolic learning approach for 
knowledge discovery and data mining. It is implemented by applying an 
algorithm that attempts to induce a general concept description that best 
describes the different classes of the training examples. Numerous 
algorithms have been developed, each using one or more different 
techniques to identify patterns that are useful in generating a concept 
description. Quinlan’s ID3 decision-tree building algorithm (Quinlan, 1983) 
and its variations such as C4.5 (Quinlan, 1993) have become one of the most 
widely used symbolic learning techniques. Given a set of objects, ID3 
produces a decision tree that attempts to classify all the given objects 
correctly.  At each step, the algorithm finds the attribute that best divides the 
objects into the different classes by minimizing entropy (information 
uncertainty). After all objects have been classified or all attributes have been 
used, the results can be represented by a decision tree or a set of production 
rules.  
Although not as powerful as SVM or neural networks (in terms of 
classification accuracy), symbolic learning techniques are computationally 
efficient and their results are easy to interpret. For many biomedical 
applications, the ability to interpret the data mining results in a way 
understandable to patients, physicians, and biologists is invaluable. Powerful 
machine learning techniques such as SVM and neural networks often suffer 
because they are treated as a “black-box.” 
2.1.3 Neural Networks 
Artificial neural networks attempt to achieve human-like performance by 
modeling the human nervous system. A neural network is a graph of many 
active nodes (neurons) that are connected with each other by weighted links 
(synapses). While knowledge is represented by symbolic descriptions such 
as decision trees and production rules in symbolic learning, knowledge is 
learned and remembered by a network of interconnected neurons, weighted 
synapses, and threshold logic units (Rumelhart et al., 1986a; Lippmann, 
1987). Based on training examples, learning algorithms can be used to adjust 
the connection weights in the network such that it can predict or classify 
unknown examples correctly. Activation algorithms over the nodes can then 
be used to retrieve concepts and knowledge from the network (Belew, 1989; 
Kwok, 1989; Chen and Ng, 1995).  
Many different types of neural networks have been developed, among 
which the feedforward/backpropagation model is the most widely used. 
Backpropagation networks are fully connected, layered, feed-forward 
networks in which activations flow from the input layer through the hidden 
layer and then to the output layer (Rumelhart et al., 1986b). The network 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
10 
usually starts with a set of random weights and adjusts its weights according 
to each learning example. Each learning example is passed through the 
network to activate the nodes. The network’s actual output is then compared 
with the target output and the error estimates are then propagated back to the 
hidden and input layers. The network updates its weights incrementally 
according to these error estimates until the network stabilizes. Other popular 
neural network models include Kohonen’s self-organizing map and the 
Hopfield network. Self-organizing maps have been widely used in 
unsupervised learning, clustering, and pattern recognition (Kohonen, 1995); 
Hopfield networks have been used mostly in search and optimization 
applications (Hopfield, 1982). Due to their performances (in terms of 
predictive power and classification accuracy), neural networks have been 
widely used in experiments and adopted for critical biomedical classification 
and clustering problems. 
2.1.4 Evolution-based Algorithms 
Evolution-based algorithms rely on analogies to natural processes and 
Darwinian survival of the fittest. Fogel (1994) identifies three categories of 
evolution-based algorithms: genetic algorithms, evolution strategies, and 
evolutionary programming. Among these, genetic algorithms are the most 
popular and have been successfully applied to various optimization 
problems. Genetic algorithms were developed based on the principle of 
genetics (Holland, 1975; Goldberg, 1989; Michalewicz, 1992). A population 
of individuals in which each individual represents a potential solution is first 
initiated. This population undergoes a set of genetic operations known as 
crossover and mutation. Crossover is a high-level process that aims at 
exploitation while mutation is a unary process that aims at exploration. 
Individuals strive for survival based on a selection scheme that is biased 
toward selecting fitter individuals (individuals that represent better 
solutions). The selected individuals form the next generation and the process 
continues. After some number of generations the program converges and the 
optimum solution is represented by the best individual. In medical 
informatics research, genetic algorithms are among the most robust 
techniques for feature selection problems (e.g., identifying a subset of genes 
that are most relevant to a disease state) due to their stochastic, global-search 
capability. 
2.1.5 Analytic Learning and Fuzzy Logic 
Analytic learning represents knowledge as logical rules and performs 
reasoning on such rules to search for proofs. Proofs can be compiled into 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
11
more complex rules to solve similar problems with a smaller number of 
searches required. For example, Samuelson and Rayner (1991) used analytic 
learning to represent grammatical rules that improve the speed of a parsing 
system.  
While traditional analytic learning systems depend on hard computing 
rules, there is usually no clear distinction between values and classes in the 
real world. To address this problem, fuzzy systems and fuzzy logic have been 
proposed. Fuzzy systems allow the values of False or True to operate over 
the range of real numbers from 0 to 1 (Zedah, 1965). Fuzziness has been 
applied to allow for imprecision and approximate reasoning. In general, we 
see little adoptation of such approaches in biomedicine. 
2.1.6 Hybrid Approach 
As Langley and Simon (1995) pointed out, the reasons for differentiating 
the paradigms are “more historical than scientific.” The boundaries between 
the different paradigms are usually unclear and many systems have been 
built to combine different approaches. For example, fuzzy logic has been 
applied to rule induction and genetic algorithms (e.g., Mendes et al., 2001), 
genetic algorithms have been combined with neural network (e.g., 
Maniezzo, 1994; Chen and Kim, 1994), and because neural network has a 
close resemblance to probabilistic model and fuzzy logic they can be easily 
mixed (e.g., Paass, 1990). It is not surprising to find that many practical 
biomedical knowledge management, data mining, and text mining systems 
adopt such a hybrid approach. 
2.2 Evaluation Methodologies 
The accuracy of a learning system needs to be evaluated before it can 
become useful. Limited availability of data often makes estimating accuracy 
a difficult task (Kohavi, 1995). Choosing a good evaluation methodology is 
very important for machine learning systems development. 
There are several popular methods used for such evaluation, including 
holdout sampling, cross validation, leave-one-out, and bootstrap sampling 
(Stone, 1974; Efron and Tibshirani, 1993). In the holdout method, data are 
divided into a training set and a testing set. Usually 2/3 of the data are 
assigned to the training set and 1/3 to the testing set. After the system is 
trained by the training set data, the system predicts the output value of each 
instance in the testing set. These values are then compared with the real 
output values to determine accuracy.  
In cross-validation, a data set is randomly divided into a number of 
subsets of roughly equal size. Ten-fold cross validation, in which the data set 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
12 
is divided into 10 subsets, is most commonly used. The system is trained and 
tested for 10 iterations. In each iteration, 9 subsets of data are used as 
training data and the remaining set is used as testing data. In rotation, each 
subset of data serves as the testing set in exactly one iteration. The accuracy 
of the system is the average accuracy over the 10 iterations. Leave-one-out is 
the extreme case of cross-validation, where the original data are split into n 
subsets, where n is the size of the original data. The system is trained and 
tested for n iterations, in each of which n–1 instances are used for training 
and the remaining instance is used for testing.  
In the bootstrap method, n independent random samples are taken from 
the original data set of size n. Because the samples are taken with 
replacement, the number of unique instances will be less than n. These 
samples are then used as the training set for the learning system, and the 
remaining data that have not been sampled are used to test the system (Efron 
and Tibshirani, 1993).  
Each of these methods has its strengths and weaknesses. Several studies 
have compared them in terms of their accuracies. Hold-out sampling is the 
easiest to implement, but a major problem is that the training set and the 
testing set are not independent. This method also does not make efficient use 
of data since as much as 1/3 of the data are not used to train the system 
(Kohavi, 1995). Leave-one-out provides the most unbiased estimate, but it is 
computationally expensive and its estimations have very high variances, 
especially for small data sets (Efron, 1983; Jain et al., 1987). Breiman and 
Spector (1992) and Kohavi (1995) conducted independent experiments to 
compare the performance of several different methods, and the results of 
both experiments showed ten-fold cross validation to be the best method for 
model selection. 
In light of the significant medical and patient consequences associated 
with many biomedical data mining applications, it is critical that a 
systematic validation method be adopted. In addition, a detailed, qualitative 
validation of the data mining or text mining results needs to be conducted 
with the help of domain experts (e.g., physicians and biologists), and 
therefore this is generally a time-consuming and costly process. 
3. KNOWLEDGE MANAGEMENT, DATA MINING, 
AND TEXT MINING APPLICATIONS IN 
BIOMEDICINE 
Knowledge management, data mining, and text mining techniques have 
been applied to different areas of biomedicine, ranging from patient record 
management to clinical diagnosis, from hypothesis generation to gene 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
13
clustering, and from spike signal detection to protein structure prediction. In 
this section, we briefly survey some of the relevant research in the field, 
covering the applications of learning techniques in knowledge management, 
and data mining and text mining in biomedicine. More exhaustive and 
detailed reviews and discussions of selected knowledge management, data 
mining, and text mining techniques and applications in biomedicine can be 
found in the subsequent chapters in this book. 
3.1 Ontologies 
Before we examine different biomedical applications, it is important to 
understand the role of ontologies in knowledge management and knowledge 
discovery, especially for text mining applications. An ontology is a 
specification of conceptualization. It describes the concepts and 
relationships that can exist and formalizes the terminology in a domain 
(Gruninger and Lee, 2002). Ontologies are often used to facilitate knowledge 
sharing between people, information processing, data mining, 
communication between software agents, or other knowledge processing 
applications.  
Many ontologies have been developed in the biomedical field. The 
Unified Medical Language System (UMLS), supported by the National 
Library of Medicine (NLM), is a major resource for facilitating computer 
programs to process and manage biomedical documents (McCray et al., 
1993; Humphreys et al., 1993; Campbell et al., 1998; Humphreys et al., 
1998). The UMLS offers three knowledge sources: the Metathesaurus, the 
Semantic Network, and the Specialist Lexicon. The Metathesaurus is a large 
multilingual controlled vocabulary database for biomedicine that allows 
users to map biomedical names and textual terms to concepts (i.e., controlled 
vocabulary terms), or to identify a set of different terms that are associated 
with a single concept. The Metathesaurus is formed by integrating about 100 
different controlled vocabularies including the Medical Subject Headings 
(MeSH), a controlled vocabulary, and SNOMED-CT, a controlled clinical 
vocabulary established by the College of American Pathologists. The 
Semantic Network provides the categorization of the concepts in the 
Metathesaurus and also the relationships among the concepts. The Specialist 
Lexicon, designed to facilitate natural language processing for biomedical 
text, is a lexicon containing syntactic definitions for both biomedical terms 
and general English terms. These resources provide a framework and 
ontology for knowledge representation in biomedicine. UMLS resources 
have been widely used in biomedical language processing (Baclawski et al., 
2000; Bodenreider and McCray, 2003; Perl and Geller, 2003; Rosse and 
Mejino, 2003; Zhang et al., 2003; Caviedes and Cimino, 2004). Several 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
14 
studies have investigated the mapping of concepts from the Metathesaurus to 
the Semantic Network (Cimino et al., 2003; Rindflesch and Fiszman, 2003).  
Besides biomedical documents, it is also important for researchers and 
computers to understand the different terminologies for genes and proteins. 
The Gene Ontology (GO) project is an effort to address the need for 
consistent descriptions of gene products in different databases (The Gene 
Ontology Consortium, 2000). Aiming to produce a dynamic, controlled 
vocabulary of genes that can be applied to all eukaryotes, the project 
includes many databases, including FlyBase (Drosophila), the 
Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD), the Mouse Genome Database 
(MGD), and several other major genome databases. GO consists of three 
structured ontologies that describe genes and gene products. GO terms are 
also cross-referenced with indexes from other databases. Similarly, the 
Human Genome Nomenclature (HUGO) specifies the standard, approved 
names and symbols for human genes (Wain et al., 2002). Most of this data 
can be searched on the Web as text files. There are numerous public 
databases specifying gene and gene products that are associated with 
multiple organisms as well as with specific model organisms. 
3.2 Knowledge Management 
Artificial intelligence techniques have been used in knowledge 
management in biomedicine as early as the 1970s, when the MYCIN 
program was developed to support consultation and decision making 
(Shortliffe, 1976). In MYCIN, the knowledge obtained from experts was 
represented as a set of IF-THEN production rules. Systems of this type 
would be later known as expert systems and become very popular in the 
1980s. Expert systems relied on expert knowledge that was engineered into 
it, which was a time-consuming and labor-intensive process.  
 
The performance of MYCIN was encouraging and it even outperformed 
human experts in some cases (Yu et al., 1979). Despite its early success, it 
was never used in actual clinical settings. Other medical diagnostic systems 
were also seldom used clinically. The reasons were two-fold. First, people 
were skeptical about computer technologies and system performances. 
Computers were not popular at that time, and many physicians did not 
believe that computers could perform better than humans. Second, 
computers were big, expensive machines in the 1970s. It was not feasible to 
support complex programs like MYCIN on an affordable computer to 
provide fast responses (Shortliffe, 1987). However, with the improved 
performance and lower cost of modern computers and medical knowledge-
based systems, we believe there is a great opportunity for adopting selected 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
15
knowledge management systems and technologies in the biomedical context, 
in particularly, not as a human replacement (i.e., expert systems) but as a 
biomedical decision making aide. 
3.2.1 Knowledge Management in Health Care 
It has been generally recognized that patient record management systems 
is highly desired in clinical settings (Heathfield and Louw, 1999; Jackson, 
2000; Abidi, 2001). The major reasons include physicians’ significant 
information needs (Dawes and Sampson, 2003) and clinical information 
overload. Hersh (1996) classified textual health information into two main 
categories: patient-specific clinical information and knowledge-based 
information, which includes research reported in academic journals, books, 
technical reports, and other sources. Both types of information are growing 
at an overwhelming pace. 
Although early clinical systems were mostly simple data storage systems, 
knowledge management capabilities have been incorporated in many of 
them since the 1980s. For example, the HELP system, developed at the 
Latter Day Saints Hospital in Utah, provides a monitoring program on top of 
a traditional medical record system. Decision logic was stored in the system 
to allow it to respond to new data entered (Kuperman et al., 1991). The 
SAPHIRE system performs automatic indexing of radiology reports by 
utilizing the UMLS Metathesaurus (Hersh et al., 2002). The clinical data 
repository at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center (Friedman et al., 1990) 
is another example of a database that is used for decision support (Hripcsak, 
1993) as well as well as physician review. The clinical data repository at the 
University of Virginia Health System is another example (Schubart and 
Einbinder, 2000). In their data warehouse system, clinical, administrative, 
and other patient data are available to users through a Web browser. Case-
based reasoning also has been proposed to allow physicians to access both 
operative knowledge and medical literature based on their medical 
information needs (Montani and Bellazzi, 2002). Janetzki et al. (2004) use a 
natural language processing approach to link electronic health records to 
online information resources. Other advanced text mining techniques also 
have been applied to knowledge management in health care and will be 
discussed in more detail later in the chapter. 
3.2.2 Knowledge Management for Biomedical Literature 
Besides clinical information, knowledge management has been applied to 
research articles and reports, mostly via selected information retrieval and 
digital library techniques. The National Library of Medicine (NLM) offers 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
16 
the PubMed service, which includes over 13 million citations for biomedical 
articles from MEDLINE and other relevant journals. Many search systems 
have been built to help users retrieve relevant biomedical research papers 
and reports in database systems and over the Web. Automatic indexing and 
retrieval techniques are often applied. For example, the Telemakus system 
offers researchers a framework for information retrieval, visualization, and 
knowledge discovery (Fuller et al., 2002; Fuller et al., 2004; Revere et al., 
2004). Using information extraction and visualization techniques, the system 
allows researchers to search the database of research articles for a 
statistically significant finding. The HelpfulMed system allows users to 
search for biomedical documents from several databases including 
MEDLINE, CancerLit, PDQ, and other evidence-based medicine databases 
(Chen et al., 2003). The HelpfulMed database includes high-quality health 
care-related Web pages collected from reputable sites using a neural-
network-based spreading activation algorithm (Chau and Chen, 2003). The 
system also provides a term-suggestion tool called Concept Mapper, which 
allows users to consult a system-generated thesaurus and the NLM’s UMLS 
to refine their search queries (Houston et al., 1999; Leroy and Chen, 2001).  
MARVIN is an example of medical information retrieval systems that 
applied selected machine learning techniques (Baujard et al., 1998). Built on 
a multi-agent architecture, the system filters relevant documents from a set 
of Web pages and follows links to retrieve new documents. While 
MARVIN’s filtering was based on simple document similarity metrics, other 
algorithms such as maximum-distance, artificial neural networks, and 
support vector machines have been applied to filtering medical Web pages 
(Palakal et al., 2001; Chau and Chen, 2004). A Bayesian model based on 
term strength analysis also has been used in biomedical document retrieval 
(Wilbur and Yang, 1996). Shatkay et al. (2000; 2002) use a probabilistic 
similarity-based search to retrieve biomedical documents that share similar 
themes. 
Other text mining techniques also have been used to facilitate the 
management and understanding of biomedical literature. For example, 
natural language processing and noun phrasing techniques have been applied 
to extract noun phrases from medical documents (Tolle and Chen, 2000). 
Noun phrases often convey more precise meanings than single terms and are 
often more useful in further analysis. Named-entity extraction also has been 
widely applied to automatically identify from text documents the names of 
entities of interest (Chau et al., 2002). While mostly tested on general 
entities such as people names, locations, organizations, dates, times, number 
expressions, and email addresses (Chinchor, 1998), named-entity extraction 
has been used to extract specific biomedical entities such as gene names, 
protein names, diseases, and symptoms with promising results (Fukuda et 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
17
al., 1998; Leroy et al., 2003). The extracted entities and relations are useful 
for information retrieval and knowledge management purposes. Both entity 
and relation extraction techniques will be discussed in more detail in our 
review of text mining later in the article. 
3.2.3 Accessing Heterogeneous Databases 
In the post-genome era, biomedical data are now being generated at a 
speed much faster than researchers can handle using traditional methods 
(National Research Council, 2000). The abundance of genomic and 
biomedical data has created great potential for research and applications in 
biomedicine, but the data are often distributed in diverse databases. As 
biological phenomena are often complex, researchers are faced with the 
challenge of information integration from heterogeneous data sources 
(Barrera et al., 2004). Many techniques have been proposed to allow 
researchers and the general public to share their data more effectively.  For 
example, Sujansky (2001) proposes a framework to integrate heterogeneous 
databases in biomedicine by providing a uniform conceptual schema and 
using selected query-translation techniques. The BLAST programs are widely 
used to search protein and DNA databases for sequence similarities 
(Altschul et al., 1997). The MedBlast system, making use of BLAST, allows 
researchers to search for articles related to a given sequence (Tu et al., 
2004). Sun (2004) uses automated algorithms to identify equivalent concepts 
available in different databases in order to support information retrieval. A 
software agent architecture also has been proposed to help users retrieve data 
from distributed databases (Karasavvas et al., 2004). 
3.2.4 Information Visualization and Multimedia Information Access 
Information (and knowledge) visualization for biomedical informatics is 
critical for understanding and sharing knowledge. With the rapid increase in 
computer speed and reduction in cost, graphical visualization has become 
increasingly popular in biomedical applications. Visualization techniques 
support display of more meaningful information and facilitate user 
understanding. Maps, trees, and networks are among some of the most 
popular information visualization representations. In the HelpfulMed system 
discussed earlier, documents retrieved from different databases are clustered 
using a self-organizing map algorithm (Kohonen, 1995) and a two-
dimensional map is generated to display the document clusters (Chen et al., 
2003). Bodenreider and McCray (2003) apply radial diagrams and 
correspondence analysis techniques to visualize semantic groups in the 
UMLS semantic network. Han and Byun (2004) use a three-dimensional 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
18 
display to visualize protein interaction networks. Virtual reality also has 
been applied in visualizing metabolic networks (Rojdestvenski, 2003). 
Three-dimensional displays, interactive visualization, multimedia 
displays, and other advanced visualization techniques have been applied 
successfully in many biomedical applications. The most prominent example 
is the NLM’s Visible Human Project (Ackerman, 1991), which produces 
three-dimensional representations of the normal male and female human 
bodies by obtaining transverse CT, MR, and cryosection images of 
representative male and female cadavers. The data is complete and 
anatomically detailed as the male was sectioned at one millimeter intervals 
and the female at one-third of a millimeter intervals. The data provides a 
good testbed for medical imaging and multimedia processing algorithms and 
has been applied to various diagnostic, educational, and research uses.  
Because text processing algorithms cannot be applied to multimedia data 
directly, image processing and indexing techniques are often needed for 
selected biomedical applications. These techniques enable users to visualize, 
retrieve, and manage multimedia data such as X-ray and CAT-scan images 
more effectively and efficiently. For example, Yoo and Chen (1994) 
developed a system to provide a natural navigation of patient data using 
three-dimensional images and surface rendering techniques. Antani et al. 
(2004) study different shape representation methods to measure the 
similarity between X-ray images in order to enable users to manage and 
organize these images. Their system allows users to retrieve vertebra shapes 
significant to the pathology indicated in the query. Due to the increasing 
popularity and maturity of medical imaging systems, we foresee a pressing 
need for advanced multimedia processing and knowledge management 
capabilities in biomedicine.  
3.3 Data Mining and Text Mining 
Data mining techniques have been widely used to find new patterns and 
knowledge from biomedical data. While Bayesian models were widely used 
in the early days, more advanced machine learning methods, such as 
artificial neural networks and support vector machines, have been applied in 
recent years. These techniques are used in different areas of biomedicine, 
including genomics, proteomics, and medical diagnosis, among others. In 
the following, we review some of the major applications of data mining and 
knowledge discovery techniques in the field. 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
19
3.3.1 Data Mining for Health care 
Because of their predictive power, data mining techniques have been 
widely used in diagnostic and health care applications. Data mining 
algorithms can learn from past examples in clinical data and model the 
oftentimes non-linear relationships between the independent and dependent 
variables. The resulting model represents formalized knowledge, which can 
often provide a good diagnostic opinion.  
Classification is the most widely used technique in medical data mining. 
Dreiseitl et al. (2001) compare five classification algorithms for the 
diagnosis of pigmented skin lesions. Their results show that logistic 
regression, artificial neural networks, and support vector machines 
performed comparably, while k-nearest neighbors and decision trees 
performed worse. This is more or less consistent with the performances of 
these classification algorithms in other applications (e.g., Yang and Liu, 
1999). Classification techniques are also applied to analyze various signals 
and their relationships with particular diseases or symptoms. For example, 
Acir and Guzelis (2004) apply support vector machines in automatic spike 
signal detection in ElectroEncephaloGrams (EEG), which can be used in 
diagnosing neurological disorders related to epilepsy. Kandaswamy et al. 
(2004) use artificial neural network to classify lung sound signals into six 
different categories (e.g., normal, wheeze, and rhonchus) to assist diagnosis. 
Data mining is also used to extract rules from health care data. For 
example, it has been used to extract diagnostic rules from breast cancer data 
(Kovalerchuk et al., 2001). The rules generated are similar to those created 
manually in expert systems and therefore can be easily validated by domain 
experts. Data mining has also been applied to clinical databases to identify 
new medical knowledge (Prather et al., 1997; Hripcsak et al., 2002). 
3.3.2 Data Mining for Molecular Biology 
New sequencing technologies and low computation cost have resulted in 
an overwhelming abundance of biological data that can be accessed easily 
by researchers. It is not feasible to analyze these data manually, and the gap 
between the amount of submitted sequence data and related annotations, 
structures, or expression profiles is rapidly growing.  
Data mining has begun to play an important role in addressing this 
problem. Clustering is probably the most widely used data mining technique 
for biological data. For example, clustering analysis is often applied to 
microarray gene expression data to identify groups of genes sharing similar 
expression profiles. Eisen et al. (1998) applied hierarchical clustering on the 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae gene expression data and achieved promising 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
20 
results. Various other clustering algorithms also have been tested on gene 
expression data, including k-means clustering (Herwig et al., 1999), 
backpropagation neural networks (Sawa and Ohno-Machado, 2003), self-
organizing maps (Tamayo et al., 1999; Herrero et al., 2001), fuzzy clustering 
(Belacel et al., 2004), expectation maximization (Qu and Xu, 2004), and 
support vector machines (Brown et al., 2000). Qin et al. (2003) used the idea 
of kernel (as in support vector machines) and combined it with hierarchical 
clustering. Gene expression analysis also has been applied in cancer class 
discovery and prediction (Golub et al., 1999; Hsu et al., 2003).  
Besides clustering, other predictive data mining techniques also have 
been applied to biomedical data. For example, neural network models have 
been widely used in predicting protein secondary structure (Qian and 
Sejnowski, 1988; Hirst and Sternberg, 1992). Increasingly, data mining 
algorithms also have been used for prediction in various biomedical 
applications including protein backbone angle prediction (Kuang et al., 
2004), protein domains (Nagarajan and Yona, 2004), biological effects 
(Krishnan and Westhead, 2004), and DNA binding (Ahmad et al., 2004). 
These predictive methods are often based on classification (supervised 
learning) algorithms such as neural networks or support vector machines.  
3.3.3 Text Mining for Literature and Clinical Records  
Text mining has been widely used to analyze biomedical literature. 
Because of the large amount of research articles in public databases and the 
diversity of biomedical research, it is not uncommon that researchers 
encounter some sequences or new genes that they have no knowledge about. 
It is quite likely that some important relationships between biological entities 
remain unnoticed because relevant data are scattered and no researcher has 
linked them together (Swanson, 1986; Smalheiser and Swanson, 1998). 
Given the large amount of published literature and that many researchers 
only specialize in a small sub-domain (e.g., several particular genes), text 
mining techniques could be invaluable in discovering new knowledge 
patterns or hypotheses from the large amount of existing and new literature 
in biomedicine (Yandell and Majoros, 2002).  
Text mining for biomedical literature often involves two major steps. 
First, it must identify biomedical entities and concepts of interests from free 
text using natural language processing techniques. For instance, if we want 
to study the relationship between a gene (e.g., p53) and a disease (e.g., brain 
tumors), the names of both entities need to be correctly identified from the 
relevant textual documents. Many text mining algorithms have been applied 
to this problem. For example, Fukuda et al. (1998) use simple morphological 
clues to recognize the names of proteins and other materials with high 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
21
accuracy. Support vector machines have been used in entity extraction by 
classifying words into the 24 entity classes in the GENIA corpus (Kazama et 
al., 2002). Tanabe and Wilbur (2002) use part-of-speech tagging and a 
Bayesian model to identify genes and proteins in text. Hatzivassiloglou et al. 
(2001) compared three machine learning techniques, namely Naïve Bayesian 
model, decision trees, and inductive rule learning, to resolve the 
classification of a biological entity (e.g., protein, gene, and RNA) after it 
was identified. Their results showed that the three learning models had 
comparable performance. Other studies have investigated the mapping 
between abbreviations and full names such that these names will not be 
considered by the system as different entities (Yu et al., 2002).  
After the entity names have been identified, further analyses are 
performed to see whether these entities have any relationships, such as gene 
regulations, metabolic pathways, or protein-protein interactions (Blaschke et 
al., 1999; Dickerson et al., 2003). Shallow parsing is often used to focus on 
specific parts of the text to analyze predefined words such as verbs and 
nouns (Leroy et al., 2003). Sekimizu et al. (1998) identified the set of most 
frequently used verbs in a collection of abstracts and developed a set of rules 
to identify the subjects and objects of the verbs. Pustejovsky et al. (2002) 
used relational parsing and finite state automata to identify inhibit 
relationships from biomedical text. The GENIES system, based on the 
MedLEE parser (Friedman and Hripcsak, 1998), also has been used to 
extract molecular pathways from texts (Friedman et al., 2001). The 
Telemakus system extracts information by analyzing the headings and 
surrounding texts of tables and figures (Fuller et al., 2002; Revere et al., 
2004). The Genescene system utilizes an ontology-based approach to 
relation extraction by integrating the Gene Ontology, the Human Genome 
Nomenclature, and the UMLS (Leroy and Chen, forthcoming). The system 
combines natural language processing and co-occurrence analysis techniques 
to identify terms and gene pathway relations from biomedical abstracts. The 
EDGAR system extracts drugs, genes, and relationships from text 
(Rindflesch et al., 2000). Wren et al. (2004) developed a system that uses a 
random network model to rank the relationships identified from text. 
Machine learning techniques also have been used to automate the process of 
annotation. For instance, Kretschmann et al. (2001) used a C4.5 algorithm to 
generate rules for keyword annotation in the SWISS-PROT database.  
Text mining also has been applied to patient records and other clinical 
documents to facilitate knowledge management. It adopts a process similar 
to that of text mining from literature. For example, the system reported by 
Harris et al. (2003) extracts terms from clinical texts. Using natural language 
processing techniques, the MedLEE system (Friedman and Hripcsak, 1998) 
has been applied to free-text patient records. It extracts useful entities in 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
22 
order to identify patients having tuberculosis or breast cancer based on their 
admission chest radiographs and mammogram reports, respectively (Knirsch 
et al., 1999; Jain and Friedman, 1997). Chapman et al. (2004) use a similar 
text mining approach for automated fever detection from clinical records to 
detect possible infectious disease outbreaks.  
3.4 Ethical and Legal Issues for Data Mining 
Medical records and biological data generated from human subjects 
contain private and confidential information. Patients’ and human subjects’ 
data must be handled with great caution in order to protect their privacy and 
confidentiality. Researchers do not automatically acquire the rights to use 
patient or subject data for data mining purposes unless they obtain the 
patients’ or subjects’ consent (Berman, 2002). In the US, the 1996 Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) set the standards for 
using and handling patient data in electronic format. The “Common Rule” 
also specifies how to protect human subjects in federally-funded research. In 
Europe, the EU Data Protection Directive specifies rules on handling and 
processing any information about individuals. Violations of these standards 
could result in legal responsibilities and penalties including fine and 
imprisonment. Data mining results that are relevant to patients and subjects 
need to be interpreted in the proper medical context and with the help of the 
biomedical professionals.  
In biomedical data mining, under most conditions patient data should not 
be individually identifiable, i.e., no record should provide sufficient data to 
identify the individual related to the record. These include anonymous data 
(data collected without patient-identification information), anonymized data 
(data collected with patient-identification information which is removed 
later), or de-identified data (data with patient-identification information 
encoded or encrypted) (Cios and Moore, 2002).  
4. SUMMARY 
In this chapter we provide a broad overview of selected knowledge 
management, data mining, and text mining techniques and their use in 
various emerging biomedical applications. However powerful they may be, 
these techniques need to be used with great care in the biomedical 
applications. One concern, as discussed earlier, is that medical data are often 
sensitive and involve private and confidential information. It is important 
that patients’ confidentiality and privacy are not compromised due to the 
introduction of advanced knowledge management, data mining, and text 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
23
mining technologies. Another caveat is that findings generated from selected 
machine learning techniques need to be interpreted carefully. Knowledge 
and patterns discovered by computers need to be experimentally or clinically 
validated in order to be considered rigorous, just like any knowledge 
generated by human. Errors and incorrect associations could propagate 
quickly through electronic media, especially when large databases and 
powerful computational techniques are involved.  
Nonetheless, these new knowledge management, data mining, and text 
mining techniques are changing the way new knowledge is discovered, 
organized, applied, and disseminated. With the increasing speed of 
computers, the connectivity of the Internet, the abundance of biomedical 
data, and the advances in medical informatics research, we believe we will 
continue to generate, manage, and harvest biomedical knowledge effectively 
and efficiently, allowing us to better understand the complex biological 
processes of life and assist in addressing the well-being of human kind. 
REFERENCES 
Abidi, S. S. R. (2001). “Knowledge Management in Healthcare: Towards ‘Knowledge-
driven’ Decision-support Services,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, 63, 5-
18. 
Acir, N. and Guzelis, C. (2004). “Automatic Spike Detection in EEG by a Two-stage 
Procedure Based on Support Vector Machines,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, 
34(7), 561-575. 
Ackerman, M. J. (1991). “The Visible Human Project,” Journal of Biocommunication, 18(2), 
14. 
Ahmad, S., Gromiha, M. M., and Sarai, A. (2004). “Analysis and Prediction of DNA-binding 
Proteins and Their Binding Residues Based on Composition, Sequence, and Structural 
Information,” Bioinformatics, 20(4), 477-486. 
Altschul, S. F., Madden, T. L., Schaffer, A. A., Zhang, J., Zhang, Z., Miller, W., and Lipman, 
D. J. (1997). “Gapped BLAST and PSI-BLAST: A New Generation of Protein Database 
Search Programs,” Nucleic Acids Research, 25(17), 3389-3402. 
Antani, S., Lee, D. J., Long, L. R., and Thoma, G. R. (2004). “Evaluation of Shape Similarity 
Measurement Methods for Spine X-ray Images,” Journal of Visual Communication and 
Image Representation, 15, 285-302. 
Baclawski, K., Cigna, J., Kokar, M. W., Mager, P., and Indurkhya, B. (2000). “Knowledge 
Representation and Indexing Using the Unified Medical Language System,” in 
Proceedings of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing, 493-504. 
Barrera, J., Cesar-Jr, R. M., Ferreira, J. E., and Gubitoso, M. D. (2004). “An Environment for 
Knowledge Discovery in Biology,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, 34, 427-447. 
Baujard, O., Baujard, V., Aurel, S., Boyer, C., and Appel, R. D. (1998). “Trends in Medical 
Information Retrieval on the Internet,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, 28, 589-601. 
Belacel, B., Cuperlovic-Culf, M., Laflamme, M., and Ouellette, R. (2004). “Fuzzy J-Means 
and VNS Methods for Clustering Genes from Microarray Data,” Bioinformatics, 20(11), 
1690-1701. 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
24 
Belew, R. K. (1989). “Adaptive Information Retrieval: Using a Connectionist representation 
to Retrieve and Learn about Documents,” in Proceedings of the 12th ACM-SIGIR 
Conference, Cambridge, MA, June 1989.  
Berman, J. J. (2002). “Confidentiality Issues for Medical Data Miners,” Artificial Intelligence 
in Medicine, 26(1-2), 25-36. 
Blaschke, C., Andrade, M. A., Ouzounis, C. and Valencia, A. (1999). “Automatic Extraction 
of Biological Information from Scientific Text: Protein-Protein Interactions,” in 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology, 
60-67. 
Bodenreider, O. and McCray, A. T. (2003). “Exploring Semantic Groups through Visual 
Approaches,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 414-432. 
Breiman, L. and Spector, P. (1992). “Submodel Selection and Evaluation in Regression: The 
X-random Case,” International Statistical Review, 60(3), 291-319. 
Brown, M. P. S., Grundy, W. N., Lin, D., Cristianini, N., Sugnet, C. W., Furey, T. S., Ares, 
M., and Haussler, D. (2000). “Knowledge-based Analysis of Microarray Gene Expression 
Data by Using Support Vector Machines,” in Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 97, 262-267. 
Campbell, K. E., Oliver, D. E., and Shortliffe, E. H. (1998). “The Unified Medical Language 
System: Toward a Collaborative Approach for Solving Terminologic Problems,” Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, 5(1), 12-16. 
Carbonell, J. G. Michalski, R. S., Mitchell, T. M. (1983). “An Overview of Machine 
Learning,” in R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, and T. M. Mitchell (Eds.), Machine 
Learning, An Artificial Intelligence Approach, Palo Alto, CA: Tioga. 
Cavideds, J. E. and Cimino, J. J. (2004). “Towards the Development of a Conceptual Distance 
Metric for the UMLS,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 37, 77-85. 
Chapman, W. W., Dowling, J. N., and Wagner, M. M. (2004). “Fever Detection from Free-
text Clinical Records for Biosurveillance,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 37, 120-
127. 
Chau, M. and Chen, H. (2003). “Comparison of Three Vertical Search Spiders,” IEEE 
Computer, 36(5), 56-62. 
Chau, M. and Chen, H. (2004). “Using Content-based and Link-based Analysis in Building 
Vertical Search Engines,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Asian Digital 
Libraries, Shanghai, China, December 13-17, 2004. 
Chau, M., Xu, J. J., and Chen, H. (2002). “Extracting Meaningful Entities from Police 
Narrative Reports,” in Proceedings of the National Conference for Digital Government 
Research, Los Angeles, California, USA, May 19-22, 2002, 271-275. 
Chen, H. (2001). Knowledge Management Systems: A Text Mining Perspective, Tucson, AZ: 
The University of Arizona.  
Chen, H. and Chau, M. (2004). “Web Mining: Machine Learning for Web Applications,” 
Annual Review of Information Science and Technology, 38, 289-329. 
Chen, H. and Kim, J. (1995). “GANNET: A Machine Learning Approach to Document 
Retrieval,” Journal of Management Information Systems, 11(3), 9-43. 
Chen, H., Lally, A. M., Zhu, B., and Chau, M. (2003). “HelpfulMed: Intelligent Searching for 
Medical Information over the Internet,” Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology, 54(7), 683-694, 2003. 
Chen, H. and Ng, T. (1995). “An Algorithmic Approach to Concept Exploration in a Large 
Knowledge Network (Automatic Thesaurus Consultation): Symbolic Branch and Bound 
Search vs. Connectionist Hopfield Net Activation,” Journal of the American Society for 
Information Science, 46(5), pp. 348-369. 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
25
Chinchor, N. A. (1998). “Overview of MUC-7/MET-2,” in Proceedings of the Seventh 
Message Understanding Conference (MUC-7), Virginia, USA, April 29 - May 1, 1998. 
Cimino, J. J., Min, H., and Perl, Y. (2003) “Consistency across the Hierarchies of the UMLS 
Semantic Network and Metathesaurus,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 450-461. 
Cios, K. J. and Moore, G. W. (2002). “Uniqueness of Medical Data Mining,” Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine, 26(1-2), 25-36. 
Cohen, P. R. and Feigenbaum, E. A. (1982). The Handbook of Artificial Intelligence: Volume 
III, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Dawes, M. and Sampson, U. (2003). “Knowledge Management in Clinical Practice: A 
Systematic Review of Information Seeking Behavior in Physicians,” International Journal 
of Medical Informatics, 71, 9-15. 
Dickerson, J. A., Berleant, D., Cox, Z., Fulmer, A. W., and Wurtele, E. (2003). “Creating and 
Modeling Metabolic and Regulatory Networks Using Text Mining and Fuzzy Expert 
Systems,” in J. T. L. Wang, C. H. Wu, and P. P. Wang (Eds.), Computational Biology and 
Genome Informatics, World Scientific. 
Dreiseitl, S., Ohno-Machado, L., Kittler, H., Vinterbo, S., Billhardt, H., Binder, M. (2001). 
“A Comparison of Machine Learning Methods for the Diagnosis of Pigmented Skin 
Lesions,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 34, 28-36. 
Duda, R. O. and Hart, P. E. (1973). Pattern Classification and Scene Analysis, New York: 
John Wiley and Sons. 
Dunham, M. H. (2002). Data Mining: Introductory and Advanced Topics, New Jersey, USA: 
Prentice Hall. 
Efron, B. (1983). “Estimating the Error Rate of a Prediction Rule: Improvement on Cross-
Validation,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, 78(382), 316-330. 
Efron, B. and Tibshirani, R. (1993). An Introduction to the Bootstrap, Chapman and Hall. 
Eisen, M., Spellman, P., Brown, P., and Botstein, D. (1998). “Cluster Analysis and Display of 
Genome-wide Expression Patterns,” in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
95, 14863-14868. 
Fayyad, U. M., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G., and Smyth, P. (1996). “From Data Mining to 
Knowledge Discovery in Databases,” AI Magazine, 17(3), 37-54. 
Fisher, D. H. (1987). “Knowledge Acquisition via Incremental Conceptual Clustering,” 
Machine Learning, 2, 139-172. 
Fogel, D. B. (1994). “An Introduction to Simulated Evolutionary Optimization,” IEEE 
Transactions on Neural Networks, 5, 3-14. 
Friedman, C. Hripcsak, G., Johnson, S. B., Cimino, J. J., Clayton, P. D. (1990). “A 
Generalized Relational Schema for an Integrated Clinical Patient Database,” in 
Proceedings of the 14th Annual Symposium on Computer Applications in Medical Care, 
335-339. 
Friedman, C. and Hripcsak, G. (1998). “Evaluating Natural Language Processors in the 
Clinical Domain,” Methods of Information in Medicine, 37, 334-344. 
Friedman, C., Kra, P., Yu, H., Krauthammer, M., and Rzhetsky, A. (2001). “GENIES: A 
Natural-language Processing System for the Extraction of Molecular Pathways from 
Journal Articles,” Bioinformatics, 17(Supp. 1), S74-S82. 
Fukuda K., Tamura A., Tsunoda T., and Takagi T. (1998). “Toward Information Extraction: 
Identifying Protein Names from Biological Papers,” in Proceedings of the Pacific 
Symposium on Biocomputing, 707-718. 
Fuller, S., Revere, D., Soderland, S., Bugni, P., Kadiyska, Y., Reber, L., Fuller, H., and 
Martin, G. (2002). “Modeling a Concept-Based Information System to Promote Scientific 
Discovery: The Telemakus System,” in Proceedings of the AMIA 2002 Annual 
Symposium, 1023. 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
26 
Fuller, S., Revere, D., Bugni, P., Fuller, H., and Martin, G. (2004). “A Knowledgebase 
System to Enhance Scientific Discovery: Telemakus,” Biomedical Digital Libraries, 1(2-
15). 
Goldberg, D. E. (1989). Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning, 
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Golub T. R., Slonim D. K., Tamayo P., Huard C., Gaasenbeek M., Mesirov J. P., Coller H., 
Loh M. L., Downing J. R., Caligiuri M. A., Bloomfield C. D., Lander E. S. (1999). 
“Molecular Classification of Cancer: Class Discovery and Class Prediction by Gene 
Expression Monitoring,” Science, 286(5439), 531-537. 
Gruninger, M. and Lee, J. (2002). “Ontology: Applications and Design,” Communications of 
the ACM, 45(2), 39-41 
Han, K., and Byun, Y. (2004). “Three-dimensional Visualization of Protein Interaction 
Networks,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, 34, 127-139. 
Harris, M. R., Savova, G. K., Johnson, T. M., and Chute, C. G. (2003). “A Term Extraction 
Tool for Expanding Content in the Domain of Functioning, Disability, and Health: Proof 
of Concept,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 250-259. 
Hatzivassiloglou, V., Duboue, P. A., and Rzhetsky, A. (2001). “Disambiguating Proteins, 
Genes, and RNA in Text: A Machine Learning Approach,” Bioinformatics, 17(Supp. 1), 
S96-S106.  
Hayes-Roth, F. and Jacobstein, N. (1994). “The State of Knowledge-based Systems,” 
Communications of the ACM, 37, 27-39. 
Hearst, M. A. (1999). “Untangling Text Data Mining,” in Proceedings of ACL'99: the 37th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Maryland, June 20-26. 
Heathfield, H. and Louw, G. (1999). “New Challenges for Clinical Informatics: Knowledge 
Management Tools,” Health Informatics Journal, 5(2), 67-73. 
Herrero, J., Valencia, A., and Dopazo, J. (2001). “A Hierarchical Unsupervised Growing 
Neural Network for Clustering Gene Expression Patterns,” Bioinformatics, 17, 126-136. 
Hersh, W. (1996). Information Retrieval: A Health Care Perspective. Berlin, Germany: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Hersh, W., Mailhot, M., Arnott-Smith, C., and Lowe, H. (2002). “Selective Automated 
Indexing of Findings and Diagnoses in Radiology Reports,” Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, 34, 262-273. 
Herwig, R., Poustka, A., Müller, C., Bull, C., Lehrach, H., and O'Brien, J. (1999). “Large-
scale Clustering of cDNA Fingerprinting Data,” Genome Research, 9, 1093-1105. 
Hirst, J. D. and Sternberg, M. J. E. (1992). “Prediction of Structural and Functional Features 
of Protein and Nucleic Acid Sequences by Artificial Neural Networks,” Biochemistry, 31, 
7211-7218. 
Holland, J. H. (1975). Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Systems, Ann Arbor, MI: 
University of Michigan Press. 
Hopfield, J. J. (1982). “Neural Network and Physical Systems with Collective Computational 
Abilities,” in Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, USA, 1982, 79(4), pp. 
2554-2558. 
Houston, A. L., Chen, H., Hubbard, S. M., Schatz, B. R., Ng, T. D., Sewell, R. R. and Tolle, 
K. M. (1999). “Medical Data Mining on the Internet: Research on a Cancer Information 
System,” Artificial Intelligence Review, 13, 437-466. 
Hsu, A. L., Tang, S., and Halgamuge, S. K. (2003). “An Unsupervised Hierarchical Dynamic 
Self-organizing Approach to Cancer Class Discovery and Market Gene Identification in 
Microarray Data,” Bioinformatics, 19(16), 2131-2140. 
Hripcsak, G. (1993). “Monitoring the Monitor: Automated Statistical Tracking of a Clinical 
Event Monitor,” Computers and  Biomedical Research, 26(5), 449-466. 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
27
Hripcsak, G., Austin, J. H., Alderson, P. O., and Friedman, C. (2002). “Use of Natural 
Language Processing to Translate Clinical Information from a Database of 889,921 Chest 
Radiographic Reports,” Radiology, 224(1), 157-163. 
Humphreys, B. L., Lindberg, D. A. B., and McCray, A. (1993). “The Unified Medical 
Language System,” Methods of Information in Medicine, 32(4), 281. 
Humphreys, B. L., Lindberg, D. A. B., Schoolman, H. M., and Barnett, G. O. (1998). “The 
Unified Medical Language System: An Informatics Research Collaboration,” Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, 5(1), 1-11. 
Jackson, J. R. (2000). “The Urgent Call for Knowledge Management in Medicine,” The 
Physician Executive, 26(1), 28-31. 
Jain, A. K., Dubes, R. C. and Chen, C. (1987). “Bootstrap Techniques for Error Estimation,” 
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Learning, 9(5), 628-633. 
Knirsch, C.A., Jain, N. L., Pablos-Mendez, A., Friedman, C., and Hripcsak, G. (1996). 
“Respiratory Isolation of Tuberculosis Patients Using Clinical Guidelines and an 
Automated Clinical Decision Support System,” Infection Control and Hospital 
Epidemiology, 19(2), 94-100. 
Jain, N. L. and Friedman, C. (1997). “Identification of Findings Suspicious for Breast Cancer 
Based on Natural Language Processing of Mammogram Reports.” in Proceedings of the 
Fall 1997 AMIA Conference, Philadelphia, USA, 829-833. 
Janetzki, V., Allen, M., and Cimino, J. J. (2004). “Using Natural Language Processing to 
Link from Medical Text to On-line Information Resources,” Proceedings of Medinfo, 
2004, 1665. 
Joachims, T. (1998). “Text Categorization with Support Vector Machines: Learning with 
Many Relevant Features,” in Proceedings of the European Conference on Machine 
Learning, Berlin, 1998, pp. 137-142. 
Kandaswamy, A., Kumar, C. S., Ramanathan, R. P. Jayaraman, R., and Malmurugan, N. 
(2004). “Neural Classification of Lung Sounds Using Wavelet Coefficients,” Computers 
in Biology and Medicine, 34, 523-537. 
Karasavvas, K. A., Baldock, R., and Burger, A. (2004). “Bioinformatics Integration and 
Agent Technology,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 37, 205-219. 
Kazama, J., Maino, T., Ohta, Y., and Tsujii, J. (2002). “Tuning Support Vector Machines for 
Biomedical Named Entity Recognition,” in Proceedings of the Workshop on Natural 
Language Processing in the Biomedical Domain, Philadelphia, USA, July 2002, 1-8. 
Kohavi, R. (1995). “A Study of Cross-validation and Bootstrap for Accuracy Estimation and 
Model Selection,” in Proceedings of the 14th International Joint Conference on Artificial 
Intelligence, San Francisco, CA, 1995, Morgan Kaufmann, pp. 1137-1143. 
Kohonen, T. (1995). Self-organizing Maps, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Kononenko, I. (1993). “Inductive and Bayesian Learning in Medical Diagnosis,” Applied 
Artificial Intelligence, 7, 317-337, 1993. 
Kovalerchuk, B., Vityaev, E., and Ruiz, J. F. (2001). “Consistent and Complete Data and 
‘Expert’ Mining in Medicine,” in Cios, K. J. (Ed.), Medical Data Mining and Knowledge 
Discovery, New York, USA: Physica-Verlag. 
Kretschmann, E., Fleischmann, W., and Apweiler, R. (2001). “Automatic Rule Generation for 
Protein Annotation with the C4.5 Data Mining Algorithm Applied on SWISS-PROT,” 
Bioinformatics, 17(10), 920-926. 
Krishnan, V. G. and Westhead, D. R. (2003). “A Comparative Study of Machine-Learning 
Methods to Predict the Effects of Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms on Protein Function,” 
Bioinformatics, 19(17), 2199-2209. 
Kuperman, G. J., Gardner, R.M., Pryor, T.A. (1991). The HELP System, New York: Springer-
Verlag. 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
28 
Kwok, K. L. (1989). “A Neural Network for Probabilistic Information Retrieval,” in 
Proceedings of the 12th ACM-SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in 
Information Retrieval, Cambridge, Massachusetts, June 1989, pp.21-30. 
Langley, P. and Simon, H. (1995). “Applications of Machine Learning and Rule Induction,” 
Communications of the ACM, 38(11), 55-64. 
Leroy, G. and Chen, H. (2001). “Meeting Medical Terminology Needs – The Ontology-
Enhanced Medical Concept Mapper,” IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine, 5(4), 261-270. 
Leroy, G. and Chen, H. (forthcoming). “Genescene: An Ontology-enhanced Integration of 
Linguistic and Co-occurrence-based Relations in Biomedical Texts” Journal of the 
American Society for Information Science and Technology, forthcoming. 
Leroy, G., Chen, H., and Martinez, J. D. (2003). “A Shallow Parser Based on Closed-class 
Words to Capture Relations in Biomedical Text,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 
145-158. 
Lippmann, R. P. (1987). An Introduction to Computing with Neural Networks, IEEE 
Acoustics Speech and Signal Processing Magazine, 4, 4-22. 
Maniezzo V. (1994). “Genetic Evolution of the Topology and Weight Distribution of Neural 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks, 5(1), 39-53. 
Mendes, R. R. F., Voznika, F. B., Freitas, A. A. and Nievola, J. C. (2001). “Discovering 
Fuzzy Classification Rules with Genetic Programming and Co-evolution,” Principles of 
Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, 2168, pp. 
314-325. Springer-Verlag, 2001. 
Michalewicz, Z. (1992). Genetic Algorithms + Data Structures =Evolution Programs. Berlin: 
Springer-Verlag. 
Mitchell, T. (1997). Machine Learning, McGraw Hill, 1997. 
Montani, S. and Bellazzi, R. (2002). “Supporting Decisions in Medical Applications: The 
Knowledge Management Perspective,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, 68, 
79-90. 
Nagarajan, N. and Yona, G. (2004). “Automatic Prediction of Protein Domains from 
Sequence Information Using a Hybrid Learning System,” Bioinformatics, 20(9), 1335-
1360. 
National Research Council (2000). Bioinformatics: Converting Data to Knowledge: 
Workshop Summary, Washington, D.C.: National Academies Press. 
Paass, G. (1990), “Probabilistic Reasoning and Probabilistic Neural Networks,” in 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Information Processing and 
Management of Uncertainty, pp.6-8. 
Palakal, M., Mukhopadhyay, S., Mostafa, J., Raje, R., N’Cho, M., and Mishra, S. (2001). “An 
Intelligent Biological Information Management System,” Bioinformatics, 18(10), 1283-
1288. 
Prather, J. C., Lobach, D. F., Goodwin, L. K., Hales, J. W., Hage, M. L., and Hammond, W. 
E. (1997). “Medical Data Mining: Knowledge Discovery in a Clinical Data Warehouse,” 
in Proceedings of the AMIA Annual Symposium Fall 1997, 101-105. 
Perl, Y. and Geller, J. (2003). “Research on Structural Issues of the UMLS – Past, Present, 
and Future,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 409-413. 
Pustejovsky J., Castano J., Zhang J., Kotecki M., and Cochran B. (2002). “Robust Relational 
Parsing over Biomedical Literature: Extracting Inhibit Relations,” Pacific Symposium on 
Biocomputing, 362-373.  
Qian, N. and Sejnowski, T. J. (1988). “Predicting the Secondary Structure of Globular 
Proteins Using Neural Network Models,” Journal of Molecular Biology, 202, 865-884. 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
29
Qin, J., Lewis, D. P., and Noble, W. S. (2003). “Kernel Hierarchical Gene Clustering from 
Microarray Expression Data,” Bioinformatics, 19(16), 2097-2104. 
Qu Y. and Xu., S. (2004). “Supervised Cluster Analysis for Microarray Data Based on 
Multivariate Gaussian Mixture,” Bioinformatics, 20(12), 1905-1913. 
Quinlan, J. R. (1983). “Learning Efficient Classification Procedures and Their Application to 
Chess End Games,” in R. S. Michalski, J. G. Carbonell, and T. M. Mitchell (Eds.), 
Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach, Palo Alto, CA: Tioga. 
Quinlan, J. R. (1993). C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning, Los Altos, CA: Morgan 
Kaufmann.  
Revere, D., Fuller, S. S, Bugni, P. F., and Martin, G. M. (2004). “An Information Extraction 
and Representation System for Rapid Review of the Biomedical Literature,” in 
Proceedings of Medinfo, 2004. 
Rindflesch, T. C., Tanabe, L., and Weinstein, J. N., and Hunter, L. (2000). “EDGAR: 
Extraction of Drugs, Genes and Relations from the Biomedical Literature,” in Proceedings 
of the Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing , 514-525. 
Rindflesch, T. C. and Fiszman, M. (2003) “The Interaction of Domain Knowledge and 
Linguistic Structure in Natural Language Processing: Interpreting Hypernymic 
Propositions in Biomedical Text,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 462-477. 
Rojdestvenski, I. (2003). “VRML Metabolic Network Visualizer,” Computers in Biology and 
Medicine, 33, 169-182. 
Rosse, C. and Mejino, J. L. V. (2003). “A Reference Ontology for Biomedical Informatics: 
The Foundational Model of Anatomy,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 478-500. 
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and McClelland, J. L. (1986a). “A General Framework for 
Parallel Distributed Processing,” in D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, and the PDP 
Research Group (Eds.), Parallel Distributed Processing, pp. 45-76, Cambridge, MA: The 
MIT Press. 
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams, R. J. (1986b). “Learning Internal 
Representations by Error Propagation,” in D. E. Rumelhart, J. L. McClelland, and the PDP 
Research Group (Eds.), Parallel Distributed Processing, pp. 318-362, Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press. 
Samuelson, C. and Rayner, M. (1991). “Quantitative Evaluation of Explanation-based 
Learning as an Optimization Tool for a Large-scale Natural Language System,” in 
Proceedings of the 12th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Sydney, 
Australia, 1991, pp. 609-615. 
Sawa, T. and Ohno-Machado, L. (2003). “A Neural Network-based Similarity Index for 
Clustering DNA Microarray Data,” Computers in Biology and Medicine, 33, 1-15. 
Schubart, J. R. and Einbinder, J. S. (2000). “Evaluation of a Data Warehouse in an Academic 
Health Sciences Center,” International Journal of Medical Informatics, 60, 319-333. 
Sekimisu, T., Park, H. S., and Tsujii, J. (1998). “Identifying the Interaction between Genes 
and Gene Products Based on Frequently Seen Verbs in MEDLINE Abstracts,” Genome 
Informatics, 9, 62-71. 
Shatkay, H., Edwards, S., and Boguski, M. (2002). “Information Retrieval Meets Gene 
Analysis,” IEEE Intelligent Systems, 17(2), 45-53. 
Shatkay, H., Edwards, S., Wilbur, W. J., and Boguski, M. (2000). “Genes, Themes, and 
Microarrays: Using Information Retrieval for Large-scale Gene Analysis,” in Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Intelligent Systems for Molecular Biology, 317-328. 
Shortliffe, E. (1976). Computer-based Medical Consultations: MYCIN, New York: 
Elsevier/North Holland. 
Shortliffe, E. (1987). “Computer Programs to Support Clinical Decision Making,” Journal of 
the American Medical Association, 258, 61-66. 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
30 
Simon, H. A. (1983). “Why Should Machines Learn?” In R. S. Michalski, J. Carbonell, and T. 
M. Mitchell (Eds.), Machine Learning: An Artificial Intelligence Approach. Palo Alto, 
CA: Tioga Press. 
Smalheiser, N. R. and Swanson, D. R. (1998). “Using ARROWSMITH: A Computer-assisted 
Approach to Formulating and Assessing Scientific Hypotheses,” Computer Methods and 
Programs in Biomedicine, 57, 149-153. 
Stone, M. (1974). “Cross-validation Choices and Assessment of Statistical Predictions,” 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 36, 111-147. 
Sujansky, W. (2001). “Heterogeneous Database Integration in Biomedicine,” Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 34, 285-298. 
Sun, Y. (2004). “Methods for Automated Concept Mapping between Medical Databases,” 
Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 37, 162-178. 
Swanson, D. R. (1986). “Fish Oil, Raynaud’s Syndrome, and Undiscovered Public 
Knowledge,” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 30(1), 7-18. 
Tamayo, P., Slonim, D., Mesirov, J., Zhu, Q., Kitareewan, S., Dmitrovsky, E., Lander, E. S., 
and Golub T. R. (1999). “Interpreting Patterns of Gene Expression with Self-organizing 
Maps: Methods and Application to Hematopoietic Differentiation,” in Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 96, 2907-2912. 
Tanabe, L. and Wilbur, W. J. (2002). “Tagging Gene and Protein Names in Biomedical Text,” 
Bioinformatics, 18(8), 1124-1132. 
The Gene Ontology Consortium (2000). “Gene Ontology: Tool for the Unification of 
Biology,” Nature Genetics, 25(1), 25-29. 
Tolle, K. and Chen, H. (2000) “Comparing Noun Phrasing Techniques for Use with Medical 
Digital Library Tools,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(4), 
352-370. 
Tu, Q., Tang, H., and Ding, D. (2004). “MedBlast: Searching Articles Related to a Biological 
Sequence,” Bioinformatics, 20(1), 75-77. 
Vapnik, V. (1998). Statistical Learning Theory, Wiley, Chichester, GB, 1998. 
Wain, H. M., Lush, M., Ducluzeau, F., Povey, S. (2002). “Genew: The Human Gene 
Nomenclature Database,” Nucleic Acids Research, 30(1), 169-171. 
Wilbur, W. J. and Yang, Y. (1996). “An Analysis of Statistical Term Strength and Its Use in 
the Indexing and Retrieval of Molecular Biology Texts,” Computers in Biology and 
Medicine, 26(3), 209-222. 
Yandell, M. D. and Majoros, W. H. (2002). “Genomics and Natural Language Processing,” 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 3(8), 601-610. 
Yang, Y. and Liu, X. (1999). “A Re-examination of Text Categorization Methods, in 
Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International ACM Conference on Research and 
Development in Information Retrieval (SIGIR’99), 1999, pp. 42-49. 
Yoo, T. S., and Chen, D. T. (1994). “Interactive 3D Medical Visualization: A Parallel 
Approach to Surface Rendering 3D Medical Data,” in Proceedings of the Symposium for 
Computer Assisted Radiology, North Carolina, USA, June 12-15, 1994, 100-105. 
Yu, H., Hatzivassiloglou, V., Rzhetsky, A., and Wilbur, W. J. (2002). “Automatically 
Identifying Gene/Protein Terms in MEDLINE Abstracts,” Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, 35, 322-330. 
Yu, V. L., Fagan, L. M., Wraith, S. M., Clancey, W. J., Scott, A. C., Hannigan, J. Blum, R. 
L., Buchanan, B. G., and Cohen, S. N. (1979). “Antimicrobial Selection by a Computer: A 
Blinded Evaluation by Infectious Disease Experts,” Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 242(12), 1279-1282. 
Zadeh, L. A. (1965). “Fuzzy sets,” Information and Control, 8, 338-353. 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
31
Zhang, L., Perl, Y., Halper, M., and Geller, J. (2003). “Designing Metaschemas for the 
UMLS Enriched Semantic Network,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, 36, 433-449. 
SUGGESTED READINGS 
Shortliffe, E. H. and Perreault, L. E. (2002). Medical Informatics: Computer Applications in 
Health Care and Biomedicine, Springer.  
 This excellent introductory book provides a comprehensive overview of the applications of 
computer and information technologies in health care and biomedicine.  
Baldi, P. and Brunak, S. (2000). Bioinformatics: The Machine Learning Approach, The MIT 
Press.  
 The book describes bioinformatics from a technical perspective and explains in detail the 
application of data mining algorithms for biomedical sequence and structure analysis. 
Mitchell, T. (1997). Machine Learning, McGraw Hill, 1997.  
 This introductory book includes useful reviews of various machine learning techniques and 
their applications. 
Chen, H., Lally, A. M., Zhu, B., and Chau, M. (2003). “HelpfulMed: Intelligent Searching for 
Medical Information over the Internet,” Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology, 54(7), 683-694, 2003.  
 This article provides an overview of medical information retrieval techniques on the 
Internet, including Web crawling, co-occurrence analysis, and document visualization. 
Eisen, M., Spellman, P., Brown, P., and Botstein, D. (1998). “Cluster Analysis and Display of 
Genome-wide Expression Patterns,” in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
95, 14863-14868.  
 This article presents a study on performing clustering techniques on gene expression data. 
Swanson, D. R. (1986). “Fish Oil, Raynaud’s Syndrome, and Undiscovered Public 
Knowledge,” Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 30(1), 7-18.  
 This article describes the interesting story of how public knowledge could remain 
“undiscovered” as there were no researchers linking the literature in two separate fields, 
and how the computer was used to discover such knowledge. 
Yandell, M. D. and Majoros, W. H. (2002). “Genomics and Natural Language Processing,” 
Nature Reviews Genetics, 3(8), 601-610.  
 This article reviews research studies that apply natural language processing and text 
mining techniques in genomics. 
ONLINE RESOURCES 
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI)  http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ 
 NCBI, a division of the National Library of Medicine, provides access to many excellent 
molecular biology resources, including GenBank (an annotated collection of all publicly 
available DNA sequences), Entrez (a cross-database search engine), and BLAST (a 
sequence similarity search engine). 
Unified Medical Language Systems (UMLS) 
 http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/ 
 MEDICAL INFORMATICS
 
32 
 Developed by the Lister Hill Center of the NLM, UMLS provides a large-scale and 
widely-used medical ontology for information retrieval and text mining applications in 
biomedicine. The three major components include the Metathesaurus, the Semantic 
Network, and the Specialist Lexicon. 
ExPASy Proteomics Server 
http://us.expasy.org/ 
 The ExPASy (Expert Protein Analysis System) proteomics server is hosted by the Swiss 
Institute of Bioinformatics (SIB). It focuses on the analysis of protein sequences and 
structures. It provides access to Swiss-PROP, TrEMBL, and other proteomics and 
sequence analysis tools and resources.   
Protein Data Bank 
http://www.rcsb.org/pdb/ 
The Protein Data Bank is the single worldwide repository for 3-D biological 
macromolecular structure data. 
European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI)  
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ 
EBI is the European equivalent of NCBI and is part of the European Molecular Biology 
Laboratory (EMBL). It manages several biological databases including: nucleic acid, 
protein sequences, and macromolecular structures.  
GenomeNet 
http://www.genome.jp/ 
Developed in Japan, GenomeNet includes several databases for genome research and 
molecular and cellular biology. Its services include the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes (KEGG) and the DBGET Integrated Database Retrieval System, among others. 
GenomeWeb 
http://www.rfcgr.mrc.ac.uk/GenomeWeb/ 
This site provides a comprehensive directory of genome-related Web sites and information. 
Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGM) 
http://www.yeastgenome.org 
This database contains information about the molecular biology and genetics of the yeast 
Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Commonly known as the baker's or budding yeast, its genome 
has been widely studied in bioinformatics. 
The Visible Human Project 
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/visible/ 
This site includes a detailed description of NLM’s Visible Human Project, instructions on 
how to obtain the data, and some other related resources and conference information. 
The UCI  Machine Learning Repository  
http://www.ics.uci.edu/~mlearn/MLRepository.html 
This repository at the University of California, Irvine, contains data in many different 
domains (including biomedicine) that have been widely used to test and compare machine 
learning techniques. 
WEKA 
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka/ 
Developed at the University of Waikato in New Zealand, WEKA is an open-source 
machine learning software written in Java, containing a wide range of useful algorithms. 
Knowledge Management, Data Mining and Text Mining 
 
33
QUESTIONS FOR DISCUSSION 
1. What are the similarities and differences between bioinformatics and 
medical informatics? How can research in the two areas be beneficial to 
each other? 
 
2. What is an intelligent system? Can an intelligent system be more 
intelligent than humans? What are the important characteristics of an 
intelligent system in biomedicine? 
 
3. Discuss the characteristics of major machine learning paradigms and 
their applicability in biomedicine.  
 
4. Explain what knowledge management is and why it is useful for medical 
informatics. What are some of the good examples of biomedical 
knowledge management systems? How can a knowledge management 
system be created and used in industry? 
 
5. Please compare the knowledge discovery process by computers with that 
in humans. Do you think that data mining and text mining techniques 
have begun to change the way that research is done in biomedicine?  
 
6. What are the social, ethical, and legal concerns for future biomedical 
knowledge management, data mining, and text mining applications? 
 

