 
 
 
 
 
162 | P a g e  
 
BIOLOGICAL COMPUTING: A NEW PARADIGM IN 
COMPUTING 
 
Mini Singh Ahuja
1 
, Samriti Sharma
2
 
1
Assistant Professor, 
2 
Student 
Department of Computer Science, Regional Campus Gurdaspur, Punjab, (India) 
 
ABSTRACT 
Advancement in computer science has played a vital role in addressing and solving problems in molecular biology, 
including the decoding of the human body. In this paper we are reviewing new computational techniques which are 
used to process, analyze, visualize and solve many complex biological problems which seems to be unapproachable 
until a few years ago. 
  
 I. INTRODUCTION 
Biological computing is about computers composed of different biological parts which are used to store and 
manipulate data to process in the human body. Biological computing is one of the new fields in research which deals 
with both computer science and Biology. The biological computers are mostly used for medical applications. The 
biological computer is made up of RNA (Ribonucleic Acid), DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid), and proteins. The 
biological computer can  also perform simple mathematical calculations. A new computing paradigm enables the 
researcher to build an array or a system of biosensors that has the ability to detect or target specific types of cells 
that could be found in the patient's body. These computing can also be used to carry out or perform target-specific 
medicinal operations that can provide medical procedures or remedies according to the doctor's instructions. 
 
Computational biology depends upon functional genomics, analysis of protein structures, and biomolecular 
computation.  These days researchers are trying to solve many complex biological problems which were 
unapproachable earlier. With this they are taking a closer look at the possibility of developing alternative models of 
computation. Biological computing nowadays is used for developing geometric techniques and paradigms for 
representing, storing, searching, analyzing, and visualizing different biological structures. In essence, biological 
computing is about supporting the potential of the DNA for the benefit of human being just by manipulating the 
DNA.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
163 | P a g e  
 
II. DNA 
 DNA, or deoxyribonucleic acid, is the hereditary material in humans and other organisms. Nearly every cell in a 
person’s body has the same DNA. The structure of DNA was first identified by Watson and Crick (1953). The 
earliest discovery of DNA was by Swiss physician Fritz Miescher in cell nuclei as early as 1868. The information in 
DNA is stored as a code made up of four chemical bases: adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), and thymine (T). 
Human DNA consists of about 3 billion bases, and more than 99 percent of those bases are the same in all people. 
The order, or sequence, of these bases determines the information available for building and maintaining an 
organism, similar to the way in which letters of the alphabet appear in a certain order to form words and sentences. 
These DNA bases pair with each other. 
 
A is always opposite T; 
T is always opposite A; 
G is always opposite C; 
C is always opposite G. 
 
Fig 1: The Structure of the DNA 
DNA does not usually exist as a single molecule, but instead as a tightly-associated pair of molecules. These two 
long strands entwine like vines, in the shape of a double helix.  DNA has an important property that it can replicate, 
or make copies of itself. 
The nucleotide contains both the segment of the backbone of the molecule and a base, which interacts with the other 
DNA strand in the helix. A base linked with a sugar is called a nucleoside and a base linked with a sugar is called a 
nucleotide. When multiple nucleotides link together as in DNA, it is known as polynucleotide. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164 | P a g e  
 
III. CURRENT COMPUTERS Vs BIOLOGICAL COMPUTETRS 
 
Current computers use registers to flip the binary between 1 and 0. But microorganisms use the same ―Registers 
and flip-flop occurs but at the DNA level. Adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C), and thymine (T) can be the 
registers that are involved in protein synthesis.  Any change to this structure or inhibition of the normal protein 
synthesis by changes in environment results in a completely new product; worse in some cases if no product is 
created. This is the whole idea behind using DNA in biological computing. DNA is intelligent and has the ability to 
adapt to changing conditions far surpasses anything and everything one could imagine.DNA also has the ability to 
repair itself; provide backup; create new patterns; select the best for its survival . Most complex computers exhibit 
the above in one way or the other. As a DNA has to survive in nature, only the fittest survive and hence the ability to 
adapt to changing environment. However the same environment (extreme heat, chemicals, Ultra Violet rays, etc.) 
can sometimes causes changes to DNA that may make them loose some of their magic and in carries to successfully 
replicate thereby passing some cases can be catastrophic. The main component of a biological computer is DNA 
DNA Computers are small, fast and highly efficient computers which have dense data storage capacity. They can 
perform massively parallel computation and are highly energy efficient systems. 
  
Table 1: DNA Vs Computer 
 IV. MECHANISM INVOLVED  
Biological computers are made inside a patient’s body. The information of the patient’s body is called a blueprint 
along which lies the biological computer. Once the computer’s genetic blueprint has been provided, the human body 
will start to build it on its own using the body’s natural biological processes and the cells found in the body. 
Through Boolean logic equations, we can easily use the biological computer to identify all types of cellular activities 
and determine whether a particular activity is harmful or not. The cellular activities that the biological computer 
could detect can even include those of mutated genes and all other activities of the genes found in cells. As with 
DNA Computer/program 
It is fully self contained It is dependent on peripherals, power etc 
It contains inbuilt redundancy Redundancy depends upon need. 
It adaptive to environment It is not available 
It stores billions of pieces of information It is limited to technology 
It is energy efficient It is less energy efficient 
 
 
 
 
 
165 | P a g e  
 
conventional computers, the biological computer also works with an output and an input signal. The main inputs of 
the biological computer are the body’s proteins, RNA, and other specific chemicals that are found in the human 
cytoplasm. The output on the other hand could be detected using laboratory equipment. 
 
 V. ADVANTAGES OF BIOLOGICAL COMPUTERS 
 Parallel Computing- Biological computers are massively parallel. 
 Incredibly light weight- With only 1 LB of DNA we can have more computing power than all the 
computers ever made. 
 Low power- The only power needed is to keep DNA from denaturing.  
 Solves Complex Problems quickly- A DNA computer can solve hardest of problems in a matter of weeks. 
  
 VI. LIMITATIONS 
 Sometimes there occur errors as the molecular operations are not perfect. 
 The increase or decrease of efficiency is calculated by examining the number molecules contributed. 
 The problem of encoding in molecules is difficult. 
 DNA computing involves a relatively large amount of error. 
 With the increase in the size of problem, probability of receiving incorrect answer becomes greater than 
probability of receiving correct answer. 
 VII. APPLICATIONS 
 The biological computer is a device which is used in various medical applications where intercellular 
evaluation and treatment are needed or required. 
  It is especially useful in monitoring intercellular activity including mutation of genes.  
 Through it, a doctor can focus on or find and treat only damaged or diseased cells. 
  With biological computer selective cell treatment is made possible.  
 It involve many possible applications like Pattern recognition, Cryptography, Evaluating gene sequence 
and many more. 
 It is used in different Medical Application such as developing disease treatments such as cancer. 
 
VIII. FUTURE OF BIOLOGICAL COMPUTING  
While we live in the age of computers, biological computing is slowly gaining importance but without much show. 
Biological computing has played a vital role in modern medicine and will continue to do so, but to see a computer 
being entirely regarded by microorganisms/DNA is far away. We are not even close enough to say that the next 
years will see the dawn of biological computing where CPU is replaced by DNA. For all those hard core computer 
 
 
 
 
 
166 | P a g e  
 
professionals who are wedded to silicon chips it is time to look at the future and prepare for the next big thing in 
computers. 
The future for biological computing is bright. Already some of the medical/industrial products like Vaccines, 
Insulin (for diabetes treatment) are benefiting from this research. Most of the design/patterns coming out of various 
software companies have already been in existence in nature (DNA) and all we need to do to effectively use the 
DNA is to reverse engineer, understand the inner workings and make it fit to work to our requirements. The 
popularity of Nano technology offer more avenues to use DNA. Under laboratory conditions, DNA self-assembly 
has been demonstrated successfully, simple patterns that are visible through microscopy has been used successfully 
for simple computations such as counting, XOR, and addition. 
 
IX. CONCLUSION 
Biological computing is a field which aims to extract the power of computing from the combined action of large 
numbers of biological molecules. In biological computers the CPU is replaced by biological molecules. Biological 
computer is a parallel machine where each processor consists of a single biological molecule. One part of the system 
can be made up of biological components and the other one by using the current or new hardware that may become 
available which gives us the combined benefit of both systems. 
Biological organisms regularly convert data about the macroscopic world gathered by senses in to a form that 
influences biology at molecular level. It is an idea to look to real biological systems for solutions to particular 
problems. A computational micro architecture based on membrane justifies the name biological computing as 
opposed to  molecular computing.    
 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://www.faadooengineers.com/attachm ent.php 
[2] http://www.omicsonline.org/biological-computers-their- echanism 
[3] http://www.technologyreview.com/computin g/12087 
[4] http://www.uhisrc.com/FTB/Biocomputing/ FTBBioComp.pdf 
 
 
 

