IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations of the International Medical Informatics 
Association (IMIA) on Education in Biomedical and Health 
Informatics - 1st Revision 
 
International Medical Informatics Association,  
Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education 
 
Prepared by: 
John Mantas, Elske Ammenwerth, George Demiris, Arie Hasman, Reinhold Haux, William 
Hersh, Evelyn Hovenga, KC Lun, Heimar Marin, Fernando Martin-Sanchez, Graham Wright; 
IMIA Recommendations on Education Task Force 
 
 
 
 
Summary 
Objective: The International Medical Informatics Association (IMIA) agreed on revising the 
existing international recommendations in health informatics / medical informatics education. 
These should help to establish courses, course tracks or even complete programs in this field, to 
further develop existing educational activities in the various nations and to support international 
initiatives concerning education in biomedical and health informatics (BMHI), particularly 
international activities in educating BMHI specialists and the sharing of courseware. 
Method: An IMIA task force, nominated in 2006, worked on updating the recommendation’s 
first version. These updates have been broadly discussed and refined by members of IMIA’s 
National Member Societies, IMIA’s Academic Institutional Members and by members of 
IMIA’s Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education. 
Results and conclusions: The IMIA recommendations centre on educational needs for health 
care professionals to acquire knowledge and skills in information processing and information 
and communication technology. The educational needs are described as a three-dimensional 
framework. The dimensions are: 1) professionals in health care (e.g. physicians, nurses, BMHI 
professionals), 2) type of specialisation in BMHI (IT users, BMHI specialists), and 3) stage of 
career progression (bachelor, master, doctorate). 
Learning outcomes are defined in terms of knowledge and practical skills for health care 
professionals in their role (a) as IT user and (b) as BMHI specialist. Recommendations are given 
for courses/course tracks in BMHI as part of educational programs in medicine, nursing, health 
care management, dentistry, pharmacy, public health, health record administration, and 
informatics/computer science as well as for dedicated programs in BMHI (with bachelor, master 
or doctor degree). 
To support education in BMHI, IMIA offers to award a certificate for high quality BMHI 
education. It supports information exchange on programs and courses in BMHI through its 
Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education. 
 
Keywords 
Medical informatics; health informatics, biomedical informatics, education, recommendations, 
International Medical Informatics Association, IMIA. 
 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table of Contents 
 
 
1  Introduction ..............................................................................................................................1 
1.1  Why Do We Need Biomedical and Health Informatics Education? .................................1 
1.2  IMIA Recommendations for Biomedical and Health informatics Education ...................3 
2  General Considerations ............................................................................................................4 
2.1  Key Principles of the IMIA Recommendations.................................................................4 
2.2  Structural Outline of the IMIA Recommendations ...........................................................5 
3  Recommendations for Learning Outcomes in Biomedical and Health Informatics ................6 
4  Recommendations for Courses/Course Tracks in Biomedical and Health Informatics as Part 
of Educational Programs.....................................................................................................14 
4.1  General Remarks .............................................................................................................14 
4.2  Recommendations for Biomedical and Health Informatics Courses as Part of Medical, 
Nursing, Health Care Management, Dentistry, Pharmacy, and Public Health Programs
.........................................................................................................................................14 
Courses/Course Tracks for IT Users ....................................................................................14 
Courses/Course Tracks for BMHI Specialists......................................................................15 
4.3  Recommendations for Biomedical and Health Informatics Courses as Part of Health 
Record Administration Programs ...................................................................................15 
Courses/Course Tracks for IT Users ....................................................................................16 
Courses/Course Tracks for Biomedical and Health Informatics Specialists........................16 
4.4  Recommendations for Biomedical and Health Informatics Courses as Part of 
Informatics/Computer Science Programs .......................................................................16 
Courses/Course Tracks for Biomedical and Health Informatics Specialists........................16 
5  Recommendations for Dedicated Educational Programs in Biomedical and Health 
Informatics ..........................................................................................................................17 
5.1  Recommendations for Bachelor Programs in Biomedical and Health Informatics ........17 
5.2  Recommendations for Master and Doctoral Programs in Biomedical and Health 
Informatics ......................................................................................................................18 
6  Recommendations for Continuing Education ........................................................................19 
6.1  Continuing Education in Biomedical and Health Informatics ........................................19 
6.2  Life-Long Learning .........................................................................................................19 
7  Other Recommendations ........................................................................................................19 
7.1  How to Commence with Biomedical and Health Informatics Education .......................19 
7.2  Modes of Education.........................................................................................................20 
7.3  Qualified Teachers...........................................................................................................20 
7.4  Recognized Qualifications...............................................................................................20 
8  IMIA Support for Programs and Courses in Biomedical and Health Informatics .................20 
8.1  IMIA Certification...........................................................................................................20 
8.2  International Programs, International Exchange of Students and Teachers....................21 
9  Information Exchange on Programs and Courses in Biomedical and Health Informatics 
supported by IMIA..............................................................................................................21 
10  Concluding Remarks ............................................................................................................21 
References ....................................................................................................................................22 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
1/28 
 
 
1 Introduction 
The first version of the “Recommendations of the International Medical Informatics Association 
(IMIA) on education in health and medical informatics” [1] has been widely used. Because of 
the tremendous progress in and the evolution of the field of health and biomedical informatics, 
the content of these recommendations are, however, not fully up-to-date. As there is still a 
continuous need for such recommendations, a revision was necessary. 
The revised version, presented here, is based on the original recommendations and the 
fundamental work following those recommendations ([2-9] and table 1 in section 1.2).  
There is increasing evidence that health information technology (HIT) improves health, 
health care, public health, and biomedical research. A number of recent systematic reviews have 
documented the evidence in favour of clinical decision support [10], information and 
communication technology (IT) interventions [11], and telemedicine [12]. This has led to 
widespread adoption of HIT around the world [13]. In addition to a growing range of research 
and application fields in biomedical and health informatics (BMHI) [14, 15], there is also 
growth in related areas of BMHI, such as clinical research informatics [16-18] and 
bioinformatics [19]. The growth of HIT has also led to the recognition of the need for 
educational programs to train professionals to develop, implement, and evaluate these systems. 
While this need has been recognized worldwide [20], there have been few international efforts 
with some notable exceptions [21, 22]. 
 
1.1 Why Do We Need Biomedical and Health Informatics Education? 
Despite the documented benefits, there are still barriers to HIT in clinical settings, including a 
mismatch of return on investment between those who pay and those who benefit, challenges to 
ameliorate workflow in clinical settings, lack of standards and interoperability, and concerns 
about privacy and confidentiality [23-25]. Another barrier, lesser studied and quantified but 
increasingly recognized, is the lack of characterization of the workforce and its training needed 
to most effectively implement HIT systems [26, 27]. 
An additional challenge is that there are various definitions of the field of BMHI [26, 28, 29]. 
Furthermore, the field has difficulty agreeing on the adjective in front of the word informatics 
(i.e., medical, biomedical, and/or health) as well as whether a practitioner should be called an 
informaticist or informatician (this paper uses the latter). We also do not know where pure IT 
ends and informatics begins. For example, the individual who installs applications on a desktop 
computer in a hospital probably does not need formal training in informatics, although the CIO 
and his or her project leaders certainly do. This has led to calls for BMHI to become a 
professional discipline [30] and for it to acquire the attributes of a profession, such as a well-
defined set of competencies, certification of fitness to practice, shared professional identity, life-
long commitment, and a code of ethics [31]. 
A number of efforts to establish formal certification have been and are underway. E.g., in 
Germany, medical informatics courses are mandatory for medical students since the 1970s 
([32]). In the US, certification in nursing informatics has been available for over a decade [33]. 
More recently, the American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) has proposed a plan for 
a physician board sub-specialization, which will be followed for other non-physician doctorally 
prepared individuals [34, 35].  
Despite these challenges, a number of organizations have deemed competence in BMHI to be 
important. Competencies in the field have been developed for a variety of disciplines within 
BMHI. In table 1 some major publications on the development of such competencies are listed 
as examples. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
2/28 
 
Table 1: Some major publications on competencies in biomedical and health informatics. 
Organization (Reference) Year Discipline 
University of Heidelberg and the University of Applied 
Sciences Heilbronn medical informatics program [36, 37] 
1972 dedicated BMHI 
programs 
German Association for Medical Informatics, Biometry and 
Epidemiology (gmds) and German Society for Computer 
Science (Reisensburg Conference) [38, 39] 
1973 BMHI and computer 
science 
Association for Computing Machinery [40] 1978 BMHI and computer 
science 
Association of the Medical Colleges [41] 1984 BMHI and medicine 
gmds [42] 1992 BMHI in general 
Concerted Action on Education and Training in Health Care 
Informatics (EDUCTRA) [43] 
1992 BMHI for health 
professionals 
Council of Europe Committee of Ministers [44] 1995 BMHI for health 
professionals 
NIGHTINGALE project [45, 46] 1996 nursing informatics 
IT-EDUCTRA project [43] 1996 BMHI for health 
professionals 
English National Board for Nursing, Midwifery and Health 
Visiting [47] 
1996 BMHI for nurses, 
midwives and health 
visitors 
National Advisory Council on Nurse Education and Practice 
[48] 
1996 nursing informatics 
Association of American Medical Colleges [49] 1999 BMHI and medicine 
International Medical Informatics Association [1] 1999 BMHI in general 
Schleyer [50] 1999 dental informatics 
UK National Health Service [51] 2001 BMHI in general 
Staggers et al [52] 2001 nursing informatics 
Covvey et al [53] 2001 BMHI in general 
Mantas and Hasman [54] 2001 nursing informatics 
O‘Caroll et al. [55] 2002 BMHI for public health 
(PH) professionals 
Curran [56] 2003 nursing informatics 
American College of Medical Informatics [57] 2004 bioinformatics 
American Health Information Management Association 
(AHIMA) [58] 
2004 health information 
management 
Hovenga and Mantas [20] 2004 BMHI in general 
Hovenga and Garde [59] 2006 health informatics 
Ivanitskaya et al. [60] 2006 health information 
literacy 
AHIMA [61] 2007 health information 
management (HIM) 
Canadian Health Informatics Association [62] 2007 health informatics 
Medical Library Association [63] 2007 health science librarians 
Pigott et al. [64] 2007 health informatics 
American Medical Informatics Association (AMIA) and 
Oregon Health and Science University [65] 
2008 BMHI in general 
AMIA and AHIMA [66] 2008 BMHI and HIM 
Karras et al. [67] 2008 PH informatics 
AMIA [68] 2009 clinical informatics 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
3/28 
 
1.2 IMIA Recommendations for Biomedical and Health informatics Education 
There are many opportunities worldwide for obtaining education in this field. In some countries, 
there are extensive educational components in BMHI at different levels of education and for the 
different health care professions. Increasingly dedicated BMHI programs exist (i.e. organized, 
structured sets of course offerings aimed at preparing participants for specific career paths and 
culminating in a BMHI degree, diploma or leaving certificate). Many other countries have not, 
or at least not sufficiently, established such opportunities until now, with all the consequences 
concerning the quality and effectiveness of health care. Lists of educational programs have been 
made available at a variety of Web sites, e.g.:  
- BMHI programs world wide [69] (University of Freiburg, Germany), 
- BMHI programs in [70] and outside [71] North America (AMIA). 
In 2007 IMIA, the International Medical Informatics Association [72] endorsed and 
published its strategic plan, “Towards IMIA 2015” [73-76]. Education in BMHI was listed 
among its six core subject-focused ‘sectors‘. Recognizing that the original version of the IMIA 
recommendations for education had become outdated, in 2006 a task force was established 
under the auspices of IMIA’s Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education “to 
consider and undertake any necessary work to update the IMIA Recommendations on Education 
in Health and Medical Informatics” ([77]). These recommendations will continue to stimulate 
the further development of existing educational activities in the various nations and to support 
international initiatives concerning education in BMHI. 
Because a variety of educational and health care systems exist all over the world, programs, 
courses and course tracks in BMHI may vary in different countries. In spite of this variability, 
basic similarities in BMHI education can be identified and used as a framework for 
recommendations. Such recommendations are also necessary for enabling an international 
exchange of students and teachers and for establishing international programs. 
The IMIA recommendations, presented here, should be regarded as a framework for national 
initiatives in BMHI education, and for constituting international programs and exchange of 
students and teachers in this field. They shall also encourage and support the sharing of 
courseware. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
4/28 
 
2 General Considerations 
2.1 Key Principles of the IMIA Recommendations 
In order to provide good quality health care, training and education in biomedical and health 
medical informatics is needed:  
H for various Health care professions,  
E in different modes of Education,  
A with different, Alternate types of specialisation in BMHI, and  
L at various Levels of education, corresponding to respective stages of career progression. 
There must be  
T qualified Teachers to provide BMHI courses, which lead to  
H recognised qualifications for biomedical and Health informatics positions. 
In more detail, ‘HEALTH‘ means: 
H Practically all professionals in health care should, during their studies, be confronted with 
BMHI education: e.g. physicians, nurses, pharmacists, dentists, health care managers, health 
record administrators, and also health and medical informaticians who are graduates from 
specialised programs in BMHI. Computer scientists/informaticians and other scientists (e.g. 
engineers), who intend to work in the fields of medicine and health care, also need BMHI 
education 
E Various education methodologies are needed to provide the required theoretical knowledge, 
practical skills and mature attitudes. In addition to traditional classroom-based models, there 
are many different models of flexible, distance and supported open learning to be considered. 
The explosive growth of the Internet and World Wide Web, video-conferencing, document 
sharing and social networking platforms and applications are additionally having great 
impacts on all educational methodologies, and in particular will favour flexible and distance 
learning including both synchronous and asynchronous communication between instructors 
and students. Inter-university collaborations might also facilitate curricular choice. 
A Alternate routes to different types of specialisation in BMHI will depend on career choice. 
The majority of health care professionals (e.g. physicians, nurses) need to know how to 
efficiently and responsibly use information and communication technology, but only a few 
will choose to have accredited specialisation in this field. They should, however, also be able 
to acquire an additional specialist qualification in BMHI as part of their chosen career 
development. BMHI specialisations may be different to suit the various types of health care 
professionals. Finally, it should also be possible to acquire specialist qualifications in BMHI 
via specific BMHI programs leading to accreditation at different levels, e.g. master or PhD. 
L Every profession in health care even at an early stage needs some core BMHI knowledge. 
Different levels of education, respectively stages of career progression, (bachelor, master, and 
doctor) have different BMHI education needs according to experience, professional role and 
responsibility. A junior professional uses information differently compared to a senior 
professional. There are specialised BMHI university programs but BMHI instruction could 
also be integrated within other professional educational programs (medicine, nursing, 
informatics/computer science etc.). Thus educational components will vary in depth and 
breadth to suit specific student groups. Subsequent continuous education programs in BMHI 
also need to be available. 
T The content and delivery of BMHI courses and programs must be of good quality. Teachers of 
BMHI courses must have adequate and specific competence in this field.  
H There must be recognised qualifications in BMHI for positions in this field. Accreditation of 
educational content and competence in BMHI is required, to eventually have recognition on 
an international basis. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
5/28 
 
2.2 Structural Outline of the IMIA Recommendations 
The IMIA recommendations centre on educational needs for health care professionals to acquire 
knowledge and skills in information processing and information and communication technology 
as it is needed and used in medicine and health care. The educational needs are described as a 
three- dimensional framework with dimensions ‘professional in health care’, ‘type of 
specialisation in BMHI’ and ‘stage of career progression’ (figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1: Structural outline of the IMIA recommendations on education in biomedical and health 
informatics (BMHI): knowledge and skills needed in BMHI by students in health care, to get a 
specialisation in BMHI and to reach a career progression lead to learning outcomes in programs, and 
have to be transformed into educational components with appropriate depth and breadth. 
 
Figure 1 points out that if one is studying a certain discipline (e.g. medicine to receive a 
bachelor degree), then the IMIA recommendations suggest that in their study, all these students 
should get a minimum of education in BMHI, so that they are able to efficiently use information 
and communication technology (IT users). 
On the other side, candidates may want to prepare for careers as BMHI specialists. The study 
of BMHI for these specialists is somewhat different. Here we have to interpret figure 1 in the 
sense, that learning outcomes (also being given in table 2 and further explained in sections 4 and 
5) are defined to get a bachelor, master or doctor degree in BMHI. Per definition this predefines 
a BMHI specialist. There are obviously different ways to become a qualified BMHI specialist. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
6/28 
 
3 Recommendations for Learning Outcomes in Biomedical and Health 
Informatics 
Interesting differences exist both within and between countries and programmes with regard to 
structures of curricula and expected learning outcomes. Several initiatives have been launched in 
the last years to define some standardized content of BMHI curricula, aiming at developing 
sample informatics curricula. 
A clear trend in curriculum design is the integration of disciplines closely related to the core 
field of BMHI, such as biomedical engineering, medical information sciences, molecular 
biology or nanosciences. Those fields share knowledge, methods and tools with BMHI. Figure 2 
highlights and describes the most important related disciplines. For further discussion of this 
issue, see e.g. also [78-80].  
The learning outcomes, presented in section 3, will integrate those overlapping areas as 
optional elements, depending on the focus of the respective programme. This assures that 
graduates from BMHI programmes know at least the basics of those related disciplines, and to 
give various programmes the flexibility to focus on one or more of those overlapping areas, 
depending on the cultural, scientific and technical context of the institution.  
 
 
Figure 2: Biomedical and health informatics and related fields. Overlapping areas: A – medical 
information science, B – medical chemoinformatics, C – clinical informatics, D – medical 
(translational) bioinformatics, E – public health informatics, F – medical nanoinformatics, G – 
medical imaging and devices. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
7/28 
 
For education in BMHI two kinds of major learning outcomes can be identified. They specify 
the 
1. Learning outcomes for all health care professionals in their role as IT users: Enabling health 
care professionals to efficiently and responsibly use information and knowledge processing 
methodology and information and communication technology. These learning outcomes need 
to be included in all undergraduate curricula, leading to a health care professional 
qualification. On the other hand there are: 
2. Learning outcomes for BMHI specialists: Preparing graduates for careers in BMHI in 
academic, health care (e.g. hospital, primary care), government or industrial settings. These 
learning outcomes need to be included in all curricula, leading to a qualification as specialist 
in BMHI.  
Obviously, between the specialisation of a health care professional as IT users and a health care 
professional as a BMHI specialist, various levels concerning depth and breadth of learning 
outcomes exist. Some programmes may focus on either health care professionals or on health 
informatics specialists. Other programmes may focus on a kind of intermediary level, where 
students are educated to communicate with physicians and nurses as IT users on one side and 
health informatics specialists on the other side.  
The learning outcomes define the levels of knowledge and skills needed. The desired 
outcomes determine the educational components either in courses/course tracks in BMHI as part 
of educational programs or as dedicated programs in BMHI.  
Table 2 contains the list of learning outcomes, recommended by IMIA. The knowledge and 
skill levels are classified into four domain areas: 
1. BMHI core knowledge and skills, 
2. medicine, health and biosciences, health system organisation, 
3. informatics/computer science, mathematics, biometry, 
4. optional modules in BMHI and from related fields. 
In order to achieve the learning outcomes mentioned above, their educational components 
should be considered for inclusion into the respective educational programs. Knowledge and 
skills, which are described, in part four are optional and are recommended e.g. if the research 
profile of the university/school offering a program includes these fields and if it fits well into the 
program. 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
8/28 
 
Table 2-1: Recommended and optional learning outcomes in terms of levels of knowledge and 
skills for professionals in health care either in their role as IT users or as BMHI specialists. 
Additional recommendations, specific for a certain educational program, will be added in 
sections 4 and 5. Recommended level of knowledge and skills:  
+ =introductory. ++ =intermediate. +++ =advanced. 
 
Knowledge/Skill - Domain - Level 
 IT BMHI 
 user specialist 
 
(1) Biomedical and Health Informatics Core Knowledge and Skills 
 
1.1 Evolution of informatics as a discipline and as a profession + + 
1.2 Need for systematic information processing in health care, 
benefits and constraints of information technology in health 
care  
++ ++ 
1.3 Efficient and responsible use of information processing 
tools, to support health care professionals’ practice and their 
decision making 
++ ++ 
1.4 Use of personal application software for documentation, 
personal communication including Internet access, for 
publication and basic statistics 
++ ++ 
1.5 Information literacy: library classification and systematic 
health related terminologies and their coding, literature 
retrieval methods, research methods and research paradigms 
+ ++ 
1.6 Characteristics, functionalities and examples of information 
systems in health care (e.g. clinical information systems, 
primary care information systems, etc.) 
+ +++ 
1.7 Architectures of information systems in health care; 
approaches and standards for communication and 
cooperation and for interfacing and integration of 
component, architectural paradigms (e.g. service-oriented 
architectures) 
 ++ 
1.8 Management of information systems in health care (health 
information management, strategic and tactic information 
management, IT governance, IT service management, legal 
and regulatory issues) 
+ +++ 
1.9 Characteristics, functionalities and examples of information 
systems to support patients and the public (e.g. patient-
oriented information system architectures and applications, 
personal health records, sensor-enhanced information 
systems) 
 + 
1.10 Methods and approaches to regional networking and 
shared care (eHealth, health telematics applications and 
inter-organizational information exchange) 
+ ++ 
to be continued 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
9/28 
 
Table 2-2: Recommended and optional learning outcomes in terms of levels of knowledge and 
skills for professionals in health care either in their role as IT users or as BMHI specialists.  
 
Knowledge/Skill - Domain - Level 
 IT BMHI 
 user specialist 
 
(1) Biomedical and Health Informatics Core Knowledge and Skills (continued) 
 
1.11 Appropriate documentation and health data management 
principles including ability to use health and medical coding 
systems, construction of health and medical coding systems 
+ +++ 
1.12 Structure, design and analysis principles of the health 
record including notions of data quality, minimum data sets, 
architecture and general applications of the electronic patient 
record/electronic health record 
+ +++ 
1.13 Socio-organizational and socio-technical issues, including 
workflow/process modelling and reorganization  
+ ++ 
1.14 Principles of data representation and data analysis using 
primary and secondary data sources, principles of data 
mining, data warehouses, knowledge management 
 ++ 
1.15 Biomedical modelling and simulation   + 
1.16 Ethical and security issues including accountability of 
health care providers and managers and BMHI specialists 
and the confidentiality, privacy and security of patient data 
+ ++ 
1.17 Nomenclatures, vocabularies, terminologies, ontologies 
and taxonomies in BMHI 
 ++ 
1.18 Informatics methods and tools to support education (incl. 
flexible and distance learning), use of relevant educational 
technologies, incl. Internet and World Wide Web 
 + 
1.19 Evaluation and assessment of information systems, 
including study design, selection and triangulation of 
(quantitative and qualitative) methods, outcome and impact 
evaluation, economic evaluation, unintended consequences, 
systematic reviews and meta-analysis, evidence-based health 
informatics 
 ++ 
to be continued 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
10/28 
 
Table 2-3: Recommended and optional learning outcomes in terms of levels of knowledge and 
skills for professionals in health care either in their role as IT users or as BMHI specialists.  
 
Knowledge/Skill - Domain - Level 
 IT BMHI 
 user specialist 
 
(2) Medicine, Health and Biosciences, Health System Organisation 
 
2.1 Fundamentals of human functioning and biosciences 
(anatomy, physiology, microbiology, genomics, and clinical 
disciplines such as internal medicine, surgery etc.) 
+ + 
2.2 Fundamentals of what constitutes health, from 
physiological, sociological, psychological, nutritional, 
emotional, environmental, cultural, spiritual perspectives and 
its assessment 
+ + 
2.3 Principles of medical decision making and diagnostic and 
therapeutic strategies  
+ ++ 
2.4 Organisation of health institutions and of the overall 
health system, interorganizational aspects, shared care  
+ +++ 
2.5 Policy and regulatory frameworks for information 
handling in health care 
 + 
2.6 Principles of evidence-based medicine and evidence-based 
nursing 
+ + 
2.7 Health administration, health economics, health quality 
management and resource management, patient safety 
initiatives, public health services and outcome measurement 
 ++ 
to be continued 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
11/28 
 
Table 2-4: Recommended and optional learning outcomes in terms of levels of knowledge and 
skills for professionals in health care either in their role as IT users or as BMHI specialists.  
 
Knowledge/Skill – Domain - Level 
 IT BMHI 
 user specialist 
 
(3) Informatics/Computer Science, Mathematics, Biometry 
 
3.1 Basic informatics terminology like data, information, 
knowledge, hardware, software, computer, networks, 
information systems, information systems management 
+ +++ 
3.2 Ability to use personal computers, text processing and 
spread sheet software, easy-to-use database management 
systems 
++ +++ 
3.3 Ability to communicate electronically, including electronic 
data exchange, with other health care professionals, 
internet/intranet use 
++ +++ 
3.4 Methods of practical informatics/computer science, 
especially on programming languages, software engineering, 
data structures, database management systems, information 
and system modelling tools, information systems theory and 
practice, knowledge engineering, (concept) representation 
and acquisition, software architectures 
 +++ 
3.5 Methods of theoretical informatics/computer science, e.g. 
complexity theory, encryption/security 
 ++ 
3.6 Methods of technical informatics/computer science, e.g. 
network architectures and topologies, telecommunications, 
wireless technology, virtual reality, multimedia 
 ++ 
3.7 Methods of interfacing and integration of information 
system components in health care, interfacing standards, 
dealing with multiple patient identifiers 
 ++ 
3.8 Handling of the information system life cycle: analysis, 
requirement specification, implementation and/or selection 
of information systems, risk management, user training 
+ +++ 
3.9 Methods of project management and change management 
(i.e. project planning, resource management, team 
management, conflict management, collaboration and 
motivation, change theories, change strategies) 
+ +++ 
to be continued 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
12/28 
 
Table 2-5: Recommended and optional learning outcomes in terms of levels of knowledge and 
skills for professionals in health care either in their role as IT users or as BMHI specialists.  
 
Knowledge/Skill – Domain - Level 
 IT BMHI 
 user specialist 
 
(3) Informatics/Computer Science, Mathematics, Biometry (continued) 
 
3.10 Mathematics: algebra, analysis, logic, numerical 
mathematics, probability theory and statistics, cryptography 
 ++ 
3.11 Biometry and epidemiology, including study design  ++ 
3.12 Methods for decision support and their application to 
patient management, acquisition, representation and 
engineering of medical knowledge; construction and use of 
clinical pathways and guidelines 
+ +++ 
3.13 Basic concepts and applications of ubiquitous computing 
(e.g. pervasive, sensor-based and ambient technologies in 
health care, health enabling technologies, ubiquitous health 
systems and ambient assisted-living) 
 + 
3.14 Usability engineering, human-computer interaction, 
usability evaluation, cognitive aspects of information 
processing 
 ++ 
to be continued 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
13/28 
 
Table 2-6: Recommended and optional learning outcomes in terms of levels of knowledge and 
skills for professionals in health care either in their role as IT users or as BMHI specialists.  
 
Knowledge/Skill – Domain - Level 
 IT BMHI 
 user specialist 
 
(4) Optional Modules in BHMI and from Related Fields 
 
4.1  Biomedical imaging and signal processing 
 
 + – +++ 
4.2 Health-enabling technologies, ubiquitous health systems and 
ambient-assisted living 
 
 + – +++ 
4.3 Medical bioinformatics and computational biology 
 
 + – +++ 
4.4 Medical chemoinformatics 
 
 + – +++ 
4.5 Medical information sciences 
 
 + – +++ 
4.6 Medical nanoinformatics 
 
 + – +++ 
4.7 Medical robotics 
 
 + – +++ 
4.8 Public health informatics 
 
 + – +++ 
 
All health care professional graduates should, in their role as IT users, have the levels of 
knowledge and skills mentioned for IT users. Analogously, those professionals in health care, 
being BMHI specialists, should have the levels of knowledge and skills specified for them.  
The levels of knowledge and skills mentioned may particularly work well for developed, 
industrialised countries, with high levels of access to, and use of, information technology, and 
which have highly developed health care infrastructures. Developing countries may at the 
beginning have the need to adapt them with regard to the level of technology. The principles of 
BMHI, however, can still be taught, developed and applied in the absence of high levels of 
information and communication technology. 
Recommendations, either specific for certain courses or course tracks in BMHI as part of 
educational programs or specific for dedicated educational programs in BMHI are mentioned in 
sections 4 and 5. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
14/28 
 
4 Recommendations for Courses/Course Tracks in Biomedical and 
Health Informatics as Part of Educational Programs 
4.1 General Remarks 
Educational course components in BMHI should be tailored to the student's advancement and 
where possible be made relevant for and used to support a given stage of student progression. 
For example, teaching about the patient record for students of medicine should be introduced 
after the student has gained some clinical experience, but not too late so that students can benefit 
from this knowledge in the latter stages of their clinical training. 
Due to the afore-mentioned large variety, there exist different perspectives for BMHI 
education. For BMHI specialists we especially can distinguish between a more informatics-
based and a more health care-based approach to BMHI education, with a variety of 
combinations in-between. It is important to recognise the need for teamwork as all health 
informatics projects require input from more than one person each with their own unique skill 
set, so that the team as whole is able to address all project aspects in a cohesive and coordinated 
manner. 
The objective of an informatics-based approach to BMHI is to focus on the machine 
processing of data, information and knowledge in health care and medicine with a strong 
emphasis on the need for advanced knowledge and skills of BMHI, of workflow, people and 
organisational aspects, of mathematics, as well as of theoretical, practical and technical 
informatics/computer science, especially semantic interoperability, ontology based software 
engineering and its relationship with effective and safe data, information and knowledge 
processing and representation. Health care problems, however, can be treated cooperatively with 
physicians and other health care professionals. In such an approach to BMHI education, 
knowledge and skills of informatics/computer science predominate, but must be applied with a 
sound knowledge of the business of providing healthcare services. 
The objective of a health care-based approach to BMHI is again to focus on the machine 
processing of data, information and knowledge in health care and medicine requiring, apart from 
knowledge in BMHI, also knowledge in medicine or other health sciences to such an extent that 
can only be imparted within the scope of a medical or health science education. In such an 
approach to BMHI education, clinical knowledge and skills predominate but these must be 
applied within the BMHI context.  
The recommendations, given in section 4.2 and 4.3 for BMHI specialists are for health care-
based approaches to BMHI. The recommendations in sections 4.4 and 5.2 are oriented towards 
an informatics-based approach. With respect to educational progression, especially for a 
bachelor, master, and doctoral degree, the general distinctions in depth and breadth should be 
considered as mentioned in section 5.  
For specifying a student’s workload, the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System 
(ECTS) is used [81]. In ECTS a full academic year’s student workload corresponds to 60 ECTS 
credits. 
 
4.2 Recommendations for Biomedical and Health Informatics Courses as Part of 
Medical, Nursing, Health Care Management, Dentistry, Pharmacy, and Public 
Health Programs 
Courses/Course Tracks for IT Users 
In order to achieve the levels of knowledge and skills in BMHI as recommended in section 3 for 
IT users, the total student workload for educational components in BMHI should comprise at 
least 4 ECTS credits. 4 ECTS credits can correspond, e.g., to approx. 40 hours of lectures, 
exercises and practical training at universities. A course, charged with 4 ECTS credits, may e.g. 
consist of a 3 hours/week lecture, given in one semester with 14 weeks of lecturing.  
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
15/28 
 
Specific examples from the work of the respective health professionals should be used. 
Emphasis should particularly be given to practical and simulated training. 
The additional recommendations of this section 3 may also apply to the programs of other 
professions in health care such as medical laboratory technicians, medical librarians, radiology 
technicians, dieticians, occupational therapists etc. or for the programs allied health/clinical 
researchers studied. These people also need to know about the potentials and the risks of 
information processing in health care and be able to efficiently use methods and tools of 
information processing and information and communication technology. 
 
Courses/Course Tracks for BMHI Specialists 
In order to achieve the levels of knowledge and skills in BMHI, as recommended in section 3 
for specialists, the student workload associated with these educational components in BMHI 
should be at least 60 ECTS credits, i.e. one year of full time studies. This is similar to dedicated 
master programs in BMHI.  
In addition to the ‘core’ knowledge and skills obtained in each program, the relative amount 
of student workload for the three knowledge and skills areas inside the health/medical 
informatics course track should approximately be as indicated in table 3. 
 
Table 3: Recommended student workload in ECTS credits for the three knowledge and skill 
areas of health/medical informatics course tracks inside programs of medicine and other health 
sciences. 
 Program 
Knowledge/Skill Area Medicine, 
Nursing,  
Health Care 
Management, 
Dentistry, 
Pharmacy,  
Public Health 
(1) BMHI core knowledge and skills 40 
(2) medicine, health and biosciences, health system organisation 5 
(3) informatics/computer science, mathematics, biometry 15 
Σ 60 
 
For all health care professionals domain area (2) should focus on health system organisation, 
area (3) on practical informatics and project management. For nurses it should be possible that 
specialisation can be included in a post registration nursing curriculum. For health care 
managers, knowledge and practical skills of information systems architectures, incl. 
characteristics required to achieve semantic interoperability and information systems/network 
management should particularly comprise work and information flow supporting enterprise 
functions for administration, controlling, quality management and executive decision making.  
 
4.3 Recommendations for Biomedical and Health Informatics Courses as Part of 
Health Record Administration Programs 
Within the past decade the discipline of health record administration (also denoted as health 
information management) has often enhanced its scope from document handling to managing 
health care information. Also the scope of practice has changed considerably.  
For educating health record administrators, two different levels of education are 
recommended:  
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
16/28 
 
- A first level should cover introductory concepts and principles and assumes an introductory 
skill level. Students at this level take e.g. a two- or three year course of study at a college 
level resulting (e.g. in the U.S.) in an associate’s degree. The focus for these students needs to 
be on data, meta-data, coding rules, classification systems and their relationship with health 
informatics. 
- At a second level a deeper understanding of knowledge and more advanced terminology 
skills, problem solving and critical thinking skills in more depth is assumed. Students at this 
level take e.g. a three- or four-year course of study resulting in a bachelor degree where 
health information management skills and knowledge is integrated with more advanced 
informatics knowledge and skills. Further studies may follow. 
 
Courses/Course Tracks for IT Users 
Health record administration students at the mentioned first level can be regarded as IT users. 
The recommendations on levels of knowledge and skills are the same as for IT users, mentioned 
in section 4.2. Particular emphasis should be given to information literacy, health terminology, 
coding and classification systems, the electronic health record, and evaluation methodology. 
There should be introductory knowledge and skills in the knowledge/skill-domain medicine, 
health and biosciences, health systems organisation. 
 
Courses/Course Tracks for Biomedical and Health Informatics Specialists 
Students of health record administration programs, respectively health information management 
programs, which lead to bachelor and master degrees should have the knowledge and skills of 
BMHI specialists, as mentioned in section 4.2. Again, special emphasis should be given to 
information literacy, meta-data, health terminology, coding and classification systems, the 
electronic health record, and evaluation methodology and to the relationship between these 
concepts and the use of various informatics technologies. 
 
4.4 Recommendations for Biomedical and Health Informatics Courses as Part of 
Informatics/Computer Science Programs 
Courses/Course Tracks for Biomedical and Health Informatics Specialists 
In order to achieve the levels of knowledge and skills in BMHI, recommended in section 3 for 
specialists, the length of studies for educational components in BMHI should be at least 60 
ECTS credits, i.e. one year of full time studies.  
In addition to the ‘core’ knowledge and skills of informatics/computer science, the relative 
amount of student workload for the three knowledge and skills areas inside the health/medical 
informatics course track should approximately be as indicated in table 4. 
 
Table 4: Recommended student workload in ECTS credits for the three knowledge and skill 
areas of a health/medical informatics course track inside informatics/computer science 
programs. 
 Program 
Knowledge/Skill Area Informatics/ 
Computer Science 
(1) BMHI core knowledge and skills 40 
(2) medicine, health and biosciences, health system organisation 15 
(3) informatics/computer science, mathematics, biometry 5 
Σ 60 
 
The student workload in (3) comprises knowledge and skills in biometry, semantic interopera-
bility and evaluation methods. Applying methods and tools of informatics in health care institu-
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
17/28 
 
tions, and for concrete problems in diagnosis, therapy, nursing and health care management 
should be emphasised. It is essential to include ontology based software engineering and the 
need to separate knowledge from system configuration, as these concepts are fundamental to 
achieving semantic interoperability and safe clinical decision support systems. This assists 
informatics or computer science students to gain more knowledge about the health care 
environment. Health information systems management should include the development and 
implementation of software and hardware components of health information systems. In medical 
signal and image processing technical and informatics aspects should particularly be considered.  
 
5 Recommendations for Dedicated Educational Programs in Biomedical 
and Health Informatics 
The aim of all dedicated programs in BMHI is to prepare graduates for careers in academic/ 
research settings, health care facilities or organizations, governmental or international public 
health entities or industrial settings.  
 
5.1 Recommendations for Bachelor Programs in Biomedical and Health Informatics 
The curriculum of a program leading to a bachelor degree in BMHI should be application-
related aiming to prepare students for a professional career in the field. In addition, the 
curriculum should offer the background and theoretical foundation necessary to pursue 
advanced graduate studies in this or related fields.  
The objective of this undergraduate education is to equip students with specialised 
knowledge in the field of BMHI and the skills to apply the acquired knowledge in a variety of 
practical situations. The intention is to provide a deep understanding of the state-of-the-art of the 
discipline and the ability to translate expertise gained in the field into practical application of 
tools and concepts. Compared to the comprehensive formal methodological foundation of a 
master program, it is the practice-oriented application that predominates the undergraduate 
curriculum. Given the diversity of the discipline, students at the bachelor program level need to 
understand the breadth of the field and become familiar with the spectrum of BMHI (capturing 
all sub-domains such as bioinformatics, clinical informatics, public health informatics etc.). The 
challenge herein is to provide knowledge and skills that students can apply in practice while 
recognizing that areas of interest could be explored further and in more-depth at the graduate 
educational level. 
In order to achieve the levels of knowledge and skills recommended in section 3, and to 
achieve a broad depth and breadth of all educational components, the length of study for the 
instructional component of a bachelor program in BMHI should be at least three years. This 
corresponds to a student workload of 180 ECTS credits. 
For an informatics-based approach to BMHI, the relative amount of student workload for the 
four knowledge and skills areas for the bachelor program should be approximately as indicated 
in table 5. This composition can be varied from very strong technical IT skill acquisition to less 
IT skill and a stronger health application focus, depending on the desired learning outcomes. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
18/28 
 
Table 5: Recommended student workload in ECTS credits for the four knowledge and skill areas 
of a biomedical and health informatics bachelor program. 
 Program 
Knowledge/Skill Area BMHI 
(bachelor) 
(1) BMHI core knowledge and skills 50 
(2) medicine, health and biosciences, health system organisation 20 
(3) informatics/computer science, mathematics, biometry 110 
Σ 180 
 
5.2 Recommendations for Master and Doctoral Programs in Biomedical and Health 
Informatics 
For programs leading to a master or doctoral degree, it is the comprehensive formal 
methodological foundation for BMHI that dominates the instructional component of the 
program.  
The objective is to provide scientific education that captures the theoretical foundations of the 
field, provides specialized knowledge and equips students with both practical skills and 
analytical approaches that will allow them to further the knowledge base of the discipline. 
Graduates will be able to master both the practical methods and tools and the leadership of 
independent research. 
Unlike undergraduate bachelor programs, these graduate and post-graduate programs 
emphasize a formal penetration into the knowledge and foundation of the discipline and promote 
methodological expertise and independent analysis. Graduates are expected to contribute to the 
field and lead its scientific advancement.  
In order to achieve the levels of knowledge and skills in BMHI as recommended in section 3, 
and in order to achieve the desired broad depth and breadth of the educational components, the 
length of study should be at least one year full time for a master degree, corresponding to at least 
60 ECTS credits. Two years of study, corresponding to 120 ECTS credits, should be preferred. 
Ph.D. studies or Ph.D. work should usually last three to four years.  
The relative amount of study time for the three knowledge and skills areas for the master 
program should approximately be as indicated in table 6. 
 
Table 6: Recommended student workload in ECTS credits for the four knowledge and skill areas 
of a two year (one year) biomedical and health informatics master program. 
 Program 
Knowledge/Skill Area BMHI (master) 
(1) BMHI core knowledge and skills 80 (40) 
(2) medicine, health and biosciences, health system organisation 20 (10) 
(3) informatics/computer science, mathematics, biometry 40 (20) 
Σ 120 (60) 
 
It is expected that master students have successfully finished either (a) a bachelor program in 
BMHI, (b) a bachelor or master program in medicine, biology, public health, health 
administration or another health science, or (c) in computer science/ information science. For 
cases (b) and (c) additional complementary courses (for b in informatics/computer science and 
for c in health and biosciences, health systems) should be offered.  
For programs leading to a doctoral degree, independent comprehensive research should be 
carried out by the student in addition to the instructional requirements already mentioned. 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
19/28 
 
Knowledge and skills should also have additional depth and breadth and students may choose to 
gain additional insight into elective fields that are at the core of their research.  
 
6 Recommendations for Continuing Education 
6.1 Continuing Education in Biomedical and Health Informatics 
A certificate of ‘Health Informatics’, ‘Medical Informatics’ and/or ‘Biomedical Informatics’ 
should be offered in recognition of having acquired sufficient competence in BMHI from an 
academic, educational and/or practical perspective relative to specific tasks or roles within the 
health industry. Furthermore, for physicians, who usually have well-established forms of 
continuing education, there should be offered the possibility of receiving, in addition to their 
medical degree, the supplementary qualification of ‘Health Informatics’, ‘Medical Informatics’ 
and/or ‘Biomedical Informatics’. This additional qualification can be issued by any national 
medical or health professional association or University. The same holds true for nurses, for 
whom various forms of continuing education are very well-established in many countries. 
In order to offer courses in BMHI for continuing education, it is recommended that specific 
entities are established to provide such courses. These entities might be inside universities or, as 
academies of health/medical informatics established by any national association in BMHI or 
provided by an independent private entity provided that in all cases the people responsible for 
course curriculum, content and educational delivery are suitably qualified. 
 
6.2 Life-Long Learning 
Working in the field of BMHI and even using information and communication technology 
requires life long learning. Therefore opportunities for continuing education should be offered 
for BMHI specialists as well as IT users of the various health professions. The ability of 
‘learning to learn’ will become of particular importance. 
 
7 Other Recommendations 
7.1 How to Commence with Biomedical and Health Informatics Education 
BMHI affects all health care professionals. To commence education in this field, IMIA 
recommends that education in BMHI for all types of health care professionals, including the 
different types of specialization and levels of education is considered. The first step is to 
consider the level of practice of the individual. As noted in table 7, work in informatics depends 
upon whether someone has a technical/informatics or clinical background. Within informatics, 
one may practice more at the applied level in operational settings or may be an academic who 
teaches and/or performs research. For countries without formal informatics educational 
programs, additional steps are necessary. In this instance, teachers have to be educated (‘teach 
the teachers’) first, or, e.g., retiring BMHI faculty in developed countries could also perform this 
service. Next, courseware has to be prepared (or adapted) and institutes for health informatics or 
medical informatics must be established within universities, usually inside medical or health 
sciences faculties. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
20/28 
 
Table 7 - Categories of informatics practice, adapted from [53]. 
Level of Practice Type of Work Example Job Titles 
Academic Individual who does research and/or 
teaching in an academic center 
Professor 
Scientist or Researcher 
Applied Individual who works in an operational 
informatics setting for a majority of his or 
her working time 
Chief Information Officer 
Chief Medical or Nursing 
Information Officer 
Project Manager 
Developer 
Trainer 
Clinical Clinicians and others who apply 
informatics in their work 
Physician 
Nurse 
Health administrator 
 
7.2 Modes of Education 
The next consideration for informatics educational programs is (are) the mode(s) of education to 
be chosen, considering the specific profile and possibilities of the respective universities. 
Besides lectures it is of importance that practical experience within health care institutions (e.g., 
in hospitals) are offered. Besides ‘traditional’ lectures and exercises within universities, different 
models of flexible, distance and supported open learning should be actively pursued. Problem-
oriented learning might particularly support the relevance of BMHI as it requires integration of 
information and a cross-disciplinary understanding [82].  
 
7.3 Qualified Teachers 
Courses and programs in BMHI must be of high quality. Teachers of courses in BMHI must 
have adequate and specific qualifications in this field. It must be possible to obtain such 
qualifications for lecturing in BMHI from universities or other institutions of higher education.  
 
7.4 Recognized Qualifications 
Education of students in BMHI, which goes beyond introductory courses in the use of 
information and communication technology, only makes sense if positions for these graduates 
exist or are created. The qualifications of such BMHI graduates must be recognised and we are 
recommending that health care organizations realize the need of positions as specialists in 
BMHI. 
 
8 IMIA Support for Programs and Courses in Biomedical and Health 
Informatics 
8.1 IMIA Certification  
To support education of high quality in the field of BMHI, IMIA offers help by providing expert 
advice to persons and institutions in this field, as far as the resources of IMIA allow. This might 
especially be needed when commencing with educational activities and when national 
institutions are not yet established to do this. IMIA is also currently establishing services for the 
accreditation of such educational programs. 
BMHI courses inside programs and specialised programs in this field can upon request add to 
the description of their course track or program the phrase ‘endorsed by the International 
Medical Informatics Association’ and can use the IMIA logo in this context. This is conditional 
to the IMIA recommendations being fulfilled and once the quality of the program, including 
organisational integration and resources, has been assessed by IMIA appointed experts. Single 
courses can not be considered, only course tracks or programs. The fulfilment of the 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
21/28 
 
recommendations and the assessment of the quality of the program will be examined by a 
committee usually consisting of four members of IMIA’s Working Group on Health and 
Medical Informatics Education or other persons, experienced in BMHI education, and will be 
approved by the IMIA President and the Chairperson of IMIA’s Working Group on education. 
After approval, a written certificate, signed by the IMIA President, the Chairperson of 
IMIA’s Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education, will be given to the 
respective organisation. 
Requests should be submitted to the Executive Director of IMIA. 
 
8.2 International Programs, International Exchange of Students and Teachers 
IMIA encourages and recommends international activities in educating BMHI specialists. IMIA 
also recommends the international exchange of students and of teachers in this field. It 
encourages the establishment of international programs to support this and to exchange 
courseware. Programs should be built up in a modular way, and international credit transfer 
systems such as the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS, [81]) should be 
used in the respective national programs to support these international perspectives. 
 
9 Information Exchange on Programs and Courses in Biomedical and 
Health Informatics supported by IMIA 
IMIA’s Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education is a group devoted to 
BMHI education. Its activities include to disseminate and exchange information on BMHI 
programs and courses and to support BMHI courses and exchange of students and teachers. The 
Working Group intends to advance the knowledge of (1) how informatics is taught in the 
education of health care professionals around the world, (2) how in particular BMHI is taught to 
students of computer science/informatics, and (3) how it is taught within dedicated curricula in 
BMHI. Working Group members contribute to various Web-based catalogues of BMHI 
programs, including those, mentioned in section 1.2. 
In addition, IMIA’s Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education operates a 
mailing list to facilitate communication between all persons interested in BMHI education 
worldwide. For subscription, instructions on the Working Group’s web site should be followed. 
IMIA encourages the development and sharing of courseware of high quality for courses in 
BMHI. This will help to further establish courses in this field. It also encourages the use of its 
IMIA Working Group on education’s web site and list server for the dissemination of 
information about such courseware.  
 
10 Concluding Remarks 
These recommendations provide a framework for individual curriculum development. 
Individual countries may wish to develop more detailed or better defined curricula guidelines to 
suit their specific needs and educational system. This could include specific minimum level 
competencies required for each level and knowledge/skill domain. Such national efforts are 
expected to inform future reviews of these guidelines. 
IMIA, understanding its role as a leader in the scientific progress of the expanding field of 
BMHI, is also developing as part of its strategic plan [73] a knowledge base [83], which can be 
of real significance for educators in the field as well as to healthcare professionals.  
IMIA’s Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education may in the near future 
develop teaching credentialing criteria to serve as a guide for teachers wishing to participate in 
BMHI education. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
22/28 
 
Acknowledgements 
These revised recommendations are the result of the task force team established by the IMIA 
Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education in 2006 ([77]). The draft 
document is being communicated and discussed by the working group members during its 
Working Conference 2008 at Buenos Aires. The recommendations are subject to final approval 
by the IMIA General Assembly. 
Significant contributions to the recommendations came from Elske Ammenwerth (Austria), 
George Demiris (USA), Arie Hasman (The Netherlands), Reinhold Haux (Germany), William 
Hersh (USA), Evelyn Hovenga (Australia), K.C. Lun (Singapore), John Mantas (Greece), 
Heimar Marin (Brazil), Fernando Martin-Sanchez (Spain), Graham Wright (UK). The team 
would like to thank Professor Dr. Reinhold Haux, President of IMIA for his continued support 
in developing the revised version of the Educational Recommendations. We also thank Dr. Peter 
Murray, Executive Director of IMIA for monitoring and supporting the team’s efforts.  
We would like to thank all contributors of the original recommendations for their pioneering 
work as mentioned in [1]. 
The recommendations have been edited by John Mantas (co-chairman of IMIA on Health and 
Medical Informatics Education) chairing the task force team. 
 
References 
[1] Recommendations of the International Medical Informatics Association (IMIA) on 
education in health and medical informatics. Methods Inf Med. 2000; 39: 267-77. 
http://www.imia.org/pubdocs/rec_english.pdf Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[2] IMIA Yearbooks of Medical Informatics. http://www.imiapubs.org and 
http://www.schattauer.de/index.php?id=imia. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[3] Haux R, Swinkels W, Ball MJ, Knaup P, Lun KC, editors. Special Issue on health and 
medical informatics education: transformation of healthcare through innovative use of 
information technology. Proceedings of the 1997 IMIA Working Group on Education 
Meeting. Int J Med Inform. 1998; 50: 1-300. 
[4] Hersh WR, Gorman P, editors. Teach Globally, Learn Locally. Proceedings of the 2003 
IMIA Working Group on Education Meeting. Int J Med Inform. 2004; 73: 95-213. 
[5] Mantas J, editor. Health and medical informatics education. Proceedings of the 2005 
IMIA Working Group on Education Meeting. Methods Inf Med. 2007; 46: 50-92. 
[6] Hersh WR, Otero P, Bernaldo de Quirós FG, editors. Building Worldwide Capacity for 
the Health Informatics Workforce. Proceedings of the 2008 IMIA Working Group on 
Education Meeting. Methods Inf Med. (to appear). 
[7] Hasman A, Albert A, Wainwright P, Klar R, Sosa M, editors. Education and training in 
health informatics in Europe. Amsterdam: IOS Press; 1995. 
[8] Mantas J. Health and nursing informatics education, Stud Health Technol Inform. 1998; 
56: 146-52. 
[9] Mantas J, Future trends in health informatics - theoretical and practical. Stud Health 
Technol Inform. 2004; 109: 114-27. 
[10] Garg AX, Adhikari NK, McDonald H, Rosas-Arellano MP, Devereaux PJ, Beyene J, 
Sam J, Haynes RB. Effects of computerized clinical decision support systems on 
practitioner performance and patient outcomes: a systematic review. JAMA. 2005; 293: 
1223-38. 
[11] Chaudhry B, Wang J, Wu S, Maglione M, Mojica W, Roth E, Morton SC, Shekelle PG. 
Systematic review: impact of health information technology on quality, efficiency, and 
costs of medical care. Ann Intern Med. 2006; 144: 742-52. 
[12] Hersh WR, Hickam DH, Severance SM, Dana TL, Pyle Krages K, Helfand M. 
Diagnosis, access and outcomes: Update of a systematic review of telemedicine 
services. J Telemed Telecare. 2006; 12 Suppl 2: S3-31. 
[13] Lorenzi NM, E-health strategies worldwide. In: Haux R, Kulikowski C, editors. IMIA 
Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2005, 157-64. Stuttgart: Schattauer; 2005. 
[14] Hasman A, Haux R. Modeling in biomedical informatics - an exploratory analysis 
(part 1). Methods Inf Med. 2006; 45: 638-42. 
[15] Hasman A, Haux R. Modeling in biomedical informatics: an exploratory analysis 
(part 2). Int J Med Inform. 2007; 76: 96-102. 
[16] Kuhn KA, Knoll A, Mewes HW, Schwaiger M, Bode A et al. Informatics and medicine 
- from molecules to populations. Methods Inf Med. 2008; 47: 283-95 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
23/28 
 
[17] Payne PR, Johnson SB, Starren JB, Tilson HH, Dowdy D. Breaking the translational 
barriers: the value of integrating biomedical informatics and translational research. J 
Investig Med. 2005; 53: 192-200. 
[18] Zerhouni EA. Translational research: moving discovery to practice. Clin Pharmacol 
Ther. 2007; 81: 126-8. 
[19] Baxevanis AD, Ouellette BFF, Bioinformatics: a practical guide to the analysis of genes 
and proteins, Third Edition. 2005, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Interscience. 
[20] Hovenga EJS and Mantas J, Global Health Informatics Education. 2004, Amsterdam: 
IOS Press. 
[21] Jaspers MW, Gardner RM, Gatewood LC, Haux R, Schmidt D, Wetter T. The 
International Partnership for Health Informatics Education: lessons learned from six 
years of experience. Methods Inf Med. 2005; 44: 25-31. 
[22] Otero P, Hersh W et.al. Translation, implementation and evaluation of a medical 
informatics distance learning course for Latin America. MEDINFO 2007 - Proceedings 
of the Twelfth World Congress on Health (Medical) Informatics, Brisbane, Australia. 
IOS Press; 2007. CD-ROM P421. 
[23] Ball MJ, Silva JS, Bierstock S, Douglas JV, Norcio AF, Chakraborty J, Srini J. Failure 
to provide clinicians useful IT systems: opportunities to leapfrog current technologies. 
Methods Inf Med. 2008; 47: 4-7. 
[24] Hersh W. Health care information technology: progress and barriers. JAMA. 2004; 292: 
2273-4. 
[25] Poon EG, Blumenthal D, Jaggi T, Honour MM, Bates DW, Kaushal R. Overcoming 
barriers to adopting and implementing computerized physician order entry systems in 
U.S. hospitals. Health Aff (Millwood). 2004; 23: 184-90. 
[26] Hersh W. Who are the informaticians? What we know and should know. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc. 2006; 13: 166-70. 
[27] Hersh W. Health and biomedical informatics: opportunities and challenges for a twenty-
first century profession and its education. Yearb Med Inform. 2008: 157-64. 
[28] Hersh W. A stimulus to define informatics and health information technology. BMC 
Med Inform Decis Mak. 2009; 9: 24. 
[29] Schuemie MJ, Talmon JL, Moorman PW, Kors JA. Mapping the domain of medical 
informatics. Methods Inf Med. 2009; 48: 76-83. 
[30] Roberts J. Developing health informatics as a recognised professional domain 
supporting clinical and health management activity. World Hosp Health Serv. 2006; 42: 
38-40. 
[31] Joyub R, The professionalisation of health informatics in the United Kingdom, UK 
Health Informatics Today. 2004; 42(Spring): 1-4. 
[32] Klar R. Official catalogue of subject matters in medical informatics for German medical 
students. In: [7], 145-52. 
[33] Scope and Standards of Nursing Informatics Practice. 2008, Washington, DC: American 
Nurses Association. 
[34] Detmer DE, Lumpkin JR, Williamson JJ. Defining the medical subspecialty of clinical 
informatics. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2009; 16: 167-8. 
[35] Safran C, Shabot MM, Munger BS, Holmes JH, Steen EB, Lumpkin JR et al. Program 
requirements for fellowship education in the subspecialty of clinical informatics. J Am 
Med Inform Assoc. 2009; 16: 158-66. Erratum in: J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2009; 16: 
605. 
[36] Leven FJ, Curriculum for medical informatics at the University of Heidelberg/School of 
Technology Heilbronn. Methods Inf Med. 1994; 33: 262-7. 
[37] Knaup P, Haag M, Leven FJ, Dickhaus H. Challenges in the evolution of the medical 
informatics program at Heidelberg/Heilbronn (Germany). Methods Inf Med. 2009; 48: 
66-75. 
[38] Moehr JR. English Translation of the Minutes of the Invitational Workshop Goals, 
Contents and Methods for Education in Medical Informatics. Haux R, Kulikowski C, 
editors. IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2004, 210-9. Stuttgart: Schattauer; 
2004. 
[39] Moehr JR. The Quest for Identity of Health Informatics and for Guidance to Education 
in it – The German Reisensburg Conference of 1973 Revisited. Haux R, Kulikowski C, 
editors. IMIA Yearbook of Medical Informatics 2004, 201-10. Stuttgart: Schattauer; 
2004. 
[40] Duncan KA Austing RH, Katz S, Pengov RE, Pogue RE, Wasserman AIl. Health 
Computing: Curriculum for an emerging profession - report of the ACM curriculum 
committee on health computing education. Proceedings of the 1978 ACM Annual 
Conference/Annual Meeting. 1978. Washington, DC: ACM Press. 277-285. 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
24/28 
 
http://portal.acm.org/ft_gateway.cfm?id=804112&type=pdf&coll=GUIDE&dl=GUIDE
&CFID=47975758&CFTOKEN=19987037. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[41] Physicians for the twenty-first century (The GPEP Report). Washington: Association of 
the American Medical Colleges: 1984. 
[42] Haux R, Dudeck J, Gaus W, Leven FJ, Kunath H, Michaelis J, et al. Recommendations 
of the German Association for Medical Informatics, Biometry and Epidemiology for 
education and training in medical informatics. Methods Inf Med. 1992; 31: 60-70. 
[43] Hasman A, Albert A. Education and training in health informatics: guidelines for 
European curricula. Int J Med Inform. 1997; 45: 91-110. 
[44] Council of Europe Committee of Ministers (1995): Recommendations No. R (90) 21 of 
the Committee of Ministers to Member States on training strategies for health 
information systems. In: [7], 3-6. 
[45] Mantas J. Developing curriculum in nursing informatics in Europe. Int J Med Inform. 
1998; 50: 123-32. 
[46] Mantas J. NIGHTINGALE--a new perspective in nursing informatics education in 
Europe. Stud Health Technol Inform. 1998; 51: 102-13. 
[47] Enabling People Programme & English National Board for Nursing, Midwifery and 
Health Visiting. Information for caring: integrating informatics into learning 
programmes for nurses, midwives and health visitors. Birmingham: Institute of Health 
and Care Development; 1997. 
[48] National Advisory Council on Nurse Education and Practice (NACNEP): A national 
informatics agenda for nursing education and practice. Washington DC: US Department 
of Health and Human Services, Division of Nursing: 1997. 
http://www.eric.ed.gov:80/ERICDocs/data/ericdocs2sql/content_storage_01/0000019b/
80/16/d3/da.pdf. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[49] Medical School Objectives Project. Medical Informatics Objectives. Washington, DC: 
Association of American Medical Colleges; 1999 
http://www.aamc.org/meded/msop/start.htm. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[50] Schleyer T. Competencies for Dental Informatics V 1.0. Pittsburgh, PA: University of 
Pittsburgh Center for Dental Informatics: 1999. 
http://www.dental.pitt.edu/informatics/competencies.php. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[51]  Health Informatics Competency Profiles for the NHS. London: National Health Service 
Information Authority; 2001. 
[52] Staggers N, Gassert CA, and Curran C. A Delphi study to determine informatics 
competencies at four levels of practice. Nursing Res. 2002; 51: 383-90. 
[53] Covvey HD, Zitner D, Bernstein R. Pointing the way: competencies and curricula in 
health informatics. Waterloo, Ontario: University of Waterloo; 2001. 
http://www.cs.uwaterloo.ca/health_info/health_docs/CurriculaMASTERDocumentVersi
on1Final.zip. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[54] Mantas J Hasman A, editors. Textbook in health informatics – a nursing perspective. 
Amsterdam: IOS Press; 2001. 
[55] O'Carroll PW; Public Health Informatics Competencies Working Group. Informatics 
competencies for public health professionals., Seattle, Wa: Northwest Center for Public 
Health Practice; 2002. http://www.nwcphp.org/docs/phi/comps/phi_print.pdf. Last 
access: August 29, 2009. 
[56] Curran CR. Informatics competencies for nurse practitioners. AACN Clin Issues. 2003; 
14: 320-30.  
[57] Friedman CP, Altman RB, Kohane IS, McCormick KA, Miller PL, Ozbolt JG et al.; 
American College of Medical Informatics. Training the next generation of 
informaticians: the impact of "BISTI" and bioinformatics - a report from the American 
College of Medical Informatics. J Am Med Inform Assoc. 2004; 11: 167-72. 
[58]  HIM Baccalaureate Degree Entry-Level Competencies. Chicago, IL: American Health 
Information Management Association; 2004. 
http://library.ahima.org/xpedio/groups/public/documents/ahima/bok1_025415.pdf. Last 
access: October 2, 2009. 
[59] Garde S, Hovenga E. Australian health informatics educational framework. Brunswick 
East, Australia: Australian College of Health Informatics; 2006. 
http://www.achi.org.au/sites/default/files/Health_Informatics_Educational_Framework_
20060326.pdf. Last access: October 2, 2009. 
[60] Ivanitskaya L, O'Boyle I, Casey AM. Health information literacy and competencies of 
information age students: results from the interactive online Research Readiness Self-
Assessment (RRSA). J Med Internet Res. 2006; 8: e6. 
[61] VISION 2016: A Blueprint for quality education in health information management. 
Chicago, Il: American Health Information Management Association (AHIMA); 2007. 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
25/28 
 
http://www.ahima.org/emerging_issues/Vision2016BlueprintforEduc.pdf. Last access: 
August 29, 2009. 
[62] Health informatics professional core competencies. Toronto, Ontario: Canadian Health 
Informatics Association (COACH); 2007. 
https://secure.coachorg.com/opendoc.asp?docID=1062 Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[63] Health information science knowledge and skills. Chicago, IL: Medical Library 
Association; 2007. http://www.mlanet.org/education/platform/skills.html. Last access: 
August 29, 2009. 
[64] Pigott K, de Lusignan S, Rapley A, Robinson J, Pritchard-Copley A. An informatics 
benchmarking statement. Methods Inf Med. 2007; 46: 394-8. 
[65] Hersh W, Course description - AMIA-OHSU 10x10 course.: Bethesda, MD: American 
Medical Informatics Association; 2008 
http://www.amia.org/10x10/partners/ohsu/description.asp. Last access: August 29, 
2009. 
[66] Joint Workforce Task Force. Health information management and informatics core 
competencies for individuals working with electronic health records. Chicago, IL and 
Bethesda, MD: American Health Information Management Association and American 
Medical Informatics Association: 2008. 
http://www.ahima.org/infocenter/whitepapers/workforce_2008.pdf. Last access: August 
29, 2009. 
[67] Karras BT, Davies J, Koo D; Working Group on Competencies for Public Health 
Informatics Competencies. Competencies for public health informaticians, Public 
Health Informatics Competencies. 2007, Seattle, WA: Center for Public Health 
Informatics; 2008. http://cphi.washington.edu/competencies. Last access: August 29, 
2009 
[68] Gardner RM, Overhage JM, Steen EB, Munger BS, Holmes JH, Williamson JJ, et al.; 
AMIA Board of Directors. Core content for the subspecialty of clinical informatics. J 
Am Med Inform Assoc. 2009; 16: 153-7. 
[69] http://www.hiww.org/. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[70] http://www.amia.org/informatics/acad%2526training/index.asp. Last access: August 29, 
2009. 
[71] http://www.amia.org/informatics/acad%2526training/international.asp. Last access: 
August 29, 2009. 
[72] http://www.imia.org. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[73] The IMIA strategic plan: towards IMIA2015. 
http://www.imia.org/images/IMIA_Strategic_Plan.pdf. Last access: August 29, 2009. 
[74] Lorenzi NM. Towards IMIA 2015 - the IMIA strategic plan. Yearb Med Inform. 2007: 
1-5. 
[75] Murray P et al. Let a thousand flowers bloom: transition towards implementation of the 
IMIA strategic plan. Methods Inf Med. 2007; 46: 625-8. 
[76] Murray PJ. The IMIA strategic plan - towards IMIA 2015. Yearb Med Inform. 2008: 7-
15. 
[77] Minutes of the IMIA General Assembly, August 2007, Brisbane, Australia. Report of 
the Vice-President for Working Groups. 
[78] Knaup P, Dickhaus H. Perspectives of medical informatics: advancing health care 
requires interdisciplinarity and interoperability. Methods Inf Med. 2009; 48: 1-3. 
[79] Kulikowski CA. The micro-macro spectrum of medical informatics challenges: from 
molecular medicine to transforming health care in a globalizing society. Methods Inf 
Med 2002; 41: 20-4. 
[80] van Bemmel JH. Medical informatics is interdisciplinary avant la lettre. Methods Inf 
Med. 2008; 47: 318-21. 
[81] European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System: 
http://ec.europa.eu/education/lifelong-learning-policy/doc48_en.htm. Last access: 
August 29, 2009 
[82] Hasman A, Boshuizen HP. Medical informatics and problem-based learning. Methods 
Inf Med. 2001; 40: 78-82. 
[83] Wright G et al. IMIA knowledge base. Report submitted to IMIA, June 2008. 
 
IMIA Educational Recommendations-Revised 
 
26/28 
 
Address of Correspondence: 
Professor John Mantas 
Chair of Task Force 
Email: jmantas@cc.uoa.gr 
 
Members of the Task Force: 
John Mantas (Chair), Elske Ammewerth, George Demiris, Arie Hasman, Reinhold Haux, 
William Hersh, Evelyn Hovenga, KC Lun, Heimar Marin, Fernando Martin-Sanchez, Graham 
Wright 
 
International Medical Informatics Association (IMIA) 
Working Group on Health and Medical Informatics Education 
http://www.imia.org 
Chair: 
Professor William Hersh 
Chairman, Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology 
Oregon health and Science University 
USA 
Email: hersh@ohsu.edu 
Co-Chair: 
Professor John Mantas 
Director, Health Informatics Laboratory 
University of Athens 
Greece 
Email: jmantas@cc.uoa.gr 

