www.sciencemag.org SCIENCE VOL 302 3 OCTOBER 2003 63
T
he National Institutes of Health (NIH)
is at a critical moment in its prestigious
history. As the 21st century unfolds,
discovery in the life sciences is accelerating
at an unprecedented rate. Although the se-
quencing of the human genome presents vast
opportunities for researchers, it also creates a
series of challenges that will redefine the
ways that medical research is conducted and,
ultimately, how research leads to im-
provements in health. 
The 5-year doubling of the NIH
budget, completed in FY 2003, both
picked up the pace of discovery and
heightened public expectations. As I
assumed the directorship of NIH,
early discussions with legislators, ad-
ministration officials, and institute
directors, as well as public, patient
advocacy, and scientific leaders con-
vinced me that NIH needed to exam-
ine its portfolio with an eye to identi-
fying critical scientific gaps. 
The NIH earned its reputation for
success because of the vitality of its
institutes, centers, and offices and be-
cause of the diverse ways in which it
funds and conducts research—all fos-
tered by decentralization inherent to
its organization and funding streams.
This characteristic serves the agency
well and should be preserved.
However, as science grows more com-
plex, it is also converging on a set of
unifying principles that link apparent-
ly disparate diseases through common
biological pathways and therapeutic
approaches. Today, NIH research
needs to reflect this new reality. 
Over the past year, NIH and its
leadership have been engaged in a
process dubbed the “NIH Roadmap.”
This process was designed to ask the
kind of probing questions that a com-
plex research organization should pe-
riodically pose, especially when in
transition. The roadmap was purpose-
fully focused on efforts that no single
or small group of institutes or centers
could or should conduct on its own,
but that NIH as a whole must address
to ensure both efficient and effective
discovery. This was not a reexamination of
the strategic plans of each institute or the de-
velopment of a wholly new comprehensive
plan for the sake of being responsive to
every interest and constituency. This would
have led to a reasoned, but impractical, plan.
Rather, the goal was to define a compelling,
limited set of priorities that can be acted on
and are essential to accelerate progress
across the spectrum of the institute missions. 
Our consultations began first with the
scientific community and public constituen-
cies, representing over 300 of the nation’s
biomedical leaders from academia, govern-
ment, and the private sector. We asked par-
ticipants to address three key questions:
What are today’s most pressing scientific
challenges? What are the roadblocks to
progress and what must be done to overcome
them? Which efforts were beyond the man-
date of one or a few institutes, but were the
responsibility of NIH as a whole?
Through these consultations, three major
themes emerged—New Path-
ways to Discovery, Research
Teams of the Future, and Re-
engineering the Clinical Re-
search Enterprise. These ideas
were examined by 15 working
groups, each led by institute
directors, with input from the
NIH Council of Public Repre-
sentatives and the Advisory
Committee to the Director. 
In June, the NIH leadership
met to make final selections of
key initiatives to be launched in
FY 2004 based on the follow-
ing criteria: Is the initiative tru-
ly transforming—will it dra-
matically change the content or
the process of medical research
in the next decade? Would out-
comes from the initiative be
used by, and synergize the work
of, many institutes? Can the
NIH afford not to do it? Will
the initiative be compelling to
NIH stakeholders, especially
the public? Does the initiative
position the NIH to do some-
thing that no other entity can or
will do? 
At this juncture, working
groups with thematically relat-
ed initiatives were combined
and reorganized into nine im-
plementation groups (see the
table) responsible for develop-
ing the proposals into tangible
activities to be launched in FY
2004. The initiatives are com-
plex, so their implementation
will be gradual and tailored to
specific short- and long-term
goals. Some efforts will reach
fruition rapidly; others will re-
quire longer incubation periods
before being fully realized.
M E D I C I N E
The NIH Roadmap
Elias Zerhouni
The author is the director of the National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
POLICY FORUM
New Pathways to Discovery
Building Blocks, Pathways, and Networks Implementation Group
 National Technology Centers for Networks and Pathways
 Metabolomics Technology Development
 Standards for Proteomics and Metabolomics/Assessment of Critical 
  Reagents for Proteomics
Molecular Libraries and Imaging Implementation Group
 Creation of NIH Bioactive Small-Molecule Library and Screening Centers
 Cheminformatics
 Technology Development
 Development of High-Specificity/High-Sensitivity Probes to Improve 
  Detection
 Comprehensive Trans-NIH Imaging Probe Database
 Core Synthesis Facility to Produce Imaging Probes
Structural Biology Implementation Group
 Membrane Protein Production Facilities
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology Implementation Group
 National Centers for Biomedical Computing
Nanomedicine Implementation Group
 Planning for Nanomedicine Centers
Research Teams of the Future
High-Risk Research Implementation Group
 NIH Director's Innovator Awards
Interdisciplinary Research Implementation Group
 Interdisciplinary Research (IR) Centers
 Interdisciplinary Research Training Initiative
 Innovations in Interdisciplinary Technology and Methods (Meetings)
 Removing Structural Barriers to Interdisciplinary Research.
 NIH Intramural Program as a Model for Interdisciplinary Research
 Interagency Conference on the Interface of Life Sciences and Physical 
  Sciences
Public-Private Partnerships Implementation Group
 Designation of a Public-Private Sector Liaison
 High-Level Science-Driven Partnership Meetings
Reengineering the Clinical Research Enterprise
Clinical Research Implementation Group
 Harmonization of Clinical Research Regulatory Requirements
 Integration of Clinical Research Networks
 Enhance Clinical Research Workforce Training
 Clinical Research Informatics:  National Electronic Clinical Trials and 
   Research (NECTAR) Network
 Translational Research Core Services
 Regional Translational Research Centers
 Enabling Technologies for Improved Assessment of Clinical Outcomes
  
 NIH ROADMAP—THEMES, IMPLEMENTATION 
GROUPS, AND INITIATIVES*
* For further description see www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/302/5642/63/DC1
3 OCTOBER 2003 VOL 302 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org64
However, we will begin to implement all 28
initiatives in 2004, with a clear focus on
making viable, enduring changes that will
lead to improvements in health. Let me out-
line the themes and initiatives in more detail.
New Pathways to Discovery. This theme
addresses the need to understand complex bi-
ological systems. Future progress in medicine
will require quantitative knowledge about the
many interconnected networks of molecules
that comprise cells and tissues, along with im-
proved insights into how these networks are
regulated and interact with each other. 
New Pathways to Discovery also sets out
to build a better “toolbox” for today’s bio-
medical researchers. To fully capitalize on
the recent sequencing of the human genome
and many new discoveries in molecular and
cell biology, the research community needs
wide access to technologies, databases, and
other scientific resources that are more sen-
sitive, more robust, and more easily adapt-
able to researchers’ individual needs. 
Roadmap initiatives within this theme ad-
dress technologies and approaches necessary
to meet contemporary research challenges, in-
cluding building blocks and pathways, molec-
ular imaging, the development of small-mol-
ecule libraries, bioinformatics and computa-
tional biology, nanomedicine, and structural
biology. We will issue new Requests for
Applications (RFAs) in FY 2004 for National
Technology Centers for Networks and
Pathways, National Centers for Biomedical
Computing, Centers for Innovation in
Membrane Protein Production, as well as in-
vestigator-initiated grants for related research
in structural biology, metabolomics technolo-
gy development, and proteomics. In addition,
we will support development of new screen-
ing centers for bioactive small molecules, a
publicly accessible cheminformatics refer-
ence database to be housed at NIH’s National
Center for Biotechnology Information, and a
database and core facility dedicated to synthe-
sizing and distributing molecular imaging
probes. The agency will also begin planning a
series of nanomedicine centers that will be
launched in 2005. These centers will focus on
quantitative measurement of biological
processes at the nanoscale and the engineer-
ing of new tools to intervene at the nanoscale
or molecular level. This research will help
scientists construct synthetic biological de-
vices, such as miniature, implantable pumps
for drug delivery or tiny sensors to scan for
the presence of infectious agents or metabol-
ic imbalances. 
Research Teams of the Future. The scale
and complexity of today’s biomedical re-
search problems increasingly demand that sci-
entists move beyond the confines of their own
discipline and explore new organizational
models for team science. NIH wants to stimu-
late new ways of combining skills and disci-
plines in the physical and biological sciences.
The Director’s Innovator Awards will encour-
age investigators to take on creative, unex-
plored avenues of research that carry a relative-
ly high potential for failure, but also possess a
greater chance for ground-breaking discover-
ies. In addition, novel partnerships, such as
those between public and private sectors, will
be encouraged to accelerate movement of sci-
entific discoveries from bench to bedside. 
Solving the puzzle of complex diseases,
from obesity to cancer, will require a holistic
understanding of the interplay between fac-
tors such as genetics, diet, infectious agents,
environment, behavior, and social structures.
To devise and use the state-of-the-art tech-
nologies developed from the roadmap effort,
we will need the expertise of nontraditional
teams of biological scientists, engineers,
mathematicians, physical scientists, comput-
er scientists, and others. The private sector
will play an essential role in this new para-
digm, and federal agencies will be required
to do more collaborating with industry and
each other. We recognize that the research
teams of the future will look and feel vastly
different from their predecessors. 
Effecting these changes will require cul-
tural and scientific adjustments and experi-
mentation with new approaches. The imple-
mentation group responsible for the Research
Teams of the Future devised a plan to meet
these challenges with a series of initiatives
that provide mechanisms for high-risk strate-
gies, interdisciplinary research, and public-
private partnerships. For example, it has been
suggested that investigators do not submit
their most innovative applications to the NIH
because they think the NIH is risk-averse. We
have heard that peer review typically values
likelihood of success more than potential im-
pact and that some funding decisions are too
conservative. To encourage high-risk re-
search, NIH will solicit nominations for the
Director’s Innovator Awards, which will pro-
vide support to a highly select group of indi-
viduals who have the potential to make ex-
traordinary contributions. They will be evalu-
ated in terms of their exceptional creative
abilities, potential for ground-breaking dis-
covery, evidence of focused and skillful
habits of mind that predict perseverance and
thorough exploration of his/her ideas, and,
most important, prospects for making semi-
nal biomedical research advances.
To build the research workforce of the fu-
ture, the agency will issue RFAs to promote
collaborative efforts, including Explora-
tory Centers for Interdisciplinary Research
and Training for a New Interdisciplinary
Research Workforce. These programs will be
augmented by conferences and symposia on
timely issues, such as methodological inno-
vations and peer review. To expedite the for-
mation of productive public-private partner-
ships, the NIH will establish a central point
of contact to support and encourage NIH ac-
tivities involving these partnerships. 
Reengineering the Clinical Research
Enterprise. Although biomedical research
has succeeded in converting many lethal dis-
eases into chronic, treatable conditions, con-
tinued success requires that the United States
recast its entire system of clinical research.
Over the years, clinical research has become
more difficult to conduct. However, exciting
basic science discoveries demand that clini-
cal research continue and even expand, while
striving to improve efficiency and better in-
form basic science. This is undoubtedly the
most difficult but most important challenge
identified by the NIH Roadmap process.
Clinical research needs to develop new
partnerships among organized patient com-
munities, community-based physicians, and
academic researchers. In the past, all research
for a clinical trial could be conducted in one
academic center; that is unlikely to be true in
the future. In these initiatives, NIH will pro-
mote creation of better integrated networks of
academic centers that work jointly on clinical
trials and include community-based physi-
cians who care for large groups of well-char-
acterized patients. Implementing this vision
will require new ways to organize how clini-
cal research information is recorded, new
standards for clinical research protocols,
modern information technology, new models
of cooperation between NIH and patient ad-
vocacy alliances, and new strategies to reen-
ergize the clinical research workforce.
Critics of the nation’s current clinical re-
search system have cited several factors that
promote inefficiency, including poor integra-
tion of existing clinical research networks,
inadequate training mechanisms for clinical
investigators, inconsistent data standards and
database requirements, and lack of informa-
tion. In addition, successful clinical research
relies on public trust, and any proposal that
addresses the nation’s investment in this area
must be sensitive to the needs of the most
important NIH constituency, the American
people. 
The NIH annually funds and conducts bil-
lions of dollars of clinical research—$8.4 bil-
lion in FY 2003—addressing the full panoply
of public health problems that confront the
nation. As such, we have a vested interest in
catalyzing the transformation of policies
throughout the federal government, while
maintaining an emphasis on the integrity and
effectiveness of federal and institutional sys-
tems of oversight. In the upcoming year, the
NIH will design pilot programs for a revolu-
tionary National Electronic Clinical Trials
and Research (NECTAR) network. These pi-
lot programs will begin to develop an infor-
P O L I C Y F O R U M
CONTINUED ON PAGE 72
3 OCTOBER 2003 VOL 302 SCIENCE www.sciencemag.org72
fied and agronomically beneficial alleles.
Such an approach uses statistical methods
to reveal significant nucleotide diversity
between wild plants and their domesticat-
ed counterparts (6), enabling researchers
to identify genes of agronomic impor-
tance. A third approach, and the one ex-
ploited by Multani and colleagues, is to
analyze plant mutants that exhibit im-
proved growth characteristics and then to
identify the responsible gene mutation.
In their study, Multani et al. (4) reveal
how the growth hormone auxin controls
plant height (see the figure). Auxin regu-
lates a plethora of growth and develop-
mental processes in plants, and its effects
depend partly on its asymmetric trans-
portation from the shoot apex along the
shoot (basipetal transport). Putative pro-
tein transporters of auxin include efflux
carriers encoded by the pinoid phenotype
(PIN) gene family (7). When the model
plant Arabidopsis is treated with the aux-
in transport inhibitor N-1-naphthylph-
thalamic acid (NPA), multiple morpho-
logical changes result and the treated
plant resembles the PIN mutant pheno-
type. In Arabidopsis mutants that exhibit
defective auxin transport due to disrupted
accumulation of PIN proteins at the basal
ends of cells (8), the genetic mutations
have been identified. Mutations have
been found in two genes encoding pro-
teins that are homologous to the P-glyco-
protein type of ABC transporters. Multani
and colleagues now reveal that the br2 and
dw3 mutant varieties carry mutations in
genes that are homologous to the P-glyco-
protein genes of Arabidopsis. The basipetal
transport of auxin is reduced in br2 maize
and dw3 sorghum dwarf mutants exposed
to light. However, in contrast to its broad
morphological effects in Arabidopsis, de-
fective auxin transport in the br2 and dw3
mutants specifically results in shortening
of lower stalk internodes and dwarfism. 
The dw3 mutant has been integrated in
sorghum plant-breeding programs for more
than 50 years. Now that the mechanism of
dwarfing in the br2 mutant has been identi-
fied, the br2 gene can be manipulated to re-
duce the height of maize cultivars. The dis-
covery of genes that increase the yield of
crop plants, coupled with genetic engineer-
ing, should enable the production of even
better crop varieties in the near future.
References 
1. I. Ishaaya, Ed., Biochemical Sites of Insecticide Action
and Resistance (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2001).
2. G. S. Khush, Nature Rev. Genet. 2, 815 (2001).
3. N. E. Borlaug, Science 219, 689 (1983).
4. D. S. Multani et al., Science 302, 81 (2003).
5. M. Morgante, F. Salamini, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 14, 214
(2003).
6. Y.Vigouroux et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 9650
(2002).
7. K. Palme, L. Gälweiler, Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 2, 375
(1999).
8. B. Noh et al., Nature 423, 999 (2003).
9. P. Hedden, Trends Genet. 19, 5 (2003).
matics infrastructure that will link current
and emerging clinical research information
systems so that data and resources can be
shared within and across clinical research
networks, across studies and across institu-
tions, reducing duplication and avoiding un-
necessary overlap between trials. We expect
NECTAR to help streamline clinical research
and to accelerate the pace of discovery and
application of clinical findings. 
We intend to issue RFAs for technologies
that improve assessment of clinical outcomes
and for regional translational research cen-
ters. We will expand efforts to provide ad-
vanced training in clinical research, through
the Institutional Career Development Award
Program and the NIH Clinical Center
Clinical Research Training Program. NIH
Clinical Research Associates (trained and
certified health-care providers) will enroll
and follow patients in clinical trials, ensuring
that principles of integration will become
routine in the clinical research culture. 
Roadmap initiatives will also be unique in
the manner in which they are funded. All in-
stitutes and centers decided to create a new
funding mechanism through a common pool
of resources agreed upon and contributed to
by all of them on the basis of the multiyear
roadmap plan. The plan will be administered
centrally, but executed by lead institutes or
centers as appropriate on behalf of the whole
of NIH. This ensures that a steady multiyear
and flexible stream of funding is available
and also institutionalizes a corporate process
for decision-making about trans-NIH priori-
ties. It reflects, in our opinion, a maturation of
the NIH toward a more adaptive management
of the NIH portfolio—an approach that will
enable rapid responses to emerging opportu-
nities that do not fit clearly within the mission
of a single or small group of institutes. 
The extraordinary participation of hun-
dreds of NIH staff, extramural scientists, and
the lay public in developing these initiatives
is a reflection of the profound commitment
of NIH and its stakeholders to do whatever is
necessary to rapidly exploit the revolutionary
advances of the past few years for the bene-
fit of our people. 
GA20 oxidase
Mutant sd1: dwarf rice
GA1
GA20
GA2 oxidase
Overexpression: dwarf rice
Plant shoot primordium
Mediated by PIN proteins
Basipetal
auxin
transport
(Active)
GA8
(Inactive)
GA53
GA12
Green revolution mutants
Genes and mutants of
putative value
gai-like mutants
rht-B1b (dwarf wheat)
rht-D1b (dwarf wheat)
slr1-1 (dwarf rice)
Overexpression of
Arabidopsis gai and
wheat rht (semi-dwarf rice)
Inhibited by N-1-naphthylphtalamic acid (NPA)
Participation of ABC transporters:
MDR class of PGPs
Mutants of PGP genes:
br2 (brachytic maize)
dw3 (dwarf sorghum)
C
D
A
B
The benefits of being short. (A) Varieties of wheat from the early 1900s were almost as tall as a nor-
mal person. (B) In contrast, modern wheat varieties, particularly those that launched the green revolution,
have stalks that are 40 to 100% shorter than the stalks of earlier cultivars. The short wheat varieties car-
ry mutations in genes encoding proteins that regulate the synthesis and signaling of gibberellin (GA), a
plant growth hormone. (C) The pathway of GA synthesis indicating mutants of agronomic interest in
which GA synthesis or signaling is disrupted. GA directs degradation of the product of the GAI (gibberel-
lic acid insensitive) gene, which is a transcriptional repressor. In gai mutants (rht, reduced height; slr, slen-
der; sd, semidwarf), degradation of GAI is abrogated and GA-inducible genes are repressed (9). (D) Gene
mutations affecting transport of auxin, some of which contribute to dwarfism. (PIN, pinoid phenotype;
ABC, ATP-binding cassette; MDR, multidrug resistance; PGPs, P-glycoproteins; br, brachytic; dw, dwarf).
P E R S P E C T I V E S
POLICY FORUM CONTINUED FROM PAGE 64
For more information, visit http://nihroadmap.nih.gov

