Computer Networking and Management
Lesson 1 - Computer Networks and Internet - Overview
 
Introduction | What is the Internet? | What is a protocol? | The Network Edge | The Network Core | Access Networks | Physical 
Media | Delay and Loss in Packet-Switched Networks | Protocol Layers and Their Service Models  | Internet History 
 
Lesson Outline 
Introduction 
What Is the Internet:’ Nuts And Bolts View'  
What Is the Internet: A Service View 
What Is A Protocol?  
A Human Analogy  
A Human Protocol and a Computer Network 
Protocol 
Network Protocols  
The Network Edge 
End Systems, Clients and Servers 
End-System Interaction 
Connectionless and Connection -Oriented 
Services 
Connection-Oriented Service 
Connectionless Service 
The Network Core 
Circuit Switching 
Packet Switching  
Packet Switching Versus Circuit Switching 
Routing 
Virtual Circuit Networks 
Datagram Networks 
Access Networks 
Residential Access Networks 
A Hybrid Fire -Coax Access Network  
Company Access Networks 
Mobile Access Networks 
Home Networks  
 
Physical Media 
Some Popular Physical Media  
Twisted Pair Copper Wire  
Coaxial Cable 
Broadband Coaxial Cable  
Fibre Optics 
Terrestrial and Satellite Radio Channels 
Delay and Loss in Packet-Switched Networks 
Types of Delay 
Comparing Transmission and Propagation Delay  
Queuing Delay (Revisited) 
Real Internet Delays and Routes 
Protocol Layers and Their Service Models  
Layer Functions 
The Internet Protocol Stack, And Protocol Data 
Units  
Application Layer 
Transport Layer 
Network Layer 
Link Layer  
Physical Layer 
Internet History  
Development and Demonstration of Early Packet 
Switching Principles: 1961-1972 
Internetworking and New Proprietary Networks: 
1972-1980 
Metcalfe’s Original Conception of the Ethernet  
A Proliferation of Networks: 1980 -1990 
Commercialization and the Web: The 1990s 
GOTO TOP
Introduction 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 1 of 44
 
This lesson provides a broad overview of the Computer Networking and the Internet. The lesson begins with an 
overview of the Internet and of networking protocols, introducing several key terms and concepts.  
We examine the 'edge' of a computer network, looking at the end systems and applications, and at the 
transport service provided to applications running of the end systems 
We also examine the 'core' of a computer network, examining the links and switches that transport data. We 
then take a broader view of networking. From a performance standpoint, we study the causes of packet delay 
and loss in computer network. We identify key architectural principles in networking, including layering and 
service models. We provide brief introduction history of computer networking.  
Finally, we provide a brief overview of ATM, a networking technology that provides an important contrast with 
Internet technologies. 
GOTO TOP
What is the Internet? 
Here we use the public Internet, a specific computer network, as our principle vehicle 
for discussing computer networking protocols. But what is the Internet? 
We would like to be able to give you a one-sentence definition of the Internet – a 
definition that you can take home and share with your family and friends. Alas, the 
Internet is very complex, both in terms of its hardware and software components, as 
well as in the services it provides.  
GOTO TOP
What is the Internet: ‘Nuts and Bolts’ View  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 2 of 44
 
Instead of giving a one sentence 
definition, let us try a more descriptive 
approach. There are a couple of ways to 
do this. One way is to describe the nuts 
and bolts of the Internet, that is, the 
basic hardware  and software  
components that make up the Internet. 
Another way is to describe the Internet 
in terms of a networking infrastructure 
that provides services to distributed 
applications.  
 
Cool Internet Appliances 
The public internet is a worldwide computer network, that is, a network that interconnects millions of computing 
devices throughout the world. Most of these computing devices are traditional desktop PCs, Unix-based 
workstations, and so called servers that store and transmit information such as Web (WWW) pages and e-mail 
 
LG's Internet Microwave 
http://www.lge.com/products/homenetwork/internetproduct/microwaveoven/microwaveoven.jsp
 
  
Qubit Touch Screen Tablet 
http://www.x-home.com/e/e43.html 
 
JCC's iBOX-2 with Geode and Linux inside 
http://www.linuxdevices.com/news/NS4653311319.html 
  
 
Digital Photo Receiver 
http://www.ceiva.com 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 3 of 44
messages. Increasingly, non-traditional computing devices such as Web TVs, mobile computers, pagers, and 
toasters are being connected to the Internet.  
In the Internet jargon, all of these devices are called hosts or end systems. The Internet applications, with 
which many of us are familiar, such as the Web and e-mail, are network application programs that run on such 
end systems. 
The IETF standards documents are called Request For Comments (RFCs). RFCs started out as general 
request for comments (hence the name) to resolve architecture problems that faced the precursor to the 
Internet. RFCs, though not formally standards, have evolved to the point where they are cited as such. RFCs 
tend to be quite technical and detailed. They define protocols such as TCP, IP, HTTP (for the web), and SMTP 
(for open-standards e-mail). There are more than 2,000 different RFCs. 
End systems, as well as most other ‘pieces’ of the Internet, run protocols that 
control the sending and receiving of information within the Internet. TCP 
(Transmission Control Protocol)  and IP (Internet Protocol) are two of the most 
important protocols in the Internet. The Internet ’s principal protocols are 
collectively known as TCP/IP.  
End systems are connected together by communication links. Links are made up 
of different types of physical media, including coaxial cable, copper wire, fibre 
optics, and radio spectrum. Different links can transmit data at different rates. The 
link transmission rate is often called the link bandwidth and is typically measured 
in bits/second.  
Usually, end systems are not directly attached to each 
other via a single communication link. Instead, they are 
indirectly connected to each other through intermediate 
switching devices known as routers. A router takes 
information arriving on one of its incoming communication links and then forwards 
that information on one of its outgoing communication links. The IP protocol 
specifies the format of the information that is sent and received among routers 
and end systems. The path that transmitted information takes from the sending 
end system, through a series of communications links and routers, to the 
receiving end system is known as a route or path through the network. 
Rather than provide a dedicated path between communicating end systems, the 
Internet uses a technique known as packet switching  that allows multiple 
communicating end systems to share a path, or parts of a path, at the same time. 
The earliest ancestors of the Internet were the first packet-switched networks. 
The Internet is really a network of networks. That is, the Internet is an 
interconnected set of privately and publicly owned and managed networks. Any 
network connected to the Internet must run the IP protocol and conform to certain 
naming and addressing conventions. Other than these few constraints, however, 
a network operator can configure and run its network (that is, its little piece of 
Internet) however it chooses. Because of the universal use of the IP protocol in 
the Internet, the IP protocol is sometimes referred to as the Internet dial tone. 
The topology of the Internet, that is, the structure of the interconnection among 
the various pieces of the internet, is loosely hierarchical. Roughly speaking, from 
bottom-to -top, the hierarchy consists of end systems connected to local Internet 
Service Providers (ISPs) through access networks. An access network may be a 
so-called local-area network within a company or university, a dial telephone line 
with a modem, or a high-speed cable -based or phone-based access network. 
Local ISPs are in turn connected to regional ISPs, which are in turn connected to 
national and international ISPs. The national and international ISPs are connected 
together at the highest tier in the hierarchy. New tiers and branches (that is, new 
networks, and new networks of networks) can be added. 
At the technical and developmental level, the Internet is made possible through 
creation, testing, and implementation of Internet standards. These standards are 
developed by the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF). 
  
Things to Remember: 
What is the Internet? 
millions of connected 
computing devices: hosts, 
end-systems  
l PCs,workstations, 
servers  
l PDAs phones, 
toasters, 
running network 
apps  
communication links  
l fiber, copper, radio, 
satellite  
l transmission rate = 
bandwidth  
routers: forward packets 
(chunks of data) 
Things to Remember: 
What is the Internet? 
protocols  control sending, 
receiving of msgs 
e.g., TCP, IP, HTTP, FTP, 
PPP 
Internet: “network of 
networks” 
l loosely hierarchical  
l public Internet 
versus private 
intranet  
Internet standards  
l RFC: Request for 
comments  
l IETF: Internet 
Engineering Task 
Force  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 4 of 44
The public Internet is the network that one typically refers to as the Internet. There are also many private 
networks, such as certain corporate and government networks, whose hosts are not accessible from (that is, 
they cannot exchange messages with) hosts outside of that private network. These private networks are often 
referred to as intranets, as they often use the same Internet technology (for example, the same types of host, 
routers, links, protocols, and standards) as the public Internet. 
The preceding discussion has identified many of the pieces that make up the Internet. 
Let us now leave the nuts-and-bolts description and take a more abstract service-oriented view.  
GOTO TOP
What is the Internet: A Service View 
The Internet allows distributed applications running on its end systems to 
exchange data with each other. These applications include remote login, file 
transfer, electronic mail, audio and video streaming, real -time audio and video 
conferencing, distributed games, the World Wide Web, and much, much 
more.  
It is worth emphasizing that the Web is not a separate network but rather just 
one of many distributed applications that use the communication services 
provided by the Internet. The Web could also run over a network besides the 
Internet. One reason that the Internet is the communication medium of choice 
for the Web, however, is that no other existing packet switched network connects more than 100 million 
computers together and has over 350 million users. 
  
Cyberspace [Gibson]: 
“a consensual hallucination experienced daily by billions of operators, in every nation, 
...." 
The Internet provides two services to its distributed applications: a connection-
oriented service and a connectionless oriented service. 
Loosely speaking, connection -oriented service guarantees that data transmitted 
from a sender to a receiver will eventually be delivered to the receiver in order and 
its entirety.  
Connectionless service does not make any guarantees about eventual delivery. 
Typically, a distributed application makes use of one or the other of these two 
services and not both. 
Currently, the Internet does not provide a service that makes promises about how 
long it will take to deliver the data from sender to receiver. Also, except for 
increasing your access bit rate to your Internet service provider, you currently 
cannot obtain better service (for example, shorter delays) by paying more.  
Our second description of the Internet – in terms of the services it provides to 
distributed applications – is a non-traditional, but important, one. Increasingly, 
advances in the nuts-and-bolts components of the Internet are being driven by the 
needs of new applications. So it is important to keep in mind that the Internet is an 
infrastructure in which new applications are being constantly invented and 
deployed.  
We have given two descriptions of the Internet, one in terms of its hardware and 
software components, the other in terms of the services it provides to distributed 
applications.  
Things to Remember: 
Communication 
infrastructure enables 
distributed applications: 
l Web  
l email  
l games  
l e-commerce  
l database  
l voting  
l file (MP3) sharing  
Communication services 
provided to apps: 
l connectionless  
l connection-oriented  
GOTO TOP
What is a Protocol? 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 5 of 44
Now that we have got a bit of a feel for what the Internet is, let us consider another important buzzword in 
computer networking – protocol. 
 
What is a protocol? What does a protocol do? How would you recognize a protocol if you met one?  
  
human protocols: 
“what’s the time?” 
“I have a question” 
introductions  
… specific msgs sent 
… specific actions taken when msgs 
received, or other events 
 network protocols: 
machines rather than humans 
all communication activity in Internet 
governed by protocols
protocols define format, order of msgs sent and received among network entities, and 
actions taken on msg transmission, receipt 
GOTO TOP
A Human Analogy 
It is probably easiest to understand the notion of a computer network protocol by first considering some human 
analogies, since we humans execute protocols all of the time. Consider what you do when you ask someone 
for the time of day.  
A typical exchange is shown in the following diagram. Human protocol dictates that one first offers a greeting 
(the first “Hi” in Figure) to initiate communication with someone else. The typical response to a “HI” message 
(at least outside of New York City) is a returned “Hi” message. Implicitly, one takes a cordial “Hi” response as 
an indication that one can proceed ahead and ask for the time of day. A different response to the initial 
“Hi” (such as “Don ’t bother me!” or “I don’t speak English, ” or an unprintable reply that one might receive in 
New York City) might indicate an unwillingness or inability to communicate.  
a human protocol and a computer network protocol:  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 6 of 44
 
  
In this case, the human protocol would be to not ask for the time of day. Sometimes one gets no response at all 
to a question, in which case one typically gives up asking that person for the time. 
Note that in our human protocol, there are specific messages we send, and specific actions we take in 
response to the received reply messages or other events (such as no reply within some given amount of time). 
Clearly transmitted and received messages, and actions taken when these messages are sent or received or 
other events occur, play a central role in human protocol.  
If people run different protocols (for example, if one person has manners but the other does not, or if one 
understands the concept of time and the other does not) the protocols do not interoperate and no useful work 
can be accomplished. The same is true in networking – it takes two (or more) communicating entities running 
the same protocol in order to accomplish a task. 
GOTO TOP
A Human Protocol and a Computer Network Protocol 
Let us consider a second human analogy. Suppose you are in a college class (a 
computer networking and management class, for example!). The teacher is droning 
on about protocols and you are confused.  
The teacher stops to ask, "Are there any questions?" (a message that is transmitted 
to, and received by, all students who are not sleeping!). You raise your hand 
(transmitting an implicit message to the teacher). 
Your teacher acknowledges you with a smile, saying "Yes. .." (a transmitted message encouraging you to ask 
your question -teachers love to be asked questions) and you then ask your question (that is, transmit your 
message to your teacher).  
Your teacher hears your question (receives your question message) and answers (transmits a reply to you). 
Once again, we see that the transmission and receipt of messages, and a set of conventional actions taken 
when these messages are sent and received, are at the heart of this question -and-answer protocol.  
GOTO TOP
Network Protocols 
A network protocol is similar to a human protocol, except that the entities exchanging messages and taking 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 7 of 44
actions are hardware or software components of a computer network. All activity in the Internet that involves 
two or more communicating remote entities is governed by a protocol. 
Protocols in routers determine a packet's path from source to destination; hardware - implemented protocols in 
the network interface cards of two physically connected computers control the flow of bits on the 'wire' between 
the two computers; a congestion - control protocol controls the rate at which packets are transmitted between 
sender and receiver.  
Protocols are running everywhere in the Internet, and consequently much of this module is about computer 
network protocols.  
As an example of a computer network protocol with which you are probably familiar, consider what happens 
when you make a request to a Web server, that is, when you type in the URL of a Web page into your Web 
browser.  
l First, your computer will send a  'connection request' message to the Web server and wait for a reply. 
The Web server will eventually receive your connection request message and return a 'connection reply' 
message.  
l Knowing that it is now OK to request the Web document, your computer then sends the name of the 
Web page it wants to fetch from that Web server in a 'get' message.  
l Finally, the Web server returns the contents of the Web document to your computer.  
Given the human and networking examples above, the exchange of messages and the actions taken when 
these messages are sent and received are the key defining elements of a protocol: 
  
The Internet and computer networks in general, make extensive use of protocols. Different protocols are used 
to accomplish different communication tasks.  
A protocol defines the format and the order of messages exchanged between two or 
more communicating entities, as well as the actions taken on the transmission and/or 
receipt of a message or other event.
GOTO TOP
A closer look at network structure 
l Network edge: 
¡ applications and hosts  
l Network core: 
¡ routers  
¡ network of networks  
l Access networks, physical media: 
¡ communication links 
In the previous sections we presented a high-level description of the Internet and networking protocols. We are 
now going to delve a bit more deeply into the components of the Internet. We begin in this section at the edge 
of network and look at the components with which we are most familiar -the computers (for example, PCs and 
workstations) that we use on a daily basis. In the next section we will move from the network edge to the 
network core and examine switching and routing in computer networks. Then we will discuss the actual 
physical links that carry the signals sent between the computers and the switches.
GOTO TOP
The Network Edge 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 8 of 44
 
GOTO TOP
End Systems, Clients, and Servers 
In computer networking jargon, the computers that we use on a daily basis are 
often referred to as hosts or end systems. They are referred to as hosts because 
they host (run) application-level programs such as a Web browser or server 
program, or an e-mail program. They are also referred to as end systems because 
they sit at the edge of the Internet, as shown in Visual 10. Throughout this module 
we will use the terms hosts and end systems interchangeably; that is, host = end 
system.
Things to Remember: 
End systems (hosts):  
l run application 
programs  
l e.g., WWW, email  
l at "edge of network"  
GOTO TOP
End-System Interaction 
Hosts are sometimes further divided into two categories: clients and servers. 
Informally, clients often tend to be desktop PCs or workstations, whereas servers 
are more powerful machines. But there is a more precise meaning of a client and 
a server in computer networking. 
In the so-called client/server 
model, a client program running 
on one end system requests 
and receives information from a 
server running on another end 
system. This client/server model 
is undoubtedly the most 
prevalent structure for Internet 
applications.  
The Web, e-mail, file transfer, remote login (for example, Telnet), newsgroups, 
and many other popular applications adopt the client/server model. Since a client 
typically runs on one computer and the server runs on another computer, 
client/server Internet applications are, by definition, distributed applications. The 
client and the server interact with each other by communicating (that is, sending 
each other message) over the Internet. 
At this level of abstraction, the routers, links and other 'pieces' of the Internet 
serve as a 'black box' that transfers messages between the distributed, 
Things to Remember: 
Client/server model:  
l client host requests, 
receives service 
from server  
l e.g. Web 
browser/server; 
email client/server  
Peer-peer model:  
l host interaction 
symmetric  
l e.g.: Gnutella, 
KaZaA  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 9 of 44
Computers (for example, a PC or a workstation), operating as clients 
and servers, are the most prevalent type of end system. However, an 
increasing number of alternative devices, such as so-called network 
computers and thin clients, Web TV s and set top boxes, digital 
cameras, etc. are being attached to the Internet as end systems. 
communicating components of an Internet application. 
GOTO TOP
Connection less and Connection-Oriented Services 
We have seen that end systems exchange messages with each other according to an application-level protocol 
in order to accomplish some task. The links, routers, and other pieces of the Internet provide the means to 
transport these messages between the end- system applications. But what are the characteristics of the 
communication services that are provided? The Internet, and more generally TCP/IP networks, provides two 
types of services to its applications: connection less service and connection-oriented service. 
A developer creating an Internet application (for example, an e-mail application, a file transfer application, a 
Web application, or an Internet phone application) must program the application to use one of these two 
services. 
GOTO TOP
Connection-Oriented Service  
The Internet's connection-oriented service comes bundled with several other services, including reliable data 
transfer, flow control, and congestion control. By reliable data transfer, we mean that an application can rely on 
the connection to deliver all of its data without error and in the proper order. 
Reliability in the Internet is achieved through the use of acknowledgements and retransmissions. To get a 
preliminary idea about how the Internet implements the reliable transport service, consider an application that 
has established a connection between end systems A and B:  
When an application uses the connection-oriented service, the client and the 
server (residing in different end systems) send control packets to each other 
before sending packets with real data (such as e-mail messages). This so-called 
handshaking procedure alerts the client and server, allowing them to prepare for 
an onslaught of packets. It is interesting to note that this initial handshaking 
procedure is similar to the protocol used in human interaction. 
The exchange of "Hi's" we saw is an example of a human 
'handshaking protocol' (even though handshaking is not literally 
taking place between the two people). The two TCP messages 
that are exchanged as part of the WWW interaction detailed in 
the above visual are two of the three messages exchanged 
when TCP sets up a connection between a sender and receiver. 
The third TCP message (not shown) that forms the final part of 
the TCP three-way handshake is contained in the get message shown in the 
above diagram. 
Once the handshaking procedure is finished, a connection is said to be 
established between the two end systems. But the two end systems are 
connected in a very loose manner, hence the terminology connection-oriented. In 
particular, only the end systems themselves are aware of this connection; the 
packet switches (that is, routers) within the Internet are completely oblivious to the 
connection. This is because a TCP connection consists of nothing more than 
allocated resources (buffers) and state variables in the end systems. The packet 
switches do not maintain any connection-state information. 
Things to Remember: 
Goal : data transfer 
between end systems 
Handshaking: setup 
(prepare for) data transfer 
ahead of time  
l Hello, hello back 
human protocol  
l set up .state" in two 
communicating 
hosts  
TCP -Transmission Control 
Protocol - Internet's 
connection oriented service 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 10 of 44
l When end system B receives a packet from A, it sends an acknowledgement; when end system A 
receives the acknowledgement, it knows that the corresponding packet has definitely been received.  
l When end system A doesn't receive an acknowledgement, it assumes that the packet it sent was not 
received by B; it therefore retransmits the packet.  
Flow control makes sure that neither side of a connection overwhelms the other side by sending too many 
packets too fast. Indeed, the application at one side of the connection may not be able to process information 
as quickly as it receives the information. Therefore, there is a risk of overwhelming either side of an application. 
The flow -control service forces the sending end system to reduce its rate whenever there is such a risk. We 
shall see that the Internet implements the flow control service by using sender and receiver buffers in the 
communicating end systems. The Internet's congestion-control service helps prevent the Internet from entering 
a state of gridlock.  
When a router becomes congested, its buffers can overflow and packet loss can occur. In such circumstances, 
if every pair of communicating end systems continues to pump packets into the network as fast as they can, 
gridlock sets in and few packets are delivered to their destinations. The Internet avoids this problem by forcing 
end systems to decrease the rate at which they send packets into the network during periods of congestion. 
End systems are alerted to the existence of severe congestion when they stop receiving acknowledgements for 
the packets they have sent. 
We emphasize here that although the Internet's connection-oriented service 
comes bundled with reliable data transfer, flow control, and congestion control, 
these three features are by no means essential components of a connection-
oriented service. A different type of computer network may provide a connection-
oriented service to its applications without bundling in one or more of these 
features. Indeed, any protocol that performs handshaking between the 
communicating entities before transferring data is a connection-oriented service.  
The Internet's connection-oriented service has a name -TCP (Transmission 
Control Protocol); the initial version of the TCP protocol is defined in the Internet 
Request for Comments RFC 793 [RFC 793]. The services that TCP provides to 
an application include reliable transport, flow control, and congestion control. It is 
important to note that an application need only care about the services that are 
provided; it need not worry about how TCP actually implements reliability, flow 
control, or congestion control.  
Things to Remember: 
TCP service [RfC 793] 
Reliable, in-order byte-
stream data transfer : 
acknowledgements and 
retransmissions 
Flow control: sender won't 
overwhelm receiver 
Congestion control: senders 
“slow down sending rate" 
when network congested 
GOTO TOP
Connection Less Service 
There is no handshaking with the Internet's connectionless service. When one 
side of an application wants to send packets to another side of an application, the 
sending application simply sends the packets. Since there is no handshaking 
procedure prior to the transmission of the packets, data can be delivered faster. 
But there are no acknowledgements either, so a source never knows for sure 
which packets arrive at the destination. Moreover, the service makes no provision 
for flow control or congestion control. The Internet's connectionless service is 
provided by User Datagram Protocol (UDP); UDP is defined in the Internet RFC 
768. 
Most of the more familiar Internet applications use TCP, the Internet's connection- 
oriented service. These applications include Telnet (remote login), SMTP (for 
electronic mail), FTP (for file transfer), and HTTP (for the Web). Nevertheless, 
UDP, the Internet's connectionless service, is used by many applications, 
including many of the emerging multimedia applications, such as Internet phone, 
audio-on-demand, and video conferencing. 
Things to Remember: 
UDP - User Datagram 
Protocol [RFC 768]:  
Unreliable data transfer  
No flow control 
No congestion control 
Applications using TCP: 
HTTP (WWW), FTP (File 
Transfer),Telnet (remote 
login), SMTP (email) 
Applications using UDP: 
Streaming media, 
Teleconferencing,Internet 
telephony 
GOTO TOP
Computer Networking and Management
Page 11 of 44
The Network Core 
 
There are two fundamental approaches towards building a network core: circuit switching  and packet 
switching. In circuit-switched networks, the resources needed along a path (buffers, link bandwidth) to provide 
for communication between the end systems are reserved for the duration of the session. In packet -switched 
networks, these resources are not reserved; a session's messages use the resource on demand, and as a 
consequence, may have to wait (that is, queue) for access to a communication link 
Today's Internet is a quintessential packet-switched network. Consider what happens when one host wants to 
send a packet to another host over a packet-switched network. As with circuit switching, the packet is 
transmitted over a series of communication links. But with packet switching, the packet is sent into the network 
without reserving any bandwidth whatsoever. If one of the links is congested because other packets need to be 
transmitted over the link at the same time, then our packet will have to wait in a buffer at the sending side of the 
transmission line, and suffer a delay. The Internet makes its best effort to deliver the data in a timely manner, 
but it does not make any guarantees. 
Not all telecommunication networks can be neatly classified as pure circuit-switched networks or pure packet-
switched networks. For example, for networks based on the ATM technology, a connection can make a 
reservation and yet its messages may still wait for congested resources! Nevertheless, this fundamental 
classification into packet- switched and circuit-switched networks is an excellent starting point in understanding 
As a simple analogy, consider two restaurants -one that requires reservations and 
another that neither requires reservations nor accepts them. For the restaurant 
that requires reservations, we have to go through the hassle of first calling before 
we leave home. But when we arrive at the restaurant we can, in principle, 
immediately communicate with the waiter and order our meal. For the restaurant 
that does not require reservations, we don't need to bother to reserve a table. But 
when we arrive at the restaurant, we may have to wait for a table before we can 
communicate with the waiter.  
Telephone networks are examples of circuit-switched networks. Consider what 
happens when one person wants to send information (voice or facsimile) to 
another over a telephone network. Before the sender can send the information, 
the network must first establish a connection between the sender and the 
receiver. In contrast with the TCP connection that we discussed in the previous 
section, this is a bona fide connection for which the switches on the path between 
the sender and receiver maintain connection state for that connection. In the 
jargon of telephony, this connection is called a circuit. When the network 
establishes the circuit, it also reserves a constant transmission rate in the 
network's links for the duration of the connection. This reservation allows the 
sender to transfer the data to the receiver at the guaranteed constant rate. 
Things to Remember: 
Network Core: Mesh of 
interconnected routers 
The fundamental question: 
how is data transferred 
through net?  
Circuit switching: 
Dedicated circuit per call: 
telephone net 
Packet-switching:  
Data sent through net in 
discrete 'chunks' 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 12 of 44
telecommunication network technology. 
GOTO TOP
Circuit Switching 
 
In contrast with the TCP connection that we discussed in the previous section, this is a bona fide connection for 
which the switches on the path between the sender and receiver maintain connection state for that connection. 
In the jargon of telephony, this connection is called a circuit. When the network establishes the circuit, it also 
reserves a constant transmission rate in the network's links for the duration of the connection. This reservation 
This course is about computer networks, the Internet, and packet switching, not 
about telephone networks and circuit switching. Nevertheless, it is important to 
understand why the Internet and other computer networks use packet switching 
rather than the more traditional circuit-switching technology used in the telephone 
networks. For this reason, we now give a brief overview of circuit switching. 
In this network, the three circuit switches are interconnected by two links; each of 
these links has n circuits, so that each link can support n simultaneous 
connections. The end systems (for example, PCs and workstations) are each 
directly connected to one of the switches. (Ordinary telephones are also 
connected to the switches, but they are not shown in the diagram.) Notice that 
some of the hosts have analogue access to the switches, whereas others have 
direct digital access. 
Things to Remember: 
End-end resources 
reserved for 'call' 
Link bandwidth, switch 
capacity 
Dedicated resources: no 
sharing 
Circuit-like (guaranteed) 
performance 
Call setup required 
For analogue access, a modem is required. When two hosts desire to 
communicate, the network establishes a dedicated end-to-end circuit between two 
hosts. (Conference calls between more than two devices are, of course, also 
possible. But to keep things simple, let us suppose for now that there are only two 
hosts for each connection.) 
Thus, in order for host A to send messages to host B, the network must first 
reserve one circuit on each of the two links. Each link has n circuits; each end-to -
end circuit over a link gets the fraction l/n of the link's bandwidth for the duration of 
the circuit.  
Most types of telephone networks are examples of circuit -switched networks. 
Consider what happens when one person wants to send information (voice or 
facsimile) to another over a telephone network. Before the sender can send the 
information, the network must first establish a connection between the sender and 
the receiver. 
Things to Remember: 
Network resources (e.g., 
bandwidth) divided into 
“pieces ” 
Pieces allocated to calls 
Resource piece idle if not 
used by owning call (no 
sharing) 
Dividing link bandwidth into 
“pieces ”  
l Frequency division  
l Time division  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 13 of 44
allows the sender to transfer the data to the receiver at the guaranteed constant rate.  
Circuit Switching: FDMA and TDMA 
 
  
A circuit in a link is implemented with either frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) or time -division multiplexing 
(TDM). With FDM, the frequency spectrum of a link is shared among the connections established across the 
link. Specifically, the link dedicates a frequency band to each connection for the duration of the connection. In 
telephone networks, this frequency band typically has a width of 4 kHz (that is, 4,000 Hertz or 4,000 cycles per 
second). The width of the band is called, not surprisingly, the bandwidth. FM radio stations also use FDM to 
share the microwave frequency spectrum. 
The trend in modem telephony is to replace FDM with TDM. Most links in most telephone systems in the United 
States and in other developed countries currently employ TDM. For a TDM link, time is divided into frames of 
fixed duration, and each frame is divided into a fixed number of time slots. When the network establishes a 
connection across a link, the network dedicates one time slot in every frame to the connection. These slots are 
dedicated for the sole use of that connection, with a time slot available for use (in every frame) to transmit the 
connection's data. 
The previous diagram illustrates FDM and TDM for a specific network link. For FDM, the frequency domain is 
segmented into a number of circuits, each of bandwidth 4 KHz. For TDM, the time domain is segmented into 
four circuits; each circuit is assigned the same dedicated slot in the revolving TDM frames. The transmission 
rate of each circuit is equal to the frame rate multiplied by the number of bits in a slot. For example, if the link 
transmits 8,000 frames per second and each slot consists of8 bits, then the circuit transmission rate is 64 Kbps.  
With FDM, each circuit continuously gets a fraction of the bandwidth. With TDM, each circuit gets all of the 
bandwidth periodically during brief intervals of time (that is, during slots).  
Proponents of packet switching have always argued that circuit switching is wasteful because the dedicated 
circuits are idle during silent periods. For example, when one of the participants in a telephone call stops 
talking, the idle network resources (frequency bands or slots in the links along the connection's route) cannot 
be used by other ongoing connections. As another example of how these resources can be under utilized, 
consider a radiologist who uses a circuit-switched network to remotely access a series of x -rays. The 
radiologist sets up a connection, requests an image, contemplates the image, and then requests a new image. 
Network resources are wasted during the radiologist's contemplation periods. Proponents of packet switching 
also enjoy pointing out that establishing end -to -end circuits and reserving end-to -end bandwidth is complicated 
and requires complex signaling software to coordinate the operation of the switches along the end -to -end path. 
Before we finish our discussion of circuit switching, let us work through a numerical example that should shed 
further insight on the matter. Let us consider how long it takes to send a file of 640 Kbits from host A to host B 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 14 of 44
over a circuit-switched network. Suppose that all links in the network use TDM with 24 slots and have a bit rate 
of 1.536 Mbps. Also suppose that it takes 500 msec to establish an end-to-end circuit before A can begin to 
transmit the file. How long does it take to send the file? Each circuit has a transmission rate of (1.536 Mbps)/24 
= 64 Kbps, so it takes (640 Kbits)/(64 Kbps) = 10 seconds to transmit the file. To these 10 seconds we add the 
circuit establishment time, giving 10.5 seconds to send the file. Note that the transmission time is independent 
of the number of links. The transmission time would be 10 seconds if the end-to -end circuit passes through one 
link or one hundred links.  
GOTO TOP
Packet Switching 
We saw that application-level protocols exchange messages in accomplishing 
their task. Messages can contain anything the protocol designer desires. 
Messages may perform a control function (for example, the "Hi" messages in our 
handshaking example) or can contain data, such as an ASCII file, a Postscript file, 
a Web page, or a digital audio file. In modem packet-switched networks, the 
source breaks long messages into smaller packets. Between source and 
destination, each of these packets traverses communication links and packet 
switches (also known as routers). 
Packets are transmitted over each communication link at a rate equal to the full 
transmission rate of the link. Most packet switches use store -and-forward 
transmission at the inputs to the links. Store-and- forward transmission means 
that the switch must receive the entire packet before it can begin to transmit the 
first bit of the packet onto the outbound link. Thus store-and-forward packet 
switches introduce a store-and-forward delay at the input to each link along the 
packet's route. This delay is proportional to the packet's length in bits. In 
particular, if a packet consists of L bits, and the packet is to be forwarded onto an 
outbound link of R bps, then the store -and-forward delay at the switch is L/R 
seconds. 
Things to Remember: 
Each end-to-end data 
stream divided into packets 
l User A, B packets 
share network 
resources  
l Each packet uses 
full link bandwidth  
l Resources used as 
needed  
Within each router there are multiple buffers (also called queues), with each link 
having an input buffer (to store packets that have just arrived to that link) and an 
output buffer. The output buffers playa key role in packet switching. If an arriving 
packet needs to be transmitted across a link but finds the link busy with the 
transmission of another packet, the arriving packet must wait in the output buffer. 
Thus, in addition to the store -and- forward delays, packets suffer output buffer 
queuing delays. These delays are variable and depend on the level of congestion 
in the network. Since the amount of buffer space is finite, an arriving packet may 
find that the buffer is completely filled with other packets waiting for transmission. 
In this case, packet loss will occur -either the arriving packet or one of the already-
queued packets will be dropped. Returning to our restaurant analogy from earlier 
in this section, the queuing delay is analogous to the amount of time one spends 
waiting for a table. Packet loss is analogous to being told by the waiter that you 
must leave the premises because there are already too many other people waiting 
at the bar for a table.
Things to Remember: 
Resource contention:  
Aggregate resource 
demand can exceed 
amount available 
Congestion: packets queue, 
wait for link use 
Store and forward: packets 
move one hop at a time  
l transmit over link  
l wait turn at next link  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 15 of 44
 
Note:  
l Bandwidth is not divided into “pieces”  
l There is NO dedicated allocation  and  
l NO resource reservation   
 
 
  
Sequence of A & B packets does not have fixed pattern - statistical multiplexing.  
In TDM each host gets same slot in revolving TDM frame. 
This diagram illustrates a simple packet-switched network. Suppose Hosts A and Bare sending packets to Host 
E. Hosts A and B first send their packets along the 10 Mbps link to the first packet switch. The packet switch 
directs these packets to the 1.544 Mbps link. If there is congestion at this link, the packets queue in the link's 
output buffer before they can be transmitted onto the link. Consider now how Host A and Host B packets are 
transmitted onto this link. As shown in the above diagram, the sequence of A and B packets does not follow 
any periodic ordering; the ordering is random or statistical because packets are sent whenever they happen to 
be present at the link. For this reason, we often say that packet switching employs statistical multiplexing. 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 16 of 44
Statistical multiplexing sharply contrasts with time -division multiplexing (TDM), for which each host gets the 
same slot in a revolving TDM frame. 
 
  
  
Packet Switching: 
Store and Forward behaviour 
l Break messages into smaller chunks called 
'packets'  
l store-and-forward: switch waits until chunk has 
completely arrived then forwards / routes  
Application level protocol exchange messages in 
accomplishing the task. In modem packet switched 
networks the source breaks long messages in 
smaller packets. Most packet switches use store -
and-forward transmission at the input to the links. 
Store-and-forward transmission means that the 
switch must receive the entire packet before it can 
transmit the first bit of the packet on to the outbound 
link. Thus the store- and-forward packet switches 
induce a store-and-forward delay at the input link 
along the packet's route. 
Message Segmentation - Java Applet  
With this interactive applet, you will see the effect of pipelining when a large message is chopped up into 
many small packets. There are four nodes: a source, a destination and two intermediate store -and-forward 
switches. Each packet sent from the source must be transmitted over three links before it reaches the 
destination.  
Message Segmentation - Click here to view applet 
GOTO TOP
Packet Switching versus Circuit Switching 
Packet switching allows more users to use network!  
Proponents of packet switching argue that  
1. it offers better sharing of bandwidth than circuit switching and  
2. it is simpler, more efficient, and less costly to implement than circuit switching.  
Generally speaking, people who do not like to hassle with restaurant reservations prefer packet switching to 
circuit switching. 
Having described circuit switching and packet switching, let us 
compare the two. Opponents of packet switching have often argued 
that packet switching is not suitable for real -time services (for 
example, telephone calls and video conference calls) because of its 
variable and unpredictable delays.  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 17 of 44
Why is packet switching more efficient? Let us look at a simple example: 
   
Therefore the output queue will begin to grow (until the aggregate input rate falls back below 1 Mbps, at which 
point the queue will begin to diminish in length). Because the probability of having 10 or more simultaneously 
active users is extremely small, packet- switching almost always has the same delay performance as circuit 
switching, but does so while allowing for more than three times the number of users.  
Although packet switching and circuit switching are both very prevalent in today's telecommunication networks, 
the trend is certainly in the direction of packet switching. Even many of today's circuit-switched telephone 
networks are slowly migrating towards packet switching. In particular, telephone networks often convert to 
packet switching for the expensive overseas portion of a telephone call. 
Packet switching has yet another important advantage over message switching. As we will discuss later in this 
course, bit errors can be introduced into packets as they transit the network. When a switch detects an error in 
a packet, it typically discards the entire packet. So, if the entire message is a packet and one bit in the 
message gets corrupted, the entire message is discarded. If, on the other hand, the message is segmented 
into many packets and one bit in one of the packets is corrupted, then only that one packet is discarded. 
Suppose users share a 1 Mbps link. Also suppose that each user alternates 
between periods of activity (when it generates data at a constant rate of 100 
Kbps) and periods of inactivity (when it generates no data). Suppose further that a 
user is active only 10 percent of the time (and is idle drinking coffee during the 
remaining 90 percent of the time). With circuit switching, 100 Kbps must be 
reserved for each user at all times. Thus, the link can support only 10 
simultaneous users. With packet switching, if there are 35 users, the probability 
that there are more than 10 simultaneously active users is approximately 0.0004. 
If there are 10 or fewer simultaneously active users (which happens with 
probability 0.9996), the aggregate arrival rate of data is less than or equal to 1 
Mbps (the output rate of the link). Thus, users' packets flow through the link 
essentially without delay, as is the case with circuit switching. When there are 
more than 10 simultaneously active users, then the aggregate arrival rate of 
packets will exceed the output capacity of the link.  
Things to Remember: 
1 Mbit link 
Each user:  
l 100 Kbps when 
"active"  
l active 10% of tie  
Circuit Switching: 10 users 
Packet switching: with 35 
users, probability >10 active 
less than 0.0004 
Packet switching is not without its disadvantages, however.  
We will see that each packet or message must carry, in addition to the data being 
sent from the sending application to the receiving application, an amount of 
control information. This information, which is carried in the packet or message 
header, might include the identity of the sender and receiver and a packet or 
message identifier (for example, number). Since the amount of header information 
would be approximately the same for a message or a packet, the amount of 
header overhead per byte of data is higher for packet switching than for message 
switching. 
  
Discussion Question: How can circuit -like behaviour be provided considering 
bandwidth guarantees are needed for audio/video applications? 
Things to Remember: 
Is packet switching a 'slam 
dunk winner'?  
Great for bursty data  
Resource sharing 
N o call setup 
Excessive congestion: 
packet delay and loss  
Protocols needed for 
reliable data transfer, 
congestion control 
GOTO TOP
Packet Switched Networks : Routing 
Goal: move packets among routers from source to destination 
There are two broad classes of packet-switched networks: datagram networks and virtual circuit networks. 
They differ according to whether they route packets according to host destination addresses or according to 
virtual circuit numbers. 
We shall call any network that routes packets according to host destination addresses a datagram network. 
The IP protocol of the Internet routes packets according to the destination addresses; hence the Internet is a 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 18 of 44
datagram network. 
We shall call any network that routes packets according to virtual circuit numbers a virtual circuit network. 
Examples of packet-switching technologies that use virtual circuits include X.25, frame relay, and 
Asynchronous Transfer Mode (ATM). 
GOTO TOP
Virtual Circuit Networks 
A virtual circuit (V C) consists of  
1. A path (that is, a series of links and packet switches) between the source and destination hosts  
2. Virtual circuit numbers, one number for each link along the path, and  
3. Entries in VC-number translation tables in each packet switch along the path.  
 
  
To illustrate the concept, consider the network shown in the figure. Suppose host A requests that the network 
establish a VC between itself and host B. Suppose that the network chooses the path A-PS1-PS2-B and 
assigns VC numbers 12, 22, 32 to the three links in this path. Then, when a packet as part of this VC leaves 
host A, the value in the VC-number field is 12; when it leaves PS1, the value is 22; and when it leaves PS2, the 
value is 32. The numbers next to the links of PS1 are the interface numbers.  
 
Once a VC is established between source and destination, packets can be sent 
with the appropriate VC numbers. Because a VC has a different VC number on 
each link, an intermediate packet switch must replace the VC number of each 
traversing packet with a new one. The new VC number is obtained from the VC-
number translation table. 
Things to Remember: 
Virtual circuit network: 
Each packet carries tag 
(virtual circuit ID). tag 
determines next hop 
Fixed path determined at 
call setup time. remains 
fixed through call 
Routers maintain per-call 
state 
GOTO TOP
Datagram Networks 
Datagram networks are analogous in many respects to the postal services. When a sender sends a letter to a 
destination, the sender wraps the letter in an envelope and writes the destination address on the envelope. 
This destination address has a hierarchical structure. For example, letters sent to a location in the United 
Kingdom include the country (England), the county (for example, Lancashire), the city (for example, 
Manchester), the street (for example, Caroline Street) and the number of the house on the street (for example, 
306). The postal services use the address on the envelope to route the letter to its destination. For example, if 
the letter is sent from United Arab Emirates, then a postal office in United Arab Emirates will first direct the 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 19 of 44
letter to a postal centre in the United Kingdom. This postal centre in the United Kingdom will then send the 
letter to a postal centre in Manchester. Finally, a mail person working in Manchester will deliver the letter to its 
ultimate destination.  
The whole routing process is also analogous to the car driver who does not use maps but instead prefers to 
ask for directions.  
For example, suppose Joe is driving from Philadelphia to 156 Lakeside Drive in Orlando, Florida. Joe first 
drives to his neighbourhood gas station and asks how to get to 156 Lakeside Drive in Orlando, Florida. The gas 
station attendant extracts the Florida portion of the address and tells Joe that he needs to get onto the 
interstate highway 1-95 South, which has an entrance just next to the gas station. He also tells Joe that once 
he enters Florida he should ask someone else there. Joe then takes 1 -95 South until he gets to Jacksonville, 
Florida, at which point he asks another gas station attendant for directions. The attendant extracts the Orlando 
portion of the address and tells Joe that. he should continue on 1 -95 to Daytona Beach and then ask someone 
else. In Daytona Beach another gas station attendant also extracts the Orlando portion of the address and tells 
Joe that he should take 1-4 directly to Orlando. Joe takes 1 -4 and gets off at the Orlando exit. Joe goes to 
another gas station attendant, and this time the attendant extracts the Lakeside Drive portion of the address 
and tells Joe the road he must follow to get to Lakeside Drive. Once Joe reaches Lakeside Drive he asks a kid 
on a bicycle how to get to his destination. The kid extracts the 156 portion of the address and points to the 
house. Joe finally reaches his ultimate destination. 
How would you like to actually see the route that packets take in the Internet? We now invite you to get your 
hands dirty by interacting with the Tracert program (Windows) or traceroute (Linux). 
In a datagram network, each packet that traverses the network contains in its 
header the address of the destination. As with postal addresses, this address has 
a hierarchical structure. When a packet arrives at a packet switch in the network, 
the packet switch examines a portion of the packet's destination address and 
forwards the packet to an adjacent switch. More specifically, each packet switch 
has a routing table that maps destination addresses (or portions of the destination 
addresses) to an outbound link. When a packet arrives at a switch, the switch 
examines the address and indexes its table with this address to find the 
appropriate outbound link. The switch then sends the packet into this outbound 
link.
Things to Remember: 
Datagram network: 
Destination address 
determines next hop 
Routes may change during 
session 
Analogy: driving, asking 
directions 
 
Network Taxonomy 
l Datagram network is not either connection-oriented or connectionless.  
l Internet provides both connection-oriented (TCP) and connectionless services 
(UDP) to apps.  
GOTO TOP
Computer Networking and Management
Page 20 of 44
Access Networks 
 
We have examined the roles of end systems and routers in network architecture. In this section we consider 
the access network -the physical link(s) that connect an end system to its edge router -that is, to the first router 
on a path from the end system to any other distant end system. Since access network technology is closely tied 
to physical media technology (fibre, coaxial pair, twisted-pair telephone wire, radio spectrum), we consider 
these two topics together in this section.  
Discussion Question: What are the different ways of connecting an end system to an edge router? 
Access networks can be loosely divided into three categories: 
l Residential access networks - connecting a home end system into the 
network.  
l Institutional access networks - connecting an end system in a business or 
educational institution into the network.  
l Mobile access networks - connecting a mobile end system into the network. 
These categories are not hard and fast; some corporate end systems may well 
use the access network technology that we ascribe to residential access 
networks, and vice versa. The following descriptions are meant to hold for the 
common (if not every) case.  
Things to Remember: 
How to connect end 
systems to edge router? 
l Residential access 
nets  
l Institutional access 
networks (school, 
company)  
l Mobile access 
networks  
GOTO TOP
Residential Access Networks 
A residential access network connects a home end system (typically a PC, but perhaps a Web TV or other 
residential system) to an edge router. Probably the most common form of home access is by use of a modem 
over a POTS (Plain Old Telephone System) dialup line to an Internet Service Provider (ISP). The home modem 
converts the digital output of the PC into analogue format for transmission over the analogue phone line. A 
modem in the ISP converts the analogue signal back into digital form for input to the ISP router. In this case, 
the access network is simply a point-to -point dialup link into an edge router. The point-to -point link is your 
ordinary twisted-pair phone line.  
GOTO TOP
Point to Point Access 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 21 of 44
Today's modem speeds allow dialup access at rates up to 56 Kbps. However, due to the poor quality of 
twisted -pair line between many homes and ISPs, many users get an effective rate significantly less than 56 
Kbps.  
Whereas dialup modems require conversion of the end system's digital data into 
analogue form for transmission, so-called narrowband ISDN technology 
(Integrated Services Digital Network) allows for all -digital transmission of data 
from a home end system over ISDN 'telephone' lines to a phone company central 
office. Although ISDN was originally conceived as a way to carry digital data from 
one end of the phone system to another, it is also an important network access 
technology that provides higher speed access (for example, 128 Kbps) from the 
home into a data network such as the Internet. In this case, ISDN can simply be 
thought of as a 'better modem'.
Things to Remember: 
Dialup via modem 
Up to 56Kbps  direct access 
to router (often less) 
Can’t surf and phone at 
same time. 
Dialup modems and narrowband ISDN are already widely deployed technologies. 
Two new technologies, Asymmetric Digital Subscriber Line (ADSL) and Hybrid 
Fibre Coaxial cable (HFC ) are currently being deployed. 
ADSL is conceptually similar to dialup modems: It is a new modem technology 
again running over existing twisted-pair telephone lines, but it can transmit at 
rates of up to about 8 Mbps from the ISP router to a home end system. The data 
rate in the reverse direction, from the home end system to the central office 
router, is less than 1 Mbps. The asymmetry in the access speeds gives rise to the 
term asymmetric in ADSL. The asymmetry in the data rates reflects the belief that 
a home user is more likely to be a consumer of information (bringing data into the 
home) than a producer of information. 
ADSL uses frequency division multiplexing, as described in the previous section. 
In particular, ADSL divides the communication link between the home and the ISP 
into three non -overlapping frequency bands.  
Things to Remember: 
ADSL: asymmetric digital 
subscriber line 
Up to 1 Mbps upstream 
(today typically < 256 kbps) 
Up to 8 Mbps downstream 
(today typically < 1 Mbps) 
FDM: 50 kHz - 1 MHz for 
downstream 
4 kHz - 50 kHz for upstream 
0 kHz - 4 kHz for ordinary 
telephone 
GOTO TOP
CabIe Modems 
   
One of the features of ADSL is that the service allows the user to make an 
ordinary telephone call, using the POTS channel, while simultaneously surfing the 
Web. This feature is not available with standard dialup modems. The actual 
amount of downstream and upstream bandwidth available to the user is a function 
of the distance between the home modem and the ISP modem, the gauge of the 
twisted -pair line, and the degree of electrical interference. For a high-quality line 
with negligible electrical interference, an 8 Mbps downstream transmission rate is 
possible if the distance between the home and the ISP is less than 3,000 meters; 
the downstream transmission rate drops to about 2 Mbps for a distance of6,000 
meters. The upstream rate ranges from 16 Kbps to 1 Mbps. 
ADSL, ISDN, and dialup modems all use ordinary phone lines, but HFC access 
networks are extensions of the current cable network used for broadcasting cable 
television. In a traditional cable system, a cable head end station broadcasts 
through a distribution of coaxial cable and amplifiers to residences, fibre optics 
(also to be discussed soon) connect the cable head end to neighbourhood-level 
junctions, from which traditional coaxial cable is then used to reach individual 
houses and apartments. Each neighbourhood juncture typically supports 500 to 
5,000 homes.  
Things to Remember: 
HFC: hybrid fiber coax 
Asymmetric: up to 10Mbps 
upstream, 1 Mbps 
downstream 
Network of cable and fiber 
attaches homes to ISP 
router 
l Shared access to 
router among home  
l Issues: congestion, 
dimensioning  
Deployment: available via 
cable companies, e.g., 
MediaOne 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 22 of 44
 
GOTO TOP
Cable Data Network Architecture  
To offer high -speed Internet services, a cable operator creates a data network that operates over its hybrid 
fiber/coax (HFC) plant. The following diagram provides a high-level look at a typical large market cable 
network, including a regional cable headend (typically serving 200,000 to 400,000 homes), which feeds 
distribution hubs (each serving 20,000 to 40,000 homes) through a metropolitan fiber ring. At the distribution 
hub, signals are modulated onto analog carriers and then transported over fiber-optic lines to nodes serving 
500 to 1,000 homes. From the node, these signals are carried via coaxial cable to a home or business.  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 23 of 44
 
Source: http://www.cabledatacomnews.com/cmic/diagram.html 
Regional Cable Headend  
The regional cable headend serves as the local data network operations center. A carrier-class IP switch or 
router interfaces with a backbone data network, such as those operated by @Home or Road Runner, offering 
connectivity to remote content servers, as well as the global Internet.  
This switch/router also connects to cable modem termination systems (CMTS) housed in the distribution hubs 
(hyperlink). Many cable operators are beginning to deploy high -capacity packet transport solutions over fiber 
rings connecting the CMTS units in their distribution hubs, such as Packet Over SONET (POS), at up to OC-12 
speeds (622 Mbps).  
Content and application servers are typically at the regional cable headend, as are network management and 
operations support systems. If the cable operator were offering IP telephony, voice calls would be directed by 
the headend router to a IP telephony gateway, and then onto the public switched telephone network (PSTN).  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 24 of 44
 
Source: http://www.cabledatacomnews.com/cmic/headend.html 
Distribution Hub  
The hub is the interchange point between the regional fiber network and the cable plant. At the hub, the cable 
modem termination system (CMTS) coverts data from a wide area network (WAN) protocol, such as POS, into 
digital signals that are modulated for transmission over HFC plant, and then demodulated by the cable modem 
in the home or business. The CMTS unit provides a dedicated 27 Mbps downstream data channel that is 
shared by the 500 to 1,000 homes served by a fiber node, or group of nodes. Upstream bandiwdth per node 
typically ranges from 2 Mbps to 10 10 Mbps.  
 
Source: http://www.cabledatacomnews.com/cmic/hub.html 
Home Environment  
A splitter at the side of the home segments coaxial cable lines serving the cable modem and TV outlets. Cable 
modems currently connect to an Ethernet card in the PC with Category 5 cabling and RJ-45 connectors. 
Forthcoming cable modem products will also offer Universal Serial Bus (USB) connections 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 25 of 44
 
Source: http://www.cabledatacomnews.com/cmic/home.html  
GOTO TOP
A Hybrid Fibre-Coax Access Network 
As with ADSL, HFC requires special 
modems, called cable modems. Companies 
that provide cable Internet access require 
their customers to either purchase or lease a 
modem. One such company is Cyber Cable, 
which uses Motorola's Cyber Surfer Cable 
Modem and provides high-speed Internet 
access to most of the neighbourhoods in 
Paris. Typically, the cable modem is an 
external device and connects to the home PC 
through a 10 -BaseT Ethernet port. Cable 
modems divide the HFC network into two 
channels, a downstream and an upstream 
channel. As with ADSL, the downstream 
channel is typically allocated more bandwidth 
and hence a larger transmission rate. For example, the downstream rate of the Cyber Cable system is 10 Mbps 
and the upstream rate is 768 Kbps. However, with HFC (and not with ADSL), these rates are shared among the 
homes, as we discuss next. 
One important characteristic of HFC is that it is a shared broadcast medium. In particular, every packet sent by 
the head end travels downstream on every link to every home; and every packet sent by a home travels on the 
upstream channel to the head end. For this reason, if several users are receiving different Internet videos on 
the downstream channel, the actual rate at which each user receives its video will be significantly less than the 
downstream rate. 
On the other hand, if all the active users are Web surfing, then each of the users may actually receive Web 
pages at the full downstream rate, as a small collection of users will rarely request a Web page at exactly the 
same time. Because the upstream channel is also shared, packets sent by two different homes at the same 
time will collide, which further decreases the effective upstream bandwidth. 
Advocates of ADSL are quick to point out that ADSL is a point-to-point connection between the home and ISP, 
and therefore all the ADSL bandwidth is dedicated rather than shared. Cable advocates, however, argue that a 
reasonably dimensioned HFC network provides higher bandwidths than ADSL. The battle between ADSL and 
HFC for high speed residential access has clearly begun. 
GOTO TOP
Company Access Networks 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 26 of 44
 
Source: http://www.cabledatacomnews.com/cmic/business.html 
In company access networks, a local area network (LAN) is used to connect an 
end system to an edge router. As we will see in a later chapter, there are many 
different types of LAN technology. However, Ethernet technology is currently by 
far the most prevalent access technology in company networks.  
Ethernet operates at 10 Mbps or 100 Mbps (and now even at 1 Gbps). It uses 
either twisted-pair copper wire or coaxial cable to connect a number of end 
systems with each other and with an edge router. The edge router is responsible 
for routing packets that have destinations outside of that LAN. Like HFC, Ethernet 
uses a shared medium, so that end users share the transmission rate of the LAN.  
More recently, shared Ethernet technology has been migrating towards switched 
Ethernet technology. Switched Ethernet uses multiple coaxial cable or twisted-pair 
Ethernet segments connected at a 'switch' to allow the full bandwidth of an 
Ethernet to be delivered to different users on the same LAN simultaneously. We 
will explore shared and switched Ethernet in some detail in a later lesson.  
Things to Remember: 
Company / Univ local area 
network (LAN) connects 
end system to edge router 
Ethernet:  
l shared or dedicated 
link connects end 
system and router  
l 10 Mbs, 100Mbps, 
Gigabit Ethernet  
Deployment: institutions, 
home LANs happening now 
GOTO TOP
Mobile Access Networks 
Mobile access networks use the radio spectrum to connect a mobile end system (for example, a laptop PC or a 
PDA with a wireless modem) to a base station. This base station, in turn, is connected to an edge router of a 
data network. 
Wireless Access Networks 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 27 of 44
An emerging standard for wireless data networking is Cellular Digital Packet 
Data (CDPD). As the name suggests, a CDPD network operates as an 
overlay network (that is, as a separate, smaller virtual network, as a piece of 
the larger network) within the cellular telephone network. A CDPD network 
thus uses the same radio spectrum as the cellular phone system, and 
operates at speeds in the tens of Kbits per second. As with cable -based 
access networks and shared Ethernet, CDPD end systems must share the 
transmission media with other CDPD end systems within the cell covered by 
a base station. 
A Media Access Control (MAC) protocol is used to arbitrate channel sharing 
among the CDPD end systems. 
The CDPD system supports the IP protocol and thus allows an IP end system to 
exchange IP packets over the wireless channel with an IP base station. CDPD 
does not provide for any protocols above the network layer. From an Internet 
perspective, CDPD can be viewed as extending the Internet dial tone (that is, the 
ability to transfer IP packets) across a wireless link between a mobile end system 
and an Internet router.
Things to Remember: 
Shared wireless access 
network connects end 
system to router via base 
station aka “access point” 
Wireless LANs: radio 
spectrum replaces wire 
 
Home networks 
 
Typical home network components:  
l ADSL or cable modem  
l router/firewall/NAT  
l Ethernet  
l wireless access point  
GOTO TOP
Physical Media 
In the previous subsection, we gave an overview of some of the most 
important access network technologies in the Internet. As we described these 
technologies, we also indicated the physical media used. For example, we 
said that HFC uses a combination of fibre cable and coaxial cable. We said 
that ordinary modems, ISDN, and ADSL use twisted-pair copper wire. And we 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 28 of 44
said that mobile access networks use the radio spectrum. In this subsection 
we provide a brief overview of these and other transmission media that are commonly employed in the Internet. 
In order to define what is meant by a physical medium; let us reflect on the brief life of a bit. Consider a bit 
traveling from one end system, through a series of links and routers, to another end system. This poor bit gets 
transmitted many, many times! The source end system first transmits the bit, and shortly thereafter the first 
router in the series receives the bit; the first router then transmits the bit, and shortly afterwards the second 
router receives the bit, and so on.  
Thus our bit, when traveling from source to destination, passes through a series of 
transmitter-receiver pairs. For each transmitter-receiver pair, the bit is sent by 
propagating electromagnetic waves or optical pulses across a physical medium. 
The physical medium can take many shapes and forms and does not have to be 
of the same type for each transmitter-receiver pair along the path. 
Examples of physical media include twisted-pair copper wire, coaxial cable, 
multimode fibre -optic cable, terrestrial radio spectrum, and satellite radio 
spectrum. 
Physical media fall into two categories: guided media and unguided media. With 
guided media, the waves are guided along a solid medium, such as a fibre-optic 
cable, a twisted- pair copper wire, or a coaxial cable. With unguided media, the 
waves propagate in the atmosphere and in outer space, such as in a digital 
satellite channel or in a CDPD system. 
Things to Remember: 
Physical Link: ransmitted 
data bit propagates across 
link 
Guided Media: signals 
propagate in solid media: 
copper, fibre 
Unguided Media: signals 
propagate freely. e.g., radio 
GOTO TOP
Some Popular Physical Media  
Suppose you want to wire a building to allow computers to access the Internet 
or an intranet. Should you use twisted-pair copper wire, coaxial cable, or fibre 
optics? Which of these media gives the highest bit rates over the longest 
distances? We shall address these questions below.  
However, before we get into the characteristics of the various guided medium 
types, let us say a few words about their costs. The actual cost of the physical 
link (copper wire, fibre- optic cable, and so on) is often relatively minor 
compared with the other networking costs. In particular, the labour cost 
associated with the installation of the physical link can be orders of magnitude higher than the cost of the 
material.  
For this reason, many builders install twisted pair, optical fibre, and coaxial cable to every room in a building. 
Even if only one medium is initially used, there is a good chance that another medium could be used in the 
near future, and so money is saved by not having to lay additional wires.  
GOTO TOP
Twisted-Pair Copper Wire 
  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 29 of 44
The least-expensive and most commonly used transmission medium is twisted-pair copper wire. For over one -
hundred years it has been used by telephone networks. In fact, more than 99 percent of the wired connections 
from the telephone handset to the local telephone switch use twisted-pair copper wire. Most of us have seen 
twisted -pair in our homes and work environments. Twisted-pair consists of two insulated copper wires, each 
about 1 mm thick, arranged in a regular spiral pattern. The wires are twisted together to reduce the electrical 
interference from similar pairs close by. Typically, a number of pairs are bundled together in a cable by 
wrapping the pairs in a protective shield. A wire pair constitutes a single communication link.  
Twisted Pair 
Unshielded Twisted Pair (UTP) is commonly used for computer networks within a building, that is, for local area 
networks (LANs). Data rates for LANs using twisted pair today range from 10 Mbps to 100 Mbps. The data 
rates that can be achieved depend on the thickness of the wire and the distance between transmitter and 
receiver.  
Two types of UTP are common in LANs -category 3 and category 5:  
l Category 3 corresponds to voice-grade twisted pair, commonly found in office buildings. Office buildings 
are often pre-wired with two or more parallel pairs of category 3 twisted pair; one pair is used for 
telephone communication, and the additional pairs can be used for additional telephone lines or for LAN 
networking. 10 Mbps Ethernet, one of the most prevalent LAN types, can use category 3 UTP.  
l Category 5, with its more twists per centimetre and Teflon TM insulation, can handle higher bit rates. 100 
Mbps Ethernet running on category 5 UTP has become very popular in recent years. In recent years, 
category 5 UTP has become common for pre-installation in new office buildings.  
When fibre -optic technology emerged in the 1980s, many people disparaged 
twisted pair because of its relatively low bit rates. Some people even felt that fibre-
optic technology would completely replace twisted pair. But twisted pair did not 
give up so easily. Modem twisted-pair technology, such as category 5 UTP, can 
achieve data rates of 100 Mbps for distances up to a few hundred meters. Even 
higher rates are possible over shorter distances. In the end, twisted pair has 
emerged as the dominant solution for high-speed LAN networking.  
As discussed in the section on access networks, twisted pair is also commonly 
used for residential Internet access. We saw that dialup modem technology 
enables access at rates of up to 56 Kbps over twisted pair. We also saw that 
ISDN is available in many communities, providing access rates of about 128 Kbps 
over twisted pair. We also saw that ADSL (asymmetric digital subscriber loop) 
technology has enabled residential users to access the Internet at rates in excess 
of 6 Mbps over twisted pair. 
Things to Remember: 
Twisted Pair (TP): 
two insulated copper wires 
Category 3 TP: traditional 
phone wires, 10 Mbps 
Ethernet 
Category 5 TP: 100Mbps 
Ethernet 
GOTO TOP
Coaxial Cable 
Like twisted pair, coaxial cable consists of two copper conductors, but the two conductors are concentric rather 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 30 of 44
than parallel. With this construction and a special insulation and shielding, coaxial cable can have higher bit 
rates than twisted pair. Coaxial cable comes in two varieties: baseband coaxial cable and broadband coaxial 
cable. 
Baseband coaxial cable, also called 50-ohm cable, is about a centimetre thick, lightweight, and easy to bend. It 
is commonly used in LANs; in fact, the computer you use at work or at school is probably connected to a LAN 
with either baseband coaxial cable or with UTP. 
Take a look at the connection to your computer's interface card: 
l If you see a telephone-like jack and some wire that resembles telephone wire, you are using UTP .  
l If you see a T-connector and a cable running out of both sides of the T - connector, you are using 
baseband coaxial cable.  
The term baseband comes from the fact that the stream of bits is dumped directly into the cable, without 
shifting the signal to a different frequency band; 10 Mbps Ethemets can use either UTP or baseband coaxial 
cable. 
GOTO TOP
Broadband Coaxial Cable  
Broadband coaxial cable, also called 75 -ohm cable, is quite a bit thicker, heavier, 
and stiffer than the baseband variety. It was once commonly used in LAN s and 
can still be found in some older installations. For LANs, baseband cable is now 
preferable since it is less expensive, easier to physically handle, and does not 
require attachment cables. 
Broadband cable, however, is quite common in cable television systems. As we 
saw earlier, cable television systems have recently been coupled with cable 
modems to provide residential users with Web access at rates of 10 Mbps or 
higher. With broadband coaxial cable, the transmitter shifts the digital signal to a 
specific frequency band, and the resulting analogue signal is sent from the 
transmitter to one or more receivers.  
Both baseband and broadband coaxial cable can be used as a guided shared 
medium. Specifically, a number of end systems can be connected directly to the 
cable, and all the end systems receive whatever anyone of the computers 
transmits.  
Things to Remember: 
Coaxial cable: 
Two concentric copper 
conductors 
It is Bidirectional 
Common use in 10 
Mbps Ethernet 
Baseband: single channel 
on cable, 
legacy Ethernet 
Broadband: multiple 
channel on cable, HFC 
GOTO TOP
Fibre Optics 
An optical fibre is a thin, flexible medium that conducts pulses of 
light, with each pulse representing a bit. A single optical fibre can 
support tremendous bit rates, up to tens or even hundreds of 
gigabits per second. They are immune to electromagnetic 
interference, have very low signal attenuation up to 100 
kilometres, and are very hard to tap. These characteristics have 
made fibre optics the preferred long-haul guided transmission 
media, particularly for overseas links. 
Many of the long-distance telephone networks in the United 
States and elsewhere now use fibre optics exclusively. Fibre optics is also 
prevalent in the backbone of the Internet. However, the high cost of optical 
devices -such as transmitters, receivers, and switches - has hindered their 
deployment for short -haul transport, such as in a LAN or into the home in a 
residential access network. 
Things to Remember: 
Fiber optic cable: 
glass fiber carrying light 
pulses, each pulse a bit 
High-speed operation: 100 
Mbps Ethernet, 
high-speed point-to-point 
transmission (e.g., 5 Gps) 
Low error rate: repeaters 
spaced far apart ; immune 
to electromagnetic noise 
GOTO TOP
Computer Networking and Management
Page 31 of 44
Terrestrial and Satellite Radio Channels 
  
A communication satellite links two or more Earth-based microwave transmitter/receivers, known as ground 
stations. The satellite receives transmissions on one frequency band, regenerates the signal using a repeater 
and transmits the signal on another frequency. Satellites can provide bandwidths in the gigabit per second 
range.  
Radio channels carry signals in the electromagnetic spectrum. They are an 
attractive media because they require no physical wire to be installed, can 
penetrate walls, provide connectivity to a mobile user, and can potentially carry a 
signal for long distances. The characteristics of a radio channel depend 
significantly on the propagation environment and the distance over which a signal 
is to be carried. Environmental considerations determine path loss and shadow 
fading (which decrease in signal strength as the signal travels over a distance, 
and around/through obstructing objects), multi path fading (due to signal reflection 
off interfering objects), and interference (due to other radio channels or 
electromagnetic signals).  
Terrestrial radio channels can be broadly classified into two groups: those that 
operate as local area networks (typically spanning from ten to a few hundred 
meters) and wide-area radio channels that are used for mobile data services 
(typically operating within a metropolitan region). A number of wireless LAN 
products are on the market, operating in the range of one to tens of Mbps. Mobile 
data services typically provide channels that operate at tens of Kbps.  
Things to Remember: 
Radio: signal carried in 
electromagnetic spectrum 
No physical “wire”  
Bidirectional 
Propagation environment 
effects: 
l reflection  
l obstruction by 
objects  
l interference  
Two types of satellites are used in communications: geostationary satellites and 
low - altitude satellites. 
 
l Geostationary satellites permanently remain above the same spot on 
Earth. This stationary presence is achieved by placing the satellite in orbit 
at 36,000 kilometres above Earth's surface. This huge distance from 
ground station through satellite back to ground station introduces a 
substantial signal propagation delay of 250 milliseconds. Nevertheless, 
satellite links, which can operate at speeds of hundreds of Mbps, are often 
Things to Remember: 
Radio link types: 
Terrestrial Microwave 
e.g. up to 45 Mbps channels  
LAN (e.g., WaveLAN) 
2Mbps, 11Mbps 
Wide-area (e.g., cellular) 
e.g. 3G: hundreds of kbps 
Satellite 
up to 50Mbps channel 
(or multiple smaller 
channels) 
270 msec end-end 
delay  
geosynchronous versus 
LEOS 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 32 of 44
l Low-altitude satellites  are placed much closer to Earth and do not 
remain permanently above one spot on Earth. They rotate around 
Earth just as the Moon does. To provide continuous coverage to an 
area, many satellites need to be placed in orbit. There are currently 
many low-altitude communication systems in development. The 
Iridium system, for example, consists of 66 low-altitude satellites. 
Lloyd's Satellite Constellation Systems' Web page provides and 
collects information on Iridium as well as other satellite constellation 
systems. The low-altitude satellite technology may be used for 
Internet access sometime in the future.  
used in telephone networks and in the backbone of the Internet.  
GOTO TOP
Delay and Loss in Packet-Switched Networks 
Having briefly considered the major pieces of the Internet architecture -the applications, end systems, end-to -
end transport protocols, routers, and links -let us now consider what can happen to a packet as it travels from 
its source to its destination. 
Recall that a packet starts in a host (the source), passes through a series of routers, and ends its journey in 
another host (the destination). As a packet travels from one node (host or router) to the subsequent node (host 
or router) along this path, the packet suffers from several different types of delays at each node along the path. 
The most important of these delays are the nodal processing delay, queuing delay, transmission delay, and 
propagation delay. Together, these delays accumulate to give a total nodal delay.  
In order to acquire a deep understanding of packet switching and computer networks, we must understand the 
nature and importance of these delays. 
Things to Remember: 
Packets queue in router 
buffers  
Packet arrival rate to link 
exceeds output link capacity 
Packets queue, wait for turn 
GOTO TOP
Types of Delay 
 
l Processing delay - the time required to examine the packet's header and 
determine where to direct the packet is part of the processing delay. The 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 33 of 44
processing delay can also include other factors, such as the time needed to 
check for bit-level errors in the packet that occurred in transmitting the 
packet's bits from the upstream router to router A. Processing delays in 
high-speed routers are typically on the order of microseconds Oi less. After 
this nodal processing, the router directs the packet to the queue that 
precedes the link to routei B.  
l Queuing delay - at the queue, the packet experiences a queuing delay as 
it waits to be transmitted onto the link. The queuing delay of a specific 
packet will depend on the number of other, earlier -arriving packets that are 
queued and waiting for transmission across the link. The delay of a given 
packet can vary significantly from packet to packet. If the queue is empty 
and no other packet is currently being transmitted, then our packet's 
queuing delay is zero. On the other hand, if the traffic is heavy and many 
other packets are also waiting to be transmitted, the queuing delay will be 
long. We will see shortly that the number of packets that an arriving packet 
might expect to find on arrival is a function of the intensity and nature of the 
traffic arriving to the queue. Queuing delays can be on the order of 
milliseconds to microseconds in practice.  
l Transmission delay  - assuming that packets are transmitted in first -come- 
first-serve manner, as is common in the Internet, our packet can be 
transmitted once all the packets that have arrived before it have been 
transmitted. Denote the length of the packet by L bits, and denote the 
transmission rate of the link from router A to router B by R bits/sec. The 
rate R is determined by transmission rate of the link to router B. For 
example, for a 10-Mbps Ethernet link, the rate is R = 10 Mbps; for a 100-
Mbps Ethernet link, the rate is R = 100 Mbps. The transmission delay is 
also known as the store-and-forward delay. This is the amount of time 
required to transmit all of the packet's bits into the link. Transmission delays 
are typically on the order of microseconds or less in practice.  
l Propagation delay - once a bit is pushed onto the link, it needs to 
propagate to router B. The time required to propagate from the beginning of 
the link to router B is the propagation delay. The bit propagates at the 
propagation speed of the link. The propagation speed depends on the 
physical medium of the link (that is, multimode fibre, twisted-pair copper 
wire, and so on) and is in the range of: 
2 * 108 metres/see to 3 * 108 metres/sec 
which is equal to, or a little less than, the speed of light. The propagation 
delay is the distance between two routers divided by the propagation 
speed. That is, the propagation delay is d/s, where d is the distance 
between router A and router B and s is the propagation speed of the link. 
Once the last bit of the packet propagates to node B, it and all the 
preceding bits of the packet are stored in router B. The whole process then 
continues with router B now performing the forwarding. In wide -area 
networks, propagation delays are on the order of milliseconds. 
  
  
  
 
Things to Remember: 
1. Nodal processing:  
check bit errors 
determine output link 
Things to Remember: 
2. Queueing 
Time waiting at output link 
for transmission  
Depends on congestion 
level of router  
Things to Remember: 
3. Transmission delay: 
R=link bandwidth (bps) 
L=packet length (bits) 
Time to send bits into link = 
L/R 
Things to Remember: 
4. Propagation delay: 
d = length of physical link 
s = propagation speed in 
medium (~2x108 m/sec) 
Propagation Delay = d/s  
GOTO TOP
Comparing Transmission and Propagation Delay 
Newcomers to the field of computer networking sometimes have difficulty understanding the difference 
between transmission delay and propagation delay. The difference is subtle but important. The transmission 
delay is the amount of time required for the router to push out the packet; it is a function of the packet ’s length 
and the transmission rate of the link, but has nothing to do with the distance between the routers. The 
propagation delay, on the other hand, is the time it takes a bit to propagate from one router to the next; it is a 
function of the distance between the two routers, but has nothing to do with the packet’s length or the 
transmission rate of the link. 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 34 of 44
Caravan Analogy 
 
  
l Cars “propagate” at 100 km/hr  
l Toll booth takes 12 sec to service a car 
(transmission time)  
l car~bit; caravan ~ packet  
Q: How long until caravan is lined up before 2nd toll 
booth? 
l Time to “push” entire caravan through toll booth 
onto highway = 12*10 = 120 sec  
l Time for last car to propagate from 1st to 2nd 
toll both: 100km/(100km/hr)= 1 hr  
A: 62 minutes 
Transmission vs Propogation Delay - Java Applet 
This simple applet illustrates one of the most fundamental concepts in computer networking: transmission 
delay versus propagation delay. Although this concept is discussed in detail in Lesson 1, an "interactive 
animation speaks a thousand words". You set the length of the link, the packet size, and the transmission 
speed; the applet shows the packet being sent from sender to receiver.  
Transmission versus Propagation Delay - Click here to view applet 
GOTO TOP
Queuing Delay 
  
  
l R = Link bandwidth (bps)  
l L = packet lenght (bits)  
l a = average packet arrival rate  
Traffic Intensit = La/R  
La/R ~ 0: average queuing delay small 
La/R =1: delays bcome large  
La/R >1: more 'work' arriving than can be serviced, average delay 
is infinite!! 
Queuing and Packet Loss - Java Applet 
The most complicated and interesting component of end-to-end delay is queuing delay. In this applet, you 
specify the packet arrival rate and the link transmission speed. You'll then see packets arrive and queue for 
service. When the queue becomes full, you'll see the queue overflow-- that is, packet loss. Enjoy!  
Queueing Delay - Click here to view applet 
GOTO TOP
Real Internet Delays and Routes 
What do “real” Internet delay & loss look like?  
Traceroute program: provides delay measurement from source to router along end-end Internet path towards 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 35 of 44
destination. For all i:  
l sends three packets that will reach router i on path towards destination  
l router i will return packets to sender  
l sender times interval between transmission and reply.  
 
Example: 
traceroute: gaia.cs.umass.edu to www.eurecom.fr 
 
 
Packet Loss 
l Queue (aka buffer) preceding link in buffer has finite capacity  
l When packet arrives to full queue, packet is dropped (aka lost)  
l Lost packet may be retransmitted by previous node, by source end system, or not retransmitted at all  
 
Exercise: Try a traceroute command if you are using Linux or tracert if you are using windows and note the 
result 
Syntax: tracert <domainname> 
Example: tracert nccedu.com 
GOTO TOP
 
Protocol Layers and their Service Models 
From our discussion so far, it is apparent that the Internet is an extremely complicated system. We have seen 
that there are many pieces to the Internet: numerous applications and protocols, various types of end systems 
and connections between end systems, routers, and various types of link-level media. Given this enormous 
complexity, is there any hope of organizing network architecture, or at least our discussion of network 
architecture? Fortunately, the answer to both questions is yes. 
To reduce design complexity, network designers organize 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 36 of 44
protocols -and the network hardware and software that 
implement the protocols -in layers. With a layered protocol architecture, each protocol belongs to one of the 
layers. It is important to realize that a protocol in layer n is distributed among the network entities (including end 
systems and packet switches) that implement that protocol, just as the functions in our layered airline 
architecture were distributed between the departing and arriving airports. In other words, there's a piece of 
layer n in each of the network entities. These pieces communicate with each other by exchanging layer-n 
messages. These messages are called layer-n protocol data units, or more commonly n-PDUs. The contents 
and format of an n-PDU, as well as the manner in which the n-PDUs are exchanged among the network 
elements, are defined by a layer-n protocol. When taken together, the protocols of the various layers are called 
the protocol stack.  
In order for one layer to interoperate with the layer below it, the interfaces between the two layers must be 
precisely defined. Standards bodies define precisely the interlaces between adjacent layers (for example, the 
format of the PDUs passed between the layers) and permit the developers of networking software and 
hardware to implement the interior of the layers as they please. Therefore, if a new and improved 
implementation of a layer is released, the new implementation can replace the old implementation and, in 
theory, the layers will continue to interoperate.  
Discussion Question: Is there any hope of organizing structure of network? Or at least our discussion of 
networks? 
Interestingly enough, this notion of relying on lower-layer services is prevalent in 
many other forms of communication. For example, consider ordinary postal mail. 
When you write a letter, you include envelope information such as the destination 
address and the return address with the letter. The letter, along with the address 
information, can be considered a PDU at the highest layer of the protocol stack. 
You then drop the PDU in a mailbox. At this point, the letter is out of your hands. 
The postal service may then add some of its own internal information onto your 
letter, essentially adding a header to your letter. For example, in the United States 
a barcode is often printed on your letter.  
Once you drop your envelope into a mailbox, you rely on the postal service to 
deliver the letter to the correct destination in a timely manner. For example, you 
don't worry about whether a postal truck will break down while carrying the letter. 
Instead the postal service takes care of this, presumably with well-defined plans to 
recover from such failures. Furthermore, within the postal service itself there are 
layers, and the protocols at one layer rely on and use the services of the layer 
below. 
Things to Remember: 
Networks are complex!  
Many “pieces”: 
l Hosts  
l Routers  
l Links of various 
media  
l Applications  
l Protocols  
l Hardware, software 
GOTO TOP
Layer Functions 
In a computer network, each layer may perform one or more of the following generic set of tasks: 
l Error control, which makes the logical channel between the layers in two peer network elements more 
reliable.  
l Flow control, which avoids overwhelming a slower peer with PDUs.  
l Segmentation and reassembly, which at the transmitting side divides large data chunks into smaller 
pieces and at the receiving side reassembles the smaller pieces into the original large chunk.  
l Multiplexing, which allows several higher-level sessions to share a single lower-level connection.  
GOTO TOP
The Internet Protocol Stack, and Protocol Data Units 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 37 of 44
A protocol layer can be implemented in software, in hardware, or using a combination of the two. Application-
layer protocols -such as HTTP and SMTP -are almost always implemented in software in the end systems; so 
are transport-layer protocols. Because the physical layer and data link layers are responsible for handling 
communication over a specific link, they are typically implemented in a network interface card (for example, 
Ethernet or ATM interlace cards) associated with a given link. The network layer is often a mixed 
implementation of hardware and software. We now summarize the Internet layers and the services they 
provide:  
 
GOTO TOP
Application Layer 
The application layer is responsible for supporting network applications. The application layer includes many 
protocols, including HTTP to support the Web, SMTP to support electronic mail, and FTP to support file 
transfer. We shall see in Lesson 2 that it is very easy to create our own new application-layer protocols. 
GOTO TOP
Transport Layer 
The transport layer provides the service of transporting application-layer messages between the client and 
server sides of an application. In the Internet there are two transport protocols, TCP and UDP, either of which 
can transport application-layer messages. TCP provides a connection-oriented service to its applications. This 
service includes guaranteed delivery of application-layer messages to the destination and flow control (that is, 
sender/receiver speed matching). TCP also segments long messages into shorter segments and provides a 
congestion control mechanism, so that a source throttles its transmission rate when the network is congested. 
The UDP protocol provides its applications a connectionless service, which (as we saw in the earlier section) is 
very much a no -frills service. 
GOTO TOP
Network Layer 
The network layer is responsible for routing datagrams from one host to another. The Internet's network layer 
has two principle components. It has a protocol that defines the fields in the IP datagram as well as how the 
end systems and routers act on these fields. This protocol is the celebrated IP protocol. There is only one IP 
protocol, and all Internet components that have a network layer must run the IP protocol. The Internet's network 
layer also contains routing protocols that determine the routes that datagrams take between sources and 
destinations. The Internet has many routing protocols. As we saw in the earlier sections, the Internet is a 
network of networks, and within a network, the network administrator can run any routing protocol desired. 
Although the network layer contains both the IP protocol and numerous routing protocols, it is often simply 
referred to as the IP layer, reflecting the fact that IP is the glue that binds the Internet together. 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 38 of 44
The Internet transport layer protocols (TCP and UDP) in a source host passes a transport- layer segment and a 
destination address to the IP layer, just as you give the postal service a letter with a destination address. The 
IP layer then provides the service of routing the segment to its destination. When the packet arrives at the 
destination, IP passes the segment to the transport layer within the destination.  
GOTO TOP
Link Layer 
The network layer routes a packet through a series of packet switches (called routers, in the Internet) between 
the source and destination. To move a packet from one node (host or packet switch) to the next node in the 
route, the network layer must rely on the services of the link layer. In particular, at each node IP passes the 
datagram to the link layer, which delivers the datagram to the next node along the route. At this next node, the 
link layer passes the IP datagram to the network layer. The process is analogous to the postal worker at a 
mailing centre who puts a letter into a plane that will deliver the letter to the next postal centre along the route. 
The services provided at the link layer depend on the specific link -layer protocol that is employed over the link. 
For example, some protocols provide reliable delivery on a link basis, that is, from transmitting node, over one 
link, to receiving node. Note that this reliable delivery service is different from the reliable delivery service of 
TCP, which provides reliable delivery from one end system to another. Examples of link layers include Ethernet 
and Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP); in some contexts, ATM and frame relay can be considered link layers. As 
datagrams typically need to traverse several links to travel from source to destination, a datagram may be 
handled by different link -layer protocols at different links along its route. For example, a datagram may be 
handled by Ethernet on one link and then PPP on the next link. IP will receive a different service from each of 
the different link -layer protocols. 
GOTO TOP
Physical Layer 
While the job of the link layer is to move entire frames from one network element to an adjacent network 
element, the job of the physical layer is to move the individual bits within the frame from one node to the next. 
The protocols in this layer are again link dependent, and further depend on the actual transmission medium of 
the link (for example, twisted-pair copper wire, single-mode fibre optics). For example, Ethernet has many 
physical layer protocols: one for twisted-pair copper wire, another for coaxial cable, another for fibre, and so on. 
In each case, a bit is moved across the link in a different way.  
GOTO TOP
Internet History 
Development and Demonstration of Early Packet Switching Principles: 1961-1972 
The fields of computer networking and today's Internet trace their beginnings back 
to the early 1 960s, a time at which the telephone network was the world's 
dominant communication network. Given the increasing importance (and great 
expense) of computers in the early 1960s and the advent of timeshared 
computers, it was perhaps natural (at least with perfect hindsight!) to consider the 
question of how to hook computers together so that they could be shared among 
geographically distributed users. The traffic generated by such users was likely to 
be 'bursty' -intervals of activity, such as the sending of a command to a remote 
computer, followed by periods of inactivity while waiting for a reply or while 
contemplating the received response.  
Three research groups around the world, all unaware of the 
others' work, began inventing the notion of packet switching 
as an efficient and robust alternative to circuit switching. 
The first published work on packet-switching techniques 
was that of Leonard Kleinrock, at that time a graduate 
student at MIT. Using queuing theory, Kleinrock's work 
Things to Remember: 
1961: Kleinrock - queuing 
theory shows effectiveness 
of packet-switching 
1964: Baran - packet-
switching in military nets 
1967: ARPAnet conceived 
by Advanced Research 
Projects Agency 
1969: First ARPAnet node 
operational 
1972: 
ARPAnet demonstrated 
publicly 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 39 of 44
The work at MIT, Rand, and NPL laid the foundations for today's Internet. But the Internet also has a long 
history of a let's -build-it-and-demonstrate-it attitude that also dates back to the early 1960s. J C R Licklider and 
Lawrence Roberts, both colleagues of Kleinrock's at MIT, went on to lead the 
computer science program at the Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(ARPA) in the United States. Roberts published an overall plan for the so-
called ARPAnet, the first packet-switched computer network and a direct 
ancestor of to day's public Internet.  
The early packet switches were known as interface message processors 
(IMPs) and the contract to build these switches was awarded to the BBN 
Company. On Labour Day in 1969, the first IMP was installed at UCLA under 
Kleinrock's supervision, with three additional IMPs being installed shortly 
thereafter at the Stanford Research Institute (SRI), UC Santa Barbara, and 
the University of Utah. The fledgling precursor to the Internet was four nodes 
large by the end of 1969. Kleinrock recalls the very first use of the network to 
perform a remote login from UCLA to SRI, crashing the system. 
By 1972, ARPAnet had grown to approximately 15 nodes, and was given its 
first public demonstration by Robert Kahn at the 1972 International 
Conference on Computer Communications. The first host-to-host protocol between ARPAnet end systems 
known as the network-control protocol (NCP) was completed [RFC 001]. With an end-to-end protocol available, 
applications could now be written. The first e-mail program was written by Ray Tomlinson at BBN in 1972.  
elegantly demonstrated the effectiveness of the packet -switching approach for 
bursty traffic sources. In 1964, Paul Baran at the Rand Institute had begun 
investigating the use of packet switching for secure voice over military networks, 
and at the National Physical Laboratory in England, Donald Davies and Roger 
Scantlebury were also developing their ideas on packet switching.  
NCP (Network Control 
Protocol) first host-host 
protocol 
First e-mail program 
ARPAnet has 15 nodes  
GOTO TOP
Internetworking, and New and Proprietary Networks: 1972-1980 
The initial ARPAnet was a single, closed network. In order to communicate with an ARPAnet host, one had to 
actually be attached to another ARPAnet IMP. In the early to mid 1970s, additional packet -switching networks 
besides ARPAnet came into being: 
These architectural principles were embodied in the TCP protocol. The 
l ALOHAnet, a microwave network linking together universities on the 
Hawaiian islands;  
l Telenet, a BBN commercial packet -switching network based on ARPAnet 
technology;  
l Tyrnnet;  
l Transpac, a French packet -switching network.  
The number of networks was beginning to grow. In 1973, Robert 
Metcalfe's PhD thesis laid out the principle of Ethernet, which 
would later lead to a huge growth in so-called local area 
networks (LANs) that operated over a small distance based on 
the Ethernet protocol.  
Once again, with perfect hindsight one might now see that the 
time was ripe for developing an encompassing architecture for 
connecting networks together. Pioneering work on 
interconnecting networks, once again under the sponsorship of 
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) -in 
essence creating a network of networks -was done by Vinton Cerf and Robert 
Kahn. The term 'internetting' was coined to describe this work. 
Things to Remember: 
1970: ALOHAnet satellite in 
Hawaii 
1973: Metcalfe's PhD thesis 
proposes Ethernet 
1974: Cerf and Kahn - 
architecture for 
interconnecting networks 
Late 70s: Proprietary 
architectures: DECnet, 
SNA, XNA 
Late 70s: Switching fixed 
lenght packets (ATM 
precursor) 
1979: ARPAnet has 200 
nodes  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 40 of 44
early versions of TCP, however, were quite different from today's 
TCPs. The early versions of TCP combined a reliable in -sequence delivery of data via end -system 
retransmission (still part of today's TCP) with forwarding functions (which today are performed by IP). Early 
experimentation with TCP, combined with the recognition of the importance of an unreliable, non-flow -
controlled end-to-end transport service for applications such as packetised voice, led to the separation of IP out 
of TCP and the development of the UDP protocol. The three key Internet protocols that we see today -TCP, 
UDP, and IP -were conceptually in place by the end of the 1970s.  
Twenty-five years ago, well before the PC revolution and the explosion of networks, Metcalfe and Boggs were 
laying the foundation for today's PC LANs. Ethernet technology represented an important step for 
internetworking as well. Each Ethernet local area network was itself' a network, and as the number of LANs 
proliferated, the need to internetwork these LANs together became increasingly important. 
In addition to the DARPA Internet-related research, many other important 
networking activities were underway. In Hawaii, Norman Abramson was 
developing ALOHAnet, a packet-based radio network that allowed multiple remote 
sites on the Hawaiian Islands to communicate with each other.  
The ALOHA protocol was the first so-called multiple -access protocol, allowing 
geographically distributed users to share a single broadcast communication 
medium (a radio frequency). Abramson's work on multiple -access protocols was 
built upon by Metcalfe and Boggs in the development of the Ethernet protocol for 
wire -based shared broadcast networks; interestingly, Metcalfe and Boggs' 
Ethernet protocol was motivated by the need to connect multiple PCs, printers, 
and shared disks together. 
Things to Remember: 
Cerf and Kahn's 
Internetworking Principles: 
Minimalism, autonomy - no 
internal changes required to 
interconnect networks 
Best effor service model 
Stateless routers 
Decentralized control 
GOTO TOP
Metcalfe's Original Conception of the Ethernet 
In addition to the DARPA internetworking efforts and the Aloha/Ethernet multiple -access 
networks, a number of companies were developing their own proprietary network 
architectures. Digital Equipment Corporation (Digital) released the first version of the DECnet 
in 1975, allowing two PDP-ll minicomputers to communicate with each other. DECnet has 
continued to evolve since then, with significant portions of the OSI protocol suite being based 
on ideas pioneered in DECnet. Other important players during the 1970s were Xerox (with the 
XNS architecture) and IBM (with the SNA architecture). Each of these early networking efforts 
would contribute to the knowledge base that would drive networking in the 80s and 90s.  
It is important to note here that in the 1980s (and even before), researchers such as [Fraser 
1983, 1993] and [Turner 1986] were also developing a competitor technology to the Internet 
architecture. These efforts have contributed to the development of the ATM architecture, a connection -oriented 
approach based on the use of fixed -size packets, known as cells.  
GOTO TOP
A Proliferation of Networks: 1980-1990 
By the end of the 1970s, approximately 200 hosts were connected to the 
ARPAnet. By the end of the 1980s the number of hosts connected to the public 
Internet, a confederation of networks looking much like today's Internet, would 
reach 100,000. The 1980s would be a time of tremendous growth.  
Much of the growth in the early 1980s resulted from several distinct efforts to 
create computer networks linking universities together. BITnet (because it's their 
network) provided e-mail and file transfers among several universities in the 
Northeast. CSNET (computer science network) was formed to link together 
university researchers without access to ARPAnet. In 1986, NSFNET was created 
to provide access to NSF-sponsored supercomputing centres. Starting with an 
Things to Remember: 
1983: deployment of TCP/IP 
1982: SMTP email protocol 
defined 
1983: DNS defined for 
name-to-IP address 
translation 
1985: FTP protocol defined 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 41 of 44
In the ARPAnet community, many of the final pieces of today ’s Internet architecture were falling into place. 
January 1, 1983, saw the official deployment of TCP/IP as the new standard host protocol for ARPAnet 
(replacing the NCP protocol). The transition [RFC 801] from NCP to TCP/IP was a 'flag day' type event -all 
hosts were required to transfer over to TCP/IP as of that day. In the late 1980s, important extensions were 
made to TCP to implement host -based congestion control. The Domain Name System, used to map between a 
human-readable Internet name (for example, gaia.cs.umass.edu) and its 32-bit IP address, was also developed 
[RFC 1034]. 
In parallel with this development of the ARPAnet (which was for the most part a United States effort), in the 
early 1980s the French launched the Minitel project, an ambitious plan to bring data networking into everyone's 
home. Sponsored by the French government, the Minitel system consisted of a public packet -switched network 
(based on the X.25 protocol suite, which uses virtual circuits), Minitel servers, and inexpensive terminals with 
built -in low speed modems.  
initial backbone speed of 56 Kbps, NSFNET's backbone would be running at 1.5 
Mbps by the end of the decade, and would be serving as a primary backbone 
linking together regional networks. 
1988: TCP congestion 
control 
The Minitel became a huge success in 1984 when the French government gave 
away a free Minitel terminal to each French household that wanted one. Minitel 
sites included free sites -such as a telephone directory site -as well as private 
sites, which collected a usage- based fee from each user. At its peak in the mid 
1990s, it offered more than 20,000 different services, ranging from home banking 
to specialized research databases. It was used by over 20% of France's 
population, generated more than $1 billion each year, and created 10,000 jobs.  
The Minitel was in a large proportion of French homes 10 years before most 
Americans had ever heard of the Internet. It still enjoys widespread use in France, 
but is increasingly facing stiff competition from the Internet. 
Things to Remember: 
New National Networks: 
Csnet, BITnet, NSFnet, 
Minitel 
100,000 hosts connected to 
confederation of networks 
GOTO TOP
Commercialization and the Web: the 1990s 
The 1990s were ushered in with two events that symbolized the continued 
evolution and the soon-to-arrive commercialization of the Internet. First, ARPAnet, 
the progenitor of the Internet ceased to exist. MlLNET and the Defense Data 
Network had grown in the 19808 to carry most of the US Department -of -Defense-
related traffic and NSFnet had begun to serve as a backbone network connecting 
regional networks in the United States and national networks overseas. In 1991, 
NSFNET lifted its restrictions on use of NSFNET for commercial purposes. 
NSFNET itself would be decommissioned in 1995, with Internet backbone traffic 
being carried by commercial Internet service providers. 
The main event of the 1990s, however, was to be the release of the World Wide 
Web, which brought the Internet into the homes and businesses of millions and 
millions of people worldwide. The Web also served as a platform for enabling and 
deploying hundreds of new applications, including online stock trading and 
banking, streamed multimedia services, and information retrieval services. 
The Web was invented at CERN by Tim Berners-Lee in 
1989-1991, based on ideas originating in earlier work on 
hypertext frOD1 the ] 940s by Bush and since the 1960s by 
Ted Nelson. Berners-Lee and his associates developed initial 
versions of HTML, HTTP, a Web server, and a browser - the 
four key components of the Web. The original CERN 
browsers only provided a line-mode interface.  
Around the end of 1992 there were about 200 Web servers in 
operation, this collection of servers being the tip of the 
iceberg for what was about to come. At about this time 
several researchers were developing Web browsers with GUI 
  
Things to Remember: 
Early 1990s: ARPAnet 
decommisioned 
1991: NSF lifts restrictions 
on commercial use of 
NSFnet (decommisioned 
1995)  
Early 1990s: WWW 
l Hypertext [Bush 
1945, Nelson 1960s]  
l HTML, http: 
Berners-Lee  
l 1994: Mosaic, later 
Netscape  
l Late 1990s: 
commercialization of 
WWW  
Things to Remember: 
Late 1990s:  
l Estimated 50 million 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 42 of 44
During the 1990s, networking research and development also made significant advance. The technical 
community struggled with the problems of defining and implementing an Internet service model for traffic 
requiring real-time constraints, such as continuous media applications. The need to secure and manage 
Internet infrastructure also became of paramount importance as e-commerce applications proliferated and the 
Internet became a central component of the world's telecommunications infrastructure. 
interfaces, including Marc Andreesen, who led the development of the popular 
GUI browser Mosaic for X. Andreesen and his colleagues released an alpha 
version of his browser in 1993, and in 1994 he and James Baker formed Mosaic 
Communications, which later became Netscape Communications Corporation. By 
1995, university students were using Mosaic and Netscape browsers to surf" the 
Web on a daily basis. At about this time companies -big and small -began to 
operate Web servers and transact commerce over the Web. In 1996, Microsoft 
got into the Web business in a big way though lately realizing the huge business 
potential of the Internet 
computers on 
Internet  
l Estimated 100 
million+ users  
l Backbone links 
running at 1 Gbps  
GOTO TOP
Read Chapter 1 of Computer Networking: A Top Down Approach Featuring the Internet, 2nd edition. Jim 
Kurose, Keith Ross Addison-Wesley, July 2002. 
 
Recommended Links 
IEEE History Center http://www.ieee.org/organizations/history_center/oral_histories/comsoc_oh.html.  
Oral Histories that have been collected to commemorate the 50th Anniversary of the IEEE Communications Society. A number of interesting 
interviews with pioneers in the field.  
International Engineering Consortium: Web ProForum Tutorials http://www.iec.org/online/tutorials/  
More than 150 tutorials on communications and networking topics, with a focus on cutting edge technology. The tutorials vary in terms of 
their technical depth, but many are outstanding, and all are extremely well-written and very readable. This is the first place we look when 
looking for an on-line survey or tutorial.  
Broadband: Bringing home the bits http://www.nap.edu/html/broadband  
Extensive report on the importance and future of residential broadband access from the Computer Science And Telecommunications Board, 
National Research Council, January 2002  
Internet Economics http://china.si.umich.edu/telecom/net-economics.html  
Comprehensive index for resources relating to Internet economics, including regulation and pricing.  
Webopedia http://www.pcwebopaedia.com  
Online dictionary for computer and Internet technology  
traceroute.org http://www.traceroute.org  
As discussed in Section 1.6, Traceroute provides routes and packet delays between pairs of hosts in the Internet. This site gives you direct 
access to hundreds of source hosts from which you can trace routes to arbitrary destination hosts. Choose a country, a source host in that 
country, and any destination host -- then see how the packets weave their way through the Internet.  
Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) http://www.ietf.org  
The IETF is an open international community concerned with the development and operation of the Internet and its architecture. The IETF 
was formally established by the Internet Architecture Board (IAB), http://www.isi.edu/iab, in 1986. The IETF meets three times a year; much 
of its ongoing work is conducted via mailing lists by working groups. Typically, based upon previous IETF proceedings, working groups will 
convene at meetings to discuss the work of the IETF working groups. The IETF is administered by the Internet Society, http://www.isoc.org, 
whose Web site contains lots of high-quality, Internet-related material.  
Henning Schulzrinne's Internet Technical Resources http://www.cs.columbia.edu/~hgs/internet  
Henning Schulzrinne has an extensive - although not always current - index of online resources for the Internet.  
The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) http://www.acm.org  
A major international professional society that has technical conferences, magazines, and journals in the networking area. The ACM Special 
Interest Group in Data Communications (SIGCOMM), http://www.acm.org/sigcomm, is the group within this body whose efforts are most 
closely related to networking  
The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) http://www.ieee.org  
The other major international professional society that has technical conferences, magazines, and journals in the networking area. The IEEE 
Communications Society, http://www.comsoc.org, and the IEEE Computer Society, http://www.computer.org, are the groups within this body 
whose efforts are most closely related to networking.  
The SETI@home Project http://setiathome.ssl.berkeley.edu  
As discussed in Section 1.2, the SETI@home project is a scientific experiment that uses Internet-connected computers to search for 
extraterrestrial intelligence. You can download the SETI program directly from this site.  
Nerds 2.0.1 A Brief History of the Internet http://www.pbs.org/opb/nerds2.0.1  
Computer Networking and Management
Page 43 of 44
This is the Web site for the highly entertaining and informative PBS video on the history of the Internet. The PBS video, Triumph of the 
Nerds, about the history of personal computers, is also recommended.  
Leonard Kleinrock's Personal History of the Internet http://www.lk.cs.ucla.edu/LK/Inet/birth.html  
Professor Leonard Kleinrock made numerous important contributions to Internet technology and to the field of computer networking. This 
page provides his own interesting and highly entertaining description of the early history of the Internet.  
The DSL Forum http://www.dslforum.org  
DSL Forum is a consortium of nearly 250 leading industry players covering telecommunications, equipment, computing, networking and 
service provider companies. The site is rich in information about developments in digital subscriber loop and broadband access to the home.  
Cable-modems.org http://www.cable-modems.org  
This site has many tutorials on cable modems, hybrid fiber-coax, and related topics. Also includes reviews of cable modem products  
GOTO TOP
 
Computer Networking and Management
Page 44 of 44

