Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2495 
Applications of Pattern Recognition 
Algorithms in Agriculture: A Review 
M. P. Raj 
Research Scholar, Rai University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India 
Email: rajmayur2005@gmail.com 
P. R. Swaminarayan 
Professor ISTAR, Anand, Gujarat, India. 
Email: swaminarayan.priya@yahoo.com 
J. R. Saini 
Associate Professor, 
Narmada College of Computer Application, Zadeshwar, Bharuch, Gujarat, India 
Email: saini_expert@yahoo.com 
D. K. Parmar 
Research Scholar, Rai University, Ahmedabad, Gujarat, India 
Email: dig.matlab@gmail.com 
--------------------------------------------------------------------ABSTRACT------------------------------------------------------------- 
Pattern recognition has its roots in artificial intelligence and is a branch of machine learning that focuses on the 
recognition of patterns and regularities in data. Data can be in the form of image, text, video or any other format. 
Under normal scenario, pattern recognition is implemented by first formalizing a problem, explain and at last 
visualize the pattern. In contrast to pattern matching, pattern recognition algorithms generally provide a fair 
result for all possible inputs by considering statistical variations. Probabilistic classifiers have supported 
Agricultural statistical inference for decades. Potential applications of this technique in agriculture are numerous 
like pattern recognition from satellite imagery, identifying the type of disease from leaf image, weed detectionetc. 
This paper explores employment of pattern recognition in an agricultural domain. 
Keywords: Classification, Feature Extraction, Feature Selection, Pattern Recognition, Pattern Recognition 
Models, Agriculture. 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ 
Date of Submission: February 02, 2015     Date of Acceptance:  March 04, 2015 
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
I. INTRODUCTION 
Agriculture industry reflects a large portion of 
economic output. Together with the breeding industry, 
researchers try to identify, improve, and breed key traits 
to satisfy the growing demands, increase resistance to 
parasites and diseases, reduce environmental impact 
(less water, less fertilizer), always striving for a more 
sustained agriculture.  
These can be satisfied if precision farming is 
implemented. Looking at the scientific literature on 
precision farming, it appears that, most efforts so far 
were focused on the development and deployment of 
sensor technologies rather than on methods for data 
analysis tailored to agricultural measurements. In other 
words, up to now, contributions to computational 
intelligence in agriculture mainly applied off-the shelf 
techniques available in software packages or libraries 
but did not develop specific frameworks or algorithms. 
Yet, efforts in this direction are noticeably increasing 
and in this paper we review recent work on pattern 
recognition in agriculture. 
Pattern recognition is a multi-disciplinary subject 
covering the fields of statistics, engineering, artificial 
intelligence, computer science, psychology, physiology, 
etc. [[1][2][3]]. The field of pattern recognition is 
concerned with the automatic discovery of regularities 
in data through the use of computer algorithms and with 
the use of these regularities to take actions such as 
classifying the data into different categories [4]. In 
simple terms, one can say that Pattern recognition 
prominently used for classification or clustering. From 
centuries, human beings are solving a number of 
problems by analogical reasoning.  
However, computer-based automated pattern 
recognition systems are required when the human 
senses fail to recognize patterns, or if there is a need for 
automating and speeding up the recognition 
process[5].Pattern reasoning employs same paradigm in 
solving problems in different domains by scrutinizing 
relevant patterns. Its main notion is to elicit patterns 
from the study area and to bifurcate the study area in to 
classes. Application of Pattern recognition systems can 
be trained or untrained. Trained methods are known as 
supervised learning and untrained is categorized as 
unsupervised learning.Solutions provided by pattern 
recognition can be found everywhere. For example it 
can be used in disease categorization, prediction of 
survival rates for patients withspecific disease[6], 
fingerprint verification[7], face recognition[[8][9]], iris 
Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2496 
discrimination[10], chromosome shape 
discrimination[11], optical character recognition[12], 
texture discrimination[13]and many more.Pattern 
recognitionsystem implements three major steps viz. 
preprocessing, feature extraction, and classification for 
solving any problem on hand. 
Pattern recognition system should consider the 
application domain for selecting pattern. Same pattern 
recognition system cannot be employed for all domains. 
For most practical applications, the original input 
variables are typically preprocessed to transform them 
into some new space of variables where, it is desired. 
For instance, in the digit recognition problem, the 
images of the digits are typically translated and scaled 
so that each digit is contained within a box of a fixed 
size. This greatly reduces the variability within each 
digit class, because the location and scale of all the 
digits are now the same, which makes it much easier for 
a subsequent pattern recognition algorithm to 
distinguish between the different classes.  
II. PATTERN RECOGNITION PROCESS 
Pattern 
There are various definitions of the term pattern: 
According to Wordweb dictionary; pattern is a 
perceptual feature, a customary way of operation or 
behavior, a decorative or artistic work, something 
regarded as a normative example, a model considered 
worthy of imitation, something intended as a guide for 
making something else or graphical representation of 
the spatial distribution of radiation from an antenna as a 
function of an angle. 
“A pattern is essentially an arrangement. It is 
characterized by the order of the elements of which it is 
made, rather than by the intrinsic nature of these 
elements,” is a definition given by Norbert Wiener [14]. 
Watanabe [15] defines a pattern as “opposite of a chaos; 
it is an entity, vaguely defined, that could be given a 
name”. “It can also be defined by the common 
denominator among the multiple instances of an entity. 
For e.g., commonality in all fingerprint images defines 
the fingerprint pattern; thus, a pattern could be a 
fingerprint image, a handwritten cursive word, a human 
face, a speech signal, a bar code, or a web page on the 
Internet” [16]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pattern recognition system  
figure -1: General steps required for supervised and 
unsupervised classification 
First process of any pattern recognition system is 
dimensionality reduction. Dimensionality reduction 
process deals with the removal of noise (i.e. irrelevant) 
and redundant features. 
The design model of a pattern recognition system 
essentially involves the following steps [[17][18]]:  
1) Preprocessing: Here the data from the surrounding 
environment is taken as an input. The raw data is then 
processed by either removing noise from the data or 
extracting pattern of interest from the background so as 
to make the input readable by the pattern recognition 
system.  
Next two steps viz. feature extraction and feature 
selection are capable of improving learning 
performance, lowering computational complexity, 
building better generalized models, and decreasing 
required storage[19]. 
2) Feature extraction: Feature is the measurable or 
observable data corresponding to the pattern. Feature 
extraction eliminates redundant data and retrieves 
characteristic information about the pattern. Elimination 
of redundant information is of vital importance for the 
reduction of processing time in the recognition process 
[5].Form processed data identical and relevant features 
are extracted. These relevant features collectively form 
identity of an object to be recognized or classified. 
Many methods of feature extraction exist like Fourier 
transform, Radon transform, Gabor Wavelets transform, 
Fuzzy invariant transform, principal component 
analysis, Semidefinite embedding, Multifactor 
dimensionality reduction, Multilinear subspace 
learning, Nonlinear dimensionality reduction, Isomap, 
Kernel PCA, Multilinear PCA, Latent semantic 
analysis, Partial least squares, Independent component 
analysis, Autoencoder  etc. 
3) Feature selection:  The objective of variable 
selection is three-fold: improving the prediction 
performance of the predictors, providing faster and 
more cost-effective predictors, and providing a 
betterunderstanding of the underlying process that 
generated the data[20]. 
List of feature extracted from the feature extraction step 
are passed through a one more filtering process to 
obtain more discriminative or representative subset of 
Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2497 
feature vector. During this process, filtering is done 
without any transformation and maintains the physical 
meaning of the original features. Feature vector/subset 
available at the end of this step is also known as 
training data set. Feature selection allows us to better 
understand the domain and cost cutting can be achieved 
by reducing set of predictors.  
These properties of feature selection ultimately 
help in improving performance of classification 
algorithms. This process aims not only to increase 
dimension reduction rate but also to prevent the effect 
of curse of dimensionality [21][2]. Feature selection is 
different from dimensionality reduction. Both methods 
seek to reduce the number of attributes in the dataset, 
but a dimensionality reduction method do so by creating 
new combinations of attributes, whereas feature 
selection methods include and exclude attributes present 
in the data without changing them [22]. Feature 
selection techniques at top level are bifurcated in to 
wrappers, filters and embedded. 
Wrapper methods use a predictive model to score 
feature subsets. Each new subset is used to train a 
model, which is tested on a hold-out set. Counting the 
number of mistakes made on that hold-out set (the error 
rate of the model) gives the score for that subset. As 
wrapper methods train a new model for each subset, 
they are very computationally intensive, but usually 
provide the best performing feature set for that 
particular type of model. 
Filter methods use a proxy measure to score a feature 
subset. This measure is chosen to be fast to compute. 
Common measures include the mutual information, 
[20] the point wise mutual information,[23] Pearson 
product-moment correlation coefficient, inter/intra class 
distance or the scores of significance tests for each 
class/feature combinations.[23][24] Filters are usually 
less computationally intensive than wrappers, but they 
produce a feature set which is not tuned. Filters can be 
uses are pre-processing part of wrapper methods.  
Embedded methods perform variable selection in the 
process of training and are usually specific to given 
learning machines.  
Feature selection techniques include methods like 
Information Gain, Relief, Fisher Score and Lasso. 
 
figure -2: General feature selection structure [25] 
4) Classification: Classification is the problem of 
identifying, i.e. to which set of categories 
(subpopulations) a new observation belongs, on the 
basis of a training set of data containing observations 
(or instances) whose category membership is known 
[19]. Performance of pattern recognition algorithm is 
dependent on this step, so it is one of the crucial process 
in pattern recognition systems. Inputs of this process are 
resultant refined feature vector/set obtained at the end 
of feature selection processes and classification dataset 
which is to be classified based on former feature vector 
or in some scenario it can be only classification dataset 
only. In case if classification algorithm accepts refined 
feature set from step 3 as input then it is known as 
supervised classification algorithms and in its absence it 
is known as unsupervised classification algorithms. 
Supervised and unsupervised algorithms are enlisted in 
Table-1.Sometimes unsupervised is also meansgrouping 
the input data into clusters based on some implicit 
similarity measure, rather than assigning each input 
instance into one of a set of predefined classes [26]. So 
in case of clustering or unsupervised classification 
algorithm feature extraction and feature selection 
processes are not mandatory. Figure-3 displays flow of 
unsupervised and supervised classification algorithms. 
Applications in which the training data along with 
target data are employedare known as supervised 
learning problems. The problems in which each input 
vector is assigned to one of a finite number of discrete 
categories, are called classification problems [4]. 
Regression is in which the desired output consists of 
one or more continuous variables.  
In other category, the training data consists of a set of 
input vectors without target values. The motto in such 
unsupervised learning problems is to identify groups of 
similar sets within the data.This is called clustering, or 
density estimation (to determine the distribution of data 
within the input space), or visualization (to project the 
data from a high-dimensional space down to two or 
three dimensions)[4]. 
Unsupervised 
Methods 
Supervised Methods 
1. Categorical 
mixture models 
2. Deep learning 
methods 
3. Hierarchical 
clustering  
4. K-means 
5. Clustering 
6. Correlation 
clustering 
7. Kernel PCA 
1. Linear discriminant 
analysis 
2. Quadratic discriminant 
analysis 
3. Maximum entropy 
classifier 
4. Decision trees, decision 
lists 
5. Kernel estimation and 
K-nearestneighbor 
6. Naive Bayes classifier 
7. Neural networks 
(multilayer perceptrons) 
8. Perceptrons 
9. Support vector 
machines 
10. Gene expression 
programming 
Table 1– List of supervised and unsupervised methods 
Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2498 
 
 
figure-3: Unsupervised and supervised classification [27] 
 
5) Decision making: Input of this process is classified 
data. In any case i.e. (supervised or unsupervised 
classification) this step is preceded by post processing 
which help in better inferring and decisiveness [28].   
III. PATTERN RECOGNITION MODELS 
Pattern recognition models are bifurcated in to four 
major categories viz. statistical approach, syntactic 
approach,template matching & neural network[29][18]. 
Statistical Model 
Statistical pattern recognition systems are extensively 
used in today’s world because of its simplicity. It is 
based on statistics and probabilities. In these systems, 
traits are recoded in form of numbers and these 
numbers vectors are used to create a pattern. Thus, each 
pattern can be represented by specific multidimensional 
vector, which in turn is used for pattern 
recognition.Approximately about 80% of agricultural 
research is supported by this approach.  
Syntactic Model 
Syntactic approach is widely used in theory of 
computation. It is also known as a structural pattern 
recognition model or rule based pattern recognition. In 
this approach, patterns are represented by definite 
structures like sentences belonging to language. In this 
model, the patterns to be recognized are called 
primitives and the complex patterns are represented by 
the inter-relationship formed between these primitives 
and the grammatical rules associated with this 
relationship[29]. The patterns are the sentences 
belonging to a language, primitives are the alphabet of 
the language, and using these primitives, the sentences 
are generated according to the grammar. Thus, the very 
complex patterns can be described by a small number of 
primitives and grammatical rules [30]. 
Template matching 
Template matching is extensively used in image 
processing domain. In this model pattern can be 
recognized by clusters of pixel or curves to localize and 
identify shapes in image. Thus patterns are in form of 
templates. So from this it can be stated that supervised 
classification algorithm will be mostly used. Scenario in 
which pre-defined pattern are not known unsupervised 
classification algorithm will be engaged. 
Neural Network 
Neural networks were originally inspired as being 
models of the human nervous system. They have shown 
many intelligent abilities, such as learning, 
generalization and abstraction.Neural networks are 
large networks of simple processing elements or node 
which process information dynamically in response to 
external inputs. The nodes are simplified models of 
neurons or processing elements (PE). The knowledge in 
a neural network is distributed throughout the network 
in the form of internode connectionsand weighted links 
(or synapse) which form the inputs to the nodes. The 
link weights server to enhance or inhibit the input 
stimuli values which are then added together at the 
nodes. If the sum of all the inputs to a node exceeds 
some threshold value T, the node executes and produces 
an output which is passed on to other nodes or is used to 
produce some output response. 
 
IV. APPLICATIONS OF PATTERN RECOGNITION IN 
AGRICULTURE 
Pattern recognition is used in many area of science and 
engineering that studies the structure of observations. It 
is now frequently used in many applications in 
manufacturing industry, health care and 
military[16].Image processing based on morphology, 
color and textural features of grains is necessary for 
different applications in the grain industry including 
assessing grain quality and variety classification. In 
grain classification process, several techniques such 
as statistical, artificial neural networks and fuzzy 
logic have been used. Below listed is the some of the 
contribution of pattern recognition in agriculture 
domain: 
Ankur M Vyas [31]surveyed different techniques 
used to identify fruits based on colour. According to 
them “In the automated fruit grading system the most 
important feature is its colour. So for any automated 
fruit grading system one should have the idea of 
colour space and segmentation needs to be 
performed. This paper provides a review of various 
colour feature extraction techniques in detail.” 
S. Arivazhagan et al.[32] proposed system as a 
software solution for automatic detection and 
classification of plant leaf diseases. The proposed 
algorithm’s efficiency can successfully detect and 
classify the examined diseases with an accuracy of 
94%. Experimental results on a database of about 500 
plant leaves confirm the robustness of the proposed 
approach. 
Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2499 
J. Rajendra Prasad et al. [33] describe the DM 
Framework development, description, components 
used for crop prediction; planting strategist test 
results are very much useful to the farmers to 
understand market needs and planting strategies. 
Victor Rodriguez-Galiano et al. [34] assessed 
groundwater vulnerability to nitrate pollution using 
Random Forest algorithm. Showed method of a 
feature selection approach to reduce the number of 
explicative variables. Developed predictive modeling 
of nitrate concentrations at or above the quality 
threshold of 50mg/L. 
Christian Bauckhage Kristian and Kersting [35] 
surveyed recent work on computational intelligence 
in precision farming. From the point of view of 
pattern recognition and data mining, the major 
challenges in agricultural applications appear to be 
the following: 
1. The widespread deployment and ease of use 
of modern, (mobile) sensor technologies 
leads to exploding amounts of data. This 
poses problems of BIG DATA and high-
troughput computation. Algorithms and 
frameworks for data management and 
analysis need to be developed that can easily 
cope with TeraBytes of data. 
2. Since agriculture is a truly interdisciplinary 
venture whose practitioners are not 
necessarily trained statisticians or data 
scientists, techniques for data analysis need 
to deliver interpretable and understandable 
results. 
3. Mobile computing for applications “out in 
the fields” has to cope with resource 
constraints such as restricted battery life, 
low computational power, or limited 
bandwidths for data transfer. Algorithms 
intended for mobile signal processing and 
analysis need to address these constraints. 
They opted an approach based on a distributional 
view of hyper-spectral signatures which they used for 
Baysian prediction of the development of drought 
stress levels. They also presented a cascade of simple 
image processing and analysis steps of low 
computational costs that allows for reliably 
distinguishing different fungal leaf spots in natural, 
unconstrained images of leaves of beet plants, that 
allows farmers in the field to take pictures of plants 
they suspect to be infected and have them analyzed 
in real time. 
Dr. D. Ashok Kumar & N. Kannathasan [36] 
surveyed utility of data minning and pattern 
recognition techniques for soil data minning and its 
allied areas. The recommendations arising from this 
research survey are: 
A comparison of different data mining techniques 
could produce an efficient algorithm for soil 
classification for multiple classes. The benefits of a 
greater understanding of soils could improve 
productivity in farming, maintain biodiversity, 
reduce reliance on fertilizers and create a better 
integrated soil management system for both the 
private and public sectors. 
Farah Khan & Dr. Divakar Singh [37] endeavour to 
provide an overview of some previous researches and 
studies done in the direction of applying data mining 
and specifically, association rule mining techniques 
in the agricultural domain. They have also tried to 
evaluate the current status and possible future trends 
in this area. The theories behind data mining and 
association rules are presented at the beginning and a 
survey of different techniques applied is provided as 
part of the evolution. 
Amina Khatra [38] showed that using color based 
image segmentation it is possible to extract the 
yellow rust from the wheat crop images. Further, the 
segmented yellow rust images can be exposed to 
measurement algorithm where the actual penetration 
of the yellow rust may be estimated in the yield. This 
kind of image segmentation may be used for mapping 
the changes in land use land cover taken over 
temporal period in general but not in particular. The 
success of the segmentation and actual penetration of 
yellow rust mainly depend upon the positioning of 
the cameras installed in order to acquire the images 
from the field. 
Archana A. Chaugule and Dr. Suresh Mali[39] in their 
research Shape-n-Color feature set outperformed in 
almost all the instances of classificationfour Paddy 
(Rice) grains, viz. Karjat-6, Ratnagiri-2, Ratnagiri-4 and 
Ratnagiri-24. They used Pattern classification was done 
using a Two-layer (i.e. one-hidden-layer) back 
propagation supervised neural networks with a single 
hidden layer of 20 neurons with LM training 
functions.The fifty-three features were used as inputs to 
a neural network and the type of the seed as target. 
Abirami et al. [40] used canny edge detection, 
thersolding and scaled conjugate gradient training 
with 9 neurons in hidden layer for grading basmati 
rice granules. Scaled Conjugate Gradient Training 
based Neural Network was able to classify granules 
with the accuracy of 98.7%. 
Various grading systems have been developed [[41], 
[42],[43],[44]] which use different morphological 
features for the classification of different cereal 
grains.  
 
Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2500 
Utku, 2000[45] developed a system to identify 31 
bread wheat and 14 durum wheat cultivars usingCCD 
video camera.  
Majumdar and Jayas [46][47][48][49] used digital 
image processing and discriminate analysis to do 
identification of different grain species. They used 
morphological, color, textural and combination of 
these features to describe physical properties of the 
kernels.  
Computer vision system offers an objective and 
quantitative method for estimation of morphological 
parameters and quality of agricultural products to 
obtain quick and more reliable results [[50][51][52]]. 
Visen, 2004[53]has compared classification 
performances of different neural network topology 
by using morphological features of Canada Western 
Amber Durum (CWAD) wheat, Canada Western Red 
Spring (CWRS) wheat, oats, rye and barley.  
 
Algorithms were developed to acquire and process 
color imagesof bulk grain samples of five grain types, 
namely barley, oats, rye,wheat, and durum wheat by 
[54]. The developed algorithms were used toextract 
over 150 color and textural features. A back 
propagation neuralnetwork-based classifier was 
developed to identify the unknown graintypes. The 
color and textural features were presented to the 
neuralnetwork for training purposes. The trained 
network was then used toidentify the unknown grain 
types. Classification accuracies of over98% were 
obtained for all grain types. 
 
R. D. Tillett [55] in his review highlighted multiple 
areas of agriculture domain in which image 
processing and different methods of pattern 
recognition was implemented, viz. Harvesting of 
oranges, tomatoes, mushrooms, apples, cucumbers, 
Plant growth monitoring and grading of oranges, 
potatoes, apples, carrots, green peppers, tomatoes, 
peaches. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper is an attempt to provide an overview of some 
previous research and studies done in the direction of 
applying pattern recognition techniques in the 
agricultural domain. A unique and proper combination 
of pre-processing, feature extraction, feature selection 
and classification process is required for each domain or 
problem in order to optimize accuracy, speed and 
reduce cost by minimizing feature set used for training 
and classification. The theories behind pattern 
recognition are presented at the beginning and a review 
of different techniques applied in grading, remote 
sensing, diseases detection etc.is provided as part of the 
evolution. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  R. O. Duda, P. Hart and D. Stork, Pattern 
Recognition, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.  
[2]  S. Theodoridis and K. Koutroumbas, Pattern 
Recognition, USA: Academic Press, 2003.  
[3]  A. Webb, Statistical Pattern Recognition, England: 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2002.  
 
[1]  R. O. Duda, P. Hart and D. Stork, Pattern 
Recognition, USA: John Wiley & Sons, 2001.  
[2]  S. Theodoridis and K. Koutroumbas, Pattern 
Recognition, USA: Academic Press, 2003.  
[3]  A. Webb, Statistical Pattern Recognition, England: 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2002.  
[4]  C. M. Bishop, Pattern Recognition and Machine 
Learning, Singapore: Springer Science+Business 
Media, LLC, 2006 .  
[5]  D. S. Gunal, "AUTOMATED 
CATEGORIZATION SCHEME FOR DIGITAL 
LIBRARIES IN DISTANCE LEARNING:A 
Pattern Recognition Approach," Turkish Online 
Journal of Distance Education-TOJDE, vol. 9, p. 
Number:4 Article 1, Octomber 2008.  
[6]  M. Steenweg, A. Vanderver, S. Blaser, T. d. K. A 
Bizzi, G. Mancini and B. F. W. N. v. d. K. M. van 
Wieringen WN, "Magnetic resonance imaging 
pattern recognition in hypomyelinating disorders.," 
p. 136(Pt 9):2923, Sep 2013.  
[7]  A. A. Aburas and S. A. Rehiel, "Fingerprint 
Patterns Recognition System Using Huffman 
Coding," Proceedings of the World Congress on 
Engineering, vol. III, 2008.  
[8]  W. Hwang, X. Huang, S. Z. Li and J. Kim, "Face 
recognition using Extended Curvature Gabor 
classifier bunch," Pattern Recognition, vol. 48, no. 
4, p. 1243–1256, November 2014.  
[9]  S. Elaiwat, M. B. F. Boussaid and A. El-Sallam, 
"A Curvelet-based approach for textured 3D face 
recognition," Pattern Recognition, p. 1231–1242, 
October 2014.  
[10]  J. Daugman, "The importance ofbeing random: 
statistical principles ofiris recognition," Pattern 
Recognition, vol. 36, p. 279 – 291, 2003.  
[11]  L. Zhang, W. Xu and C. Chang, "Genetic 
algorithm for affine point pattern matching," 
Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 24, pp. 9-19, 
2003.  
[12]  F. Mohammad, J. Anarase, M. Shingote and P. 
Ghanwat, "Optical Character Recognition 
Implementation Using Pattern Matching," (IJCSIT) 
International Journal of Computer Science and 
Information Technologies, vol. 5, pp. 2088-2090, 
2014.  
[13]  X. Liu and D. Wang, "A spectral histogram model 
Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2501 
for texton modeling and texture discrimination," 
Vision Research, vol. 42, no. 23, p. 2617–2634, 
October 2002.  
[14]  R. C. Gonzalez , "“Object Recognition”, in Digital 
image processing,," 3rd ed. Pearson, pp. 861-909, 
2008.  
[15]  S. Watanabe, “Pattern Recognition: Human and 
Mechanical”, New York: Wiley, 1985.  
[16]  A. K. Jain and P. D. Robert, “Introduction to 
pattern recognition”, The Oxford Companion to the 
Mind, Second Edition, Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press, 2004.  
[17]  M. Parasher, S. Sharma, A. K. Sharma and J. P. 
Gupta, "“Anatomy On Pattern Recognition"," 
Indian Journal of Computer Science and 
Engineering (IJCSE), Vols. vol. 2, no. 3, Jun-Jul 
2011.  
[18]  S. Asht and R. Dass, "“Pattern Recognition 
Techniques: A Review”," International Journal of 
Computer Science and Telecommunications, vol. 2, 
no. 8, August 2012.  
[19]  J. Tang, S. Alelyani and H. Liu, Feature Selection 
for Classification: A Review.  
[20]  I. Guyon and A. Elisseeff, "An Introduction to 
Variable and Feature Selection," Andr´e Elisseeff, 
vol. 3, pp. 1157-1182, March 2003.  
[21]  A. Jain and D. Zongker, "“Feature selection: 
evaluation, application, and small sample 
performance”," IEEE Trans. on Pattern Analysis 
and Machine Intelligence, vol. 19, no. 2, p. 153–
158, 1997.  
[22]  J. Brownlee, "An Introduction to Feature 
Selection," 06 Octomber 2014. [Online]. Available: 
http://machinelearningmastery.com/an-
introduction-to-feature-selection/. [Accessed 29 
December 2014]. 
[23]  Y. Yang and J. O. Pedersen, "A comparative study 
on feature selection in text categorization," ICML, 
1997.  
[24]  G. Forman, "An extensive empirical study of 
feature selection metrics for text classification," 
Journal of Machine Learning Research, vol. 3, p. 
1289–1305, 2003.  
[25]  J. NOVAKOVIĆ, P. STRBAC and D. 
BULATOVIĆ, "TOWARD OPTIMAL FEATURE 
SELECTION USING RANKING METHODS 
AND CLASSIFICATION ALGORITHMS," 
Yugoslav Journal of Operations Research 21, pp. 
119-135, March 2011.  
[26]  "Pattern Recognition," [Online]. Available: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pattern_recognition. 
[Accessed 18 Dec 2014]. 
[27]  "Lesson 1: Image Processing and Interpretation - 
Morro Bay, California," [Online]. Available: 
http://wgbis.ces.iisc.ernet.in/envisrs/?q=node/26/. 
[Accessed 29 December 2014]. 
[28]  P. Sharma and M. Kaur, "Classification in Pattern 
Recognition: A Review," International Journal of 
Advanced Research in Computer Science and 
Software Engineering, vol. 3, no. 4, April 2013.  
[29]  J. Liu, J. Sun and S. Wang, "Pattern Recognition: 
An overview," IJCSNS International Journal of 
Computer Science and Network Security, vol. 6, 
no. 6, June 2006.  
[30]  A. K. Jain, R. P. Duin and J. Mao, "Statistical 
pattern recognition-A review," IEEE transactions 
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 
22, no. 1, January 2000.  
[31]  A. M. Vyas, B. Talati and S. Naik, "Colour Feature 
Extraction Techniques of Fruits: A Survey," 
International Journal of Computer Applications, 
vol. 83(15), pp. 15-22, December 2013.  
[32]  S. Arivazhagan, R. N. Shebiah, S. Ananthi and S. 
V. Varthini, "Detection of unhealthy region of 
plant leaves and classification of plant leaf diseases 
using texture features," Agric Eng Int: CIGR 
Journal, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 211-217, March 2013.  
[33]  J. R. Prasad, P. R. Prakash and S. S. Kumar, 
"Identification of Agricultural Production Areas in 
Andhra Pradesh," International Journal of 
Engineering and Innovative Technology (IJEIT), 
vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 137-140, August 2012.  
[34]  V. Rodriguez-Galiano, M. P. Mendes, M. J. 
Garcia-Soldado, M. Chica-Olmo and L. Ribeiro, 
"Predictive modeling of groundwater nitrate 
pollution using Random Forest and multisource 
variables related to intrinsic and specific 
vulnerability: A case study in an agricultural 
setting (Southern Spain)," Science of the Total 
Environment 476–477, Elsevier, p. 189–206, 2014.  
[35]  C. Bauckhage and K. Kersting, "Data Mining and 
Pattern Recognition in Agriculture," Springer-
Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2013.  
[36]  D. D. A. Kumar and N. Kannathasan, "A Survey 
on Data Mining and Pattern Recognition 
Techniques for Soil Data Mining," IJCSI 
International Journal of Computer Science Issues, 
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 422-428, May 2011.  
[37]  F. Khan and D. D. Singh, "Association Rule 
Mining in the field of Agriculture : A survey," 
International Journal of Scientific and Research 
Publications, vol. 4, no. 7, July 2014.  
[38]  A. Khatra, "Yellow Rust Extraction in Wheat Crop 
based on Color Segmentation Techniques," IOSR 
Journal of Engineering (IOSRJEN), vol. 3, no. 12, 
pp. 56-58, December. 2013.  
[39]  A. Chaugule and S. N. Mali, "Evaluation of Shape 
and Color Features for Classification of Four 
Paddy Varieties," I.J. Image, Graphics and Signal 
Int. J. Advanced Networking and Applications  
Volume: 6   Issue: 5   Pages: 2495-2502     (2015) ISSN: 0975-0290 
 
 
 
2502 
Processing, vol. 12, pp. 32-38, 2014.  
[40]  S. Abirami, P. Neelamegam and H. Kala, "Analysis 
of Rice Granules using Image Processing and 
Neural Network Pattern Recognition Tool," 
International Journal of Computer Applications, 
vol. 96, no. 7, pp. 20-24, June 2014.  
[41]  S. P. Shouche, R. Rastogi, S. G. Bhagwat and K. S. 
Jayashree, "Shape analysis of grains of Indian 
wheat," Elsevier, Computers and Electronics in 
Agriculture 33, p. 55–76, 2001.  
[42]  B. P. Dubey, S. G. Bhagwat, S. P. Shouche and J. 
K. Sainis, " Potential of artificial neural networks 
in varietal identification using morphometry of 
wheat grains," Biosystems Engineering, vol. 95, p. 
61–67, 2006.  
[43]  P. Zapotoczny, M. Zielinska and M. Nitab, 
"Application of image analysis for the varietal 
classification of barley: Morphological features.," 
Journal of Cereal Science., vol. 48, pp. 104-110, 
2008.  
[44]  A. Masoumiasl, R. Amiri-Fahliani and A. 
Khoshroo, "Some local and commercial rice 
(Oryza sativa L.) varieties comparison for aroma 
and other qualitative properties," International 
Journal of Agriculture and Crop Sciences., vol. 5, 
pp. 2184-2189, 2013.  
[45]  H. Utku, " Application of the feature selection 
method to discriminate digitized wheat varieties.," 
Journal of Food Engineering., vol. 46, pp. 211-
216, 2000.  
[46]  S. Majumdar and D. S. Jayas, "Classification of 
cereal grains using machine vision: I. Morphology 
models.," Transaction of American Society of 
Agricultural Engineering., vol. 43, pp. 1669-1675, 
2000a.  
[47]  S. Majumdar and D. S. Jayas, "Classification of 
cereal grains using machine vision: II. Colour 
models.," Transaction of American Society of 
Agricultural Engineering., vol. 43, pp. 1677-1680, 
2000b.  
[48]  S. Majumdar and D. S. Jayas, "Classification of 
cereal grains using machine vision: III. Texture 
models.," Transaction of American Society of 
Agricultural Engineering., vol. 43, pp. 1681-1687, 
2000c.  
[49]  S. a. D. J. Majumdar, "Classification of cereal 
grains using machine vision: IV. Combined 
morphology, colour, and texture models.," 
Transaction of American Society of Agricultural 
Engineering., vol. 43, pp. 1689-1694, 2000d.  
[50]  A. Arefi, A. Motlagh and A. Khoshroo, 
"Recognition of weed seed species by image 
processing," Journal of Food, Agriculture and 
Environment, vol. 9, pp. 379-383, 2011.  
[51]  R. Choudhary, J. Paliwl and D. Jayas, 
"Classification of cereal grains using wavelet, 
morphological, colour, and textural features of 
nontouching kernel images," Biosystem 
Engineering, vol. 99, pp. 330-337, 2008.  
[52]  A. Khoshroo, A. Keyhani, S. Rafiee, R. Zoroofi 
and Z. Zamani, "Pomegranate quality evaluation 
using machine vision.," Proceedings of the First 
International Symposium on Pomegranate and 
Minor Mediterranean Fruits, pp. 347- 352, 2009.  
[53]  N. Visen, D. Jayas, J. Paliwal and N. White, 
"Comparison of two neural network architectures 
for classification of singulated cereal grains.," 
Canadian Biosystems Engineering, vol. 46, pp. 
3.7-3.14, 2004.  
[54]  N. Visen, J. Paliwal, D. Jayas and N. White, 
"Image analysis of bulk grain samples using neural 
networks," Canadian Biosystems Engineering, vol. 
46, no. 7, pp. 11-15, 2004.  
[55]  R. D. Tillett, "Image analysis for agriculture 
processes: a review of potential opportunities," 
Jornal of Agricultural Engineering Research, vol. 
50, pp. 247-258, September-December 1991.  
 
 

