New Approaches in Philips ECG Database    
Management System Design 
 
S Zhou, G Guillemette, R Antinoro, F Fulton 
 
Diagnostic ECG Group, Philips Medical Systems,  
Oxnard, California, USA 
 
 
 
Abstract 
Electrocardiogram (ECG) databases play an 
important role in medical research, pharmaceutical 
research, medical education and health care. Due to 
growing demands in research, training, and health care, 
designing and managing such ECG databases has 
become a complex problem. This paper reports on the 
new design approach and the new application model of 
the Philips ECG Management System (EMS). The 
Philips EMS is designed not only to store and manage 
ECG data, but also to automate the ECG workflow, to 
facilitate the ECG editing and confirmation process, to 
compare the serial ECG recordings, to capture and 
store auditing information, and report the serial ECG 
changes, and most importantly, to communicate with 
other systems, such as hospital information systems etc. 
The patient demographic and clinical data and ECGs 
are managed by a relational database. The system 
allows authorized users to access ECG data, ECG 
measurements and ECG interpretation in data format 
that is written in eXtensible Markup Language (XML), 
and to retrieve clinical cases for research and education 
by simple structured query language queries. In 
summary, the Philips EMS provides a powerful and 
easy-to-use tool to support research, education, and 
ultimately, to enhance patient care.         
 
 
1.  Introduction 
Medical research, medical education and patient care 
require ECG databases and database management 
systems [1, 2]. Numerous research institutions, 
healthcare organizations and manufacturers have 
designed and developed such database management 
systems over the last few decades, and only a small 
portion of systems achieved success [3,4,5]. The main 
challenge is due to rapid technology evolution. The 
current “state-of-art” technology often becomes 
obsolete in a couple of years if not by months. 
Designing such a sophisticated ECG database 
management system in an era of rapid evolution of 
clinical and information technology has become 
increasingly complex. Sizeable resources are consumed 
in development and maintenance. As part of Philips 
Medical Systems’ longstanding commitment to the 
medical community, substantial efforts have been made 
continuously to the ECG management system. This 
paper is to report the new design approaches of Philips 
ECG Management System with a focus on its flexibility 
and openness in data access.  
 
 
2.  Technical methods 
The new design approaches adopted in the current 
Philips ECG Management System include open industry 
standards for data storage, convenience in user access 
and data query, communication, security, configurable 
workflow, auditing and tracking.   
 
2.1.  System architecture 
 
The Philips EMS design is based on industry 
standard three-tier architecture and divided into three 
major components including the underlying layer of 
relational database, the upper layer applications for 
ECG viewing, editing, data retrieval and data 
aggregation, and the middle layer to adapt a flexibly 
configurable workflow according to the practices of 
individual institutions (Fig.1).  
 
2.2. ECG XML format  
ECGs stored in the system are in industry standard 
XML format. The most significant step Philips Medical 
System has taken is to make the XML data format 
0276−6547/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE 267 Computers in Cardiology 2003;30:267−270.
schema available to the users. This new approach 
provides the users with maximum access to the data 
stored and supports the system interoperability.      
2.3. Relational database 
Structured Query Language (SQL) server is the core 
of database management in this system. The Philips 
EMS database is composed of normalized tables 
containing patient demographics,   digital   ECG   
waveform,   measurements and      ECG interpretation.  
Essentially, most ECG data are exposed via individual 
columns in relational tables [6]. This design enables the 
use of simple to advanced SQL queries for information 
retrieval [7].   
 
2.4. Secured user access 
Secure sockets layer (SSL) is supported to provide 
encrypted hypertext markup language (HTML) protocol 
whereby anywhere, anytime access can be provided to 
authorized users. Secure web-based application for ECG 
viewing and printing from the system is supported over 
the intranet and internet.  Remote ECG editing is 
supported over the internet and Microsoft (dot).Net 
 
web-based editor whereby ECGs can be reviewed and 
confirmed by clinicians at their convenience.   
 
2.5.  Web server 
Bidirectional information relay is performed by an 
industry standard web server. The server can relay user 
requests via web-based application to the back-end 
database layer, or forwards the database information 
resulted from the backend database to the web-based 
application. 
 
2.6.  Workflow  
The workflow layer is configurable to meet the 
needs of a wide variety of practices, including 
automated pre-processing such as routing of incoming 
new ECGs for review via hard copy reports, diagnostic 
serial ECG comparison, notification via email, 
automated in-box assignment, additional special 
processing on confirmation of ECGs, including 
exporting the ECG in a variety of formats, such as XML 
[8], and Health Level Seven (HL7) to a variety of 
external systems, including HIS billing, order 
management and enterprise clinical information 
systems.   
 
 
Figure 1.  The three-tier client/server system architecture is divided into the lower-tier relational database, the mid-tier workflow and 
the upper-tier application as shown above. 
268
2.7.  Auditing and tracking 
The system is designed with auditing and tracking 
capability, and supports full auditing and tracking of 
ECG access and the operations and actions performed 
on individual ECGs. This capability facilitates the 
variable needs of users in different settings to comply 
with regulatory requirements. 
2.8.  System communication 
 
A rich set of communications protocols are 
supported, including TCP/IP over local area network 
(LAN) and wide area network (WAN), and transmission 
control protocol/point-to-point protocol (TCP/PPP) over 
modem and dialup connections for communication with 
Electrocardiographs for transmission of ECGs to the 
Philips EMS for storage and subsequent review. 
Bidirectional communications between the EMS and the 
hospital information system (HIS) is supported using 
Unicode [9] encoded XML and HL7 message exchange 
(Fig.2). Exchange typically consists of importing ECG 
orders from HIS Data Order Entry system, exporting 
ECG order fulfillment to the HIS billing system and 
confirmed ECG readings to the enterprise clinical 
information system. 
 
3.  Applications  
Application models are designed with focuses on 
medical research, medical education and patient care.  
Several new application models have been adopted in 
the latest design. 
3.1.  Medical and pharmaceutical research  
Ownership of the ECG database on a commercial 
management system has been debated over a few 
decades.  The openness of the industry standard XML 
format, a major breakthrough design approach in the 
Philips EMS, allows researchers to maintain ownership 
of the ECG database and enable access with ease.  
Issues related to propritary ECG format no longer exist. 
One major effort made in the system design is to allow 
easy access for researchers, cardiologists, and healthcare  
 
 
 
\ 
Figure.2. Communication between the ECG management system and the ECG devices is depicted in this diagram. Bidirectional 
communication requirements increase the complexity significantly. 
269
professionals.  Researchers in medical and 
pharmaceutical studies have complete flexibility in data 
storage and retrieval, and in accessing and searching 
ECG by measurements, interpretation or the high 
fidelity digital waveform.    
 
3.2.  Medical education 
ECG reading is an art in medical science. However, 
ECG examples shown in medical school textbooks are 
very limited. Without an ECG database management 
system, training ECG reading can be difficult. In the 
Philips EMS, ECG examples can be searched, retrieved, 
displayed and printed in seconds. The database can be 
queried easily using an SQL editor and tools.  
Essentially all ECG data is exposed via individual 
columns in relational tables. Using SQL’s powerful 
commands such as “SELECT and JOIN”, virtually any 
search query can be submitted to the system, and results 
can be obtained quickly.  
 
3.3.  ECG management in patient care 
Most hospitals in the United States have experienced 
a shortage of experienced ECG professionals in recent 
years. The Philips EMS automates ECG order handling 
and reporting of order results to offset the resource 
shortage. The flexible workflow model and order 
handling capability work together to maximize process 
automation – from downloading ECG orders from HIS 
order entry system, uploading ECG order fulfillment 
data to the HIS billing system and sending ECG 
confirmed results to the enterprise clinical information 
system. All of the above facilitates handling of ECG 
data and aid decision-making for patient care.  Another 
advanced application among many on the ECG 
management system is to perform serial ECG 
comparisons [10,11,12]. Serial comparison algorithm 
assists cardiologists in ECG diagnosis and evaluating 
progression and regression of a cardiac condition. 
 
4.     Summary 
In summary, the system design is focused on the 
needs of researchers and health care professionals. The 
design is based on open industry standards and a 
networked three-tier client/server model. The system is 
adaptable and scalable to a wide variety of United States 
and international IT environments and requirements 
[13].  The ECG data stored is completely exposed via 
relational tables. The system meets and satisfies a 
variety of business and clinical information 
requirements.  Although the system is non-trivial and 
may be considered a complex clinical information 
system, it is easily accessible via a standard web-based 
application, it is highly configurable to a wide variety of 
requirements in diagnostic cardiology departments for 
enhanced patient care, and its ad-hoc SQL querying 
capability makes it easy to use but powerful.  
 
Acknowledgements 
The authors acknowledge Alan Risse, Gary 
Okumura, Leigh Wells, George Diller, Krystyna Niklarz  
for their contribution in the new design of Philips ECG 
Management System.  
 
References 
[1]  Gamon R, Cooper A: Applying an ECG database to aid 
decision-making in the A&E. Accid Emerg Nurs 
2002;10(2):62-62. 
[2] Norman JE, Bailey JJ, Berson AS, et al.: NHLBI 
workshop on the utilization of ECG databases: 
preservation and use of existing ECG databases and 
development of future resources. J Electrocardiol, 
1998;31(2):83-89. 
[3]   Chiarugi F, Lombardi D, Lees PJ, et al.: Support of daily 
ECG procedures in a cardiology department via the 
integration of an existing clinical database and a 
commercial ECG management system. Ann Noninvasive 
Electrocardiol, 2002;7(3):263-270. 
[4] Nose Y, Akazawa K, Yokota M, et al.: An 
electrocardiogram database incorporated into the hospital 
information system. Med Inform (Lond), 1987;12(1):1-9. 
[5]  Wang C, Ohe K, Sakurai T, Nagase T, Kaihara S: An 
ECG storage and retrieval system embedded in client 
server HIS utilizing object-oriented DB. J Med Syst 
1996;20(10):35-43.  
[6] Codd EF: The Relational Model for Database    
Management: Version 2, Addison-Wesley, 2002.  
[7]  Date CJ: An Introduction to Database Systems. 8th 
edition, Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[8]  Goldfarb CF, Prescod P: XML Handbook. Prentice Hall, 
4th edition, 2001. 
[9]   The Unicode Consortium: The Unicode Standard, 
Version 3.0. Addison-Wesley Longman, 2000. 
[10] Ariet M, Crevasse L, Caverly S, Leggett S, Greenfield J:  
Computerized serial comparison of electrocardiograms. J 
Electrocardiol 1991;23(supp):123-131. 
[11]  Crevasse L, Ariet M: Clinical usefulness of computerized 
ECG systems. J Med Syst  1987;11(1):21-24.  
[12] Hedstrom K, Macfarlane PW: Development of a new 
approach to serial analysis. The manufactuer’s viewpoint. 
J Electrocardiol 1996;29(Supp):35-40. 
[13]  Philips Medical Systems: TraceMaster ECG Management 
System User’s Guide. U.S.A., 2003. 
 
 
Address for correspondence. 
 
Sophia Zhou PhD, FACC 
Philips Medical Systems 
1201 N Rice Ave., Oxnard CA USA 93030 
Sophia.zhou@philips.com 
270

