HIGHER EDUCATION COM
MISSION
CURRICULUM
OF
COMPUTER SCIENCE,
SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
&
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY
FOR
BS/MS
(Revised 2013)
HIGHER EDUCATION COMMISSION
ISLAMABAD
2
CURRICULUM DIVISION, HEC
Prof. Dr. Mukhtar Ahmed Executive Director
Mr. Fida Hussain Director General (Acad)
Mr. Rizwan Shoukat Deputy Director (Curr)
Mr. Abid Wahab Assistant Director (Curr)
Mr. Riaz-ul-Haque Assistant Director (Curr)
Composed by Mr. Zulfiqar Ali
HEC Islamabad
3
CONTENTS
Introduction Computer Science 7
Computer Science Programme BS(CS) 10
Programme Structure 12
University Electives 13
Eligibility Criteria 13
General Recommendation regarding implementation of Programme 14
BS Computer Science Curriculum 15
Computer Science courses 15
University Elective courses 17
Structure of BS(CS) Programme 17
Proposed Scheme of Study for BS (CS) 18
Course Outline 19
Common Computing Core Courses 19
Computing Supporting Courses for Computer Science Porgramme 25
Computing General Education 27
Computer Science Core Courses 30
Computer Science Supporting Courses 33
Computer Science Electives 35
Curriculum for MS (Computer Science) 45
Programme Objectives 45
Programme Structure 46
Eligibility 46
Scheme of Studies MS (CS) 47
List of Electives Courses 47
MS (CS) Semester-wise Model Programme 51
MS (CS) Elective Courses with Course Details 53
MS (CS) Course Outlines 63
Introduction Software Engineering 72
The Discipline of Software Engineering 73
Definition 74
Vision 75
Software Engineering Degree Programme 77
Nomenclature 77
Duration of Programme 77
Admission Criteria 77
Curriculum for BS Software Engineering — BS (SE) 78
Programme Objective 78
Programme Model 79
Software Engineering Core Courses 15 Credit Hours 82
Software Engineering Elective Computing 15 Credit Hours 82
Computing Requirements-Supporting Sciences 12 Credit hours
(refer to Computing part) 83
Computing Requirements-General Education   15 Credit Hours
(Refer to Computing part) 84
Sample Scheme of Study for BS (SE) 4-year Programme (8 Semesters) 84
BS (SE) - Software Engineering (Core) 85
BS (SE) - Software Engineering Courses (Electives) 89
Elective Supporting Courses 100
4
Curriculum for MS Software Engineering, MS (SE) 103
Eligibility 103
Duration 103
Degree Requirements 103
List of Elective Courses 104
Sample Scheme of Study for MS (SE) 105
MS (SE) Elective Courses with course outline 107
Introduction Information Technology (IT) 113
The Discipline of Information Technology 114
IT Programs’ Rational 115
Vision of Information Technology Education 116
Information Technology Degree Programmes 117
Nomenclature 117
Duration of Programmes 117
Admission Criteria 117
Curriculum for BS Information Technology, BS (IT) 117
Programme’s Aims & Objectives 117
Structure of BS Information Technology 118
IT Electives 120
Proposed Scheme of Study for BS (IT) Model 1 122
Proposed Scheme of Study for BS (IT) Model 2 124
Computing Supporting Elective Courses 132
Contents of General Education Elective Courses 135
University Elective Courses 142
Information Technology Core Courses 146
Contents of Information Technology Supporting Courses 151
Contents of Information Technology Elective Courses 154
Curriculum for MS Information Technology MS (IT) 177
Programme’s Rationale 177
Programme Aim 177
Program Objectives 178
Program Structure 178
Eligibility Criteria 178
Duration 179
Degree Requirements: 179
Distribution of Courses: 179
List of Elective Courses 180
Sample Scheme of Study for MS (IT) Programme 181
Course Outline for MS (IT) Programme (Core) 182
5
PREFACE
The curriculum, with varying definitions, is said to be a plan of the teaching-
learning process that students of an academic programme are required to
undergo. It includes objectives & learning outcomes, course contents,
scheme of studies, teaching methodologies and methods of assessment of
learning. Since knowledge in all disciplines and fields is expanding at a fast
pace and new disciplines are also emerging; it is imperative that curricula be
developed and revised accordingly.
University Grants Commission (UGC) was designated as the competent
authority to develop, review and revise curricula beyond Class-XII vide Section
3, Sub-Section 2 (ii), Act of Parliament No. X of 1976 titled “Supervision of
Curricula and Textbooks and Maintenance of Standard of Education”.
With the repeal of UGC Act, the same function was assigned to the Higher
Education Commission (HEC) under its Ordinance of 2002, Section 10, Sub-
Section 1 (v).
In compliance with the above provisions, the Curriculum Division of HEC
undertakes the revision of curricula after every three years through respective
National Curriculum Revision Committees (NCRCs) which consist of eminent
professors and researchers of relevant fields from public and private sector
universities, R&D organizations, councils, industry and civil society by seeking
nominations from their organizations.
In order to impart quality education which is at par with international
standards, HEC NCRCs have developed unified templates as guidelines for
the development and revision of curricula in the disciplines of Basic Sciences,
Applied Sciences, Social Sciences, Agriculture and Engineering in 2007 and
2009.
It is hoped that this curriculum document, prepared by the respective NCRC’s,
would serve the purpose of meeting our national, social and economic needs,
and it would also provide the level of competency specified in Pakistan
Qualification Framework to make it compatible with international educational
standards. The curriculum is also placed on the website of HEC
(www.hec.gov.pk).
(Fida Hussain)
Director General (Academics)
6
CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
STAGE-I STAGE-II STAGE-III STAGE-IV
CURRI. UNDER
CONSIDERATION
CURRI. IN DRAFT
STAGE
FINAL STAGE FOLLOW UP
STUDY
COLLECTION OF
REC
APPRAISAL OF 1ST
DRAFT BY EXP. OF
COL./UNIV
PREP. OF FINAL
CURRI.
QUESTIONNAIRE
CONS. OF CRC. FINALIZATION OF
DRAFT BY CRC
INCORPORATION
OF REC. OF V.C.C.
COMMENTS
PREP. OF DRAFT
BY CRC
APPROVAL OF
CURRI. BY V.C.C.
PRINTING OF
CURRI.
REVIEW
IMPLE. OF
CURRI.
BACK TO
STAGE-I
ORIENTATION
COURSES
Abbreviations Used:
CRC. Curriculum Revision Committee
VCC. Vice Chancellor’s Committee
EXP. Experts
COL. Colleges
UNI. Universities
PREP. Preparation
REC. Recommendations
7
Introduction:
National Curriculum Revision Committee
A three day final meeting of the National Curriculum Revision Committee
pertaining to revising the curriculum for Computer Science, Software
Engineering, and IT degree programmes developed in 2008-09 was held
from June 10-12, 2013 at HEC regional Centre, Lahore.  The aims and
objectives of the meeting were to discuss the deliberations and finalization of
curricula drafted by committees of the last meeting, in the same areas, held
in February 2013.
Committee Members:
The following members took part in revising the curricula of Computer
Science under the supervision of Dr. Abu Turab Alam, convener of the
revision committees.  The information covered in this document was the effort
of the people worked under the following structure:
National Curriculum Revision Committee (NCRC) year 2013
Convener: Dr. Abu Turab Alam
Sub-Committees
1. Computer Science (Chair: Dr. Shariffullah Khan)
2. Software Engineering (Chair: and Convener Dr. Abu Turab Alam)
3. Information Technology (Chair: Dr.  Muhammad Anwar-ur-Rehman Pasha)
Committee Members and Curriculum for Computer Scinece
1. Dr. Sharifullah Khan,
Associate Professor, School of Electrical
Engg & Computer Science National University
of Science & TechnologyH-12 Islamabad.
(Chairperson
CS
committee)
2. Dr. Imdad Ali Ismaili,
Professor & PVC,
Institute of Information & Communication
Technology,
University of Sindh, Allama I.I. Kazi Campus,
Jamshoro, Sindh.
Member
3. Dr. Hameedullah Kazi,
Associate Professor & Chairperson,
Dept. of Electrical Engg & Computer Science,
ISRA University, Hyderabad, Sindh
Member
4. Dr. Abdul Basit Siddiqui,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Software Engg,
Member
8
Foundation University Institute of Engg. &
Management Sciences,
New Lalazar Rawalpindi
5. Dr. Syed Asad Raza Kazmi,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Computer Science,
Government College University,
Lahore.
Member
6. Dr. Aurangzeb Khan,
Director/Assistant Professor,
Institute of Engg & Computing Sciences,
University of Science & Tech,
Bannu.
Member
7. Dr. Muhammad Abuzar Fahiem,
Head, Dept. of Computer Science,
Lahore College for Women University,
Lahore.
Member
8. Mr. Asim Munir,
Professor / Chairman,
Dept. of Computer Science & Software Engg,
International Islamic University,
H-10, Islamabad.
Member
9. Dr. Zahid Hussain,
Professor,
Head of Dept. Computer Science &
Information Tech,
The University of Lahore,
Lahore.
Member
10. Dr. Aftab Ahmed Shaikh,
Associate Professor & Dean, Faculty of ICT
Dept. of Computer Science,
Balochistan University of Information Tech.
Engg &
Management Sciences, Quetta.
Member
11. Mr. Amjad Hussain Zahid,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Computer Science,
Forman Christian College,
Ferozepur Road, Lahore.
Member
9
12. Dr. Syed Jamal Hussain,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Computer Science,
University of Karachi, Karachi.
Member
13. Dr. Sehat Ullah,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Computer Science & IT,
University of Malakand,
Chakdara Dir (Lower).
Member
14. Dr. Ayesha Maqbool.
Assistant Professor & Coordinator
Dept. of Computer Science,
Shaheed Benazir Bhutto Women University,
Peshawar.
Member
15. Dr. Arshad Aziz
Professor,
Department of Electrical Engineering
Pakistan Navy Engineering Colledge
National University of Science and
Technology PNS, Johar, Habib Rehmatullah
Road
Member
16. Prof. Dr. Aftab Ahmad Malik,
Dean,Faculty of Computer Science Engg,
GIK Institute of Engg & Tech,
Topi, Swabi, KPK
Member
17. Dr. Ehsan Ullah Munir,
Associate Professor / HOD,
Dept. of Computer Science,
COMSATS Institute of Information Tech
(CIIT),
Quaid Avenue, Wah Cantt.
Member
18. Dr. Syed Asif Ali,
Associate Professor,
Department of Computer Science,
Sindh Madresatul Islam University,
Awan-e-Tijarat Road, Karachi-74000
Member
19. Dr. Syed M. Aqil Burney
HoD, Depart of Actuarial Science,
IoBM, Karachi.
Member
10
20. Muhammad Anwaar Saeed
Assistant Professor
Computer Science Department,
Virtual University of Pakistan, Islamabad
Campus,
9-E, Rizwan Plaza, Blue Area,
Islamabad, Pakistan.
Member
Curricula Consideration
The committee used the following basis, particularly on panel discussion, to
revise the curricula of BS(CS), BS(SE), and BS(IT).
 Programme Objectives
 Programme Outcomes and Strategies
 Fast Changing Disciplines
 Emerging Technologies
 International Standards
 Industrial Challenges
 Possible Programme design structure
The committee unanimously approved the proposed objectives of each
programme, its structure, eligibility criteria, general recommendation
regarding the update and revise of the curricula.
The structure and other details of the programme proposed by the committee
were designed inline to the recommendations of various leading bodies
continuously in the quest of designing the educational programme of
Computer Science and related disciplines. These bodies include IEEE and
ACM.
Section-I
Computer Science Programme BS (CS)
Many changes were recommended in various sections of the curricula developed by
this Committee in the last meeting held in February 2013. In the meeting scheduled
on June 10-12 2013, the Committee finally agreed to the curriculum model
presented in the following table.
Table-1.1: Course Category and Credit Hours for BS(CS)
S.No. Category Credit Hours
1
Computing Courses
52Core Courses 40
Supporting Areas Courses 12
2
Computer Science Courses
48Com. Sc. Core Courses 21
Com Sc. Supporting Courses 9
11
Comp. Sc. Electives 18
3 General Education Courses 18 18
4 University Elective Courses 12 12
Total Credit Hours 130
A complete detail of BS programme involving programme structure and
distribution of credits among various components of programme are
discussed in the following pages.
Recent Development in Technology:
Recent developments in computer hardware, software and communication
technologies have offered new exciting opportunities and challenges for
creation of innovative learning environments for Computer Science and its
curricula design. One of the key elements here is to prepare the graduates
for the future. The challenge of getting all newly emerging technologies
incorporated in to the curriculum is becoming pivotal for the effectiveness of
curricula. There is a need for curricula structures that are really able to grow
as we put new demands on them. The curriculum is required to provide
integration of all components and the foundations that allow accessing all of
the new knowledge and technology to fulfil the vision of future.
The basic intention of an academic programme in Computer Science is to
develop the student’s critical professional thinking and intuition. The
curriculum must be structured to provide a balanced mixture of learning
experiences to make the graduate capable of sound professional decisions.
As a result the graduate should be able to assume responsible positions in
business, government, and education at the research, development, and
planning levels. The programme should also provide an excellent foundation
for further formal learning and training. The Computer Science curriculum is
expected to provide environments to put into practice, the principles and
techniques learnt during the course of implementation of academic
programme.
The following summarizes some key characteristics for consideration as a
basis of a successful academic programme in Computer Science:
The programme should provide a broad understanding of the field via
introducing concepts, theory, and techniques.
Intensive education/training in focused areas of Computer Science is
desirable.
The programme may encourage students to develop and use abstract
models in addition to apply respective technology in practical situations.
Computer Science graduates require special communication skills both orally
and in writing. They must be able to produce well-organized reports, which
clearly delineate objectives, methods of solution, results, and conclusions for
a complex task.
12
The programme should provide formal foundations for higher learning.
The programme should be dynamic and flexible enough to maintain
currency with the latest scientific and technological developments in the
field.
The programme should provide professional orientation to prepare
students for industry.
Programme Structure:
The structure of a BS programme in Computer Science is proposed to meet the
needs of students with formal computing experience and with established
relevant skills. The students are expected to learn theoretical and practical
understanding of the entire field of Computer Science.
The proposed structure is dynamic and provides basis for various options
including Breadth-Based, Depth-Based, and Integrated Breadth & Depth-Based
specializations. Student may choose a particular option, which is most
appropriate to their planned future career. The following are some relevant
details:
 Minimum credit hours shall be 130 for BS (Computer Science) programme
including computing related courses.
 The programme shall comprise 8 semesters spread over 4 years with two
semesters a year.
 The major area of specialization shall be incorporated in the structure. Each
major area shall comprise of 4-6 courses.
 The following table gives the percentage distribution of total credit hours.
Table 1.2: Percentage Distribution
Course Group
Credit
hour Percentage
Computing - Core courses 40 31%
Computing - Supporting areas 12 9%
Computing - General Education 18 14%
CS - Core courses 21 16%
CS – Electives 18 14%
CS - Supporting courses 9 7%
University Electives 12 9%
13
Some knowledge areas in Computer Science Electives Courses are listed
below:
a) Networking
b) Information Management
c) Intelligent Systems
d) Graphics & Visualization
e) Software Engineering
f) Web Engineering
g) E-Commerce
h) Multimedia
i) Distributed Computing
j) Security
k) Languages and Translators
l) Computer Architecture
m) Systems Software
n) Scientific Computing
o) Soft Computing
University Electives:
It was unanimously recommended that 18 credit hours shall require to be
taken from the list of general elective courses. The university may add any
number of courses to the general elective courses preferably other than
Computer Science courses.
Eligibility Criteria:
The eligibility criteria of the curriculum by the last meeting were opened for
discussion in the House. It was thoroughly discussed by considering all
input streams of BS (Computer Science). The House unanimously
recommended the eligibility criteria for admission to BS (Computer
Science) as given:
Computing - Core courses
(30.77%)
Computing - Supporting
areas (9.23%)
Computing - General
Education (13.85%)
CS - Core courses (16.15%)
CS – Electives (13.85%)
CS - Supporting courses
(6.92%)
14
The candidates require intermediate or equivalent qualification. However, the
university shall define their selection criteria.
General Recommendation Regarding Implementation of
Programme:
Faculty level and orientation is vital for the successful implementation It is
strongly recommended that the BS programme should be only
implemented via experienced computer science faculty having formal
education in Computer Science.
The access to state of the art computing and information technology is
essential for creation of innovative learning environments. Professional
areas of specialization such as computer graphics, multimedia systems,
computer networking and virtual reality or design automation require very
special and dedicated computing facilities. Dedicated computing facilities
are essential for hands-on experience. Variety of programming languages
systems and operating systems must be available.
Besides faculty and computing facilities, substantial library resources are
important to support a rigorous graduate programme in information
technology. Students should have access to digital libraries and
knowledge resources via Internet technologies.
Computing - CS Core Courses
# Pre
Req
Course Title Credit
hours
Proposed
Semester
1 - Programming Fundamentals 4 (3+1) 1
2 1 Object Oriented Programming 4 (3+1) 2
3 1 Data Structure and Algorithms 3 (2+1) 3
4 Discrete Structures 3 1
5 - Digital Logic Design 3 (2+1) 3
6 3 Operating Systems 4 (3+1) 5
7 - Database Systems 4 (3+1) 5
8 2 Software Engineering 3 6
9 - Data Communications and Computer
Networks
3 (2+1) 6
10 - Human Computer Interaction 3 (2+1) 7
11 - Final year Project 6 7, 8
Total Credit hours 40
15
BS Computer Science Curriculum
Computing courses:
Computing – Supporting Courses
# Code Pre-
Req
Course Title Credit
hours
Proposed
Semester
12 MT - Calculus and Analytical Geometry 3 1
13 MT - Probability and Statistics 3 3
14 MT - Linear Algebra 3 2
15 EL - Basic Electronics 3 (2+1) 2
Total Credit hours 12
Computing – General Education
Courses
# Code Pre-
Req
Course Title Credit
hours
Proposed
Semester
16 EG - English Composition  and
Comprehension
3 1
17 EG - Technical and Business Writing 3 2
18 EG - Communication Skills 3 3
19a PK - Islamic Studies / Ethics 2 1
19b PK - Pakistan Studies 2 2
20 SS - Professional Practices 3 7
21 CS - Introduction to Information and
Communication Technologies
3 (2+1) 1
Total Credit hours 19
Computer Science Courses
Computer Science – Core Courses
# Code Pre-
Req
Course Title Credit
Hours
Proposed
Semester
22 CS 5 Microprocessor and Assembly
Language
3 (2+1) 4
23 CS - Theory of Automata 3 5
24 CS 3 Design and Analysis of Algorithms 3 5
25 CS 3 Artificial Intelligence 3 (2+1) 6
26 CS 5 Computer Architecture and
Organization
3 4
27 CS 23 Compiler Construction 3 (2+1) 7
28 CS 9 Information Security 3 7
Total Credit Hours 21
16
Computer Science – Supporting
Courses
# Code Pre
Req
Course Title Credit
Hours
Proposed
Semester
29 CS 12 Numerical Computing 3 (2+1) 8
30 ST 12 Multivariate Calculus 3 4
31 ST 12 Differential Equations 3 5
Total Credit Hours 9
Computer Science – Elective Courses
Not limited to the list below
# Course Title Credit
hours
Proposed
Semester
32 Computer Graphics 3 (2+1) 6
33 Digital Image Processing 3 (2+1) 6
34 Digital Signal Processing 3 6
35 Computer Vision 3 7
36 Distributed Computing 3 (2+1) 6
37 Data and Network Security 3 7
38 Wireless Networks 3 (2+1) 6
39 Social Computing 3 8
40 Mobile Application and Development 3 (2+1) 8
41 Web Design and Development 3 (2+1) 5
42 Data Warehousing 3 (2+1) 6
43 Expert Systems 3
44 Artificial Neural Network 3
45 Fuzzy Logic 3
46 Web Engineering 3
47 Fundamentals of Data Mining 3
48 Computational Intelligence 3
49 Multi Agent Systems 3
50 Natural Language Processing 3
51 Game Development 3
52 Logical Paradigms of Computing 3
53 Formal Methods for Software Engineering 3
17
University Elective Courses
Computer Science – University Elective
Courses
Not limited to the list below
# Course Title Credit
Hours
Proposed
Semester
101 Financial Accounting 3
102 Financial Management 3 4
103 Human Resource Management 3 5
104 Marketing 3 6
105 Economics 3 7
106 Psychology 3 6
107 International Relations 3 7
108 Foreign/Regional Language (French,
German, Sindhi, Punjabi, Urdu etc.)
3 7-8
109 Philosophy 3 6-8
Structure of BS (CS) Programme
# Category Credit Hours
1
Computing Courses
52Core Courses 40
Supporting Areas Courses 12
2
Computer Science Courses
48Computer Science Core Course 21Computer Science Supporting Courses 9
Computer Science Electives Courses 18
3 General Education Courses 18 18
4 University Elective Courses 12 12
Total Credit Hours 130
 Between 124-136 Credit hours are required for UG Degree
 51-63 Credit hours should be taken in courses prescribed as major
 34 Credit hours must be earned taking courses outside the major
but within the same school as major
 30 Credit hours must be earned taking multi-disciplinary courses
outside the school of major.
 Regular students are required to take 12 Credit hours, but can take
maximum 18 Credit hours if  their CGPA is equal or more than 3.5
 Regular graduate students are required to take 9 Credit hours but
can take maximum 12 if they meet the above conditions.
18
Proposed Scheme of Study for BS (CS)
4-Year Programme (8 Semesters)
Semester 1 (18 Cr. Hrs.) Cr.Hrs. Semester 2 (12 Cr. Hrs.)
Cr.
Hrs.
Programming Fundamentals
(Comp. Core) 4 (3+1)
Object Oriented Programming
(Comp. Core) 4 (3+1)
Discrete Structures(Comp. Core) 3 Linear Algebra (Com –
Supporting)
3
Calculus and Analytical
Geometry        (Comp.
Supporting)
3 Technical and BusinessWriting(Gen. Edu) 3
Introduction to Information and
Communication Technology
(Intro to Information System)
(Gen. Edu)
3 (2+1)
Pakistan Studies(Gen. Edu) 2
English Composition and
Comprehension (English-I) (Gen.
Edu)
3 Basic  Electronics (Comp.Supporting) 3 (2+1)
Islamic Studies/Ethics (Gen.
Edu.) 2
Semester 3 (15 Cr. Hrs.) Cr.Hrs. Semester 4 (15 Cr. Hrs.)
Cr.
Hrs.
Data Structure and
Algorithms(Comp. Core)
3 (2+1) Microprocessor and
Assembly Language (Comp.
Sc. Core)
3
(2+1)
University Elective I 3 Computer Architecture and
Organization (Comp. Sc.
Core)
3
Digital Logic Design (Comp.
Core)
3 (2+1) Multivariate Calculus
(Comp Sc. Support)
3
Probability and Statistics (Comp.
Supporting)
3 University Elective III 3
Communication Skills(Gen. Edu) 3 University Elective IV 3
University Elective II 3
19
Semester 5 (17 Cr. Hrs.) Cr.Hrs. Semester 6 (15 Cr. Hrs.)
Cr.
Hrs.
Operating Systems (Comp. Core) 4 (3+1) Introduction to Software
Engineering (Comp. Core)
3
Database Systems (Comp. Core) 4 (3+1) Data Communications and
Computer Networks (Comp.
Core)
3 (2+1)
Theory of Automata  (Comp.
Core)
3 Artificial Intelligence (Comp.
Sc. Core)
3 (2+1)
Design and Analysis of
Algorithms  (Comp. Sc. Core)
3 Computer Science Elective I
Differential Equations (Comp. Sc.
Supporting)
3 Computer Science Elective II
Semester 7 (15 Cr. Hrs.) Cr.Hrs. Semester 8 (9 Cr. Hrs.)
Cr.
Hrs.
Human Computer Interaction
(Comp. Core)
3 (2+1) Numerical Computing (Comp
Sc Supp)
3 (2+1)
Professional Practices   (Gen.
Edu.)
3 Computer Science Elective
IV 3
Compiler Construction(Comp Sc.
Core)
3 (2+1) Final Year Project (Comp.
Core) 3
Information Security(Comp. Sc.
Core)
3
Computer Science Elective III 3
Final Year Project 3
COURSE OUTLINE
Common Computing Core Courses to BS (CS), BS(IT), and BS(SE)
Course Name: Discrete Structures
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Mathematical reasoning:  introduction to logic, propositional and predicate
calculus; negation disjunction and conjunction; implication and equivalence;
truth tables; predicates; quantifiers; natural deduction; rules of Inference;
methods of proofs; use in program proving; resolution principle; Set theory:
Paradoxes in set theory; inductive definition of sets and proof by induction;
Relations, representation of relations by graphs; properties of relations,
equivalence relations and partitions; Partial orderings; Linear and well-
ordered sets; Functions: mappings, injection and surjection, composition of
functions; inverse functions; special functions; Peano postulates; Recursive
20
function theory; Elementary combinatorics; counting techniques; recurrence
relation; generating functions.
Graph Theory: elements of graph theory, Planar Graphs, Graph Colouring,
Euler graph, Hamiltonian path, trees and their applications.
Reference Materials:
1. Discrete Mathematical Structure with Application to Computer Science, J.
P. Temblay and B Manohar, McGraw-Hill, 2nd Edition.
2. Discrete Mathematics, 7th edition, Richard Johnson Baugh, 2008,
Prentice Hall Publishers.
3. Discrete Mathematics and Its Applications, 6th edition, Kenneth H. Rosen,
2006, McGraw-Hill Book Co.
4. Discrete Mathematical Structures, 4th edition, Kolman, Busby & Ross,
2000, Prentice-Hall Publishers.
5. Discrete and Combinatorial Mathematics: An Applied Introduction, Ralph
P. Grimaldi,  Addison-Wesley Pub. Co., 1985.
6. Logic and Discrete Mathematics: A Computer Science Perspective by
Winifred Grassman, Jean-Paul Tremblay, Winifred Grassman, Prentice
Hall, 1995
Course Name: Programming Fundamentals
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
This course covers overview of Computer Programming, Principles of
Structured and Modular Programming, Overview of Structured Programming
Languages, Algorithms and Problem Solving, Program Development:
Analyzing Problem, Designing Algorithm/Solution, Testing Designed Solution,
Translating Algorithms into Programs, Fundamental Programming
Constructs, Data Types; Basics of Input and Output, Selection and Decision
(If, If-Else, Nested If-Else, Switch Statement and Condition Operator),
Repetition (While and For Loop, Do-While Loops), Break Statement,
Continue Statement, Control Structures, Functions, Arrays, Pointers,
Records, Files (Input-Output), Testing & Debugging.
Reference Materials:
1. C How to Program, Paul Deitel and Harvey Deitel, Prentice Hall; 7th
edition (March 4, 2012)
2. Programming in C, Stephen G. Kochan, Addison-Wesley Professional;
4th edition (September 25, 2013). ISBN-10: 0321776410
3. Java How to Program, Paul Deitel and Harvey Deitel, Prentice Hall; 9th
edition (March, 2011)
4. C++ How to Programme, Paul Deitel and Harvey Deitel, Prentice Hall; 9th
edition (February, 2013).
21
Course Name: Object Oriented Programming
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Evolution of Object Oriented Programming (OOP), Object Oriented concepts
and principles, problem solving in Object Oriented paradigm, OOP design
process, classes, functions/methods, objects and encapsulation; constructors
and destructors, operator and function/method overloading, association,
aggregation, composition, generalization, inheritance and its types, derived
classes, function/method overriding, abstract and concrete classes, virtual
functions, polymorphism, exception handling.
Reference Materials:
1. An Introduction to Object-Oriented Programming with Java, C. Thomas
Wu (2010). 5th Edition. McGraw-Hill. ISBN: 9780073523309
2. Java: How to Programme, 5/e, Deitel and Deitel, Prentice Hall,
0131016210/ 0131202367 International Edition.
3. Ivor Horton’s Beginning Java, 7/e, Ivor Horton
4. C++: How to Programme, Deitel and Deitel, 5/e, Pearson.
5. Object Oriented Programming in C++, 3rd Edition, Robert Lafore
Course Name: Data Structures and Algorithms
Credit Hours: 4(3+1)
Prerequisites: Programming fundamentals, Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Introduction to Data Structures and Algorithms; Complexity Analysis;  Arrays;
Sorting Algorithms: Insertion Sort, Selection Sort, Bubble Sort, Shell Sort,
Heap Sort, Quick Sort, Merge Sort, Radix Sort, Bucket Sort;  Linked Lists:
Singly Linked Lists, Doubly Linked Lists, Circular List; Stacks, Queues, and
Priority Queue; Recursion: Function call and Recursion Implementation, Tail
Recursion, Non-tail Recursion, Indirect Recursion, Nested Recursion,
Backtracking. Trees: Binary Trees, Binary Heap, Binary Search. Tree
Traversal, Insertion, Deletion, and Balancing a Tree; Heap; B-Tree; Spanning
Tree, Splay Trees; Graphs: Representation, Traversal, Shortest Path, and
Cycle Detection; Isomorphic Graphs; Graph Traversal Algorithms;  Hashing;
Memory Management and Garbage Collection.
Reference Materials:
1. Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis, Mark Allen Weiss, Florida
International University, Addison-Wesley (latest Edition)
2. Algorithms, Robert Sedgewick, Princeton University Publisher: Addison-
Wesley Professional (latest Edition)
3. Data Structures: Abstraction and Design Using Java, Koffman and
Wolfgang, Wiley; 2nd Edition  (or latest Edition), 2010
22
4. Data Structures and Algorithms in C++, Adam Drozdek, Course
Technology; 4th Edition, 2012.
Course Name: Digital Logic Design
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Basic Electronics
Course Outline:
Number Systems, Logic Gates, Boolean Algebra, Combination logic circuits
and designs, Simplification Methods K-Maps, Quinne, Mc-Cluskey,, Flip
Flops and Latches, Asynchronous and Synchronous circuits, Counters, Shift
Registers, Shift Registers Counters,  Triggered devices & its types. Binary
Arithmetic and Arithmetic Circuits, Memory Elements, State Machines.
Introduction Programmable Logic Devices (CPLD, FPGA); Lab Assignments
using tools such as Verilog HDL/VHDL, MultiSim, etc.
Reference Materials:
1. Digital Fundamentals by Floyd, 11/e.
2. Fundamental of Digital Logic with Verilog Design, Stephen Brown, 2/e.
Course Name: Operating Systems
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
History and Goals, Evolution of multi-user systems. Introduction to the
techniques used to implement operating systems and related kinds of
systems software. Among the topics covered will be process management
(creation, synchronization, and communication); Multi-Threading, processor
scheduling; deadlock prevention, avoidance, and recovery; main-memory
management; virtual memory management (swapping, paging, segmentation
and page-replacement algorithms); control of disks and other input/output
devices; file-system structure and implementation; and protection and
security. Lab assignments involving different single and multithreaded OS
algorithms.
Reference Materials:
1. Operating System Concepts, 9th Edition, Silberschatz A., Peterson, J. L., &
Galvin P. C. 2012.
2. Modern Operating Systems, 3rd Edition, Tanenmaum A. S., 2008.
23
Course Name: Database Systems
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Basic database concepts, Database Architecture, DB Design Life Cycle,
Schema Architecture, Conceptual, Logical and physical database Modelling
and design,  Entity Relationship diagram (ERD), Enhanced ERD ,Relational
data model, mapping ERD to relational model, Functional dependencies and
Normalization, Relational Algebra, Structured Query language (SQL),
Transaction processing, concurrency control and recovery techniques, Query
optimization concepts.
Reference Material:
1. Database Systems A Practical Approach to Design, Implementation, and
Management, 4th Edition, Thomas Connolly, Carolyn Begg, Addison
Wesley, 2005.
2. Modern Database Management by Fred McFadden, Jeffrey Hoofer, Mary
Prescott, Prentice Hall; 11th Edition (July 26, 2012). ISBN-10: 0132662256
3. Fundamentals of Database Systems by R. Elmasri and S. Navathe. 6th
Edition, Addison-Wesley (2010). ISBN-10: 0136086209.
4. Database Design and Relational Theory: Normal Forms and All That Jazz
by C. J. Date, O'Reilly Media; 1st Edition (April 24, 2012). ISBN-10:
1449328016.
Course Name: Data Communication and Networks
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Data Communication concepts, Analogue and digital Transmission, Noise,
Media, Encoding, Asynchronous and Synchronous transmission. Network
system architectures (OSI, TCP/IP), Error Control, Flow Control, Data Link
Protocols, Bridging. Local Area Networks and MAC Layer protocols,
Multiplexing, Switched and IP Networks, Inter-networking, Routing. Transport
layer protocols TCP, UDP and SCTP. Application Layer Protocols. Wireless
LANs.
Lab exercises using tools such as Wireshark, OpNet, Packet tracer etc.
Reference Material:
1. Data Communications and Networking, by Behrouz A. Forouzan, 5 th
edition, 2013
2. Computer Networks by A. S. Tanenbaum, D. J. Wetherall, 5th Edition
Prentice Hall 2010
3. Data and Computer Communications By William Stallings 9th Edition 2011
24
Course Name: Introduction to Software Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Overview of SE, Practice & Myths; the Software Processes, Generic Process
Models: Framework Activity, Task Set, Process Patterns, Process
Improvement, CMM Prescriptive, Process Models: Waterfall Model,
Incremental Process Model, Evolutionary Process Model; Specialized
Process Models: Component Based Development, the Formal Methods
Models, Agile Development; Business Information Systems: Components,
Types, and Evaluating methods. SDLC: Phases, System Planning,
Preliminary Investigation, SWOT Analysis. The Importance of Strategic
Planning; Evaluation of Systems Requests, Requirements Engineering.
Difference between Structured Analysis and Object Oriented Analysis,
Difference between FDD Diagrams & UML Diagrams; Data & Process
Modelling; Diagrams: Data Flow, Context, Conventions, Detailed Level
DFD’s; Levelling and Balancing. Logical Versus Physical Models. The Design
Process; Architecture Design Elements, Interface Design Elements,
Component-Level Design Elements, Deployments Design Elements; System
Architecture, Architectural Styles. User Interface Design. WebApps Interface
Design; Software Quality Assurance. Validation Testing, System Testing;
Internal and External View of Testing. Project Management. Risk
Management; Maintenance and Reengineering.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Engineering 8E by Ian Sommerville, Addison Wesley; 8th Edition
(2006). ISBN-10: 0321313798
2. Systems Analysis and Design by Gary B. Shelly, Thomas J. Cashman and
Harry J. Rosenblatt, Course Technology; 7th Edition (2007). ISBN-10:
1423912225
3. Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach by Roger S. Pressman,
McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math; 7th Edition (2009). ISBN-10:
0073375977.
25
COMPUTING SUPPORTING COURSES FOR COMPUTER
SCIENCE PORGRAMME
Course Name: Calculus and Analytic Geometry
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Complex Numbers, DeMoivre’s Theorem and its Applications, Simple
Cartesian Curves, Functions and Graphs, Symmetrical Properties, Curve
Tracing, Limit and Continuity, Differentiation of Functions. Derivative as Slope
of Tangent to a Curve and as Rate of Change, Application to Tangent and
Normal, Linearization, Maxima/Minima and Point of Inflexion, Taylor and
Maclaurin Expansions and their convergence; Integral as Anti-derivative,
Indefinite Integration of Simple Functions. Methods of Integration: Integration
by Substitution, by Parts, and by Partial Fractions, Definite Integral as Limit of
a Sum, Application to Area, Arc Length, Volume and Surface of Revolution.
Reference Materials:
1. Calculus and Analytical Geometry, Swokowski Olinick. Pence. 1994.  6th
edition. Brooks/Cole Publishers.
2. Calculus, 7th edition.2002. John Wiley and Sons (WIE).
3. Calculus, William, E. Boyce .Richard, C. Diprima. John Wiley & Sons, ISBN:
0471093335.
4. Calculus and Analytical Geometry 10th edition.  Thomas, F.  John Wiley and
Sons.
5. Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 7th edition. Erwin, K. 1993. John
Wiley & Sons Inc.
Course Name: Probability and Statistics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to Statistics, Descriptive Statistics, Statistics in decision making,
Graphical representation of Data Stem-and Lead plot, Box-Cox plots,
measures of central tendencies and dispersion, moments of frequency
distribution; Counting techniques, introduction to probability, sample space,
events, laws of probability, Conditional probability and Baye’s theorem with
application to random variable (Discrete and continuous) Binomial, Poisson,
Geometric, Negative Binomial Distributions; Exponential Gamma and Normal
distributions; Regression and Correlation, Estimation and testing of
hypotheses, use of elementary statistical packages for explanatory Data
analysis.
26
Reference Materials:
1. Probability & Statistics for Engineers & Scientists Ronald, W. Myers, Y.
2008”, 8th edition. Prentice Hall Publisher.
2. Probability and Statistics for Engineering and the Sciences Lay, L.
Devore. 2003. Duxbury Publishers.
3. Statistical Data Analysis.  G. Cowan.1998. Clarendon and Oxford.
Course Name: Linear Algebra
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Vectors, Vector Spaces, Matrices & Determinants, Cofactor and Inverse,
Rank, Linear Independence, Solution of system of Linear systems, Positive
Definite matrix, Linear Transformations, Operations on matrices, Inner
products, orthgonality and least squares, Eigenvalue & Eigenvectors.
Applications to Systems of Equations and to Geometry, Singular Value
Decomposition.
Reference Materials:
1. Elementary Linear Algebra with Applications 9th edition Bernard, K. David,
H. 2007. Prentice Hall PTR.
2. Strang's Linear Algebra and Its Applications, 4th edition. Gilbert, S.
Strang, B. Coonley. Andy, B. Andrew, B. 2005. Brooks/Cole.
3. Elementary Linear Algebra: Applications Howard. A. Chris. 2005.  Version,
9th edition.
Course Name: Basic Electronics
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Fundamentals of Semiconductor physics: Band theory, semiconductors
(intrinsic and extrinsic), PN junction, PN junctions as a rectifier, clipper and
clamper circuits, Zener diode and voltage regulator, LED and LCD etc.,
Transistors: Bipolar Junction transistors, BJT biasing circuits, Q-point, BJT as
a switch, BJT amplifiers, classes of amplifiers, power amplifiers, Metal oxide
transistors, nMOS, pMOS and CMOS inverters circuits. Introduction to A/D
and D/A conversion circuits.
Reference Materials:
1. University Physics, Freedman. Young. 10th and higher editions.
2. College Physics, Resnick. Halliday. Krane. 6th and higher editions.
27
Computing General Education
Course Name: English Composition and Comprehension
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Principles of writing good English, understanding the composition process:
writing clearly; word, sentence and paragraph. Comprehension and
expression; Use of grammar and punctuation; Process of writing, observing,
audience analysis, collecting, composing, drafting and revising, persuasive
writing, reading skills, listening skills and comprehension, skills for taking
notes in class, skills for exams.
Reference Materials:
1. John E. Warriner. Warriner’s English Grammar and Composition.
Course Name: Technical and Business Writing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Overview of technical reporting, use of library and information gathering,
administering questionnaires, reviewing the gathered information; Technical
exposition; topical arrangement, exemplification, definition, classification and
division, casual analysis, effective exposition, technical narration, description
and argumentation, persuasive strategy, Organizing information and
generation solution: brainstorming, organizing material, construction of the
formal outline, outlining conventions, electronic communication, generation
solutions. Polishing style: paragraphs, listening sentence structure, clarity,
length and order, pomposity, empty words, pompous vocabulary, document
design: document structure, preamble, summaries, abstracts, table of
contents, footnotes, glossaries, cross-referencing, plagiarism, citation and
bibliography, glossaries, index, appendices, typesetting systems, creating the
professional report; elements, mechanical elements and graphical elements.
Reports: Proposals, progress reports, Leaflets, brochures, handbooks,
magazines articles, research papers, feasibility reports, project reports,
technical research reports, manuals and documentation, thesis. Electronic
documents, Linear verses hierarchical structure documents.
Reference Material:
1. Technical and Business Writing for Working Professionals, Ray E.
Hardesty, Xlibris Corporation, 15-Dec-2010, ISBN = 1456819402
2. Successful Technical Writing/Instructor’s Guide, Bill Wesley Brown,
Goodheart-Willcox Publisher, 01-Mar-193-Technology and Engineering.
28
Course Name: Communication Skills
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Principles of writing good English, understanding the composition process:
writing clearly; words, sentence and paragraphs; Comprehension and
expression; Use of grammar and punctuation. Process of writing, observing,
audience collecting, composing, drafting and revising, persuasive writing,
reading skills, listening skills and comprehension, skills for taking notes in
class, skills for exams; Business communications; planning messages,
writing concise but with impact. Letter formats, mechanics of business, letter
writing, letters, memo and applications, summaries, proposals, writing
resumes, styles and formats, oral communications, verbal and non-verbal
communication, conducting meetings, small group communication, taking
minutes. Presentation skills; presentation strategies, defining the objective,
scope and audience of the presentation, material gathering material
organization strategies, time management, opening and concluding, use of
audio-visual aids, delivery and presentation.
Reference Material:
1. Practical Business English, Collen Vawdrey, 1993, ISBN = 0256192740
2. Effective Communication Skills: The Foundations for Change, John
Nielsen, 2008, ISBN = 1453506748
Course Name: Pakistan Studies
Credit Hours: 2
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Historical background of Pakistan: Muslim society in Indo-Pakistan, the
movement led by the societies, the downfall of Islamic society, the
establishment of British Raj- Causes and consequences. Political evolution of
Muslims in the twentieth century: Sir Syed Ahmed Khan; Muslim League;
Nehru; Allama Iqbal: Independence Movement; Lahore Resolution; Pakistan
culture and society, Constitutional and Administrative issues, Pakistan and its
geo-political dimension, Pakistan and International Affairs, Pakistan and the
challenges ahead.
Reference Material:
1. The Emergence of Pakistan, Chaudary M., 1967
2. The making of Pakistan, Aziz. 1976
29
Course Name: Professional Practices
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Historical, social, and economic context of Computing (software engineering,
Computer Science, Information Technology); Definitions of Computing
(software engineering, Computer Science, Information Technology) subject
areas and professional activities; professional societies; professional ethics;
professional competency and life-long learning; uses, misuses, and risks of
software; information security and privacy; business practices and the
economics of software; intellectual property and software law (cyber law);
social responsibilities, software related contracts, Software house
organization.
Reference Material:
1. Professional Issues in Software Engineering M.F. Bott et al.
Course Name: Introduction to Information and Communication
Technologies
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Pre-requisite: None
Course Outline:
Basic Definitions & Concepts, Hardware: Computer Systems & Components.
Storage Devices, Number Systems, Software: Operating Systems,
Programming and Application Software, Introduction to Programming,
Databases and Information Systems, Networks,  Data Communication, The
Internet, Browsers and Search Engines, The Internet: Email, Collaborative
Computing and Social Networking, The Internet: E-Commerce, IT Security
and other issues, Project Week, Review Week
Reference Materials:
1. Introduction to Computers 6th International Edition, Peter, N. McGraw-Hill
2. Using Information Technology: A Practical Introduction to Computer &
Communications, 6th Edition. Williams, S. McGraw-Hills.
3. Computers, Communications & information: A user's introduction, Sarah,
E. Hutchinson. Stacey, C. Swayer.
4. Fundamentals of Information Technology, Alexis L Mathewsleon Leon
Press.
30
Computer Science Core Courses
Course Name: Microprocessor and Assembly Language
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Digital Logic Design
Course Outline:
Microprocessor Bus Structure: Addressing, Data and Control, Introduction to
Registers and Flags. Addressing Modes, Instruction sets including Data
Movement, Arithmetic and Logic, Programme Control, Stack and its
operation. Peripheral Control Interrupts.
Introduction to the Assembler and Debugger, Manipulate and translate
machine and assembly code, Describe actions inside the processing chip.
Reference Materials:
1. The Intel Microprocessor 8th ed, Barry B Brey.
2. Assembly Language for Intel-based Computers, 6th Ed Irvine,
http://vig.prenhall.com/catalog/academic/product/0,1144,0132383101,00.h
tml
3. The 8086/8088 Microprocessor 4th Edition by Avtar Singh.
Course Name: Theory of Automata
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Finite State Models: Language definitions preliminaries, Regular
expressions/Regular languages, Finite automata (FAs), Transition graphs
(TGs), NFAs, Kleene’s theorem, Transducers (automata with output),
Pumping lemma and non regular language Grammars and PDA: Context free
grammars, Derivations, derivation trees and ambiguity, Simplifying  CFLs ,
Normal form grammars and parsing, Decidability, Context sensitive
languages, grammars and linear bounded automata (LBA), Chomsky’s
hierarchy of grammars Turing Machines Theory: Turing machines, Post
machine, Variations on TM, TM encoding, Universal Turing Machine,
Defining Computers by TMs.
Reference Materials:
1. Introduction to computer theory, Daniel I. A. Cohen, 2nd Edition
2. Automata, Computability and Complexity: Theory and Applications, by
Elaine Rich, 2011
3. An Introduction to Formal Languages and Automata, By Peter Linz, 4th
edition, Jones & Bartlett Publishers, 2006
4. Theory of Automata, Formal Languages and Computation, By S. P.
Eugene, Kavier, 2005, New Age Publishers, ISBN (10): 81-224-2334-5,
ISBN (13): 978-81-224-2334-1.
31
5. Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and Computation, John
Hopcroft and Jeffrey Ullman, 2nd edition, 2001, Addison-Wesley.
6. Introduction to Languages and the Theory of Computation, By John C.
Martin 3rd edition, 2002, McGraw-Hill Professional.
Course Name: Design and Analysis of Algorithms
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Introduction; Asymptotic notations; Recursion and recurrence relations;
Divide-and-conquer approach; Sorting; Search trees; Heaps; Hashing;
Greedy approach; Dynamic programming; Graph algorithms; Shortest paths;
Network flow; Disjoint Sets; Polynomial and matrix calculations; String
matching; NP complete problems; Approximation algorithms.
Reference Materials:
1. Introduction to Algorithms, T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, and R. L.
Rivest, MIT Press, McGraw-Hill, 3rd Edition, New York, NY, 2010.
2. Algorithms in C++; Robert Sedgewick
Course Name: (Intro.) Artificial Intelligence
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Artificial Intelligence: Introduction, AI Paradigms and Hypothesis, Intelligent
Agents. Difference between Cybernetic Intelligence and Artificial Intelligence,
Objectives and Scope of Weak AI and Strong AI, Problem-solving: Solving
Problems by Searching, Informed Search and Exploration, Constraint
Satisfaction Problems, Adversarial Search. Knowledge and reasoning:
Logical Agents, First-Order Logic, Inference in First-Order Logic, Knowledge
Representation. Planning and Acting in the Real World. Uncertain knowledge
and reasoning: Uncertainty, Probabilistic Reasoning, Probabilistic Reasoning
over Time, Making Simple Decisions, Making Complex Decisions. Learning:
Learning from Observations, Knowledge in Learning; Learning Methods,
Reinforcement Learning. Communicating, perceiving, and acting:
Communication, Probabilistic Language Processing, Perception and
Robotics. Introduction to LISP/PROLOG and Expert Systems (ES) and
Applications; Artificial General Intelligence, Issues in Safe AI, Introduction to
Cognitive and Conscious Systems.
Reference Materials:
1. Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem
Solving: International Edition by George F. Luger, 6th edition: Pearson
Education, 2008.
2. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, by Stuart Jonathan Russell,
Peter Norvig, John F. Canny, 3nd Edition, Prentice Hall.
32
3. Prolog Programming for Artificial Intelligence, Ivan Bratko, 3rd Edition,
Addison Wesley, 2001.
Course Name: Computer Architecture and Organization
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Digital Logic and Design
Course Outline:
The design of computer systems and components. Processor design,
instruction set design, and addressing; control structures and
microprogramming; memory management, caches, and memory hierarchies;
and interrupts and I/O structures. Pipelining of processor Issues and Hurdles,
exception handling, Parallelism, Multiprocessor Systems.
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach by Hennessy &
Patterson, Morgan & Kauffman Series (2006) 4th Edition.
2. Computer Organization & Design: The Hardware/Software Interface By
Patterson & Hennessy, Morgan & Kauffman Series (2008) 4th Edition.
Course Name: Compiler Construction
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Theory of Automata
Course Outline:
Introduction to interpreter and compiler. Compiler techniques and
methodology; Organization of compilers; Lexical and syntax analysis; Parsing
techniques. Types of parsers, top-down parsing, bottom-up parsing, Type
checking, Semantic analyser, Object code generation and optimization,
detection and recovery from errors.
Reference Materials:
1. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools By Alfred V. Aho, Ravi
Sethi, Jeffrey D. Ullman, Contributor Jeffrey D. Ullman, Addison-Wesley
Pub. Co., 2nd edition, 2006 Original from the University of Michigan
2. Modern Compiler Design, by Dick Grune, Henri E. Bal, Ceriel J. H.
Jacobs, Koen G. Langendoen, John Wiley, 2000.
3. Modern Compiler Implementation in C, by Andrew W. Appel, Maia
Ginsburg, Contributor Maia Ginsburg,  Cambridge University Press, 2004.
4. Modern Compiler Design by Dick Grune, Henri E. Bal, Ceriel J. H. Jacobs,
Koen G. Langendoen, 2003, John Wiley & Sons.
Course Name: Information Security
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communication and Computer Networks
Course Outline:
Basic notions of confidentiality, integrity, availability; authentication models;
protection models; security kernels; Encryption, Hashing and Digital
33
Signatures; audit; intrusion detection and response; database security, host-
based and network-based security issues operational security issues;
physical security issues; personnel security; policy formation and
enforcement; access controls; information flow; legal and social issues;
identification and authentication in local and distributed systems;
classification and trust modeling; risk assessment
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Security: Art and Science, Matthew Bishop
2. Cryptography and Network Security by William Stalling 6th Edition, 2012
3. Principles of Information Security 3rd E by Michael E. Whitman and
Herbert J. Mattord
Computer Science Supporting Courses
Course Name: Numerical Computing
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Calculus and Analytical Geometry
Course Outline:
The concepts of efficiency, reliability and accuracy of a method; Minimising
computational errors; Theory of Differences, Difference Operators, Difference
Tables, Forward Differences, Backward Differences and Central Differences.
Mathematical Preliminaries, Solution of Equations in one variable,
Interpolation and Polynomial Approximation, Numerical Differentiation and
Numerical Integration, Initial Value Problems for Ordinary Differential
Equations, Direct Methods for Solving Linear Systems, Iterative Techniques
in Matrix Algebra, Solution of non-linear equations.
Reference Materials:
1. Numerical Methods in Scientific Computing by Germund, D. Åke, B.
2. Numerical Methods for Scientific Computing by J. H. Heinbockel.
3. Numerical Analysis by I. A. Khubaza.
4. Numerical Analysis and Programming by Shan S Kuo.
5. Numerical Analysis by Berden, F.
6. Numerical Analysis by Gerald.
Course Name: Multivariate Calculus
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Calculus and Analytical Geometry
Course Outline:
Functions of Several Variables and Partial Differentiation. Multiple Integrals,
Line and Surface Integrals. Green’s and Stoke’s Theorem. Fourier Series:
periodic functions, Functions of any period P-2L, Even & odd functions, Half
Range expansions, Fourier Transform; Laplace Transform, Z-Transform.
34
Reference Materials:
1. Multivariable Calculus, 6th edition James, Stewart 2007 Cengage Learning
publishers.
2. Calculus and Analytical Geometry, 6th edition.  Swokowski, Olinick and
Pence.1994.Thomson Learning EMEA, Ltd.
3. Multivariable Calculus, 5th edition Howard, A. Albert, H. 1995, John Wiley.
Course Name: Differential Equations
Credit Hours: 3 (3, 0)
Prerequisites: Calculus and Analytical Geometry
Course Outline:
Ordinary Differential Equations of the First Order: Geometrical
Considerations, Isoclines, Separable Equations, Equations Reducible to
Separable Form, Exact Differential Equations, Integrating Factors, Linear
First-Order Differential Equations, variation of Parameters. Ordinary Linear
Differential Equations; Homogeneous Linear Equations of the Second Order,
Homogeneous Second-Order Equations with Constant Coefficients, General
Solution, Real Roots, Complex Roots, Double Root of the Characteristic
Equation, Differential Operators, Cauchy Equation, Homogeneous Linear
Equations of Arbitrary Order, Homogeneous Linear Equations of Arbitrary
Order with Constant Coefficients, Non-homogeneous Linear Equations.
Modelling of Electrical Circuits. Systems of Differential Equations. Series
Solutions of Differential Equations. Partial Differential Equations: Method of
Separation of variables, wave, Heat & Laplace equations and their solutions
by Fourier series method.
Reference Materials:
1. Advanced Engineering Mathematics Michael, G.1996, Prentice Hall
Publishers.
2. Advanced Engineering Mathematics, 7th edition, Erwin, K. 1993, John Wiley &
Sons Inc.
3. A First Course in Differential Equation Zill. Prindle. Weber. Schmidt.1996.
Brooks/Cole Publishing.
4. Differential Equations with Boundary-Value Problems, Dennis. G. Zill,
Michael, R. Cullen. 1996, Brooks/Cole Publishing,
5. Elementary Differential Equations with Applications C. H. Edwards. David,
E. 1993. Penney, Prentice Hall.
35
Computer Science Electives
Course Name: Computer Graphics
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Graphics hardware. Fundamental algorithms. Applications of graphics.
Interactive graphics programming — graph plotting, windows and clipping,
and segmentation. Programming raster display systems, Differential Line
Algorithm, panning and zooming. Raster algorithms and software — Scan-
Converting lines, characters and circles. Scaling, Rotation, Translation,
Region filling and clipping. Two and three dimensional imaging geometry
(Perspective projection and Orthogonal projection) and transformations.
Curve and surface design, rendering, shading, colour and animation.
Reference Materials:
1. Fundamentals of Computer Graphics: 2nd Edition by Peter Shirley A. K.
Peters, 2005
2. Computer Graphics, Principles and Practice, J. D. Foley, A. van Dam, S.
K. Feiner and J. F. Hughes, Addison-Wesley ISBN: 0-201-12110-7.
3. Computer Graphics, F. S. Hill, Maxwell MacMillan ISBN: 0-02-354860-6.
4. Interactive Computer Graphics: Functional, Procedural and Device-level
methods; Peter Burger and Duncan. F. Gillies; Addison-Wesley, (2003)
Course Name: Digital Image Processing
Credit Hours: 3(2+1)
Prerequisites:
Course Outlines:
Introduction: Elements of digital image processing, Image model,  Sampling
and quantization, Relationships between pixels, Image Enhancement:
Enhancement by point processing, Spatial filtering, Enhancement in the
frequency domain, Colour Image Processing, image Segmentation:
Discontinuity detection,  Edge linking and boundary detection,  Tresh holding,
Region oriented segmentation, Use of motion for segmentation, Image
Registration: Introduction to image registration, Techniques of image
registration, Representation and Description: Boundary description,  Regional
description, Morphological Image Processing: Dilation and Erosion, Opening
and Closing, Some basic morphological algorithms, Extensions to gray level
images, Image Transforms:  Discrete Fourier Transform, Discrete Cosine
Transform,  Haar Transform, Hadamard Transform
Reference Material:
1. Digital Image Processing, R. C. Gonzalez & R. E. Woods, 3rd edition,
Prentice Hall, 2008, ISBN 9780131687288.
2. Digital Image Processing (3rd Edition) by Rafael C. Gonzalez, Prentice
Hall; 3rd edition (2007)
36
3. Understanding Digital Signal Processing (3rd Edition) by Richard G. Lyons,
Prentice Hall; 3rd edition (2010)
Course Name: Computer Vision
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Concepts behind computer-based recognition and extraction of features from
raster images. applications of vision systems and their limitations. Overview
of early, intermediate and high level vision, Segmentation: region splitting and
merging; quadtree structures for segmentation; mean and variance pyramids;
computing the first and second derivatives of images using the Sobel and
Laplacian operators; grouping edge points into straight lines by means of the
Hough transform; limitations of the Hough transform; parameterisation of
conic sections. Perceptual grouping: failure of the Hough transform;
perceptual criteria; improved Hough transform with perceptual features;
grouping line segments into curves. 3D vision, Triangulation principle,
Stereoscopy.
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Vision: A Modern Approach 2nd ed, By David Forsyth, Jean
Ponce, Prentice Hall, 2011.
2. Computer Vision, by Linda G. Shapiro, George C. Stockman, Prentice
Hall, 2001.
3. Handbook of Mathematical Models in Computer Vision, by Nikos
Paragios, Yunmei Chen, Olivier Faugeras, Birkhäuser, 2006.
Course Name: Distributed Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Operating Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction to Parallel and Distributed Systems, Software Architectures:
Threads and Shared memory, Processes and Message passing, Distributed
Shared Memory (DSM), Distributed Shared Data (DSD). System Models,
Networking and Internetworking, Communication Models and Abstractions
(Message passing, stream-oriented communications, remote procedure calls,
remote method invocation), Naming in Distributed Systems, Concurrency and
Synchronization, Process Synchronization, Distributed Transaction and
Concurrency Control, Distributed Data Replication, Security and Access
Control, Overview of Web Services, Cloud Computing.
Reference Materials:
1. Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms, Andrew S. Tanenbaum
and Maarten van Steen. Prentice-Hall, 2002.
2. Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design by 4th edition, George
Coulouris, Jean Dollimore and Tim Kindberg.  Addison-Wesley, 2005
37
3. Web Services: Principles and Technology. Michael P. Papazoglou.
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007.
Course Name: Social Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Web Programming
Course Outline:
The topics covered will reflect the latest research and development activities
in social networking e.g., Service architectures for social networks; Common
APIs for popular architectures (Facebook, Open Social, etc.); Open ID and
Shibboleth; Linked Data for social networks (FOAF, SKOS, etc); Social
network properties and analysis methodologies; Social network
interoperability; Social network topologies and ecosystems.
Social networks in e-learning, enterprise and media; Identity, privacy and
ownership in social networks; Aspects of recommendation engines and
information retrieval in social networks; Sentiment classification, opinion
extraction, social knowledge acquisition, social group identification and
clustering, outlier detection.
Reference Materials:
1. Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis (Foundations and Trends(R) in
Information Retrieval by Bo Pang Lillian Lee
2. Introduction to Social Network Theory by Kadushin, Charles. (Feb 17,
2004).
3. Social Network Analysis. Semantic studios, Morville, Peter. (Feb 21,
2002).
4. What is Web 2.0? O’Reilly, Behind the Cover. O’Reilly, Tim. (Sep 30,
2005).
5. Media Studies: The Essential Resource by Rayner, Philip et al. Routledge
Taylor and Francis Group. London.
6. The Online Disinhibition Effect. The Psychology of Cyberspace. Suler,
John.
Course Name: Mobile Application and Development
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Mobile Development Concepts, Activities, Resource Management and Media,
Services and Content Providers, Data Storage, Security, Managing Evolution,
Tablets Graphics Speech Sensors Networking, Processes and Threads,
Deployment
Reference Materials:
1. Android Wireless Application Development, third edition, Lauren Darcey,
Shane Conder, Addison Wesley, 2012, ISBN 0321813839
38
2. Mobile Design and Development: Practical concepts and techniques for
creating mobile sites and web apps, by Brian Fling Publisher: O'Reilly
Media, 2009.
Course Name: Web Design and Development
Course Structure: Lectures: 2, Labs: 1
Credit Hours: 3(2+1)
Prerequisites: Fundamentals of programming
Course Outline:
HTML, DHTML, CSS, clients side scripting, server side scripting, dynamic
website development. Introduction to current technology e.g. MySQL, php,
ASP, ASP.net. Introduction to related methods and tools e.g., website
hosting, database connectivity, Macromedia. Overview of XML
Reference Materials:
1. Web enabled Commercial application development using HTML, DHTML,
JAVASCRIPT by Ivon Bayross. BPS Publications.
2. Beginning ASP by Richard Anderson, Brain Francis. Wrox series
Publications.
Course Name: Data Warehousing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction of the business context for data warehousing and decision
support systems. Differences between TPS and DSS environments. Data
extraction, transformation and loading (ETL and ELT), Data warehouse
Architecture. Data Marts. Differentiate Data Marts and Data Warehouse. Data
Warehouse Design Methodology: De-normalization and Dimensional
Modelling. Online analytical processing (OLAP) and data aggregations.
Indexing techniques used in data warehousing. Hardware and software
systems consideration for data warehousing. Data warehouse maintenance.
Reference Materials:
1. Data Warehousing Fundamentals, 2nd Edition, Paulraj Ponniah, 2010,
John Wiley & Sons Inc., NY.
2. Building the Data Warehouse, 4th Edition, W. H. Inmon, 2005, John Wiley
& Sons Inc., NY.
3. The Data Warehouse Toolkit, 2nd Edition Ralph Kimball and Margy Ross,
2002, John Wiley & Sons Inc., NY.
39
Course Name: Expert Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Discrete Structures
Course outline:
Introduction of expert systems, Review of knowledge representation,  Review
of inference techniques, Study of logic, rule-based expert systems,  Review
of course expert system development software, Demonstration of a rule-
based expert system, Workshop: Building a small rule-based expert system,
Advance expert system programming techniques, Review of typical
programming errors, Review of MYCIN, Overview of inexact reasoning,
Study of inexact classification, intelligent database management,  intelligent
distributed problem solving.
Reference Materials:
1. Expert Systems: Principles and Programming, Joseph C. Giarratano, Gary
D. Riley, 4th Edition, Course Technology, 2004, ISBN: 0534384471.
2. Jess in Action: Java Rule-Based Systems, Ernest Friedman-Hill, Manning
Publications, July 2003, ISBN: 1930110898.
Course Name: Artificial Neural Networks (ANN)
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Discrete Structure
Course Outline:
Introduction to cybernetics, Brain and Neural System as Cybernetics, Type of
Neural Networks, Static and Dynamic Neural Networks, Neuron Models.
Network Architecture and Toplogy, Training and Validation Procedure,
Perceptron, Hamming Network, Feed forward Layer, Recurrent Layer,
Perceptron Learning Rule, Proof of Convergence, Signals and Weight Vector
Space, Linear Transformation, Performance Surface and Optimization,
Hebbian and Widrow-Hoff Learning, Back-propagation and Variations.
Associative Learning, Competitive Networks using SOM, Biological
Motivation for Vision using Grossberg Network, Adaptive Resonance Theory,
Hopfield Network, Cellular Neural Network. Evolutionary Neural Network,
Spike Neural Networks, Application of Neural Networks in Signal and Image
Processing, Bioinformatics, Telecommunication and High Energy Physics.
Quantum Neural Networks.
Reference Material:
1. Neural Network Design, Martin T. Hagan, Howard B. Demuth, Mark H.
Beale, ISBN: 0-9717321-0-8
40
Course Name: Fuzzy Logic System
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Mathematical introduction of fuzzy sets and fuzzy logic, A study of the
fundamentals of fuzzy sets, operations on these sets, and their geometrical
interpretations. Methodologies to design fuzzy models and feedback
controllers for dynamical systems, fundamental concepts of dynamical
systems, multi-input multi-output dynamical systems, stability, feedback-
control design, and MATLAB® Control System Toolbox. Fuzzy systems and
properties Fuzzifier and Defuzzifier design, Design of fuzzy systems Fuzzy
controllers, Hardware and Software based design of fuzzy logic control
system.
Reference Material:
1. A Course in Fuzzy Systems and Control, Li-Xin Wang (Prentice-Hall)
Hand out and research papers related with the subject.
Course Name: Web Engineering
Credit Hours: 3 (2+1)
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
XML, XSL, XLink, DOM, SMIL RDF, RDF-SCHEMA, Web 3.0 and the
semantic web, Web Searching, web services.
Reference Materials:
1. Ivon Bayross. Web enabled Commercial application development using
HTML, DHTML, JAVASCRIPT, BPS Publications.
2. Richard Anderson, Brain Francis. Beginning ASP, Wrox series
Publications.
Course Name: Fundamentals of Data Mining
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Concepts of Data mining, data pre-processing and pre-mining,(noisy and
missing data, data normalization and discretization), outlier detection, Data
mining learning methods, Data mining classes (association rule mining,
clustering, classification), fundamental of  other algorithms related to data
mining(fuzzy logic, genetic algorithm and neural network), decision trees,
rules, patterns and trends.
Reference Materials:
1. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, 3rd Edition Jiawei Han, Micheline
Kamber, Jian Pei; , 2011
41
2. Data Mning: Concepts, Models, Methods, and Algorithms, 2nd Edition,
Mehmed Kantatardzic, 2011.
3. Data Mining, Introductory and Advanced Topics, 2006, Margaret H.
Dunham and S. Sridhar, Pearson Education.
4. Principles of Data Mining, 2007, Max Bramer, Springer-Verlag.
Course Name: Computational Intelligence
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Discrete Structures
Course outline:
Introduction to Computational intelligence, Applicability and history,
Fundamentals of Genetic Algorithms, Encoding, Fitness Function,
Tournament Selection, Truncation Selection, Elitist Selection, Crossover,
Mutation, Control Parameters Estimation, Parallel Genetic Algorithms,
Handling Constraints, Fundamentals and background of Particle Swarm
Optimization Techniques, Discrete PSO, Hybrid PSO (HPSO), Adaptive PSO
(APSO), Fundamentals of Ant Colony Search Algorithms, Behavior of Real
Ants, The Max-Min Ant System, Use of Greedy Search and Constructive
Heuristic Information, Fundamentals of Tabu Search, Neighbourhood
Structure, Characterization of the Neighbourhood, Recency-Based Tabu
Search, The Use of Long-Term Memory in Tabu Search, Fundamentals of
Simulated Annealing, Cooling Schedule, Determination of Cooling Rate,
Stopping Criterion, Fuzzy Systems, Creation of the Fuzzy Control,
Evolutionary Algorithms, Differential Evolution, Key Operators for Differential
Evolution.
Reference Materials:
1. Computational Intelligence: An Introduction, Second Edition, 2007,
Andries P. Engelbrecht, Print ISBN: 9780470035610, Online ISBN:
9780470512517.
2. Modern Heuristic Optimization Techniques: Theory and Applications to
Power Systems, Kwang Y. Lee (Editor), Mohamed A. El-Sharkawi
(Editor), IEEE Press Series on Power Engineering, Publication Date:
February 8, 2008.
Course Name: Multi Agent Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites by topic: Discrete Structure
Course Outline:
Intelligent Agents Introduction, Agents and Expert Systems,Abstract
Architectures for Intelligent Agents reactive agents, deliberate agents
Concrete Architectures for Intelligent Agents, Multiagent Systems and
Societies of Agents, Agent Communications, Distributed Problem Solving and
Planning, Task Sharing, Distributed Planning, Search Algorithms for Agents,
42
Distributed Rational Decision Making, Task Allocation Negotiation, Learning
in Multiagent Systems
Reference Materials:
1. Multi-agent systems: an introduction to distributed artificial intelligence.
Steven J. Ferber. Addison-Wesley, 1999.
2. Multiagent systems: a modern approach to distributed artificial
intelligence. G. Weiss. The MIT Press, 1999.
3. An Introduction to Multi Agent Systems, Wooldridge, Michael, 2009, John
Wiley & Sons.
Course Name: Natural Language Processing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Discrete Structures
Course outline:
Introduction and Overview, Ambiguity and uncertainty in language, Regular
Expressions. Chomsky hierarchy, regular languages, and their limitations.
Finite-state automata. Practical regular expressions for finding and counting
language phenomena. A little morphology. In class demonstrations of
exploring a large corpus with regex tools, String Edit Distance and Alignment,
Key algorithmic tool: dynamic programming, first a simple example, then its
use in optimal alignment of sequences. String edit operations, edit distance,
and examples of use in spelling correction, and machine translation, Context
Free Grammars, Constituency, CFG definition, use and limitations. Chomsky
Normal Form. Top-down parsing; bottom-up parsing, and the problems with
each. The desirability of combining evidence from both directions, Information
Theory, What is information? Measuring it in bits. The "noisy channel model."
The "Shannon game"--motivated by language! Entropy, cross-entropy,
information gain. Its application to some language phenomena, Language
modeling and Naive Bayes, Probabilistic language modeling and its
applications. Markov models. N-grams. Estimating the probability of a word,
and smoothing. Generative models of language. Their application to building
an automatically-trained email spam filter, and automatically determining the
language, Part of Speech Tagging and Hidden Markov Models, The concept
of parts-of-speech, examples, usage. The Penn Treebank and Brown
Corpus. Probabilistic (weighted) finite state automata. Hidden Markov models
(HMMs), definition and use, Probabilistic Context Free Grammars, Weighted
context free grammars, Maximum Entropy Classifiers, The maximum entropy
principle, and its relation to maximum likelihood. The need in NLP to integrate
many pieces of weak evidence. Maximum entropy classifiers and their
application to document classification, sentence segmentation.
Reference Materials:
1. Daniel Jurafsky and James H. Martin. 2008. Speech and Language
Processing: An Introduction to Natural Language Processing,
43
Computational Linguistics and Speech Recognition. Second Edition.
Prentice Hall.
2. Foundations of Statistical Natural Language Processing, Manning and
Schütze, MIT Press. Cambridge, MA: May 1999
Course Name: Game Development
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals, Object Oriented
Programming
Course Outline:
History of Computer and Video Games, Game Design Principles, Python
Programming, Pygame, Storytelling, Sprites and Animation, Game
Development Methodologies, Physics, Loose Ends, Audio, Sound, and Music
(PDF), 2D Game Group Project Check-In, Game Testing, Ethics, MMORPGs,
and Securing Online Games, Game Engines, iOS Development, Cocos2D,
Games in 2012 and Beyond
Reference Materials:
1. Agile Game Development with Scrum, by Clinton Keith (Addison-Wesley,
2010)
2. AI for Game Developers, by David Bourg and Glenn Seemann (O'Reilly
Media, 2004)
3. The Art of Game Design: A Book of Lenses, by Jesse Schell (Morgan
Kaufmann, 2008)
4. Fundamentals of Game Design, Second Edition, by Ernest Adams (New
Riders, 2010).
Course Name: Logical Paradigms of Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Introduction to logic, modal logic, propositional and predicate logic and their
proof theories, relational and temporal logic, linear time temporal logic (LTL),
Computation Tree Logic (CTL), CTL*, mu-Calculus, Introduction to Model
checking and model checking algorithms, formal program verifications, partial
order correctness, proof calculus for partial proof rules, introduction to
statistical and stochastic processes (random walk, Markov chains, hidden
Markov chains), introduction to process algebra, and evolutionary computing.
Reference Materials:
1. Logic in Computer Science Modelling and Reasoning about Systems 2nd
Edition Michael Huth, Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine, London Mark Ryan, University of Birmingham, 2004
2. Principles of Model Checking by Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen
MIT Press, 2008.
44
Course Name: Formal Methods in Software Engineering
Course Structure: Lectures: 3
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Introduction to formal methods, developing and acquiring formal methods,
using and applying formal methods, a brief introduction to logic and set
theory, Introduction to Hoare's Logic, logic and theorem proving, modelling
software systems, sequential, concurrent and reactive systems, states, state
spaces, transition systems, combining state spaces, fairness, partial order
view, modelling formalism; Formal Specifications Linear temporal logic,
automata on infinite words, specifications using Buchi-automata,
completeness of specification; Automatic verification, state space verification,
representing states, the automata framework, combining Buchi-automata,
checking emptiness, translating  LTL into automata, model checking
examples, checking complexity of model checking, safety properties, state
space explosion problem. Z-Specification, Structure and Schema.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Reliability Methods, Doron A. Peled , 2001 Springer-Verlag
2. Logic in Computer Science Modelling and Reasoning about Systems 2nd
Edition Michael Huth, Imperial College of Science, Technology and
Medicine, London Mark Ryan, University of Birmingham, 2004
3. Principles of Model Checking, Christel Baier and Joost-Pieter Katoen MIT
Press, 2008.
45
Curriculum for MS (Computer Science)
The recommendations of the last meeting held in August 2009 were also
considered and very minor changes in the structure have been made in the
light of committee’s recommendations. The complete detail regarding
proposed MS (Computer Sciences) Programme is available herein the
following pages
 Minimum credit hours shall be 30 for MS (Computer Science)
programme.
 The programme shall comprise 4 semesters spread over 2 years
with two semesters a year.
 The additional major areas may be added in the list of specialization
as appropriate to university
Category wise Credit Hours Distribution
Category or Area Credit Hours
Core 6
Electives 18
Thesis 6
Total Credit Hours 30
Programme Objectives:
A challenging graduate programme may be structured on the basis of the
classical objective, which is the preparation for study of doctoral level, and
this remains an important aspect of such programmes, but it is believed that
all programmes should prepare the student for study beyond the master’s
level.
Many people already in the field desire additional training in Computer
Science. These individuals may have undergraduate degrees in Computer
Science and desire to advance; or they may have considerable experience in
Computer Science, but little formal education in the field. While this latter
group should be declining in number as more undergraduate Computer
Science majors enter the job market, the demand does exist and will continue
to do so in the foreseeable future. In addition, there will be a continuing need
for individuals with a bachelor’s degree in Computer Science to update their
training.
Among the objectives for students in master’s programmes is entry into the
Computer Science field at a relatively high level of responsibility and
expertise. Computer Science is such a new and rapidly expanding field that
individuals entering with a master’s degree in this field will almost
46
immediately move to positions with great responsibility. This, in turn, implies
the requirement for an advanced level of prior training in both technical and
related areas (e.g. communication skills). In all these cases, the master’s
degree provides both motivations for the student and a standard for reward
by the employer.
Programme Structure:
The graduate programme should embody sufficient flexibility to fulfill the
requirements of either an “academic” degree (Breadth-Based) obtained in
preparation for further graduate study or a terminal “professional” degree
(Depth-Based). The discipline of Computer Science has matured enough that
the distinction between academic and professional programmes is beginning
to appear. However, the concept of an utterly terminal programme is not
widely accepted in the field. All Computer Science academic programmes
should provide the possibility of additional study in the field. The proposed
programme is intended to establish an integrated breadth and depth based
curriculum model to assure that the common aspects of various potential
masters’ programmes in Computer Science are captured.
The proposed curriculum structure may be implemented within four-semester
time. A project/thesis work may be unified with student’s chosen depth
oriented specialties. Generally graduate programmes are structured with a
common core of fundamental material and wide range of options for the rest
of the course work.
Eligibility:
BS (CS) 4 Years Degree Programme (min 130 credit hours), or  Computer
Science Conversion Course 2 Years Degree Programme referred to as
“MCS” or “MSc (CS).”
 BCS-3 years Degree Programme-Student will be required to complete
the deficiency of difference of total earned credit hours and 130 credit
hours.
 16 year Science and Engineering graduates are eligible but they have
to cover deficiency.
47
SCHEME OF STUDIES MS (CS)
Courses Requirements:
List of Core Course
# Code Course Title Credit
hours
Semester
1 CS Advanced Theory of
Computation
3 1
2 CS Advanced Algorithm Analysis 3 1
List of Electives Courses:
Specialized Areas (not limited) to the list given below (Students will select 6
Courses of 18 credit hours.) Course details are not included.
Code Specialization Areas Crt.
Hrs
Code Specialization Areas Crt. Hrs
CS Software Engineering CS Artificial Intelligence
CS Advanced SoftwareDevelopment 3 CS
Design of Intelligent
Systems 3
CS Topics in SoftwareEngineering 3 CS Machine Learning 3
CS Object OrientedSoftware Engineering. 3 CS Neural Networks 3
CS Software QualityAssurance 3 CS
Mathematical
Reasoning 3
CS RequirementsEngineering 3 CS
Decision Support
Systems 3
CS Software Architecture 3 CS Computer Vision 3
CS Agent OrientedSoftware Engineering 3 CS
Automated
Reasoning 3
CS Software ProjectManagement 3 CS
Knowledge based
systems 3
CS Software Design 3 CS Planning systems 3
CS
Software Engineering
and Formal
Specifications
3 CS Natural LanguageProcessing 3
CS Empirical SoftwareEngineering 3 CS Agents 3
CS Software ProcessImprovement 3 CS Robotics 3
CS Component-BasedComputing 3 CS Symbolic Computing 3
CS ProgrammingEnvironment 3 CS Genetic Algorithms 3
CS Safety-Critical 3 CS Semantic Web 3
48
Systems
Information
Management
CS Computer
Architecture and
Organization
3
CS Advanced DBMS 3 CS Embedded Systems 3
CS Multimedia
Information Systems 3
CS Parallel and
Distributed Systems 3
CS Database Design 3 CS Design Verification 3
CS Transaction
Processing 3
CS Integrated Circuit 3
CS Distributed and Object
Databases 3
CS System on a chip 3
CS Data Mining 3 CS VLSI Development 3
CS Spatial and Temporal
Databases 3
CS Device
Development 3
CS Semantic Databases 3
CS Data Warehousing 3 CS Graphics and VisualComputing
CS Object Oriented
Databases 3
CS Advanced Computer
Graphics 3
CS Digital Libraries 3 CS Multimedia &Hypermedia System 3
CS Web-Based DBMS 3 CS Virtual Reality 3
CS Topics in DBMS 3 CS Visualization 3
CS Data Grids 3 CS GeographicalInformation Systems 3
CS Text Mining 3 CS Computer Animation 3
CS Genetic Algorithms 3
System Engineering CS Human Computer
Interaction 3
CS Digital Signal
Processing 3
CS Switching and Fault
Diagnosis 3
Computer Science
Education
CS FPGAs and Verilog 3 CS EducationalTechnology 3
CS Control Systems and
Robotics 3
CS Multimedia and
Hypermedia Sys 3
CS Real Time Systems 3 CS Computer AidedInstructions 3
CS Parallel & Distributed
Systems 3
CS Web Based
Education Systems 3
CS Control Systems and
Robotics 3
CS Measurement of
Learning 3
CS Real Time Operating
Systems 3
CS Topics in Comp
Science Education 3
CS Embedded System 3 Research Methods 3
CS ASIC Design 3
49
CS VHDL 3 Human ComputerInteraction 3
CS Intelligent UserInterfaces 3
CS Net-Centric computing CS
Information
Retrieval
Techniques
3
CS Advanced ComputerNetworks 3 CS
Rich Internet
Applications 3
CS Network Security 3 CS Graphical UserInterfaces 3
CS Topics in ComputerNetworking 3 CS
Computer-
Supported
Cooperative Work
(CSCW)
3
CS
Broadband and
Satellite
Communication
3 CS Multimedia SystemsDevelopment 3
CS Mobile and Pervasivecomputing 3 CS
Interactive-Systems
Development 3
CS Wireless and MobileComputing Networks 3
CS Intelligent and activenetworks 3
Social and
Professional Issues
(SP)
CS Network PerformanceEvaluation 3 CS
Social Context
computing 3
CS Cluster Computing 3 CS Computing andEthics 3
CS Distributed Computing 3 CS ComputingEconomics 3
CS Data Compression 3 CS Computer Law 3
CS Network Management 3 CS Intellectual Property 3
CS Enterprise Networking 3 CS Privacy and CivilLiberties 3
CS Programming for theWorld-Wide Web 3
Programming
Language Design and
Translators
CS Concurrent andDistributed Systems 3
CS Compiler Construction CS DependentComputing 3
CS ProgrammingLanguage Design 3 CS Fault- Tolerance 3
CS ProgrammingLanguage Semantics 3 CS Real- Time Systems 3
CS ProgrammingParadigms 3
CS Functional 3 Advanced Discrete
50
Programming Structures
CS Logic Programming 3 CS Combinatorics 3
CS Scripting Languages 3 CS Probability andStatistics 3
CS Algorithm andcomplexity (AL) 3 CS
Coding and
Information Theory 3
CS
Advanced Algorithmic
Analysis 3
CS Automata andLanguage Theory 3
Computational
Science
CS Cryptography 3 CS ComputationalScience 3
CS Geometric Algorithms 3 CS Numerical Analysis 3
CS Parallel Algorithms 3 CS OperationsResearch 3
CS Simulation andModelling 3
CS Grid and CloudComputing CS Scientific Computing 3
CS AutonomousComputing 3 CS
Computational
Biology 3
CS Data Grids 3
CS Semantic Grid 3 Web Engineering
CS Computational Grid 3 CS Semantic Web 3
CS Utility Computing 3 CS Web Services 3
CS AutonomousComputing 3
CS Data Grids 3
51
MS (CS) Semester-wise Model Programme
Semester 1
S.No. Code Subjects Credit Hrs.
1 CS Advanced Theory of Computation 3
2 CS Advanced Algorithm Analysis 3
4 CS Research Methods (University
Preferred Elective Course) Elective I
3
Total: 9
Semester 2
S.No. Code Subjects Credit Hrs.
1 CS Elective II 3
2 CS Elective III 3
3 CS Elective IV 3
Total: 9
Semester 3
S.No. Code Subjects Credit Hrs.
1 CS Thesis (partial registration) 3
2 CS Elective V 3
Elective VI 3
Total: 9
Semester 4
S.No. Code Subjects Credit Hrs.
1 CS Thesis (full registration) 3
Total: 3
Total (all semesters) 30
52
MS (CS) Core Courses
Course Description
Course Name: Advanced Theory of Computation
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Theory of Automata
Course Outline:
Automata theory, formal languages, Turing machines, computability theory
and reducibility, computational complexity, determinism, non-determinism,
time hierarchy, space hierarchy, NP completeness, selected advanced
topics.
Reference Materials:
1. Michael Sipser, Introduction to the Theory of Computation, 1st Edition,
1997, PWS Publishing Company.
2. Christos Papadimitriou, Computational Complexity, 1994, Addison-
Wesley.
3. John Hopcroft and Jeffrey Ullman, Introduction to Automata Theory,
Languages, and Computation, 1979, Addison-Wesley. (or the second
edition).
4. Tao Jiang, Ming Li, and Bala Ravikumar, Formal models and
Computability, in Handbook of Computer Science, CRC Press, 1996.
5. T.H. Cormen, et al., Introduction to Algorithms, MIT Press and McGraw-
Hill Book Co., 1990.
6. Peter Linz, An Introduction to Formal Languages and Automata, ISBN: 0-
669-17342-8.
Course Name: Advanced Algorithm Analysis
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Advanced algorithm analysis including the introduction of formal techniques
and the underlying mathematical theory. NP-completeness; Search
Techniques; Randomized Algorithms. Heuristic and Approximation
Algorithms; Topics include asymptotic analysis of upper and average
complexity bounds using big-O, little-o, and theta notation. Fundamental
algorithmic strategies (brute-force, greedy, divide-and-conquer, backtracking,
branch-and-bound, pattern matching, and numerical approximations) are
covered. Also included are standard graph and tree algorithms. Additional
topics include standard complexity classes, time and space tradeoffs in
algorithms, using recurrence relations to analyze recursive algorithms, non-
computable functions, the halting problem, and the implications of non-
computability. Algorithmic animation is used to reinforce theoretical results.
Upon completion of the course, students should be able to explain the
mathematical concepts used in describing the complexity of an algorithm,
and select and apply algorithms appropriate to a particular situation.
53
Reference Materials:
1. Approximation Algorithms, By Vijay V. Vazirani, Springer, 2004.
2. Introduction to Algorithms, By Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson,
Ronald L. Rivest, Clifford Stein, 2nd edition, Published by MIT Press, 2001.
3. Algorithms and Theory of Computation Handbook, By Mikhail J. Atallah
Contributor Mikhail J. Atallah, CRC Press, 1998.
MS (CS) Elective Courses with Course Details
Course Name: Advanced Operating Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Operating Systems
Course Outline:
Characterization of Modern Operating Systems; file systems, memory
management techniques, Process scheduling and resource management,
System Models Architectural models, Inter-process Communication, Issues
of Security in Distributed Systems (Partial coverage), Distributed File System,
Concurrency Control in Distributed Systems, Problems of coordination and
agreement in Distributed Systems, Replication, advantages and
requirements, Fault-tolerant services, Mobile and Ubiquitous Computing.
Reference Materials:
1. Distributed Systems Concepts and Design 4th edition by George
Coulouris, Jean Dollimore and Tim Kindberg
2. Distributed Operating Systems: Concepts and Design by Pradeep k.
Sinha
3. Advanced Concepts in Operating Systems by Singhal and Shiviratri
Course Title: Research Methods
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics
Course Outline:
Research: introduction to the nature of research, and types of Research;
Research questions, and the nature of evidence: deciding what type of
question to ask, and how to handle the various types of answer; Mud pits and
how to avoid them: things that go wrong; Isms: necessary assumptions,
dubious assumptions, and being caught in crossfire; Searching the literature:
why, where, what for and how; Research in society agendas, context and the
like: things we take for granted, and things that can cause you trouble;
Research design: Types of design: which to use and how to use them;
Surveys and sampling; Field experiments: doing research in the world.
Controlled experiments: changing things systematically and seeing what
happens; Summary and technical terms; Generic advice; Arranging a study:
subjects, equipment, procedures, things to remember, things to beware;
54
Handling subjects; Recording; Data collection; Data collection methods: the
methods, and choosing and using the appropriate method; Reports: getting
respondents to talk about how things happen; Observation: watching what
happens; Card sorts: getting respondents to categorise things; Laddering:
unpacking the respondents’ concepts systematically; Repertory grids: a
systematic representation for respondents’ knowledge interviews: asking
people questions; Face-to-face interactions with respondents: the nuts and
bolts of asking questions; Questionnaires: when to use, when not to use,
which questions to ask, what format to use; Data analysis; Content analysis:
what is said in a text, how it is said, and how often it’s said; Discourse
analysis: who says what, about what, to whom, in what format.
Knowledge representation: formats, structures and concepts for making
sense of knowledge; Statistics: describing things with numbers, and
assessing the odds; Descriptive statistics: giving a systematic description of
the numbers you’ve found; Measurement theory: types of measurement and
their implications; Inferential statistics: what are the odds against your
findings being due to random chance? Conclusion: the end game; Writing up:
demonstrating your excellence efficiently, and practical points to remember;
References and referencing: using and citing the right texts to demonstrate
your excellence; what next; thinking forward about what you really want your
life to be?
Reference Materials:
1. A Gentle Guide to Research, Gordon Rugg & Marian Petre, Open
University Press McGraw-Hill Education, 2007
2. Practical Research Methods, CATHERINE DAWSON, How To Books Ltd,
3 Newtec Place, 2002.
Course Name: Advanced Computer Architecture
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Architecture
Course Outline:
This course is aimed at the hardware aspects of parallel computer
architectures including the design and protocols evaluation for memory
coherence, inter-connection networks and system scalability. Advanced
topics in this course will cover multiprocessors on a chip, reconfigurable
computing and power aware designs. Various coarse-grained and fine-
grained architectures with reference to SIMD and MIMD designs should also
be covered.
Reference Materials:
1. Advanced Computer Architecture: A Design Space Approach, Dezso
Sima, Terence Fountain, Peter Kacsuk, Addison-Wesley Publishers,
1997.
2. Scalable Parallel Computing Technology, Architecture, Programming, Kai
Hwang, Zhiwei Xu, McGraw-Hill Publishers, 1998.
55
Course Name: Digital Signal Processing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Data Communications and Computer Networks
Course Outline:
One and N-dimensional signals and systems, Sampling theorem, Discrete-
time Fourier transform, discrete Fourier transform, fast Fourier transform, z-
transforms: stability and minimum phase signals/systems, Linear filtering of
signal: Time domain: Difference equations and convolution, Impulse
invariance, bilinear transform, FIR filter design, 2D filter design, Statistical
signal processing: Stochastic signals: correlation functions and power density
spectra, Optimal filtering: Wiener filters, Adaptive filters: LMS and array
processing.
Reference Material:
1. Discrete-Time Signal Processing, 2nd edition Alan V. Oppenheim and
Ronald W. Schafer, Prentice-Hall.
Course Name: Parallel and Distributed Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communications and Computer Networks
Course Outlines:
Why use parallel and distributed systems? Why not use them? Speedup and
Amdahl's Law, Hardware architectures: multiprocessors (shared memory),
networks of workstations (distributed memory), clusters (latest variation).
Software architectures: threads and shared memory, processes and
message passing, distributed shared memory (DSM), distributed shared data
(DSD). Possible research and project topics, Parallel Algorithms,
Concurrency and synchronization, Data and work partitioning, Common
parallelization strategies, Granularity, Load balancing, Examples: parallel
search, parallel sorting, etc. Shared-Memory Programming: Threads,
Pthreads, Locks and semaphores, Distributed-Memory Programming:
Message Passing, MPI, PVM. Other Parallel Programming Systems,
Distributed shared memory, Aurora: Scoped behaviour and abstract data
types, Enterprise: Process templates. Research Topics.
Reference Materials:
1. B. Wilkinson and M. Allen, Parallel Programming: Techniques and
Applications Using Networked Workstations and Parallel Computers, 1/e,
Prentice Hall, 1999.
2. W. Stevens, Advanced Programming in the Unix Environment, Addison
Wesley, 1993.
56
Course Name: Control Systems and Robotics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Artificial Intelligence
Course Outline:
Review of classical control analysis methods; Nyquist stability criterion;
Classical design using frequency domain methods; phase lead and lag
controllers; PID controllers; Relay auto tuning; Introduction to state space
methods; State space models; state transformations; solution of the state
equations; Controllability and observability; Design using state feedback.
LQR design; pole placement; use of observers; Introduction to robotics;
Transducers; actuators and robot control.
Reference Materials:
1. R.C. Dorf, Modern Control Systems, 7th (1995), 8th (1998) or 9th (2001)
Edition, Addison-Wesley.
2. C.C. Bissell, Control Engineering, 2nd Edition, 1994, Publisher: Chapman
& Hall.
3. K. Ogata, Modern Control Engineering, Prentice Hall, 2nd ed. 1990.
Course Name: Real Time Operating Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Operating Systems
Course Outline:
The principles of real-time and embedded systems inherent in many
hardware platforms and applications being developed for engineering and
science as well as for ubiquitous systems, including robotics and
manufacturing, interactive and multimedia, immersive and omnipresent
applications. Real-time and quality of service system principles, understand
real-time operating systems and the resource management and quality of
service issues that arise, and construct sample applications on representative
platforms. Platforms range from handheld and mobile computers to media
and real-time server systems. Platforms may also include specialized
systems used in application-specific contexts, such as autonomous robotics,
smart sensors, and others.
Reference Material:
It is an advanced course and the instructor may make his notes from various
resources from internet (this need revision before print ready format).
Course Name: Advanced Networking
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communications and Computer Networks
Course Outline:
Review of basic concepts: The OSI Model, packet and circuit switching,
network topology, ISDN. The TCP/IP protocol stack: IP, ARP, TCP and UDP,
57
DNS, ICMP, Internet Addressing, Routing, IP Multicast, RSVP, Next
Generation IP Ipng, Wireless: Radio basics, Satellite Systems, WAP, current
trends, Issues with wireless over TCP. Congestion Control: Control vs.
Avoidance.  Algorithms, Congestion in the Internet. Mobile IP, Voice over IP
(VoIP), VPNs, Network Security. Management: Quality of Service (QoS),
network vs. distributed systems management Protocols, web-based
management
Reference Materials:
1. James F. Kurose and Keith W. Ross, “Computer Networking A Top-Down
Approach Featuring the Internet”, Addison Wesley.
2. Coulouris, Dollimore, Kindberg, “Distributed Systems Concepts and
Design”, Addison Wesley.
3. William Stallings, "Data and Computer Communications", Prentice-Hall
Sixth Edition (for those who want to review basics of networking).
Course Name: Network Security
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communications and Computer Networks
Course Outline:
Introduction; Cryptology and simple cryptosystems; Conventional encryption
techniques; Stream and block ciphers; DES; More on Block Ciphers; The
Advanced Encryption Standard. Confidentiality & Message authentication:
Hash functions; Number theory and algorithm complexity; Public key
Encryption. RSA and Discrete Logarithms; Elliptic curves; Digital signatures.
Key management schemes; Identification schemes; Dial-up security. E-mail
security, PGP, S-MIME; Kerberos and directory authentication. Emerging
Internet security standards; SET; SSL and IPsec; VPNs; Firewalls; Viruses;
Miscellaneous topics.
Reference Materials:
1. W. Stallings, Cryptography and Network Security, Prentice Hall PTR,
Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2003.
2. Kaufman, R. Perlman, M. Speciner, Network Security: Private
Communication in a Public World Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River,
NJ, 2002.
3. M. Bishop, Computer Security: Art and Science Addison-Wesley, 2003.
4. Stinson, Cryptography: Theory and Practice, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,
1995.
5. Richard A. Mollin, An Introduction to Cryptography, Chapman and
Hall/CRC, 2001.
6. B. Schneier, Applied Cryptography, John Wiley and Sons, NY, 1996.
7. A. Menezes, P. Oorshcot, and S. Vanstone, Handbook of Applied
Cryptography, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1997.
58
Course Name: Topics in Computer Networking
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communications and Computer Networks
Course Outline:
This course offers an advanced introduction and research perspectives in the
areas of switch/router architectures, scheduling for best-effort and
guaranteed services, QoS mechanisms and architectures, web protocols and
applications, network interface design, optical networking, and network
economics; the course also includes a research project in computer
networking involving literature survey, critical analysis, and finally, an original
and novel research contribution; typical topics are listed below:
Overview of packet switching networks and devices; Fundamentals of
Internet Protocol (IP) networking. Route lookup algorithms; Router
architecture and performance; Detailed operation of Internet routing protocols
such as Open Shortest Path First (OSPF) and  Border Gateway Protocol
(BGP); Integrated and differentiated network service models; Traffic
Engineering (TE) concepts and mechanisms including label assignment,
label distribution, and constraint-based routing algorithms. Multi-protocol label
switching and its generalization. Quality of service mechanisms for
multimedia and real-time communications. TE-based routing and signalling
protocols. Fundamentals of per-flow and aggregate scheduling algorithms.
Application-level and network-level signalling protocols for data, voice, and
video communications. Resource signalling and resource reservation
protocols. Worst-case analysis for multimedia networking.
Reference Materials:
1. Puzmanov, Switching and Routing, Addison Wesley, 2002.
2. Garica and Widjaja, Communication Networks: Fundamentals Concepts
and Key Architectures, McGraw-Hill, 2001.
3. Peterson and Davie, Computer Networking a Systems Approach, 3rd
Edition, Morgan Kaufman, 2003.
4. William Stallings, High-Speed Networks: TCP/IP and ATM Design
Principles, Prentice Hall; 1998, ISBN: 0135259657.
5. Andrew S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, 3rd Edition. Prentice Hall,
March 1996.
Course Name: Network Administration
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Through completion of this course, students will be able to plan, install, and
configure a Web Server, manage, monitor, and optimize a Web Server, and
design and implement a Web Site on the Web Server created.
59
Reference Materials:
1. Information Technology Project Management, (2002) Course Technology,
ISBN: 0-619-03528-5.
2. Principles of Web Design. (2000) Course Technology. ISBN:  0-619-
01526-8.
Course Name: Wireless Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communications and Computer Networks
Course Outline:
This course covers fundamental techniques in design and operation of first,
second, and third generation wireless networks: cellular systems, medium
access techniques, radio propagation models, error control techniques,
handoff, power control, common air protocols (AMPS, IS-95, IS-136, GSM,
GPRS, EDGE, WCDMA, cdma2000, etc), radio resource and network
management. As an example for the third generation air interfaces, WCDMA
is discussed in detail since it is expected to have a large impact on future
wireless networks. This course is intended for graduate students who have
some background on computer networks.
Reference Materials:
1. Wireless Communications and Networks, W. Stallings, Prentice Hall,
2002.
2. Wireless Communications: Principles & Practice, T.S. Rappaport, Second
Edition, Prentice Hall, 2002.
3. Mobile Communications, J. Schiller, Addison Wesley, 2000.
4. IS-95 CDMA and cdma 2000, V.K. Garg, Prentice Hall PTR, 2000.
5. J.P. Castro, “The UMTS Network and Radio Access Technology Air
Interface Techniques for Future Mobile Systems”, Wiley, 2001.
6. H. Holma and A. Toskala, “WCDMA for UMTS Radio Access for Third
Generation Mobile Communications”, John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
Course Name: Network Performance Evaluation
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communications and Computer Networks
Course Outline:
This is an advanced course in networks and protocols. Analytical, simulation
and experimental methods should be used to evaluate and design networks
and protocols. Investigate network management tools and techniques.
Reference Material:
1. T. G. Robertazzi, Computer Networks and Systems: Queuing Theory and
Performance Evaluation, Springer-Verlag, 2nd edition, 1994.
60
Course Name: Theory of Programming Languages
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Compiler Construction
Course Outline:
Introduction and History, Syntax and Semantics, Control Structures, Types,
Logic Programming, Functional Programming and Lambda calculus,
Concurrent and Distributed Programming, Dataflow, Object-oriented
Programming.
Reference Materials:
1. Advanced Programming Language Design, Raphael Finkel, Addison-
Wesley. ISBN: 0805311912
2. Introduction to the Theory of Programming Languages Bertrand Meyer
3. The Study of Programming Languages, Ryan Stansifer
4. The Anatomy of Programming Languages, Fischer and Grodzinsky
5. Concepts of Programming Languages, Sebesta
Course Name: Advanced Compiler Design I
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Compiler Construction
Course Outline:
An in-depth study of compiler backend design for high-performance
architectures. Topics include control-flow and data-flow analysis, classical
optimization, instruction scheduling, and register allocation. Advanced topics
include memory hierarchy management, optimization for instruction-level
parallelism, modulo scheduling, predicated and speculative execution. The
class focus is processor-specific compilation techniques, thus familiarity with
both computer architecture and compilers is recommended.
Reference Materials:
1. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi,
and Jeffrey D. Ullman, Addison-Wesley, 1988.
2. Advanced Compiler Design & Implementation, Steven S. Muchnick,
Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.
3. Building an Optimizing Compiler, Robert Morgan, Butterworth-Heinemann,
1998.
Course Name: Advanced Compiler Design II
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Advanced Compiler Design I
Course Outline:
The course should consist of one or two major projects. Theoretical study
should depend on the level of the first course Design I and the student needs.
61
Reference Materials:
1. Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools, Alfred V. Aho, Ravi Sethi,
and Jeffrey D. Ullman, Addison-Wesley, 1988.
2. Advanced Compiler Design & Implementation, Steven S. Muchnick,
Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.
3. Building an Optimizing Compiler, Robert Morgan, Butterworth-Heinemann,
1998.
Course Name: Intelligent User Interfaces
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Human Computer Interaction
Course Outline:
The increasing complexity of software and the proliferation of information
make intelligent user interfaces increasingly important. The promise of
interfaces that are knowledgeable, sensitive to our needs, agile, and
genuinely useful has motivated research across the world to advance the
state of the art and practice in user interfaces that exhibit intelligence. The
text covers the topic well.
Reference Material:
1. Readings in Intelligent User Interfaces, Mark T. Maybury (Editor),
Wolfgang Wahlster (Editor), Paperback - 736 pages (April 1998) Morgan
Kaufman Publishers; ISBN: 1558604448.
Course Name: Multimedia Database
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction; Overview of Relational and Object-Relational Data
Representations; Text/Document Databases; Multidimensional Data
Structures, similarity based search (spatial, image, audio); XML Databases;
Temporal Data Models; Logical Frameworks.
Reference Materials:
1. Principles of Multimedia Database Systems, by V.S. Subrahmanian,
Morgan Kaufmann Publishing Company, San Francisco, CA. 1998. ISBN:
1558604669.
2. Principles of Database Query Processing for Advanced Applications
(Morgan Kaufmann Series in Data Management Systems), by Clement T.
Yu, Weiyi Meng, 1998. ISBN: 1558604340.
3. Databases and Transaction Processing, An Application-Oriented
Approach, Philip M. Lewis, Arthur Bernstein, and Micheal Kifer. Addison
Wesley Publishers, 2002. ISBN: 0201708728.
62
Course Name: Computer Vision
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Concepts behind computer-based recognition and extraction of features from
raster images. applications of vision systems and their limitations. Overview
of early, intermediate and high level vision, Segmentation: region splitting and
merging; quadtree structures for segmentation; mean and variance pyramids;
computing the first and second derivatives of images using the isotropic,
Sobel and Laplacian operators; grouping edge points into straight lines by
means of the Hough transform; limitations of the Hough transform;
parameterisation of conic sections. Perceptual grouping: failure of the Hough
transform; perceptual criteria; improved Hough transform with perceptual
features; grouping line segments into curves. Overview of mammalian vision:
experimental results of Hubel and Weisel; analogy to edge point detection
and Hough transform; Relaxation labeling of images: detection of image
features; Grouping of contours and straight lines into higher order features
such as vertices and facets; Depth measurement in images.
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Vision: A Modern Approach, by David Forsyth, Jean Ponce,
Prentice Hall, 2003.
2. Computer Vision, by Linda G. Shapiro, George C. Stockman, Prentice
Hall, 2001.
3. Handbook of Mathematical Models in Computer Vision, by Nikos
Paragios, Yunmei Chen, Olivier Faugeras, Birkhäuser, 2006.
Course Name: Rich Internet Applications
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
This course covers the concept and technology evolution regarding the
internet applications and the use of interface tools. Mainly, the course can
focus on any one of the technologies of modern day, for example,
macromedia’s FLASH. However, the course will use the concepts of data
structures, object oriented programming, programming languages and the
software design and engineering to develop projects of medium to large
magnitude.
Reference Materials:
The contents and teaching approach depend on the instructor and the latest
trends in the area. Macromedia’s presence on the web can be utilized for
information transfer.
63
MS (CS) Course Outlines
Following are some of the new course outlines for MS (CS) Programme
suggested by Computer Science Committee.
1. Machine Learning
2. Advanced Optimization methods
3. Robotics
4. Intelligent Planning
5. Fuzzy Systems
6. Intelligent Data Modelling
7. Logic Programming & Automated Reasoning
8. Advanced statistical methods
9. Cybernetics
10. Evolutionary Computation/Algorithms
11. Knowledge Management (3 credits)
12. Visualization in Medicine
13. Virtual Reality
14. Advanced database systems
15. Distributed Databases
16. Web Mining
17. Text Mining
18. Decision Theory
Course Name: Machine learning
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Artificial Intelligence
Course Outline:
Basic concepts of Machine Learning; Supervised learning; Supervised
learning setup. Logistic regression; Perceptron; Generative learning
algorithms; Gaussian discriminant analysis; Support vector machines; Model
selection and feature selection; Evaluating and debugging learning
algorithms; Learning theory; Bias/variance tradeoff; Union and
Chernoff/Hoeffding bounds; Unsupervised learning; K-means Clustering; EM
algorithm.
Factor analysis; PCA (Principal components analysis); ICA (Independent
components analysis); Reinforcement learning and control; Bellman
equations; Value iteration and policy iteration; Linear quadratic regulation; Q-
learning; Value function approximation
Reference Materials:
1. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning, Bishop, C., 2006
2. Machine Learning, Mitchell, T., McGraw-Hill, (1997)
3. The Elements of Statistical Learning, Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and
Friedman, J., Neural Networks for Pattern Recognition, 2009Bishop, C.,
1995
64
Course Name: Advanced Optimization methods
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Mathematics
Course Outline:
A taxonomy of optimization problems and solution methods; Convex sets,
convex functions and convex optimization; Linear and convex quadratic
optimization problems. Combinatorial optimization; Geometric and semi-
definite optimization. Duality; Computational complexity and NP-
completeness; Algorithms for smooth unconstrained optimization; Algorithms
for constrained optimization, including interior point methods; Sequential
quadratic programming; Derivative-free optimization.
Outline of techniques for discrete optimization, including relaxation; Multi-
objective Optimization.
Reference Materials:
1. Constraint processing, R. Dechter (2003): Morgan Kaufmann.
2. Convex Optimization, Boyd and Vandenberghe, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, 2004.
3. Convex optimization theory, Bertsekas, Athena Scientific, Belmont, MA,
2009.
4. Convex analysis and optimization, Bertsekas, with Nedic and Ozdaglar,
Athena Scientific, Belmont, MA, 2003.
5. Numerical Optimization, Nocedal and Wright, Second Edition, Springer,
New York, 2006.
6. Nonlinear Programming, Bertsekas, Second Edition, Athena Scientific,
Belmont, MA, 1999.
7. Practical Optimization, Gill, Murry and Wright, Academic Press, London,
1986.
8. Optimization: Algorithms and Engineering Applications, Antoniou and Lu,
Practical Springer, New York, 2007.
9. An Introduction to Optimization, Chong and Zak, second edition, Wiley,
2001.
Course Name: Robotics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Artificial Intelligence
Course Outline:
A brief history of robotics, types of robots; Potential applications of intelligent
systems and robotics; Sensors and Actuators; Sonar, laser scanner, optical
encoders; DC motors. Control; Feedback control; Localization and mapping;
Dead-reckoning; Triangulation. Kalman filter; Uncertainty grid; Behavior
based programming; Robot behaviors. Potential field approach; Behavior
based architecture; Recent advances; Multi-robotic systems; Robot evolution.
65
Reference Materials:
1. Robot Motion Planning, Jean-Claude, Latombe Kluwer, Academic
Publishers, Boston, 1991.
2. Artificial Intelligence and Mobile Robots, D. Kortenkamp, R. Bonasso, and
R. Murphy, ed., AAAI Press, 1998.
3. Handbook of Robotics, Siciliano, Bruno; Khatib, Oussama (Eds.), Springer
Springer 2008
4. An Introduction to Intelligent and Autonomous Control, P. Antsaklis and K.
Passino, Kluwer, 1993.
Course Name: Intelligent Planning
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Artificial Intelligence
Course Outline:
Introduction to Planning Approaches; Plan generation and causal-link
planning; Planning as constraint satisfaction; Planning Problems; Planning on
a computational grid; Planning using temporal logics; Heuristic search
planning; Knowledge representation for planning, ontologies, description
logics; Reasoning about time: temporal reasoning and scheduling; Controlling
Search; Complexity of planning problems; Learning search control knowledge
& case-based planning; Distributed & multi-agent planning; Learning from an
external environment; Planning and execution; Reactive systems;
Probabilistic planning; Planning and decision theory, Markov decision
processes; Mixed-initiative planning
Reference Materials:
1. Planning in intelligent systems, Wezel, Wout van and Jorna, René J.,
2006, Wiley.
2. LaValle, Steven Michael, 2006, Planning Algorithms.
3. Machine learning methods for planning, Minton, Steven, 1993, Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers.
4. Planning Algorithms, LaValle, Steven Michael, 2006.
5. Planning with Markov Decision, Kolobov, Andrey, 2012, Morgan &
Claypool Publishers.
6. Intelligent Task Planning Using Fuzzy Petri Nets, Cao, Tiehua and
Sanderson, A. Arthur C., 1996,. World Scientific Publishing Company
Incorporated.
7. Intelligent Techniques For Planning, Vlahavas, Ioannis and Vrakas,
Dimitris, 2005, Igi Global.
8. Planning in intelligent systems, Wezel, Wout van and Jorna, René J.,
2006, Wiley.
66
Course Name: Fuzzy Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Mathematics
Course Outline:
The Mathematics of Fuzzy Systems and Control; Fuzzy Sets and Operations
on Fuzzy Sets; Fuzzy Relations and the Extension Principle; Fuzzy Logic and
Approximate Reasoning; Fuzzy Systems and Their Properties; Fuzzy Rule
Base and Fuzzy Inference Engine; Fuzzifiers and Defuzzifiers; Fuzzy
Systems as Nonlinear Mappings; Approximation Accuracy of the Fuzzy
System; Fuzzy Systems with Second-Order Approximation Accuracy;
Approximation; Accuracy of Fuzzy Systems with Maximum; Design of Fuzzy
Systems from Input-Output Data; A Table Look-Up Scheme; Gradient
Descent Training; Recursive Least Squares; Design of Fuzzy; Systems Using
Clustering; Non-adaptive Fuzzy Control; Adaptive Fuzzy Control; Fuzzy
Linear Programming
Reference Materials:
1. A course in fuzzy systems and control, Wang, Li-Xin, 1997, Prentice Hall.
2. Advanced Fuzzy Systems Design and Applications, Jin, Yaochu, 2003,
Physica Verlag.
3. Advanced Concepts in Fuzzy Logic and Systems with Membership
Uncertainty, Starczewski, Janusz T., 2012, Springer.
4. Advanced Fuzzy Systems Design and Applications, Jin, Yaochu, 2003,
PhysicaVerlag.
5. Siddique, Nazmul and Adeli, Hojjat, 2013, Computational Intelligence.
Wiley.
Course Name: Intelligent Probabilistic Data Modeling
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics
Course Outline:
Bayes' Theorem and Simple Bayesian Inference; Bayesian Decision Trees;
Approximate Inference; Exact Inference; Graphical Models; Sampling and
Resampling; Data Models and Distributions; Feature Reduction, Principal
Component Analysis; Linear Discriminant Analysis; Support Vector
Machines; Maximum Weighted Spanning Tree; Learning in Belief Networks;
Hidden Markov Models; Probabilistic Relational models; Relational
Uncertainty in Probabilistic Relational models
Reference Materials:
1. Learning from Data, Cherkassky, Vladimir and Mulier, Filip M., 2007,
Wiley-IEEE Press.
2. The Elements of Statistical Learning. Hastie, Trevor J. et el, 2009,
Springer.
3. Computational Vision in Neural and Machine Systems, Harris, Laurence R
and Jenkin, Michael R. M., 2007
67
4. The Art of the Sale, Broughton, Philip Delves, 2013, Penguin Group USA.
5. Optimized Bayesian Dynamic Advising, Karny, Miroslav, 2006, Springer-
Verlag New York Incorporated.
6. Scalable Optimization Via Probabilistic Modeling, Pelikan, Martin and
Sastry, Kumara, 2006, Springer Verlag.
Course Name: Logic Programming & Automated Reasoning
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Propositional logic; Propositional logic reasoning using resolution; First-
order/predicate logic; First-order reasoning using unrestricted resolution;
Well-founded orderings; Multi-set and Multi-set orderings; Structural
transformation; Fuzzy logic; Bayesian inference. Reasoning with maximal
entropy.
Reference Materials:
1. Probabilistic Inductive Logic Programming, Raedt, Luc De, 2008,
Springer-Verlag New York Incorporated.
2. Meta-reasoning, Cox, Michael T. and Raja, Anita, 2011, The MIT Press.
3. Thinking As Computation, Levesque, Hector J., 2012,. MIT Press (MA).
4. Automated Theory Formation in Pure Mathematics, Colton, Simon, 2002,
Springer Verlag.
Course Title: Evolutionary Computation/Algorithms
Credit Hours: 3
Course Outline:
Introduction to Evolutionary Algorithm, Genetic Algorithms, Evolution
Strategies, Evolutionary Programming, Genetic Programming, Learning
Classifier Systems, Parameter Control in Evolutionary Algorithms, Multi-
Modal Problems and Spatial Distribution, Hybridisation with Other
Techniques: Memetic Algorithms, Theory of EAs, Constraint Handling Special
Forms of Evolution, Working with Evolutionary Algorithms, Practical
implementation of EAs.
Reference Materials:
1. Introduction to Evolutionary Computing, Agoston E. Eiben, J.E. Smith.
2. Introduction to Genetic Algorithms, S.N. Sivanandam, S. N. Deepa
3. Evolutionary Computation, Kenneth A. de De Jong, Kenneth A. De Jong
4. Genetic Algorithms in Search, Optimization, and Machine Learning, David
E.Goldberg.
5. Genetic Algorithms + Data Structures = Evolution Programs, Zbigniew
Michalewicz
68
Course Title: Visualization in Medicine
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Probability and Statistics and Graph Theory
Course outline:
Introduction: 2D and 3D Visualization in Medicine; Medical Image Data and
Visual Perception; Acquisition of Medical Image Data; Medical Volume Data
in Clinical Practice.
Image Analysis for Medical Visualization; Volume visualization Exploration of
Medical Volume Data; Measurements in Medical Visualization; Virtual
Endoscopy; Image Guided Surgery and Virtual Reality
Reference Material:
1. Visualization in Medicine: Theory, Algorithms, and Applications, Bernhard
Preim, Dirk Bartz
Course Name: Advanced Database Systems
Course Structure: Lectures: 3
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Introduction to Database Systems
Course Outline:
Advance Normal Forms such as Multivalued Dependency, 4th and 5th normal
forms, Domain Key normal form, Hierarchical structure of DBMS, Storage
and File Organization, Storage Indexing and Hashing, Relational Calculus,
Query Processing Transaction processing, ACID properties, Serializability,
Recoverability, Concurrency control and Recovery, Protocols (Lock-based,
Graph-based, Timestamp-based, Validation-based), Deadlock Handling
techniques and prevention, Log-based Recovery, Failure with loss of
Nonvolatile storage.
Reference Materials:
1. Fundamentals of Database Systems, By R. Elmasri and S. Navathe, 6th
Edition, 2011.
2. Database Management Systems, By R. Ramakrishnan, J. Gehrke, 3rd
Edition, 2003.
3. Database System Concepts, By Abraham Silberschatz, Henry F. Korth S.
Sudarshan, 6th Edition, 2010.
4. Database Systems, The Complete Book. By H. Garcia-Molina, J. D.
Ullman, and J. Widom; Prentice Hall, 2002.
5. Database Systems, C. J. Date, 8th Edition, 2004
69
Course Name: Distributed Databases
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Advanced Database Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction to distributed database systems (DDBMS), architectural models,
DDBMS architecture, distributed database design strategies, design issues,
fragmentation, allocation, view management, data security, semantic integrity
control, distributed query processing problems, query decomposition,
localization of distributed data, query optimization, join ordering in fragment
queries, distributed query optimization algorithms, transaction processing,
concurrency control mechanisms, serializability theory, locked-based and
timestamp-based algorithms, optimistic algorithms, deadlock management,
reliability concepts and measures, failures in DDBMS, local reliability
protocols, distributed reliability protocols, dealing with site failures, Network
partitioning, database integration, data processing in multi-databases and
inter-operability issues.
Reference Materials:
1. Principles of Distributed Database Systems, M.T. Ozsu, P. Valduriez
(eds.): (2nd Edition), Prentice Hall, 1999.
2. Transactional Information Systems, G. Weikum and G. Vossen, Morgan
Kaufmann, 2002.
Course Name: Web Mining
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Mining
Course outline:
Introduction to web, usage, content, and structure mining, Use of Machine
Learning and Computational Intelligence Techniques for web mining and
information networks, mining information sites and streams, Web crawling,
indexing, ranking and filtering algorithms using content and link analysis
summarizing and analyzing web information, mining opinion and reviews,
identifying and mining social networks and social media, Applications for
searching, classification, recommendation, and Web intelligence.
Reference Materials:
1. Web Data Mining: Exploring Hyperlinks, Contents, and Usage Data, Bing
Liu 2011; 2nd Edition.
2. Mining the Web, Soumen Chakrabarti, Morgan-Kaufmann, 2011, 2nd
Edition.
70
Course Name: Text Mining
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Fundamental of Data Mining
Course outline:
Introduction to text mining, Structuring Text, Normalization, Stop words,
Stemming, part-of-speech tagging, phrase chunking, relation finding, and
named-entity recognition. Document-Term Matrix Formation Processing, and
Manipulations, Latent Semantic Indexing, Searching, Topic Modeling,
Clustering and Classification, Spam Detection. Using different software tools
such as Weka, GATE, covering programming and tuning existing modules.
Course Title: Virtual and Augmented Reality Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Course Outline:
Introduction  to  Virtual  Reality,  Human  and  its  environment,    I3 diagram
for  VR (Interaction, Immersion, Imagination),  Human centric reference
model of VR, Sensory motor  interfaces,  Motion  trackers,    Stereoscopic
vision(depth  perception,  stereoscopic image  creation,  active  and  passive
stereoscopy),  Design  and  evaluation  of  virtual environments,  Application
of  (Medical, Psychotherapy,  Fighting  Simulation,  Training Simulation,
Assembling and Repairing, Biological and Physical Sciences,  Collaborative
Work, Ergonomic studies,  Games VR, Introduction to Augmented Reality.
Reference Materials:
1. Handbook of Virtual Environments: Design, Implementation, and
Applications (Human Factors and Ergonomics), Edited by Kay M Stanney,
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Virtual Reality Technology by GRIGORE
Course Title: Knowledge Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Artificial Intelligence
Course Outline:
Overview of Knowledge Management (KM), The Nature of Knowledge, KM
Solutions, Organizational Impacts of KM, Factors Influencing KM, KM
Assessment of an Organization, Technologies to Manage Knowledge,
Knowledge-Based Systems, Converting Tacit Knowledge to Explicit,
Discovering New Knowledge, Data Mining, Knowledge Discovery, Knowledge
Capture Systems, Knowledge Sharing Systems, Knowledge Application
Systems, The Future of Knowledge Management
Reference Materials:
1. Knowledge Management Challenges, Solutions, and Technologies, Irma
Becerra-Fernandez, Avelino Gonzalez, Rajiv Sabherwal (2004). (edition
with accompanying CD). Prentice Hall. ISBN: 0-13-109931-0.
71
2. Essentials of Knowledge Management, Bryan Bergeron, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc. 2003
Course Title: Decision Theory
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisite: Probability and Statistics
Course Outline:
Introduces the basic problems and techniques of decision making may be
covered in two basic parts: 1. principles and approaches in decision making,
2. explores the methods and applications of information that are used in
making an optimal decision. Differences between the classical frequencies
approach and Bayesian approach in making decision, identify prior
distributions and likelihood functions, and combine these two entities to
obtain posterior distributions, which will then be combined with loss function
to obtain Bayesian estimators. Concepts of conjugate distributions on prior
and posterior distributions, important definitions in decision theory, proving
admissibility and inadmissibility of a decision, process of making an optimal
decision, utility and reward, and sensitivity analysis related to an optimal
decision. Analysis of subjective probabilities
Reference Materials:
1. Bayesian Data Analysis, Gelman, A., Carlin, J. B. and Rubin, D. B. (2003),
Chapman & Hall. (QA279.5.B3862003)
2. Decision Making and Forecasting, Marshall, K. T. & Oliver, R. M. (1995),
McGraw-Hill, Inc. (T57.95.M351995)
3. Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, Berger J. O. (1985),
2nd Ed. Springer-Verlag. (QA279.4.B461985)
4. A Bayesian Approach, Smith, J. Q. (1988), Decision Analysis: Chapman &
Hall, London (QA279.5.S641988)
5. Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analysis, Box, G. E. P. & Tiow, G. C.
(1973), Addison-Wesley. (QA276.B681973)
72
National Curriculum Revision Committee
Software Engineering
The National Curriculum Revision Committee for Software Engineering
(NCRC-SE) met on 6-8 February, 2013 to develop the vision for Software
Engineering education and curriculum for software engineering programme.
The Committee met again on 10-12 June, 2013 to finalize the curricula
recommendations. Participants represented most of the universities and
software industry of the country. Following experts participated in the
meetings for sub-group on Software Engineering:
Name and Address
1. Dr. Abu Turab Alam
Professor, College of Computer Science
& Information System, Institute of
Business Management, Korangi Creek,
Industrial Area, Karachi.
Convener and
Chairperson of
SE committee
2. Dr. Mohammad Riaz Moghal,
Professor,
Computer Systems Engg, Mirpur
University of Science & Tech, Main
Campus, Mirpur A.K
Member
3. Mr. Muhammad Shakeel,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Computer Sciences,
GIFT University,
Gujranwala
Member
4. Dr. Fakhar-ul-Islam Lodhi,
Dean,
Deptt. Of Computer Sciences,
GIFT University, Gujranwala.
Member
5. Dr. Naveed Arshad,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Computer Science,
Lahore University of Management
Sciences (LUMS), Opp. Sector “U”, DHA,
Lahore Cantt
Member
73
6. Dr. Shahbaz Khan,
Chairman,
Dept. of Telecommunication  Engg,
University of Engg & Tech, Mardan
Campus
Peshawar.
Member
7. Dr. Iftikhar Ahmed Khan,
Assistant Professor,
Dept. of Computer Software Engg,
University of Engg & Tech, Mardan
Campus, Peshawar.
Member
8. Dr. Najmi Ghani Haider,
Professor,
Dept. of Computer & Information Systems
Engg, NED University of Engg & Tech,
Karachi.
Member
9. Dr. Muaz Ahmad Khan Niazi,
Professor,
Dept. of Computer & Software Engg,
Bahria University, E-8,
Islamabad.
Member
10. Dr. Muhammad Akram Shaikh
Director General
Pakistan Scientific & Technological
Information Centre QAU Campus,
Islamabad.
Member
The Discipline of Software Engineering:
Software Engineering is a bridge connecting the basic concepts and
principles of Computer Science with the variety of users who can benefit from
technologies based upon those principles.  It includes the design and
development of software systems which are effective, efficient, robust,
maintainable, and maximally useful and usable.  It also includes the design
and development of techniques, processes and higher level tools by which
these applications can be developed in a timely, cost effective and
sustainable manner.  At both levels it requires a systematic approach which
deals with quantifiable measures of quality and effectiveness, as well as
attention to the critical nature of the various products of the process.
Software engineering therefore requires familiarity with the basic needs and
processes in the various application domains, with the principles of good
74
engineering practice and with the underlying concepts and principles of
computer science. It requires facility in problem analysis, solution design,
program development and documentation.  It also requires a basic
understanding of the ways in which humans interact with technological
systems.
A software engineering programme should develop professionals who have a
mastery of software development principles, theory, practice, and process.
Software Engineering and Computer Science differ in much the same way as
do Electrical Engineering and Physics1. Generally, engineering should be
concerned with applying what we already know to create products, while
science is more theoretical. Therefore, the goal of Computer Science,
according to Parnas2, is to learn and to extend the science. SE on the other
hand aims to use the science and technology already available to create
products and tools for use.
Software Engineering derives its essence from computer science as other
engineering disciplines do from natural or life sciences, with an emphasis on
issues of process, design, measurement, analysis and verification providing a
strong foundation in engineering principles and practices as applied to
software development.
Definition:
Software Engineering is a discipline concerned with the development of
software systems by applying engineering principles with the goal of
developing cost-effective quality systems. There are many definitions in
literature. Such as:
 "The establishment and use of sound engineering principles
(methods) in order to obtain economically software that is reliable
and works on real machines" [Bauer 1972].
 "Software engineering is that form of engineering that applies the
principles of computer science and mathematics to achieving cost-
effective solutions to software problems." [CMU/SEI-90-TR-003]
 "The application of a systematic, disciplined, quantifiable
approach to the development, operation, and maintenance of
software" [IEEE 1990].
1 David Parnas, “Software Engineering Programmes are not Computer Science
Programmes”, IEEE Software, Nov/Dec. 1999, pp. 19-30.
2 David Parnas, “Software Engineering Programmes are not Computer Science
Programmes”, IEEE Software, Nov/Dec. 1999, pp. 19-30.
75
 IEEE defines software engineering [IEEE-93] as
“1. The application of systematic, disciplined, quantifiable
approach to development, operation, and maintenance of
software; that is application of engineering to software.
2.The study of approaches as in 1.”
Software Engineering could also be defined as:
“The application of systematic, disciplined, quantifiable approach to
design, development, deployment, and maintenance of reliable and
economical software systems.”
Vision:
Software engineering is the discipline of creating high-quality software
systems in a systematic, controlled and efficient manner. It involves the
application of engineering concepts, techniques, and methods to the design,
development, deployment and maintenance of software systems. A software
engineering programme should develop professionals who have a mastery of
principles, theory, practices, and processes necessary to produce quality
software systems. The curriculum committee formalized the Vision Statement
for SE education in Pakistan as follows:
The SE education in Pakistan will focus on imparting the knowledge and
training which should enable students to harmonize theory with practice,
concept with application, and problem with solution. It will prepare them to
apply ably engineering principles, practices, and processes to design,
develop, deploy, and maintain software systems. The programme will lead
to development of student’s professional and interpersonal skills. It will
help students to enhance their ability in oral and written communication,
and their adaptability to team environments. The programme will inculcate
among students a strong sense of civic, professional and ethical
responsibility. The programme will also strive to develop a capacity for
innovation and a passion for lifelong learning.
SE curricula thus developed would reflect the aim to satisfy professional
demands of the industry and academia both in terms of immediate needs and
the capacity for longer term development. The graduates thus produced will
be adequately equipped to exploit the opportunities and answer the
challenges offered by the modern world.
Knowledge Areas of SE Curriculum Development ABET Engineering Criteria
2000 notes:
“The curriculum must provide both breadth and depth across the range of
engineering and computer science topics implied by the title and objective of
76
the programme. The programme must demonstrate that graduates have: the
ability to analyze, design, verify, validate, implement, apply, and maintain
software systems; the ability to appropriately apply discrete mathematics,
probability and statistics, and relevant topics in computer and management
sciences to complex software systems.”
SE curriculum specified here has been developed systematically by
identifying the major knowledge areas of SE education, in the spirit of
engineering criteria above. It is noted that efforts carried out by ACM and
IEEE-CS to develop international software curricula are very relevant and
provide excellent guidelines on the issue. Outcome of these efforts is
documented in Software Engineering Body of Knowledge (SWEBOK)3,
Software Engineering Education Knowledge (SEEK)4, and Computing
Curriculum 20085.
The following major areas of relevant pedagogy have been identified to be
appropriate for design of the software engineering curriculum:
1 Computing Foundation (CS/SE/CE)
2 Software Engineering  (SE Major)
3 Software Engineering Application Domain
4 Supporting Areas (Mathematics and Natural Sciences)
5 General Education (Management, Humanities, Social Sciences)
The committee is of the view that good curriculum should focus on building a
solid foundation in the early stages of learning. It should gradually introduce
and strengthen the core professional competencies and desired skill-sets.
Software engineering concepts should be taken up as early as the start of 2nd
year. The main technical SE content should be covered during the third and
fourth years. Practical component should use medium to large scale projects
to develop in students a systematic approach to problem solving and
program development. Good SE practices must be nurtured all through the
education programme. The practice of software engineering is often in the
context of non-software application domains. The graduates, therefore,
should be provided an opportunity for reasonably broad exposure to at least
one application area in the senior years. It will help them learn and
demonstrate the application of software engineering practices. A capstone
design project should provide the opportunity to bring together all the
knowledge gained in a wide variety of courses to solve realistic problems in a
team-based environment.
3 Guide to Software Engineering Body of Knowledge, 2004 Edition,.
4 Software Engineering – Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Software
Engineering, 2004August 23, 2004
5 Computing Curriculum 2008—Draft
77
Software Engineering Degree Programme:
Nomenclature:
The committee emphasized that the nomenclature followed for Software
Engineering programs should correspond to international trends and standards. The
following nomenclature was thus agreed upon for various degrees:
Bachelor of Science in Software Engineering — BS Software Engg — BS (SE)
Master of Science in Software Engineering — MS Software Engg— MS (SE)
Duration of Programme:
The committee defined a credit hour as one lecture hour in a course offered
in a particular semester. It was agreed that 3 weekly lab hours shall be
treated as one credit hour. In normal circumstances a semester comprises 15
to16 teaching weeks followed by the final examination. It is also
recommended that one week may be given to students as preparation week
before final exam.
The BS Software Engineering Degree would be a 4-year programme spread
over 8 semesters and MS Software Engineering programme would be a 2-
year programme spread over 4 semesters.
Admission Criteria:
The eligibility criteria for BS Software Engineering admission was agreed to
be intermediate with mathematics or equivalent qualifications, however,
universities may define their own admission criteria.
The eligibility criterion for admission to MS Software Engineering was
unanimously agreed to be 4-year BS Software Engineering or equivalent
qualifications, however, universities may define their own admission criteria.
78
Curriculum for BS Software Engineering-BS (SE)
Programme Objective:
The objective of the programme is to prepare students for professional
careers and for graduate studies in software engineering.  With a balance
between computing theory and practical application of software engineering
concepts including software project management, methodologies, tools and
technologies in the modern software development environments.
Graduates of such a programme will be able to function as proficient software
developers and effective team members. They will have grounding in
communication, mathematics and science, and the cultural, historical, and
social issues that influence and effect or relate to the development of high
quality software systems. They will have knowledge of and experience with
software product engineering and engineering management and an
understanding of professional issues and practices. Graduates will be able to
understand and assess their own software engineering capabilities and
performance.
The curriculum is designed to ensure breadth across allied disciplines and
supporting subjects; and depth in most areas of the software engineering
body of knowledge. Various components have been included in the
curriculum to ensure that the graduates will:
 Understand and be able to apply mathematics, physical science,
computer science and related disciplines.
 Understand and be able to apply the principles of software engineering
practice and process, subject to realistic constraints.
 Be able to model, analyze, document and track system requirements,
both functional and non-functional.
 Be able to design, implement, deploy and maintain software systems.
 Be able to verify and validate the software systems.
 Have an awareness of current industry standards and practices.
 Be able to work in one or more application domains.
 Understand and apply the principles of the team process.
 Be able to understand and apply software project management skills:
measurement, estimation, costing, planning, deployment and tracking
of resources.
 Have strong communication and interpersonal skills.
 Be capable of independent learning.
 Understand professional responsibility and application of ethical
principles.
 Have knowledge of economics, humanities and social sciences.
79
Programme Model:
The programme is designed to achieve systematically the objectives set out
above.  It has been structured to suit the needs of the students, the demands
of the market and trends. During the first two years of the programme the
students will be given core understanding of the programme may be similar
to other focusing areas in computing—computer science, information
technology. The students will be exposed to the discipline in a systematic,
gradual and definite way. Students will also be trained in the skills and
techniques which are rooted in the basic sciences like mathematics and
physics. These areas will be taken care of in the supporting courses which
have been allocated reasonably sufficient space. Students’ personal traits
and personality polishing will be cared for by the general education courses
including communication and writing skills. A host of slots for elective courses
have also been proposed to give to the students an opportunity to move
towards their areas of interest.
During the senior years the students will be given exposure to the more
specialized aspects of the discipline. They will also be given training in at
least one application domain which will help institutions to prepare human
resource well suited to the needs of different segments of the job market. In
order to inculcate among them a scientific attitude they will go through a
substantial lab work, which will prepare them for the industry and for further
research oriented studies. The final year project will mark the crystallization
and culmination of the students’ four-year learning experience.  Table for
BS(SE) gives the credit hour distribution of the core and elective courses.
Table for BS (SE): The Credit Hour Distribution of the
Core and Elective Courses
Major Areas Core/
Required
Elective Credit Hours
Computing
Foundation
46
21 85
(64%)Software
Engineering
18
Supporting
Studies
(Math/Science )
12 9 21
(17%)
General
Education
15 12 27
(21%)
Total 91
(68%)
42
(33%)
133
80
Computing-Core Courses-45 Credit Hours
# Pre-
Req
Course Title Credit
hours
Proposed
Semester
1 - Introduction to Computing 4 (3+1) 1
2 - Programming Fundamentals 4 (3+1) 1
3 2 Object Oriented Programming 4 (3+1) 2
4 - Discrete Structures 3 (3-0) 2
5 3 Data Structure and Algorithms 4 (3+1) 3
6 3 Digital Logic Design* 4 (3+1) 3
7 5 Operating Systems 4 (3+1) 4
8 4 Introduction to Database Systems 4 (3+1) 4
9 3 Software Engineering * 4 (3+1) 4
10 6 Computer Communications and
Networks*
4 (3+1) 5
11 - Final Project 6 (0+6) 7,8
*: Labs preferred in these courses.  However, implementation details are
left upon the concerned Institutes.
Elective Computing and Software Engineering Courses
(15/133)
Domain Specific Elective Courses (6/133)
In-depth treatment of one of the following SE Application Domains should be
offered in the form of set of two to three courses of 3 credits each in the
selected domain. The list below is by no means exhaustive. Institutions may
add new domains.
Each domain treatment should be organized as domain introduction, computing
concept of the domains and the domain specific computing examples with
general sprit of implementation using SE principles. Common domains may
include banking, insurance, oil exploration; textile and garments; agriculture,
medicine, defense, etc.
Domains Topics /Component Cr
1 IS Enterprise
Systems
Engineering
ERP Systems, SCM  Systems,
CRM Systems
6
2 NS Net-Centric
Systems
Knowledge and skills in Web-based
Technologies
Depth in networking, Depth in
security
6
3 IS Enterprise
Security
Architecture
Business issues related to security,
Security weaknesses and risk
analysis, Cryptography,
cryptanalysis, steganography, etc.,
Depth in networks
6
81
4 IS Information
Systems
and Data
Processing
Data warehousing, Depth in
databases
Depth in business administration
6
5 IS Financial
and E-
commerce
Systems
Accounting; Finance
Depth in security
6
6 CE Fault
Tolerant and
Survivable
Systems
Knowledge and skills in
heterogeneous, distributed
systems; Depth in security,
Intrusion detection
Failure analysis and recovery
6
7 CE Safety
Critical
Systems
Depth in formal methods, Proof of
correctness, etc.
Knowledge of control systems
6
8 CE Embedded
& Real time
Systems
Hardware for embedded systems
Languages and tools for
development
Depth in timing issues; Hardware
verification
6
9 BI Bio-medical
Systems
Biology and related sciences
Related safety critical systems
knowledge
6
10 SS Scientific
Systems
Depth in related sciences; Depth in
statistics
Visualization and graphics
6
11 TE Telecommu
nication
Systems
Depth in signals, information
theory, etc.
Telephony and telecommunication
protocols
6
12 AS Avionic &
Vehicular
Systems
Mechanical engineering concepts
Related safety critical systems
knowledge
Related embedded and real-time
systems knowledge
6
14 IE Industrial
Process
Systems
Control systems
Industrial engineering and other
relevant areas
Related embedded and real-time
systems knowledge
6
15 ES Multimedia,
game, and
entertainme
nt Systems
Visualization, haptics, and graphics
Depth in human computer interface
design
Depth in networks
6
82
Bachelor of Science in Software Engineering: BS (SE)
Software Engineering Core Courses 15 Credit Hours
Required Software Engineering Courses      (15/133)
# Code Pre-
Req
Course Title Credit
Hours
Semester
1 SE 3,9 Object Oriented Software
Engineering
3 4
2 SE 9 Software Requirements and
Specifications
3 5
3 SE 13 Software Architecture Design 3 6
4 SE 13 Software Vérification and
Validation
3 6
5 SE 9 Software Project Management 3 7
Software Engineering Elective Computing 15 Credit Hours
Elective Computing & Software Engineering Courses (15/133)
(The list below is by no means exhaustive. Institutions may add new course)
# Code Pre-
req
Course Title Credit
hours
1 SE 9 Software Engineering Economics 3 (2+1)
2MG - Information System Audit 3 (2+1)
3 CS 9 Business Process Engineering 3 (2+1)
4 SE 7,10 Distributed Computing 3 (2+1)
5 CS 3 Introduction to Soft Computing 3 (2+1)
6 CS 7,10 Real-time systems 3 (2+1)
7 CS 8 Data Warehousing 3 (2+1)
8 CS 8 Data Mining 3 (2+1)
9 CS 4 Artificial Intelligence 3 (2+1)
10CS 3 Data Security and Encryption 3 (2+1)
16 WN System for
Small &
mobile
Platforms
Depth in human computer
interfaces for small and mobile
platforms, Wireless technology
Related embedded and real-time
systems knowledge
Related telecom systems
knowledge
6
17 AI Artificial
Intelligence
Agent based Systems Machine
learning, Fuzzy logic
Knowledge engineering
6
83
11CS 14 Secure Software Development 3 (2+1)
12CS 4 Automata Theory and Formal
Languages
3
13CS 8 Advance Database Management
Systems
3 (2+1)
14CS 1,4 Introduction to Bioinformatics 3 (2+1)
15CS 33 Bioinformatics Software
Engineering
3 (2+1)
16CS 2 Web-Engineering 3 (2+1)
17CS 9 System Analysis and Design 3
18CS 3 Event Driven Programming 3 (2+1)
19SE 12 Aspect Oriented Software Design 3 (2+1)
20SE 3 Agent Based Computing 3 (2+1)
21SE 20 Cloud Computing 3 (2+1)
22SE - Social Networks 3
23SE - Intro. to Complex Networks 3
24CS 2 Functional Programming 3 (2+1)
25CS 2 Mobile Computing 3 (2+1)
26SE 9 Formal Methods 3
Computing Requirements-Supporting Sciences 12 Credit hours
(refer to Computing part)
Elective Supporting Courses (9/130)
(The list below is by no means exhaustive. Institutions may add new course)
1 MT 1 Advanced Calculus 3
2 MT 3 Numerical and Symbolic Computing 3
3 MT 3 Stochastic Processes 3
4 Sc - Physics-II (Mechanics) 3
5 Sc - Bio-Chemistry 3
6 Sc - Biology/ genetics 3
7 EE 4 Digital Electronics 4 (3+1)
8 Sc -- Software Engineering Economics 3
9 MT -- Computational Linear Algebra 3
10MT -- Operation Research 3
11MT -- Simulation and Modeling 3
12 CS -- Natural Language Processing 3
84
Computing Requirements-General Education   15 Credit Hours
(Refer to Computing part)
Elective General Education Courses (12/130)
(The list below is by no means exhaustive. Institutions may add new course)
1 SS - English Literature 3 5
2 SS - Economics 3 7
3 SS - Sociology 3 2-6
4 SS - Psychology 3 6
5 SS - International Relations 3 7
6 HU - Foreign Language (Arabic, French,
German, etc.)
3 7-8
7 MG - Information System Audit 3 7
8 MG - Principles of  Management 3 4
9 MG - Human Resource Management 3 5
10 MG - Marketing 3 6-7
11 MG - Accounting and Finance 3 5-7
Sample Scheme of Study for BS (SE) 4-year Programme (8
Semesters) (130 Credit Hours)
Semester-wise 4-Year Plan
Semester 1
Cr.
Hrs. Semester 2
Cr.
Hrs.
Introduction to Computing
4
(3+1)
Calculus and Analytical
Geometry 3
Programming
Fundamentals
4
(3+1)
Object Oriented
Programming 4 (3+1)
Discrete Structures 3 Supporting Elective-I 3
Physics 3 GE/University Elective-I 3
English-I (Functional
English) 3
English-II (Communication
Skills) 3
Islamic Studies/Ethics 2
17 18
Semester 3
Cr.
Hrs. Semester 4
Cr.
Hrs.
Software Engineering 3
Object Oriented Software
Engineering 4 (3+1)
Data Structures and
Algorithms
4
(3+1) Supporting Elective-II 3
Digital Logic & Design
4
(3+1) GE/University Elective II 3
Linear Algebra 3
Introduction to Database
Systems 4(3+1)
Pakistan Studies 2
85
Operating Systems
4
(3+1)
18 16
Semester 5
Cr.
Hrs. Semester 6
Cr.
Hrs.
Software Requirement  and
Specifications 3 GE/University Elective III 3
Probability and Statistics 3
Software Verification and
Validation 3
Computer Communication
and Networks
4
(3+1)
Software Architecture &
Design 3
SE Elective I 3
Human Computer
Interaction 3
Supporting Elective III 3
SE Application Domain
Elective I 3
SE Elective II 3
English-III (Technical and
Report Writing) 3
Total 19 Total 18
Semester 7
Cr.
Hrs. Semester 8
Cr.
Hrs.
Final Year Project 3 Final Year Project 3
Software Project
Management 3 SE Elective III 3
Professional Practice 3 SE Elective IV 3
SE Application Domain
Elective –II 3 SE Elective V 3
GE/University Elective IV 3
Total 15 Total 12
BS (SE)-Software Engineering (Core)
Course Name: Object Oriented Software Engineering
Credit Hours: 4
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming
Course Outline:
Introduction to Software Engineering, Modeling with UML, Project
Organization and Communication, Requirements Elicitation, Analyses,
System Design: Decomposing the System,  System Design: Addressing
Design Goals, Object Design: Reusing Pattern Solutions,  Object Design:
Specifying Interfaces,  Mapping Models to Code,  Testing,  Rationale
Management,  Configuration  Management,  Project Management,  Software
Life Cycle,  Methodologies: Putting It All Together.
86
Reference Materials:
1. Object-Oriented Software Engineering: Using UML, Patterns, and Java,
Bernd Bruegge, Allen H. Dutoit, Prentice Hall, 2010 ( or Latest Edition)
2. Object-Oriented Software Construction, Bertrand Meyer, 2nd Edition,
Prentice Hall in 1997 (or Latest Edition)
3. Formal Methods in Computing, M. Ferenczi, and Andras Pataricza ,
Akademiai Kiao, 2005 ( or Latest Edition)
4. Code Complete: A practical handbook of software construction, Microsoft
Press, 2004. (or Latest Edition)
5. Software Engineering, Ian Sommerville, 8th edition, Addison & Wesley.
2006 (or Latest Edition)
Course Name: Software Requirements and Specifications
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Introduction to Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Definition of Requirements Engineering and role in system development,
Fundamental concepts and activities of Requirements Engineering,
Information elicitation techniques, Modeling scenarios.
Fundamentals of goal-oriented Requirements Engineering, Modelling
behavioural goals, Modelling quality goals, Goal modelling heuristics, Object
modelling for Requirements Engineering, Object modelling notations, Object
modelling heuristics, Identifying objects from goals, Modelling Use Cases and
state machines, Deriving operational requirements from goals, Requirements
Specification, Requirements verification and validation.
Management of inconsistency and conflict, Techniques for requirements
evaluation, selection and prioritization; Requirements management;
Requirements traceability
Reference Materials:
1. Requirements Engineering: Processes and Techniques, Gerald Kotonya
and Sommerville, John-Wiley Sons, 1998 (or Latest Edition).
2. Software Requirements, Karl E. Wiegers, Microsoft Press, 2003(or Latest
Edition).
3. Software Requirements Specification, David Tuffley, CreateSpace
Independent Publishing Platform, 2010 (or Latest Edition).
4. System Requirements Engineering, Loucopoulos and Karakostas,
McGraw-Hill, 1995 (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Software Design and Architecture
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Introduction to the discipline of design, generic design processes, and design
management; software product design, including analysis activities such as
87
needs elicitation and documentation, requirements development activities
such as requirements specification and validation, prototyping, and use case
modelling; engineering design analysis, including conceptual modelling and
both architectural and detailed design; survey of  patterns in software design,
including architectural styles and common mid-level design patterns.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Architecture and Design Illuminated, Kai Qian, Xiang Fu, Lixin
Tao, Chong-Wei Xu, Jorge L. Diaz-Herrera, Jones and Bartlett Publishers,
1st Edition, 2009 (or Latest Edition).
2. Introduction to Software Engineering Design: Processes, Principles and
Patterns with UML2, Christopher Fox, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2006
(or Latest Edition).
3. Software Engineering Design: Theory and Practice, Carlos Otero, CRC
Press, 2012 (or Latest Edition).
4. Software Engineering Techniques: Design for Quality, Krzysztof Sacha,
Springer, 2006 (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Software Verification and Validation
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: (Intro to) Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Introduction to software quality assurance, The Quality Challenge, Quality
Control v/s Quality Assurance, Quality Assurance in Software Projects
(Phases), Principles and Practices, Quality Management, Quality Assurance
and Standards, Quality Planning and Quality Control, Verification and
Validation, Planning Verification and Validation, Critical System Validation,
Reliability Validation, Safety Assurance, Security assessment, Inspections
and reviews, Principles of software validation, Software verification, Planning
for Software Quality Assurance, Software Quality Assurance (SQA) Plans,
SQA-Organizational Level Initiatives, SQA Planning (Observations, Numbers,
Results), Software Testing, Specification based test construction techniques,
White-box and grey-box testing, Others comprehensive software testing
techniques for SDLC, Control flow oriented test construction techniques, Data
flow oriented test construction techniques, Clean-room approach to quality
assurance, Product Quality and Process Quality, Standards for process
quality and standards for product quality, Walkthroughs and Inspections,
Structure, Checklist, Audits, Roles and Responsibilities (Reviews,
Inspections, etc), How to make Reviews and Inspections most effective.
Reference Materials:
1. Fundamentals of Software Testing, Bernard Hom, Wiley, 2012, (or Latest
Edition).
2. “Software Quality Assurance: Principles and Practice”, Nina S. Godbole,
Alpha Science, 2004 (or Latest Edition).
88
3. Software Quality Engineering: Testing, Quality Assurance, and
Quantifiable Improvement, Jeff Tian, John-Wiley & sons, 2005 (or Latest
Edition).
4. Software Testing in the Real World: Improving the Process, Kit, Edward,
Addison-Wesley, 1998 (or Latest Edition).
5. Perfect Software: And other illusions about testing, Gerald M. Weinberg,
Dorest House, 2008 (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Software Project Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: (Intro. to) Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Software Crisis and Software Engineering, Classic Mistakes, Overview of
Project Management, PMI Process Groups, Software project Phases, Project
charter, Statement of Work (SOW), Planning Phase: Development lifecycle
models, matching lifecycles to projects, Project plans, Work Breakdown
Structures (WBS), Estimation of effort and cost (Expert Judgment, FP and
Use Case point methods), Scheduling: Project network diagram
fundamentals, CPM, PERT, Gantt charts, Critical chain scheduling, Using
MS-Project, Assigning Resources, Resource leveling, Team models,
Managing conflict and motivating, Project Monitoring and Control: Status
reporting, Project metrics, EVM, Communications Techniques, Risk
management and Change control Project Recovery, Documentation,
Cutover/Migration, Post Project Reviews, Closing.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Project Management, Bob Hughes, Mike Cotterell, McGraw-Hill
Higher Education, 5th Edition, 2009 (or Latest Edition).
2. The Software Project Manager's Handbook: Principles that work at work,
Dwayne Phillips, IEEE Computer Society Press and Wiley Interscience,
2nd Edition, 2004 (or Latest Edition).
89
BS (SE) - Software Engineering Courses (Electives)
Course Name: Software Engineering Economics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: (Intro. to) Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Programming aspects, economic aspects, human relations aspects, software
trends: cost, social impact, the plurality of SE Means, The GOALS Approach
to Software Engineering, The Software Work Breakdown Structure (WBS),
Software Maintenance, introduction to COCOMO, definitions and
assumptions, development effort and schedule, phase distribution, The
Raylaigh Distribution, interpolation, basic software maintenance effort
estimation. Performance Models, Optimal Performance, Sensitivity Analysis,
Cost-Effectiveness Models.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Engineering Economics, Boehm, Prentice Hall, 1981(or Latest
Edition).
2. Software Cost Estimation with COCOMO II, Boehm et al., Prentice Hall,
2000 (or Latest Edition).
3. Making the Software Business Case: Improvement, Reifer, Don, Addison
Wesley, 2001, (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Information System Audit
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
IS Audit charter, Polices, Procedures, Audit computer networks and
communication, Auditing software development, Acquisition, Maintenance,
Auditing IT infrastructure, Auditing Management and Organization, Business
process re-engineering: IS audit proposal, report, evidence and follow-up,
complaint to standard, Enterprise service agreement, IP pro count   policies
and process, Backup and procedures
Reference Materials:
1. Auditing Information Systems, Jack J. Champlain, John-Wiley & Sons,
2003 (or Latest Edition).
2. Information Systems Control and Audit, Ron Weber, Pearson, 2011 (or
Latest Edition).
3. CISA Review Manual, Information System Audit and Control Association,
2004, www.isaca.org.
90
Course Name: Business Process Re-Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Introduction to Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Why Focus on Business Processes?  Setting the Stage for Business
Process; Organizing for Process Improvement; Flowcharting: Drawing a
Process Picture; Understanding the Process Characteristics; Streamlining the
Process; Measurements, Feedback, and Action; Process Qualification;
Measurements, Feedback, and Action.
Reference Materials:
1. Business Process Improvement; The Breakthrough Strategy for Total
Quality, Productivity, and Competitiveness, H. J. Harrington,
Course Name: Distributed Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Operating Systems, Computer
Communications and Networks
Course Outline:
Introduction to distributed systems, Distributed data, Distributed processing
system, Multithreading, Thread synchronization, Resource brokerage,
Resource monitoring, Load balancing, Storage elements, Batch processing
models, Middle layer architecture, Resource clustering, RMI, CORBA, Net,
MPI. Mobile and ubiquitous computing, Web Services, Coordination of web
services with the grid.
Reference Materials:
1. Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms, Tanenbaum, 2nd Edition,
2002 (or Latest edition).
2. Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design, George Coulouris, Jean
Dollimore, Tim Kindberg, Gordon Blair, 2011(or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Introduction to Soft Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming
Course Outline:
Neural Networks, Classification Tree, Naïve Bayes, Applications of Predictive
Models, Probabilistic Reasoning using Bayesian Networks: Knowledge
Acquisition, Belief Updating, Exact and Simulation-based Propagation
Algorithms, Parameter and Structure Learning. Influence Nets, Dempster-
Shafter Theory of Belief Functions, Fuzzy Logic.
91
Reference Materials:
1. “Bayesian Artificial Intelligence”, Kevin Korb, Ann Nicholson, CRC Press,
2010 (or Latest Edition).
2. “Artificial Intelligence Illuminated”, Ben Coppin, Jones and Bartlett, 2004
(or Latest Edition).
3. “Soft Computing & Intelligent Systems Design: Theory, Tools and
Applications”, Fakhreddine O. Karray, Clarence W De Silva, Addison-
Wesley, 1st. Edition, 2005 (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Real Time Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Operating Systems
Course Outlines:
Introduction to Real-Time and Embedded Systems: Reference Model, Hard
versus soft real-time, Job Scheduling: Clock driven scheduling algorithms,
Priority driven scheduling algorithms, Schedulers in commodity and real-time
operating systems, Resource access control: Algorithms, Implementation,
Real-time communication: On best-effort networks, Enhanced quality of
service.
Reference Material:
1. Real-Time Systems, Jane W. S. Liu, Prentice Hall, 1st Edition, 2000 (or
Latest Edition).
2. Real-Time Systems: Design Principles for Distributed Embedded
Applications,   Hermann Kopetz, Springer; 2nd Edition, 2011, (or Latest
Edition).
3. Real-Time Systems Design and Analysis: Tools for the Practitioner, Phillip
A. Laplante, Seppo J. Ovaska, Wiley-IEEE Press; 4th Edition, 2011 (or
Latest Edition).
Course Name: Introduction to Complex Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Fundamentals of networks, Mathematics of Graphs and Networks, Measures
and Metrics Degree and eccentricity Centrality,  Shortest path between
Centrality, Clustering coefficient, Matching index, Large-scale Nature of
Networks, Network Models (Erdos-Renyi random, Small-world , Scale-free
network models, Calculation of basic measures in networks), Network
Modeling tools overview (Pajek, Network Workbench, Gephi, Visone,
Cytoscape, Centibin etc.), Evolution of Online Social networks: Facebook,
Google+, Twitter, LinkedIn and Beyond,  Social Network Analysis,  Modeling
Software Components as Agents in Networks
92
Reference Materials:
1. Networks: An Introduction by Mark Newman, Oxford University Press,
2010 (latest Ed.)
2. Exploratory Social Network Analysis with Pajek (Structural Analysis in the
Social Sciences) by Wouter De Nooy, Andrej Mrvar and Vladimir Batagelj,
Cambridge University Press, 2011 (latest Ed.)
3. Six Degrees: The Science of a Connected Age, Duncan J. Watts, Vintage,
2004 (latest Ed).
Course Name: Data Warehousing
Course Structure: Lectures: 2 Lab: 1 Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Introduction to Database Systems
Course Outline:
Need for DW, Evolution of Business intelligence, DW building blocks, Intro to
data marts, architectural types, Trends, Web enabled DW, Planning and
Project management, Defining Requirements, Metadata, Storage
Specifications, Info delivery strategy, Architectural components and
frameworks, Tools, Types of functional areas for metadata, Schemas, Star
Schema, Dimensional Modelling, Data Extraction, Transformation and
loading, OLAP Models, Data Quality.
Reference Material:
1. Data warehousing fundamentals for IT Professionals by Paulraj ponniah,
(2011). John Wiley and Sons. (Latest Edition)
Course Name: Data Mining
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Introduction to Database Systems
Course Outline:
Concepts of Data mining, Data Preparation Techniques: outlier and missing
data analysis, Data Reduction Techniques, learning methods in Data mining,
Statistical Methods in Data Mining, Cluster Analysis, hierarchal,
agglomerative and Naïve Bayesian methods, Decision Trees and Decision
Rules, Association Rules, Other Soft Computing Approaches in Data Mining,
Artificial Neural Networks, Fuzzy Logic and Fuzzy Set Theory, Genetic
Algorithm, evolutionary algorithms.
Reference Materials:
1. Mehmed Kantatardzic, Data Mining: Concepts, Models, Methods, and
Algorithms, 2003, John Wiley and Sons. (latest edition)
2. Margaret H. Dunham and S. Sridhar, Data Mining, Introductory and
Advanced Topics, 2006, Pearson Education, (latest edition)
3. David Hand, Heikki MAnnila and Padhraic Smyth, Principles of Data
Mining, 2001, The MIT Press. (latest edition)
93
Course Name: Artificial Intelligence
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures, Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Introduction to Common Lisp. AI classical systems: General Problem Solver,
rules, simple search, means-ends analysis. ELIZA, pattern matching, rule
based translators, OPS-5. Knowledge Representation: Natural language,
rules, productions, predicate logic, semantic networks, frames, objects,
scripts. Search: Depth first search, breadth first search, best first search, hill
climbing, min-max search, A* search. Symbolic Mathematics: student, solving
algebra problems, translating English equations, solving algebraic equations,
simplification rules, re-write rules, meta-rules, Macsyma, PRESS, ATLAS.
Logic Programming: Resolution, unification, horn-clause logic, Prolog, Prolog
programming. Sample case studies of shells and Knowledge Based Systems.
A brief appreciation of state of the art computational techniques like neural
networks, genetic algorithm, fuzzy sets.
Reference Materials:
1. Artificial Intelligence by Luger, 6th Edition (latest), Pearson Education.
2. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, Russell and Norvig, 3rd Edition
(latest), Pearson Education.
Course Name: Data Security and Encryption
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures, Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
The course consists of three parts: mathematical background, cryptography,
and network security. The first part (mathematical background) introduces the
principle of number theory and some results from probability theory, including
Primes, random numbers, modular arithmetic and discrete logarithms. The
second part (cryptography) covers cryptographic algorithms and design
principles, including conventional and symmetric encryption (DES, IDEA,
Blowfish, Rijndael, RC-4, RC-5), public key or asymmetric encryption (RSA,
Diffie-Hellman), key management, hash functions (MD5, SHA-1, RIPEMD-
160, HMAC), digital signatures, and certificates. The third part (network
security) deals with practical applications that have been implemented and
are in use to provide network security, including authentication protocols
(X.509, Kerberos), electronic mail security (S/MIME, PGP), web security and
protocols for secure electronic commerce (IPSec, SSL, TLS, SET).
Reference Material:
1. Cryptography and Network Security: Principles and Practice, William
Stallings, 6th edition (latest), Prentice Hall, 2005.
94
Course Name: Secure Software Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Software Architecture and Design
Course Outline:
Different techniques to prevent or detect problems including: threat modeling,
check lists and coding standards, To grasp static analysis tools, Understand
code reviews, typing and static analysis, To comprehend language-based
security (or platform-based security), security middleware and runtime
monitoring.
Reference Materials:
1. Building Secure Software, by John Viega and Gary McGraw. Addison-
Wesley, 2002. (latest edition)
2. The 24 Deadly Sins of Software Security, by Michael Howard, David
LeBlanc and John Viega, McGraw-Hill, 2009 (latest edition)
3. Secure Coding: Principles & Practices, by Mark G. Graff and Kenneth R.
van Wyk. O'Reilly, 2003.  (latest edition)
4. Writing Secure Code, by Michael Howard and David LeBlanc, Microsoft
Press, 2002.  (latest edition).
Course Name: Theory of Automata and Formal Languages
Course Structure: Lectures: 3 / Labs: 0
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures, Data Structures and Algorithms
Course Outline:
Finite State Models: Language definitions preliminaries, Regular
expressions/Regular languages, Finite automata (Fas), Transition graphs
(TGs), NFAs, kleene’s theorem, Transducers (automata with output),
Pumping lemma and non regular language Grammars and PDA: Context free
grammars, Derivations, derivation trees and ambiguity, Simplifying  CFLs,
Normal form grammars and parsing, Push-down Automata, Pumping lemma
and non-context free languages, Decidability, Chomsky’s hierarchy of
grammars Turing Machines Theory: Turing machines, Post machine,
Variations on TM, TM encoding, Universal Turing Machine, Context sensitive
Grammars, Defining Computers by TMs.
Reference Materials:
1. Formal Languages and Automata, Peter Linz, Jones and Bartlett
Learning, 5th Edition, 2011 (Latest edition)
2. Introduction to Computer Theory, by Denial Cohen, John Wiley & Sons,
Inc., 1996 (Latest edition)
3. Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages and Computation, by J
Hopcraft, D. Ullman, 2006. (Latest edition)
4. Languages and Machines, An Into to the Theory of Comp. Sc., by Thomas
A. Sudkamp. (Latest edition)
95
Course Name: Introduction to Bioinformatics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Introduction to Computing, Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Origin of the field , Advances in biology and computers , Brief overview of key
Biological concepts related to DNA, RNA, nucleotides, amino acids, proteins,
protein interaction, Databases and web resources, Algorithms how to write
them, and calculate their complexities, etc. , Nucleotide analysis principals
and tools , Sequence similarity, Dot Matrix, Dynamic Programming for local ,
Global pair wise alignment using Smith-Waterman and Needle-Wunsch
algorithms, Gap penalties including Affine gap penalty, Scoring and
Substitution Matrices (PAM & BLOSUM), Multiple Sequence Alignment,
BLAST and FASTA, etc., Dynamic programming algorithms, Statistical
models, Artificial intelligence algorithms, Protein analysis including protein
structure prediction from a sequence. , Phylogenetics, Mutations, evolution
and protein families, clustering, predictions using distance methods (such as
UPGMA), etc.
Reference Materials:
1. Introduction to Bioinformatics by T K Attwood, D J Parry-Smith, Samiron
Phukan, Pearson Education (Latest edition)
2. Introduction to Bioinformatics by Arthur Lesk
3. Algorithms in Bioinformatics by Gary Benson, Roderic Page, Springer
4. Algorithmic Aspects of Bioinformatics by Hans-Joachim Bockenhauer,
Dirk Bongartz, Springer.
Course Name: Web Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Introduction, Web Basics, Servlets and Sessions, Java Server Pages, XML
and the Web Database Access for Web Applications, Design Patterns for
Web Applications, Security and Privacy, Performance and Scalability,
Performance Analysis, WAP Protocol, Wireless application development,
Android Programming.
Reference Materials:
1. Web Engineering: A Practitioners’ Approach, Roger S. Pressman,
McGraw Hill (2008) or Latest Edition
2. Web Engineering: The Discipline of Systematic Development of Web
Applications, Gerti Kappel, Birgit Prýýll, Siegfried Reich and Werner
Retschitzegger, McGraw-Hill, (2006) or Latest Edition
3. Web Engineering, Emilia Mendes and Nile Mosley, Springer Verlag,
(2010) or Latest Edition.
96
Course Name: Human Computer Interaction
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Introduction to Software Engineering
Course Outlines:
The Human, Computer and Interaction, Usability paradigm and principles,
Introduction to design basics, HCI in software process, Design rules,
prototyping, evaluation techniques, task analysis, Universal design and User
support and Computer Supported Cooperative Work; Introduction to
specialized topics such as Groupware, pervasive and ubiquitous applications.
Reference Materials:
1. “Human-Computer Interaction”, Alan Dix, Computing Department,
Lancaster University Janet E. Finlay, Leeds Metropolitan University,
Gregory D. Abowd, Georgia Institute of Technology, Russell Beale,
University of Birmingham ISBN-10: 0130461091
ISBN-13: 9780130461094 Publisher: Prentice Hall 3rd Ed or Latest Edition
2. “Designing the User Interface: Strategies for Effective Human-Computer
Interaction”, Ben Shneiderman, University of Maryland Catherine Plaisant,
University of Maryland ISBN-10: 0321197860 ISBN-13: 9780321197863
Publisher: Addison-Wesley 4th Ed or Latest Edition.
Course Name: System Analysis and Design
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Concept of Entity; Relationships; System Outputs; System Inputs; People
and Organizations; products; ordering of products; shipments; Invoicing;
Account and Budgeting; Human resources; Creating the Data Warehouse
Data model from the Enterprise Data Model.
Reference Materials:
1. The Data Model Resource, Revised Edition Volume 1; A Library of
Universal Data Models for All Enterprises; Len Silverston; John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.; (2001) or Latest Edition.
Course Name: Event Driven Programming
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming
Course Outline:
Introduction to the course and its importance, history and course format ,
Introduction to C# or Java, Event-driven programming basics, Maintaining
state, On-demand Rendering in event-driven applications, Timer and
perpetual tasks, Multithreading and event-driven programming, A
"window/frame" as a drawing surface + event-handling unit , Interesting
97
widgets, GUI design patterns, Performance issues, Gui on mobile
devices/smart phones.
Reference Materials:
1. Event Processing in Action, Opher Etzion (Latest Edition)
2. Windows Presentation Foundation Unleashed, Adam Nathan (Latest
Edition)
3. Event-Based Programming: Taking Events to the Limit, Ted Faison,
Apress (Latest Edition)
Course Name: Aspect Oriented Software Design
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Software Engineering
Course Outline:
AOSD is a novel programming paradigm that aims at a better separation of
concerns. AOSD emerged from the academic world in the late nineties and
experiences a significant acceptance by industry. The topics covered in the
course are:
Separation of Concerns and AOSD, Aspect-Oriented Programming in Aspect
J, Case study: Design Patterns in AOP, Framework-based AOP approaches,
Case study: Aspects in Enterprise Software, Current research topics in
AOSD
Reference Materials:
1. Using Aspect-Oriented Programming for Trustworthy Software
Development, Vladimir O. Safonov, John Wiley and Sons (2008) or Latest
Edition
2. Aspect in Action: Enterprise AOP with Spring Applications, Ramnivas
Laddad. Manning Publication Co. (2009) or Latest Edition.
Course Name: Agent Based Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Programming
Course Outlines:
Introduction to Agent-based Computing, Agent-based Models, Modeling
Complex Real-world Problems using Agents, Introduction to Net Logo,
Describing ABMs, From Animation to Science, Model Verification &
Validation, Model Design, Emergence, Observation, Adaptive Behaviour,
Prediction, Software Multiagent Systems, Intelligent Agents, Deductive
Reasoning Agents, Agent Methodologies.
98
Reference Materials:
1. Agent-Based and Individual-Based Modeling: A Practical Introduction,
Steven F. Railsback and Volker Grimm (Latest Edition)
2. An Introduction to MultiAgent Systems, Michael Woodridge, Wiley (Latest
Edition)
3. Managing Business Complexity: Discovering Strategic Solutions with
Agent-Based Modelling and Simulation, Michael J. North and Charles M.
Macal, Oxford University Press (Latest Edition)
4. Cognitive Agent-based Computing-I, Muaz A. Niazi and Amir Hussain,
Springer (Latest Edition).
Course Name: Cloud Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Distributed Computing
Course Outline:
Datacenter Architectures, Cloud Stack , Technology Trends, Consistency,
Availability, Partitions, Cluster File Systems, Data-flow Computation
Frameworks, Key-Value Store and Interactive Query Systems, Big Data in
the Clouds, Geographic distributed Storage, Programming Languages for the
Cloud, DBases in the Cloud, In-Memory Frameworks, Google file system,
Hadoop file system, MapReduce, OSes and Clouds Networking: topologies,
Networking: Traffic Management, Networking: Transport Protocol
Improvements, Security, Scheduling and Resource Management in clouds,
Software Level Agreements.
Reference Materials:
1. Handbook of Cloud Computing, Borko Furht. Springer (2010) or Latest
Edition
2. Cloud Computing:  SaaS, PaaS, IaaS, Virtualization, Business Models,
Mobile, Security, and More, Kris Jamsa Jones & Bartlett Publishers,
(2012) or Latest Edition
3. Cloud Computing and SOA: Convergence in your enterprise, David
Linthicum (2009), Addison Wesley (Latest Edition)
4. Distributed File Systems: Hadoop, Lustre, Google File System, Andrew
File System, Off system, Distributed File System”, Ceph. General books
LLC. (2010) or Latest Edition
5. Map Reduce Design Patterns, Donald Miner and Adam Shook. O’ Reilly
and Sons, (2012) or Latest Edition
99
Course Name: Social Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Link analysis and network community detection, diffusion and information
propagation on the web, virus outbreak detection in networks, and
connections with work in the social sciences and economics.
Reference Material:
1. Social and Economic Networks, Mathew O Jackson, Princeton University
Press, (2010). or Latest Edition
Course Name: Functional Programming
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Introduction. Functions, lists and Recursion; map, filter, fold; binding;
algebraic data types, abstract types; type classes; logic and programs;
applications and domains for functional programming.
Reference Materials:
1. The Craft of Functional Programming, Simon Thompson, Addison Wesley.
(Latest Edition)
2. Programming in Haskell, Graham Hutton, Cambridge University Press.
(Latest Edition)
3. The Haskell School of Expression, Paul Hudak, Cambridge University
Press, (Latest Edition).
Course Name: Mobile Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals.
Course Outline:
Types of Mobile Applications How are Users of Mobile Devices
(Smartphones) Different from Users of Other Devices? Technologies
Involved in Application Development. Differences from Desktop and Server
Side Software Development, Software Design Concerns, Stakeholders in
mobile applications: manufacturers, network operators, consumers,
application developers, content providers, Android Platform Architecture and
Application Fundamentals, Android application development tools. User
Interface components, Data Storage and Content Providers, Services,
Broadcast Receivers, Application Resources and other android structures,
Using Android platform APIs, Web applications, Application Testing
Framework, Introduction to games for mobile platforms, Introduction to
100
mobile gaming engines. Overview of game development using a game
engine, Apple iOS, Java ME, Windows Phone, Comparison and limitations of
popular Cross platform development tools.
Reference Materials:
1. Pro Android 4,Satya Komatineni and Dave MacLean, Professional Apress,
(Latest Edition)
2. The Busy Coder's Guide to Android Development, Mark Murphy,
CommonsWare, LLC. (Latest Edition)
3. Professional Android 4 Application Development, Reto Meier, Wrox.
(Latest Edition)
4. Beginning Android Games, Mario Zechner et al, Apress, (Latest Edition)
5. Designing the Mobile User Experience, Barbara Ballard, Wiley. (Latest
Edition).
Elective Supporting Courses
Course Name: Linear Algebra
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Calculus
Course Outline:
Background matrix algebra, measuring vectors, matrices, subspaces, and
linear system sensitivity, numerical matrix algebra, Gaussian elimination,
special linear systems, orthogonalization and least squares methods, the
unsymmetrical eigenvalues problem, the symmetric eigenvalues problem,
Lanczos methods, iterative methods for linear systems, functions of matrices.
Introduction of discrete transforms, discrete Fourier and cosine transforms
and simple applications.  Error analysis and estimation for all techniques
studied.
Sample labs and assignments:
- Implementation and testing of algorithms for typical linear algebra
problems, including an analysis of errors.
Reference Materials:
1. Matrix Computations, G. Golub, and C. Van Loan, (3/e), (1996) or Latest
Edition
2. Computational Methods of Linear Algebra, G. Sewell, (2/e), (2005) or
Latest Edition
3. Wavelets Made Easy, Y. Nievergelt, (1999) or Latest Edition
101
Course Name: Operations Research
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics
Course Outline:
Introduction to mathematical modeling. Linear program models, simplex
method for solving LP models, sensitivity analysis, other solution techniques
for LP models, specialized LP models (transport, assignment, etc.).  Network
based models, shortest path, min weight spanning tree, max flow,
PERT/CPM. Decision models, dynamic programming, games theory.
Probabilistic models, expected return models, Markov chains, stochastic
processes, queuing models, stochastic inventory models.
Sample labs and assignments:
Given a scenario, select and develop an appropriate model, solve it for the
given parameters, and analyze the sensitivity of the solution to changes in
the problem parameters.
Reference Materials:
1. Operations Research: An Introduction, Hamdi A. Taha, (8/e), (2006) or
Latest Edition
2. Introduction to Operations Research, F.S. Hillier, and G. J. Leibermann,
(8/e), (2005) or Latest Edition
Course Name: Simulation and Modelling
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics, Data Structures
Course Outline:
Introduction to Simulation and Modeling, Discrete-Event Simulation,
Simulation of a Single-Server Queueing System, Alternative Approaches to
Modeling and Simulations; Review of Basic Probability and Statistics;
Estimation of Means, Variances, and Correlations, Confidence Intervals and
Hypothesis Tests for the Mean, The Laws of Large Numbers; Random
number generators; Simulation of discrete, continuous probability
distributions and  empirical distributions; tests on simulated distributions,
rejection method, simulation of multivariate distributions, correlations, and
stochastic processes, simulation of  models of arrival processes, Poisson
Processes, Nonstationary Poisson Processes, Batch Arrivals, tests on
generators, Markov- Chain Monte-Carlo simulations; Variance-Reduction
Techniques.
Reference Materials:
1. Simulation Modelling and Analysis, A.M. Law and W.D. Kelton, McGraw
Hill, (2000) or Latest Edition
2. Discrete-event System Simulation, J. Banks, J.S. Carson and B.L. Nelson,
Prentice Hall International, (1994) or Latest Edition
102
3. Probabilistic Modelling, Mitrani, Cambridge University Press, (1998) or
Latest Edition
4. Simulation and Modelling, Sheldon M. Ross, (2002) or Latest Edition
5. Stochastic Simulations, Brian Ripley. (Latest Edition)
Course Name: Professional Practices
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction, Computing Ethics, Philosophy of Ethics, Ethics and the Internet.
Intellectual Copy Right, Accountability and Auditing, Social Application of
Ethics.
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Ethics, Deborah G. Johnson, Pearson Education (2001) 3rd
edition or Latest Edition
2. Professional Issues in Software Engineering, M.F. Bott et. al. (Latest
Edition).
103
Curriculum for MS Software Engineering, MS (SE)
Eligibility:
1. BS (SE/CS) 4 years degree programme,
OR
2. Computer Science conversion course two years degree programme
referred to as MCS or M.Sc. (Computer Science),
OR
3. BCS 3-year programme degree applicants may be provisionally
admitted in the MS (SE) programme. Candidates will be required to
take additional courses to complete credit hour requirement of min. 130
before being formally enrolled in the MS (SE) programme.
Under eligibility criteria 1-3 the university/department may recommend
additional deficiency courses, from the BS (SE) curriculum, considering the
deficiency of the candidates.
OR
4. 16-years education science/engineering degrees.
Under eligibility criterion 4 candidates will be required to complete the
deficiency coursework prior to the MS (SE) coursework to ensure the
pre-requisite competency in SE.
The deficiency coursework will be determined on the basis of the core
SE courses of the BS (SE) degree.
Duration:
 4 semesters
 30-36 credit hours from graduate Software Engineering courses
including thesis
Degree Requirements:
In order to obtain MS (SE) degree a student must pass a minimum of:
i) Four (4) courses (12 credit hours) from the core courses
AND
ii) Four (4) courses of 12 credit hours graduate elective
courses of which two graduate courses may be taken from
other areas.
AND
iii) Satisfactorily complete a Research Project Thesis of 9
credit hours.
104
Core Courses:
Following two courses are considered as core courses for MS (SE)
Program
S. No. Code Course Title Cr.
Hrs.
Semester
1 SE Requirements Engineering 3 1-2
2 SE Software Quality Assurance 3 1-2
List of Elective Courses:
Candidate has to select a total of four courses from the list of SE electives
including electives offered in the areas to support the research in software
engineering by the university.
Graduate Level SE courses (Institution may add courses to the list of
Electives.)
S.No Course Title Credit
Hours
Semester
1.Software Risk Management 3 2-4
2.Software Measurement and Metrics 3 2-4
3.Software Configuration Management 3 2-4
4.Reliability Engineering 3 2-4
5.Component Based Software Engineering 3 2-4
6.Design Patterns 3 2-4
7.Complex Networks 3 2-4
8.Agent Based Modelling 3 2-4
9.Formal Methods 3 2-4
10.Software Engineering Ontologies 3 2-4
11.Semantic based Software Engineering 3 2-4
12.Model Driven Software Development 3 2-4
13.Software Process Engineering 3 2-4
14.Advanced Web Services 3 2-4
15.Advanced Human Computer Interaction 3 2-4
16.Simulation and Modeling 3 2-4
105
Sample Scheme of Study for MS (SE)
2–year Programme (4 Semesters)
(30 Credit Hours)
Semester 1
S.No. Code Course Title Cr. Hrs.
1 SE Requirements Engineering 3
2 SE Software Quality Assurance 3
3 SE Research Methods
(University Elective I)
3
Semester Total 9
Semester 2
S.No. Code Course Title Cr. Hrs.
1 SE Elective II 3
2 SE Elective III 3
3 SE Elective IV 3
Semester Total 9
Semester 3
S.No. Code Course Title Cr. Hrs.
1 SE Elective V 3
2 SE Thesis (Partial Enrolment) 3
Semester Total 6
Semester 4
S.No. Code Course Title Cr. Hrs.
1 SE Thesis (Full Enrolment) 3
2 SE Elective VI 3
3 SE Semester Total 6
Total Credit Hours 30
Course Descriptions (Core)
Course Name: Requirements Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Role of requirements engineering in system development, Fundamental
concepts and activities of requirements engineering, Information elicitation
techniques, Fundamentals of goal-oriented requirements engineering,
Modeling behavioral goals, Modeling quality goals, Goal modeling heuristics,
Deriving operational requirements from goals, Requirements Specification,
Requirements verification and validation, Management of inconsistency and
conflict, requirements engineering risks, requirement change control board
and process, the role of quality goals in the requirements selection process,
Techniques for requirements evaluation, selection and prioritization;
Requirements management; Requirements traceability and impact analysis.
106
Reference Materials:
1. Software Requirements, Karl E. Wiegers, Microsoft Press, 2003(or Latest
Edition).
2. Software Requirements Specifictaion, David Tuffley, CreateSpace
Independent Publishing Platform, 2010 (or Latest Edition).
3. System Requirements Engineering, Loucopoulos and Karakostas,
McGraw-Hill, 1995(or Latest Edition).
4. Requirements Engineering: Processes and Techniques, Gerald Kotonya
and Sommerville, John-Wiley Sons, 1998 (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Software Quality Assurance
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Software Engineering
Course Outline:
What Is Software Quality: Quality Assurance, Quality Engineering
Software Testing: Testing: Concepts, Issues, and Techniques, Test Activities,
Management, and Automation, Coverage and Usage Testing Based on
Checklists and Partitions, Input Domain Partitioning and Boundary Testing,
Coverage and Usage Testing Based on Finite-State Machines and Markov
Chains, Control Flow, Data Dependency, and Interaction Testing, Testing
Techniques: Adaptation, Specialization, and Integration.
Quality Assurance Beyond Testing: Defect Prevention and Process
Improvement, Software Inspection, Formal Verification, Fault Tolerance and
Failure Containment, Comparing Quality Assurance Techniques and
Activities.
Quantifiable Quality Improvement: Feedback Loop and Activities for
Quantifiable Quality Improvement, Quality Models and Measurements, Defect
Classification and Analysis.
Risk Identification for Quantifiable Quality Improvement, Software Reliability
Engineering.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Quality Engineering: Testing, Quality Assurance, and
Quantifiable Improvement, Jeff Tian, Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Press,
1st Edition, 2005(or Latest Edition).
2. “Mastering Software Quality Assurance: Best Practices, Tools and
Techniques for Software Developers”, Murali Chemuturi, J. Ross
Publishing, 2010 (or Latest Edition).
107
MS (SE) Elective Courses with course outline
Course Name: Software System Architecture
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: System Analysis and Design
Course Outline:
Definition and overview of software architecture, the architecture business
cycle, Understanding and achieving quality attributes, Attribute-driven design,
Documenting software architecture, Evaluating software architecture,
Architecture reuse Life-cycle view of architecture design and analysis
methods, The QAW, a method for eliciting critical quality attributes, such as
availability, performance, security, interoperability, and modifiability,
Architecture Driven Design, Evaluating a software architecture (ATAM,
CBAM, ARID), Principles of sound documentation, View types, styles, and
views; Advanced concepts such as refinement, context diagrams, variability,
software interfaces, and how to document interfaces; Documenting the
behavior of software elements and software systems; Choosing relevant
views; Building a documentation package, Future of Software Design,
Architecture Description Languages , Introduction to AADL , AADL:
Continued , Testing Architectures, Feature Modeling in SPLs, Testing a
Family of Products.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Architecture: Foundations, Theory, and Practice, Taylor,
Medvidovic, and Dashofy, Wiley, 1st Edition, 2009(or Latest Edition).
2. Architecting Software Intensive Systems: A Practitioners Guide, Anthony
J. Lattanze, Auerbach Publications, 2008(or Latest Edition).
3. Software Architecture in Practice, Bass, Clements, and Kazman, 2nd
Edition, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003(or Latest Edition).
4. Evaluating Software Architectures: Methods and Case Studies, Clements,
Kazman, Klein, Addison-Wesley Professional, 2001(or Latest Edition).
5. Software Product Lines: Practices and Patterns, P. Clements and L.
Northrup, Addison-Wesley, 2002(or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Software Risk Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Risk-Management Discovery, Risk-Management Process, Process steps,
inputs, and outputs, Methods and tools, reusable process component.  Risk-
Management Infrastructure, Training metrics, establishing a baseline for
quantitative process improvement, infrastructure, there is no strategic plan in
place to institutionalize risk management. Senior managers, engineering
108
managers, and change agents should benefit from these organizational
building blocks.
Risk-Management Implementation, standard process, Risk management
activities, lifecycle planning, budgeting, scheduling, and staffing.  Crisis and
Control, risk-management evolution stages, Effective and ineffective
practices.
Reference Materials:
1. Managing Risk: Methods for Software Systems Development, Elaine M.
Hall, Addison-Wesley(or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Software Measurements & Metrics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Introduction to foundations of measurement theory, models of software
engineering measurement, software products metrics, software process
metrics and measuring management. Measurement theory (overview of
software metrics, basics of measurement theory, goal-based framework for
software measurement, empirical investigation in software engineering).
Software product and process measurements (measuring internal product
attributes: size and structure, measuring external product attributes: quality,
measuring cost and effort, measuring software reliability, software test
metrics, object-oriented metrics) Measurement management
Reference Materials:
1. A Rigorous and Practical Approach Software Metrics, N.E. Fenton, S.L.
Pfleeger, PWS Publishing (or Latest Edition).
2. Metrics and Models in Software Quality Engineering, Stephen H. Kan,
Addison-Wesley Professional (or Latest Edition).
3. Software Engineering Measurement, John C. Munson, Auerbach
Publications (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Software Configuration Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: System Analysis and Design
Course Outlines:
Source Code Management, Build Engineering, Environment Configuration,
Change Control, Release Management, Deployment, Architecting Your
Application for CM, Hardware Configuration Management, Rightsizing Your
Processes, Overcoming Resistance to Change, Personality and CM: A
109
Psychologist Loods at the Workplace, Learning From Mistakes, Establishing
IT Controls and Compliance, Industry Standards and Framework.
Reference Materials:
1 Software configuration management handbook, Alexis Leon, Artech
House, 2005 (or Latest Edition)
2 Software Configuration Management Patterns: Effective Teamwork,
Practical Integration, Stephen P. Berczuk, Brad Appleton, Addison
Wesley, 2004 (or Latest Edition).
Course Name: Component Based Software Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outlines:
Introduction to CBSE, Reuse, Basic Concepts in CBSE, Modeling
components with UML, Open-COM component model, Fractal component
model, Component Models and Technology, Component contracts
component specification techniques, Component integration and Predictable
composition, Service Oriented Computing - Key Concepts and Principles,
SOA.
Reference Materials:
1. Component Software: Beyond Object Oriented Programming, Clemens
Szyperski, Second Edition, Addison Wesley, 2002 (latest ed.).
2. Building reliable component based software systems, Ivica Crnkovic,
Magnus Larsson. Artech House, 2002 (latest ed.).
3. Service-oriented Computing: Semantics, Processes, Agents, Munindar P.
Singh and Michael N. Huhns, 2005 (latest ed.)
Course Name: Design Patterns
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Overview of Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, Design Patterns
(Concepts, Major issues, Reuse of ideas), Creational Patterns, Structural
Patterns, Behavioral Patterns. Applications of design patterns for:
Organization of Work, Access Control, Service Variation and Service
Extension, Object Management and Adaptation, Architectural Patterns,
Patterns for Distribution, Patterns for Interactive Systems, Adaptable
Systems.
Frameworks and Patterns, Idea of frameworks, Patterns for flexibility,
Achieving benefits of frameworks, Failures of frameworks.
110
Reference Materials:
1. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable OO Software, Ralph Johnson,
John Vlissides, Richard Helm, Erich Gamma, Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1994 (latest ed.)
2. Pattern Hatching: Design Patterns Applied, Vlissides, Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1998.
Course Name: Complex Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
What are networks and why networks, Erdos-Renyi random, small-world and
scale-free network models, Calculation of basic measures in networks,
Degree and eccentricity Centrality, Shortest path between start and end
nodes, case study of calculation, Clustering coefficient, Matching index and
case study, Network tools overview, Pajek, Network Workbench, Gephi,
Visone, Cytoscape, Centibin, Network Simulation (Agent-based simulation of
networks), Biological networks, Social Networks, Scientometric study using
Networks, Modelling Communication Networks as graphs/networks, Disk
Graph models such as WSNs.
Reference Materials:
1. Dynamical Processes on Complex Networks, Alain Barrat, Marc
Barthélemy, Alessandro Vespignani, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
(latest ed.)
2. The Structure and Dynamics of Networks, Mark Newman, Albert-Lazlo
Barabasi, Duncan J. Watts, Princeton University Press, 2006 (latest ed.)
3. Exploratory Social Network Analysis with Pajek (Structural Analysis in the
Social Sciences), Wouter De Nooy, Andrej Mrvar and Vladimir Batagelj,
Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 2011 (latest ed.)
4. Analysis of Biological Networks (Wiley Series in Bioinformatics), Björn H.
Junker and Falk Schreiber, Wiley-Interscience, 2008 (latest ed.)
Course Name: Agent-based Modeling
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to Agent-based Models, Introduction to NetLogo, Describing
ABMs, First ABM Development, Animation to Science, Model Verification &
Validation, Emergence, Adaptive Behavior, Prediction, Cognitive AB
Computing Framework, Complex Network Modeling, Exploratory AB
Modeling, Descriptive AB Modeling, Validated AB Modeling.
111
Reference Materials:
1. Agent-Based and Individual-Based Modeling: A Practical Introduction by
Steven F. Railsback and Volker Grimm, 2011 (latest ed.).
2. Managing Business Complexity: Discovering Strategic Solutions with
Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation, Michael J. North and Charles M.
Macal, 2007.
Course Name: Component Based Software Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outlines:
Introduction to CBSE, Reuse, Basic Concepts in CBSE, Modeling
components with UML, Open COM component model, Fractal component
model, Component Models and Technology, Component contracts -
component specification techniques, Component integration and Predictable
composition , Service Oriented Computing - Key Concepts and Principles ,
SOA.
Reference Materials:
1. Component Software: Beyond Object Oriented Programming, Clemens
Szyperski. Second Edition, Addison Wesley, 2002 (latest ed.).
2. Building reliable component based software systems, Ivica Crnkovic,
Magnus Larsson. Artech House, 2002 (latest ed.).
3. Service-oriented Computing: Semantics, Processes, Agents, Munindar P.
Singh and Michael N. Huhns, 2005 (latest ed.)
Course Name: Design Patterns
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Overview of Object-Oriented Analysis and Design, Design Patterns
(Concepts, Major issues, Reusibility), Creational Patterns, Structural
Patterns, Behavioral Patterns. Applications of design patterns for:
Organization of Work; Access Control; Service Variation and Service
Extension; Object Management and Adaptation; Architectural Patterns,
Patterns for Distribution, Patterns for Interactive Systems, Adaptable
Systems; Frameworks and Patterns, Idea of frameworks; Patterns for
flexibility; Achieving benefits of frameworks; Failures of frameworks.
Reference Materials:
1. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable OO Software by Ralph Johnson,
John Vlissides, Richard Helm, Erich Gamma, Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1994 (latest ed.)
112
2. Pattern Hatching: Design Patterns Applied by Vlissides, Addison-Wesley
Professional, 1998. (latest ed.)
Course Name: Complex Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Communication and Network
Course Outline:
What are networks and why networks, Erdos-Renyi random, small-world and
scale-free network models, Calculation of basic measures in networks,
Degree and eccentricity Centrality, Shortest search path, case study of
calculation, Clustering coefficient, Matching index and case study, Network
tools overview, Pajek, Network Workbench, Gephi, Visone, Cytoscape,
Centibin, Network Simulation (Agent-based simulation of networks),
Biological networks, Social Networks, Scientometric study using Networks,
Modeling Communication Networks as graphs/networks, Disk Graph models
such as WSNs.
Reference Materials:
1. Dynamical Processes on Complex Networks by Alain Barrat, Marc
Barthélemy, Alessandro Vespignani, Cambridge University Press, 2012.
(latest ed.)
2. The Structure and Dynamics of Networks by Mark Newman, Albert-Lazlo
Barabasi, Duncan J. Watts, Princeton University Press, 2006 (latest ed.)
3. Exploratory Social Network Analysis with Pajek (Structural Analysis in the
Social Sciences) by Wouter De Nooy, Andrej Mrvar and Vladimir Batagelj,
Cambridge University Press, Second Edition, 2011 (latest ed.)
4. Analysis of Biological Networks (Wiley Series in Bioinformatics) by Björn
H. Junker and Falk Schreiber, Wiley-Inter-science, 2008.
113
National Curriculum Revision Committee for
Information Technology (IT)
The National Curriculum Revision Committee for Information Technology
(NCRC-IT) met at HEC Regional Office Lahore on 6-8 February, 2013 to
develop the vision for Information Technology education and curriculum for
Information Technology programs. The Committee will met again on 10 th to
12th June, 2013 to finalize the curricula recommendations. Following experts
participated in the meetings for sub-group on Information Technology:
Sr. No. Name & Address
1. Prof. Dr.  Muhammad Anwar-ur-Rehman
Pasha, Chairman, Department of Computer
Science & Information Technology, University
of Sargodha,
Sargodha
Chairperson
committee on
BS(IT)
2. Dr. Imdad Ali Ismaili,
Professor & Director,
Institute of Information & Communication
Technology, University of Sindh, Allama I.I.
Kazi Campus, Jamshoro,
Sindh.
Member
3. Dr. Mansoor-uz-Zafar Dawood,
Dean,
Faculty of Computer Sciences & IT,
Institute of Business & Tech (IBT)
Main Ibrahim Hydri Road, Karachi.
Member
4. Prof. Dr. Madad Ali Shah,
Professor and Head,
Department of Electrical & Telecommunication
Engineering,
Sukkur IBA, Airport Road,
Sukkur, Sindh.
Member
5. Prof. Dr. Nisar Ahmed Memon,
Professor,
Dept. of Computer System,
Quaid-e-Awam University of Engg Science &
Technology, Nawabshah.
Member
6. Dr. Mumtaz Hussain Mahar,
Professor,
Dept. of Computer Science,
Shah Abdul Latif University, Khairpur.
Member
7. Dr. Saeed Mahfooz,
Associate Professor & Chairman,
Dept. of Computer Science,
University of Peshawar, Peshawar.
Member
114
8. Dr. Muhammad Khalid Badini
Chairperson
Department of CS & IT UoB Quetta, Pakistan
Member
9. Dr. Asfandyar Khan,
Assistant Professor/Chairman,
Department of Engineering,
Institute of Engg & Computing Sciences,
University of Science & Tech, Bannu.
Member
The National Curriculum Revision Committee for Information Technology
(NCRC-IT) met at HEC Regional Office Lahore on meet again on 10th to 12th
June, 2013 and finalized the curricula recommendations. The experts
attended were same as in the first meeting.
The Discipline of Information Technology
According to ACM Curricula 20056: “Information Technology” is a label that
has two meanings.  In the broadest sense, the term information technology is
often referred to computing.  Furthermore, it also refers to undergraduate
degree programs that prepare students to meet the computer technology
needs of business, government, healthcare, schools, and other kinds of
organizations.  Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in
Information Technology (2008) explains that “Information Technology (IT) in
its broadest sense encompasses all aspects of computing technology. IT, as
an academic discipline, is concerned with issues related to advocating for
users and meeting their needs within an organizational and societal context
through the selection, creation, application, integration and administration of
computing technologies.” Figure 17, depicts the key pillars of academic
discipline of Information Technology
Information Technology as an
academic discipline, as defined by The
Information Technology Association of
America (ITAA), is “the study, design,
development, application,
implementation, support or
management of computer-based
information systems, particularly
software applications and computer
hardware”. It deals with the use of
electronic computers and computer
software to securely convert, store,
protect, process, transmit, input, output, and retrieve information.  [Wikipedia]
Figure 1:Key Pillars of IT
6 Computing Curricula 2005: The Overview Report, IEEE and ACM Press.
7Curriculum Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Information Technology (2008)
115
IT Programs’ Rational
The digital revolution not only reshaped the way scientists conduct their
research but also expedite the pace of inventions. Consequently, the latest
advancements in technologies for communication, computation, and delivery
of information brought a paradigm shift in the business world - from data
processing to information processing - converting computer technology into
information technology (IT) and industrial society into an “information
society”. While this paradigm shift improves productivity, it also created new
work place challenges regarding the development, operation, maintenance,
and up-gradation of organizational IT infrastructure. Inventions like the
Internet, the World Wide Web, email, bulletin board systems, virtual
communities, E-business and other online technologies forced organizations
to find IT based solutions to all kinds of business challenges. For this,
organizations need appropriate systems that work properly and professionals
who make these systems secured, upgraded, and maintained. In parallel,
employees require support from these professionals to make technology
effective for enhancing organizational productivity. This has created a huge
demand of IT professionals both locally and globally. Meeting this demand is
the key rationale behind the IT programs. In this regard, the IT programs offer
a curriculum structure that can produce graduates who can meet above
discussed challenges of the 21st century’s knowledge driven complex work
places. The curriculum structure will create, expand, disseminate and teach
the information technology body of knowledge through academics,
applications and research which positively impact society (locally, nationally,
and internationally). It will also provide an integration of all components that
allow accessing all of the new knowledge and technologies for meeting the
above discussed challenges (See Fig. 2).
Figure 2 IT Knowledge Areas and Technologies
116
Vision of Information Technology Education
As defined in cc2008 “Information Technology is very much an integrative
discipline; it pulls together the IT pillars of databases, human-computer
interaction, networking, programming, and web systems and uses a solid
background in each of them to enable graduates to solve all types of
computing and informational problems, regardless of their origin. As a
discipline, IT emphasizes the pervasive themes of user centeredness and
advocacy, information assurance and security, and the management of
complexity through abstraction and modeling, best practices, patterns,
standards, and the use of appropriate tools.” In the light of this explanation,
the curriculum committee formalized the Vision Statement for IT education in
Pakistan as follows:
The IT education in Pakistan will focus on imparting the knowledge and
training which enable students:
1. to understand and contribute to the scientific, mathematical and
theoretical foundations on which information technologies are built;
2. to use and apply current technical concepts, techniques, skills, tools
and practices to analyze the local and global impact of IT on
individuals, organizations, and society and to identify their
computing needs, and select, design, create, implement, administer
and evaluate a computer-based system, process, component, or
program to meet the desired needs and integrate them into the user
environment;
3. to develop students’ interpersonal and organizational skills to
communicate effectively with a range of audience, create operative
project plans and work  in a collaborative environment;
4. to strengthen students’ understanding of professional, ethical, legal
and social issues and responsibilities;
5. to develop students’ capacity for innovation and passion for lifelong
learning.
IT curriculum thus aims to achieve the targets set in the vision statement. It
should strive to meet the professional demands of the industry and academia
both in terms of immediate needs and the capacity for longer term
development to avail the opportunities and face the challenges of the modern
world.  The committee is of the view that the curriculum must focus on
building a solid foundation in the early stages of learning. Thus, Information
Technology concepts should be taken up as early as the start of 1st year.
These should gradually be strengthened through developing the core
competencies and desired skill-sets during the second, third and fourth years.
The students must also be provided opportunities to bring together the
knowledge gained in a wide variety of courses to solve realistic problems in a
team-based environment through lab sessions, practical assignments, course
projects and a capstone design project.
117
Information Technology Degree Programs
Nomenclature:
The committee emphasized that the nomenclature followed for Information
Technology programs should correspond to international trends and
standards. The following nomenclatures were thus agreed:
1. Bachelor of Science in Information Technology, BS (IT)
2. Master of Science in Information Technology, MS (IT)
Duration of Programs:
The committee defined a credit hour as 15 lecturing hours in a course offered
in a particular semester. It was agreed that 3 weekly lab hours shall be
treated as one credit hour for a course. In normal circumstances a semester
comprises 15 teaching weeks followed by the final examination. The notation
used for this purpose is X(Y+Z), X represents total credit hours, Y represents
credit hours for theory and Z represents credit hours for practical lab work.
The BS Information Technology Degree would be a 4-year program spread
over 8 semesters and MS Information Technology program would be a 2-year
program spread over 4 semesters.
Admission Criteria:
The eligibility criteria for BS Information Technology program shall be
intermediate or equivalent qualifications; however, universities/institutions
may define their own admission criteria.
The eligibility criterion for admission to MS Information Technology shall be 4-
year BS Information Technology or equivalent qualifications; however,
universities/institutions may define their own admission criteria.
Curriculum for BS Information Technology, BS (IT)
Program’s Aims & Objectives:
The aim of the BS (IT) program is to produce entrepreneurs of great
character, competence, vision and drive equip with up-to-date knowledge,
marketable skills, valuable competencies, unique expertise, globally
compatible dispositions and culturally and professionally acceptable values to
take on appropriate professional roles in information technology domain or
proceed to further or higher education or training. One of the key objectives
of the program is to equip students with skills and knowledge that enable
them to take on appropriate professional positions in IT and grow into leading
roles.  The goals of the program are to produce, in coordination with
organizational management, IT graduates who have ability to:
1. Apply knowledge of computing and mathematics appropriate to the
discipline.
118
2. Analyze a problem, and identify and define the computing
requirements appropriate to its solution.
3. Design, implement, and evaluate a computer-based system,
process, component, or program to meet desired needs.
4. Function effectively on teams to accomplish a common goal.
5. Understand the professional, ethical, legal, security and social
issues and responsibilities.
6. Communicate effectively with a range of audiences.
7. Analyze the local and global impact of computing on individuals,
organizations, and society.
8. Recognize the need for and an ability to engage in continuing
professional development.
9. Use the current techniques, skills, and tools necessary for
computing practice.
10.Use and apply the latest technical concepts and practices in the
core information technologies.
11. Identify and analyze user needs and take them into account in the
selection, creation, evaluation and administration of computer-
based systems.
12. Integrate IT-based solutions into the user environment.
13.Understand the best practices and standards and their application.
14.Assist in the creation of an effective project plan.
Structure of BS Information Technology:
The structure of BS (IT) program is dynamic and provides basis for various
options including Breadth-Based, Depth-Based, and Integrated Breadth &
Depth-Based specializations. Students may choose a particular option, which
is the most appropriate to their planned future career. Followings are the
distribution of total credit hours:
# Category Credit Hours
1 Computing CoursesCore 40
Supporting Areas 12
2
Information Technology Courses
Core 21
Electives 21
Supporting 15
3 General Education Courses 18
4 University Elective Courses 9
Total Credit Hours 136
119
Computing — Core Courses (40 Credits Hours)
Required Computing Courses
# Code Pre-req Course Name Cr. Hrs.
1 CMP - Programming Fundamentals 4 (3+1)
2 CMP 1 Object Oriented Programming 3*
3 CMP - Discrete Structures 3
4 CMP 3 Data Structures and Algorithms 4 (3+1)
5 CMP - Digital Logic  Design 4 (3+1)
6 CMP - Operating Systems 3*
7 CMP - Database Systems 4 (3+1)
8 CMP - Software Engineering 3
9 CMP - Computer Communications andNetworks 3*
10 CMP - Human Computer Interaction 3
11 CMP - IT Capstone Project 6 (0+6)
Total Credit Hours (40/136)
* Labs are preferred in these courses. However, implementation details are left
upon the Institutes.
IT — Core Courses (21 Credits Hours)
Required IT Core Courses
# Code Pre-req Course Name Cr. Hrs.
16 IT - Web Systems and Technologies 3*
17 IT - Multimedia Systems and Design 3 (2+1)
18 IT 6 Systems and Network Administration 3*
19 IT - Network Security 3 (3+ 0)
20 Cloud Computing 3 (3+ 0)
IT - System Integration and Architecture 3
21 IT - Technology Management 3
Total Credit Hours (21/136)
* Labs are preferred in these courses. However, implementation details are left
upon the concerned Institutes.
IT — Supporting Courses (15 Credits Hours)
Required Supporting Courses
# Code Pre-req Course Name Credithours
23 IT 8,21 IT Project Management 3
24 IT 9 Internet Architecture & Protocols 3
25 IT 8 Object Oriented Analysis & Design 3*
26 IT 7 Database Administration & Management 3 (2+1)
27 IT - Information Systems 3 (3+ 0)
Total Credit Hours (15/136)
120
General Education (18 Credits Hours)
Required General Education Courses
# Code Pre-req Course Name Cr. Hrs
1 ENG - Functional English (English-I) 3
2 ENG - Communication Skills (English-II) 3
3 ENG - Technical Report Writing (English-III) 3
4 SS - Islamic Studies /Ethics 2
5 SS - Pakistan Studies 2
6 SS - Professional Practices 2
IT - Information & CommunicationTechnologies 3 (2+1)
Total Credit Hours (18/136)
University Electives (9 Credits Hours)
University Elective Courses
# Code Pre-req Course Name Cr. Hrs.
34 MNG - Principles of  Accounting 3
35 MNG - Human Resource Management 3
36 MNG - Principles of Management 3
37 MNG - Organizational Behaviour 3
38 SS - Principles of Philosophy 3
39 SS - Principles of Psychology 3
40 SS - Foreign/Regional Language 3
41 MNG - Entrepreneurship 3
IT Electives
(7 Courses; 21 Credits Hours)
Following is a suggestive list of the elective courses for different domain
including Databases, Networking, Multimedia Systems, Web Base Application
Development, and Software Engineering. Universities/institutions may add
other courses in this list. A student must select at least 4 courses from one
domain for his/her major area of specialization.
IT Telecommunication Systems 3
IT Routing & Switching 3
IT Network Design and Management 3
IT Network Programming 3
IT Computer Game Development 3
IT Multimedia  Technologies 3
IT 3D Modeling & Animation 3
IT Mobile Computing 3
IT Software Agents Technology 3
IT E-Commerce Applications Development 3
IT Enterprise Application Development 3
IT Distributed Computing 3
121
IT Mobile Application Development 3
IT Web Engineering 3
IT Data Warehousing 3
IT Data Mining 3
IT Business Intelligence and Analytics 3
IT Distributed Database Systems 3
IT Enterprise Resource Planning Systems 3
IT Information Systems Auditing andAssurance 3
IT Business Process Management 3
IT Knowledge Management 3
IT Artificial Intelligence 3
SE Formal Methods in Software Engineering 3
SE Software Requirement Engineering 3
SE Software Design and Architecture 3
SE Software Quality Engineering 3
SE Software CASE Tools & Applications 3
SE Software Construction 3
SE Software Engineering Economics 3
SE Design Patterns 3
IT Service-Oriented Architecture 3
IT Computer Graphics 3
IT Bioinformatics 3
IT Biometric Systems 3
122
Proposed Scheme of Study for BS (IT) Model 1
4-Year Program (8 Semesters) (136 Credit Hours)
Semester 1 (18 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Programming Fundamentals (Comp. Core) 4 (3+1)
Basic  Electronics (Comp. Supporting) 3
Calculus and Analytical Geometry        (Comp. Supporting) 3
Fundamentals of ICT (IT Core) 3 (2+1)
Functional English(English-I) (Gen. Edu) 3
Islamic Studies/Ethics (Gen. Edu.) 2 (2+0)
Semester 2 (18 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Object Oriented Programming (Comp. Core) 3
Digital Logic Design (Comp. Core) 3 (2+1)
Discrete Structures (Comp. Core) 3
Principles of Psychology (Uni. Elective) 3
Communication Skills (English-II)        (Gen. Edu.) 3
Probability and Statistics (Comm. Supporting) 3
Semester 3 (19 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Data Structures and Algorithms (Comp. Core) 4(3+1)
Computer Communication and Networks (Comp. Core) 3*
Principles of Accounting (Uni. Elective) 3
Information Systems (IT – Supporting) 3
Technical and Report Writing (English-III) (Gen. Edu.) 3
Linear Algebra (Comp. Supporting) 3
Semester 4 (18 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Organizational Behaviour (Uni. Elective) 3
Internet Architecture & Protocols (IT – Supporting) 3
Software Engineering (Comp. Core) 3
Database  Systems (Comp. Core) 4 (3+1)
Multimedia Systems and Design (IT Core) 3 (2+1)
Pakistan Studies (Gen. Edu.) 2 (2+0)
Semester 5 (18 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
IT Elective-I 3
Operating Systems (Comp. Core) 3*
OO Analysis & Design                      (IT – Supporting) 3
DB Administration & Management                      (IT – Supporting) 3*
Web Systems and Technologies (IT Core) 3
Technology Management (IT Core) 3
123
Semester 6 (18 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Human Computer Interaction      (Comp. Core) 3
Systems and Network Administration 3*
IT Elective II 3
IT Elective –III 3
System Integration and Architecture (IT Core) 3
IT Project Management                      (IT – Supporting) 3
Semester 7 (15 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Capstone Project Part I (Comp. Core) 3
Data & Network Security (IT Core) 3
IT Elective IV 3
IT Elective V 3
Cloud Computing 3
Semester 8 (12 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Capstone Project Part II (Comp. Core) 3
Professional Practices (Gen. Edu.) 2(2+0)
IT Elective VI 3
IT Elective VII 3
* Labs are preferred in these courses. However, implementation details are left
upon the concerned Institutes.
124
Proposed Scheme of Study for BS (IT) Model 2
4-Year Program (8 Semesters) (136 Credit Hours)
Semester 1 (19 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Programming Fundamentals (Comp. Core) 4(3+1)
Basic  Electronics (Comp. Supporting) 3
Calculus and Analytical Geometry        (Comp. Supporting) 3
Fundamentals of ICT (IT Core) 3 (2+1)
Functional English(English-I) (Gen. Edu) 3
Islamic Studies/Ethics (Gen. Edu.) 2 (2+0)
Semester 2 (19 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Object Oriented Programming (Comp. Core) 4 (3+1)
Information Systems (IT – Supporting) 3
Discrete Structures (Comp. Core) 3
Principles of Psychology (Uni. Elective) 3
Communication Skills (English-II)        (Gen. Edu.) 3
Probability and Statistics (Comm. Supporting) 3
Semester 3 (19 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Data Structures and Algorithms (Comp. Core) 3
Pakistan Studies (Gen. Edu.) 2 (2+0)
Principles of Accounting (Uni. Elective) 3
Digital Logic Design (Comp. Core) 4 (3+1)
Technical and Report Writing (English-III) (Gen. Edu.) 3
Linear Algebra (Comp. Supporting) 3
Semester 4 (19 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Organizational Behaviour (Uni. Elective) 3
Computer Communication and Networks (Comp. Core) 3
Software Engineering (Comp. Core) 3
Database  Systems (Comp. Core) 4 (3+1)
Multimedia Systems and Design (IT Core) 3 (2+1)
Operating Systems (Comp. Core) 3*
Semester 5 (18 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Internet Architecture & Protocols (IT – Supporting) 3
Systems and Network Administration 3*
OO Analysis & Design                      (IT – Supporting) 3
DB Administration & Management                      (IT – Supporting) 3*
Web Systems and Technologies (IT Core) 3
Technology Management (IT Core) 3
125
Semester 6 (15 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Human Computer Interaction      (Comp. Core) 3
IT Elective-I 3
IT Elective II 3
IT Elective –III 3
IT Project Management                      (IT – Supporting) 3
Cloud Computing 3
Semester 7 (15 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Capstone Project Part I (Comp. Core) 3 (0+3)
Data & Network Security (IT Core) 3
IT Elective IV 3
IT Elective V 3
System Integration and Architecture (IT Core) 3
Semester 8 (12 Cr. Hrs.) Cr. Hrs.
Capstone Project Part II (Comp. Core) 3
Professional Practices (Gen. Edu.) 2
IT Elective VI 3
IT Elective VII 3
* Labs are preferred in these courses. However, implementation details are left
upon the concerned Institutes.
126
BS Information Technology, BS (IT), COURSE CONTENTS
Computing Core Courses:
Course Name: Programming Fundamentals
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
This course covers overview of Computer Programming, Principles of
Structured and Modular Programming, Overview of Structured Programming
Languages, Algorithms and Problem Solving, Program Development:
Analyzing Problem, Designing Algorithm/Solution, Testing Designed Solution,
Translating Algorithms into Programs, Fundamental Programming
Constructs, Data Types. Basics of Input and Output, Selection and Decision
(If, If-Else, Nested If-Else, Switch Statement and Condition Operator),
Repetition (While and For Loop, Do-While Loops), Break Statement,
Continue Statement, Control Structures, Functions, Arrays, Pointers,
Records, Files (Input-Output), Testing & Debugging.
Reference Materials:
1. C How to Program by Paul Deitel and Harvey Deitel, Prentice Hall; 7
edition (March 4, 2012). ISBN-10: 013299044X
2. Programming in C by Stephen G. Kochan, Addison-Wesley Professional;
4 edition (September 25, 2013). ISBN-10: 0321776410
3. Java How to Program by Paul Deitel and Harvey Deitel, Prentice Hall; 9th
edition (March, 2011)
4. C++ How to Program by Paul Deitel and Harvey Deitel, Prentice Hall; 9th
edition (February, 2013)
Course Name: Object Oriented Programming
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Evolution of Object Oriented Programming (OOP), Object Oriented concepts
and principles, problem solving in Object Oriented paradigm, OOP design
process, classes, functions/methods, objects and encapsulation; constructors
and destructors, operator and function/method overloading,  association,
aggregation, composition, generalization, inheritance and its types, derived
classes, function/method overriding, abstract and concrete classes, virtual
functions, polymorphism, exception handling.
Reference Materials:
1. Java: How to Programme, Harvey M. Deitel and Paul J. Deitel, Prentice
Hall; 8 edition (March 27, 2009). ISBN-10: 0136053068
127
2. C++: How to Programme, Prentice Hall; 8 edition (March 25, 2011). ISBN-
10: 0132662361
3. Object Oriented Programming in C++ by Robert Lafore, Sams Publishing;
4 edition (December 29, 2001). ISBN-10: 0672323087
4. Java Programming: From the Ground Up by Ralph Bravaco and Shai
Simonson, McGraw-Hill Higher Education New York, 2010, ISBN 978–0–
07–352335–4
5. Beginning Java by Ivor Horton, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 7th Edition, 2011,
ISBN: 978-0-470-40414-0
Course Name: Discrete Structures
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Please See in BS (CS) Section
Reference Materials:
Please See in BS (CS) Section
Course Name: Data Structure and Algorithms
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Introduction to Data Structures and Algorithms. Complexity Analysis. Arrays.
Sorting Algorithms: Insertion Sort, Selection Sort, Bubble Sort, Shell Sort,
Heap Sort, Quick Sort, Merge Sort, Radix Sort, Bucket Sort. Linked Lists:
Singly Linked Lists, Doubly Linked Lists, Circular List. Stacks, Queues, and
Priority Queue. Recursion: Function call and Recursion Implementation, Tail
Recursion, Non-tail Recursion, Indirect Recursion, Nested Recursion,
Backtracking. Trees: Binary Trees, Binary Heap, Binary Search. Tree
Traversal, Insertion, Deletion, and Balancing a Tree. Heap. B-Tree, B+Tree,
Spanning Tree, Splay Trees. Graphs:  Representation, Treversal, Shortest
Path, and Cycle Detection; Isomorphic Graphs. Graph Traversal Algorithms.
Hashing. Memory Management and Garbage Collection.
Reference Materials:
1. Data Structures & Problem Solving Using Java by Mark Allen Weiss,
Addison-Wesley, 4th Edition (October 7, 2009). ISBN-10: 0321541405 (or
Latest Edition)
2. Algorithms, Robert Sedgewick, Princeton University Publisher: Addison-
Wesley Professional (latest Edition)
3. Data Structures: Abstraction and Design Using Java by Koffman and
Wolfgang, Wiley; 2nd Edition (January 26, 2010). ISBN-10: 0470128704
128
4. Data Structures and Algorithms in C++ by Adam Drozdek, Course
Technology; 4th Edition (August 27, 2012). ISBN-10: 1133608426
5. Data Structures Using C++ by D. S. Malik, Course Technology; 2nd Edition
(July 31, 2009). ISBN-10: 0324782012
6. Data Structures and Other Objects Using C++ by Michael Main and
Walter Savitch, Prentice Hall; 4th Edition (March 6, 2010). ISBN-10:
0132129485
Course Name: Digital Logic and Design
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Basic Electronics
Course Outline:
Number Systems, Logic Gates, Boolean Algebra, Combination logic circuits
and designs, Simplification Methods K-Maps, Quinne,  Mc-Cluskey,, Flip
Flops and Latches, Asynchronous and Synchronous circuits, Counters, Shift
Registers, Shift Registers Counters, Triggered devices & its types. Binary
Arithmetic and Arithmetic Circuits, Memory Elements, State Machines.
Introduction Programmable Logic Devices (CPLD, FPGA); Lab
Assignments using tools such as Verilog HDL/VHDL, MultiSim, etc.
Reference Materials:
1. Digital Fundamentals by Thomas L. Floyd, Prentice Hall; 11th edition.
2. Fundamentals of Digital Logic with Verilog Design by Stephen Brown and
Zvonko Vranesic, McGraw-Hill; 3rd Edition (February 12, 2013). ISBN-10:
0073380547
3. Digital Fundamentals: A Systems Approach by Thomas L. Floyd, Prentice
Hall; (July 13, 2012). ISBN-10: 0132933950
4. Digital Design, by M. Morris Mano, Michael D. Ciletti, 4th Edition, Prentice
Hall (2007). ISBN-10: 0131989243
5. Fundamentals of Logic Design by Jr. Charles H. Roth and Larry L Kinney,
CL Engineering; 6th Edition (March 13, 2009). ISBN-10: 0495471690
Course Name: Operating Systems
Credit Hours: 3*
Pre-requisites: None
Course Outline:
History and Goals, Evolution of operating systems. Operating System:
Services, Structure, User Interface. Virtual Machines concept, System Boot,
System Calls, Types of System Calls. Processes: Concept, Scheduling,
Operations on Processes, Inter-process Communication. Threading:
Multithreading Models, Thread Libraries, Threading Issues, processor
scheduling; deadlock prevention, avoidance, and recovery; main-memory
management; virtual memory management (swapping, paging, segmentation
and page-replacement algorithms); Disks management and other
129
input/output devices; file-system structure and implementation; protection and
security. Case studies: Linux/Windows Operating Systems.
*Lab assignments involving different single and multithreaded OS algorithms.
Reference Materials:
1. Operating System Concepts by Abraham Silberschatz, Peter B. Galvin,
and Greg Gagne, Wiley; 9th edition (December 17, 2012). ISBN-10:
1118063333
2. Operating Systems: Internals and Design Principles by William Stallings,
Prentice Hall; 7 edition (March 10, 2011). ISBN-10: 013230998X
3. Applied Operating Systems Concepts by Silberschatz A., Peterson, J.L., &
Galvin P.C. Wiley; 8th Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 1118112733
4. Modern Operating Systems by Tanenmaum A.S., Prentice Hall; 3rd Edition
(2007). ISBN-13: 978-0136006633
Course Name: Database Systems
Credit Hours: 4 (3+1)
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Basic Database Concepts, Database Architecture, DB Design Life Cycle,
Schema Architecture, Conceptual, Logical and Physical Database Modelling
and Design, , Entity Relationship Diagram (ERD), Enhanced ERD, Relational
Data Model, Mapping ERD to Relational Model, Functional Dependencies
and Normalization, Relational Algebra, Structured Query Language (SQL),
Transaction Processing, Concurrency Control And Recovery Techniques,
Query Optimization Concepts.
Reference Materials:
1. Database Systems A Practical Approach to Design, Implementation, and
Management, Thomas Connolly and Carolyn Begg, Prentice Hall; 7th
edition (March 10, 2011)
2. Modern Database Management by Fred McFadden, Jeffrey Hoofer, Mary
Prescott, Prentice Hall; 11th Edition (July 26, 2012). ISBN-10: 0132662256
3. Fundamentals of Database Systems by R. Elmasri and S. Navathe. 6th
Edition, Addison-Wesley (2010). ISBN-10: 0136086209.
4. Database Design and Relational Theory: Normal Forms and All That Jazz
by C. J. Date, O'Reilly Media; 1st Edition (April 24, 2012). ISBN-10:
1449328016.
5. Modern Database Management by Fred McFadden, Jeffrey Hoofer, Mary
Prescott, Prentice Hall; 11th Edition (July 26, 2012). ISBN-10: 0132662256
130
Course Name: (Intro. to) Software Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Overview of SE, Practice & Myths; the Software Processes, Generic Process
Models: Framework Activity, Task Set, Process Patterns, Process
Improvement, CMM. Prescriptive Process Models: Waterfall Model,
Incremental Process Model, Evolutionary Process Model. Specialized
Process Models: Component Based Development; The Formal Methods
Models, Agile Development. Business Information Systems: Components;
Types; and Evaluating methods. SDLC: Phases; System Planning;
Preliminary Investigation, SWOT Analysis; the Importance of Strategic
Planning; Evaluation of Systems Requests; Requirements Engineering.
Difference between Structured Analysis and Object Oriented Analysis;
Difference between FDD Diagrams & UML Diagrams; Data & Process
Modelling. Diagrams: Data Flow, Context, Conventions, Detailed Level
DFD’s; the Design Process; Architecture Design Elements, Interface Design
Elements, Component-Level Design Elements, Deployments Design
Elements; System Architecture, Architectural Styles; User Interface Design;
WebApps Interface Design; Software Quality Assurance. Validation Testing,
System Testing. Internal and External View of Testing. Project Management.
Risk Management; Maintenance and Reengineering.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Engineering 8E by Ian Sommerville, Addison Wesley; 8th Edition
(2006). ISBN-10: 0321313798
2. Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach by Roger S. Pressman,
McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math; 7th Edition (2009). ISBN-10:
0073375977
Course Name: Computer Communications and Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Data Communication concepts, Analogue and digital Transmission, Noise,
Media, Encoding, Asynchronous and Synchronous transmission. Network
system architectures (OSI, TCP/IP), Error Control, Flow Control, Data Link
Protocols, Bridging. Local Area Networks and MAC Layer protocols,
Multiplexing, Switched and IP Networks, Inter-networking, Routing. Transport
layer protocols TCP, UDP and SCTP. Application Layer Protocols. Wireless
LANs.
Lab exercises using tools such as Wireshark, OpNet, Packet tracer etc.
131
Reference Materials:
1. Data Communications and Networking, by Behrouz A. Forouzan,
McGraw-Hill Science; 5th edition (February 17, 2012). ISBN-10:
0073376221
2. Data and Computer Communications by William Stallings, Prentice Hall;
9th Edition (August 13, 2010). ISBN-10: 0131392050
3. Computer Networks by Andrew S. Tanenbaum and David J. Wetherall,
Prentice Hall; 5th Edition (October 7, 2010). ISBN-10: 0132126958
4. Computer Networks and Internets by Douglas E. Comer, Prentice Hall; 5th
Edition (April 28, 2008). ISBN-10: 0136066984
Course Name: Human Computer Interaction
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
The human and the computer and their interaction, Human psychology and
ergonomics, Interaction Paradigms, Interaction design basics, HCI in the
software process, Design rules, Implementation support, Evaluation
techniques, Universal design, User support, ,Cognitive models, Socio-
organizational issues and stakeholder requirements, Communication and
collaboration models, Task analysis, Dialog notations and design , Models of
the system, Modeling rich interaction, Groupware, Ubiquitous computing and
augmented realities
Reference Materials:
1. Human-Computer Interaction by Alan Dix, Janet E. Finlay, Gregory D.
Abowd,  Russell Beale, Prentice Hall; 3rd Edition (December 20, 2003).
ISBN-10: 0130461091
2. Human-Computer Interaction: Concepts And Design by J. Preece, Y.
Rogers,  H. Sharp, D. Benyon,  S. Holland,  T. Carey, Addison Wesley;
1st Edition (April 30, 1994). ISBN-10: 0201627698.
3. Human-Computer Interaction Handbook: Fundamentals, Evolving
Technologies, and Emerging Applications by Julie A. Jacko, CRC Press; 3
Edition (May 4, 2012). ISBN-10: 1439829438
4. Interaction Design: Beyond Human - Computer Interaction by Yvonne
Rogers, Helen Sharp, and Jenny Preece, Wiley; 3rd Edition (June 15,
2011). ISBN-10: 0470665769
5. Designing with the Mind in Mind: Simple Guide to Understanding User
Interface Design Rules by Jeff Johnson, Morgan Kaufmann; 1st Edition
(June 3, 2010). ISBN-10: 012375030X.
132
Computing Supporting Elective Courses
Course Name: Calculus and Analytical Geometry
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Real Numbers and the Real Line, Coordinates, Lines, and Increments,
Functions, Shifting Graphs, Trigonometric Functions. Limits and Continuity:
Rates of Change and Limits, Rules for Finding Limits, Target Values and
Formal Definitions of Limits, Extensions of the Limit Concept, Continuity,
Tangent Lines. Derivatives: The Derivative of a Function, Differentiation
Rules, Rates of Change, Derivatives of Trigonometric Functions, The Chain
Rule, Implicit Differentiation and Rational Exponents. Applications of
Derivatives. Integration:  Indefinite Integrals, Integration by Substitution,
Definite Integrals, Substitution in Definite Integrals. Numerical Integration.
Applications of Integrals.  Transcendental Functions: Inverse Functions and
Their Derivatives, Natural Logarithms, The Exponential Function, ax and
logax,  Growth and Decay, L'Hôpital's Rule, Relative Rates of Growth, Inverse
Trigonomic Functions, Derivatives of Inverse Trigonometric Functions;
Hyperbolic Functions. Conic Sections, Parametrized Curves, and Polar
Coordinates. Graphing in Polar Coordinates. Polar Equations for Conic
Sections. Integration in Polar Coordinates.  Vectors and Analytic Geometry in
Space; Vectors in the Plane Dot Products;  Vector-Valued Function Cartesian
(Rectangular) Coordinates and Vectors in Space. Dot Products; Cross
Products. Lines and Planes in Space; Cylinders and Quadric Surfaces;
Cylindrical and Spherical Coordinates.
Reference Materials:
1. Calculus and Analytic Geometry by George B. Thomas  and  Ross L.
Finney, Addison Wesley; 10th Edition (1995)  ISBN-10: 0201531747
2. Calculus and Analytical Geometry by Swokowski, Olinick and Pence, 6th
Edition, 1994, Brooks/Cole Publishers.
3. Calculus by Howard Anton, Irl C. Bivens, Stephen Davis, Wiley; 10th
Edition (2012), ISBN-10: 0470647728
4. Calculus with Analytic Geometry: Student Solution Manual by Howard
Anton,   Wiley; 5th Edition (1995). ISBN-10: 0471105899
Course Name: Probability and Statistics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to Statistics and Data Analysis, Statistical Inference, Samples,
Populations, and the Role of Probability. Sampling Procedures. Discrete and
Continuous Data. Statistical Modeling. Types of Statistical Studies.
133
Probability: Sample Space, Events, Counting Sample Points, Probability of
an Event, Additive Rules, Conditional Probability, Independence, and the
Product Rule, Bayes’ Rule. Random Variables and Probability Distributions.
Mathematical Expectation: Mean of a Random Variable, Variance and
Covariance of Random Variables, Means and Variances of Linear
Combinations of Random Variables, Chebyshev’s Theorem. Discrete
Probability Distributions. Continuous Probability Distributions.  Fundamental
Sampling Distributions and Data Descriptions: Random Sampling, Sampling
Distributions, Sampling Distribution of Means and the Central Limit Theorem.
Sampling Distribution of S2, t-Distribution, F-Quantile and Probability Plots.
Single Sample & One- and Two-Sample Estimation Problems.  Single
Sample & One- and Two-Sample Tests of Hypotheses. The Use of P-Values
for Decision Making in Testing Hypotheses (Single Sample & One- and Two-
Sample Tests), Linear Regression and Correlation. Least Squares and the
Fitted Model, Multiple Linear Regression and Certain, Nonlinear Regression
Models, Linear Regression Model Using Matrices, Properties of the Least
Squares Estimators.
Reference Materials:
1. Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists by Ronald E.
Walpole, Raymond H. Myers, Sharon L. Myers and Keying E. Ye,
Pearson; 9th Edition (January 6, 2011). ISBN-10: 0321629116
2. Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists by Anthony J.
Hayter,  Duxbury Press; 3rd Edition (February 3, 2006), ISBN-10:
0495107573
3. Schaum's Outline of Probability and Statistics, by John Schiller, R. Alu
Srinivasan and Murray Spiegel, McGraw-Hill; 3rd Edition (2008). ISBN-10:
0071544259
4. Probability: A Very Short Introduction by John Haigh, Oxford University
Press (2012). ISBN-10: 0199588481
Course Name: Linear Algebra
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Calculus and Analytical Geometry
Course Outline:
Introduction to Vectors. Solving Linear Equations. Elimination Factorization.
Vector Spaces and Subspaces. Orthogonality. DeTerminants. Eigenvalues
and Eigenvectors. Linear Transformations. Linear Transformation,
Applications of Matrices in Engineering.  Graphs and Networks, Markov
Matrices, Population, and Economics.  Linear Programming.  Fourier Series.
Linear Algebra for Functions, Linear Algebra for Statistics and Probability,
Computer Graphics. Numerical Linear Algebra. Complex Vectors and
Matrices. Discrete Transforms and Simple Applications. Cosine Transform,
The Discrete Fourier Transform.  Simplification and Factorization of the DFT
134
Matrix. Fast Fourier Transforms. The Discrete Time Fourier Transform. The Z-
Transform.
Reference Materials:
1. Introduction to Linear Algebra by Gilbert Strang, Wellesley Cambridge
Press; 4th Edition (February 10, 2009). ISBN-10: 0980232716
2. Linear Algebra: A Modern Introduction by David Poole by Brooks Cole; 3rd
Edition (May 25, 2010).ISBN-10: 0538735457
3. Elementary Linear Algebra with Applications by Bernard Kolman, David
Hill, 9th Edition, Prentice Hall PTR, 2007. ISBN-10: 0132296543
4. Strang's Linear Algebra And Its Applications by Gilbert Strang, Strang,
Brett Coonley, Andy Bulman-Fleming, Andrew Bulman-Fleming, 4th
Edition, Brooks/Cole, 2005
5. Elementary Linear Algebra: Applications Version by Howard Anton, Chris
Rorres, 9th Edition, Wiley, 2005.
Course Name: Basic Electronics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Zero Reference Level, Ohm’s Law, Linear & Non-Linear Resistors, Cells in
Series and Parallel. Resistive Circuits. Resistors, Inductors, Capacitors,
Energy Sources. Magnetism and Electromagnetism; Theory of Solid State; P-
N Junction; Forward Biased P-N Junction; Forward V/I Characteristics;
Reverse Biased P-N Junction; Reverse Saturation Current; Reverse V/I
Characteristics, Junction Breakdown, Junction Capacitance. Opto-electronics
Devices; Spectral Response of Human Eye; Light Emitting Diode (LED);
Photoemission Devices, Photomultiplier Tube, Photovoltaic Devices, Bulk
Type Photoconductive Cells, Photodiodes, P-N Junction Photodiode, PIN
Photodiode, and Avalanche Photodiode; DC Power Supplies; Rectifiers.
Filters, Voltage Multipliers, Silicon Controlled Rectifier SCR; The Basic
Transistor; Transistor Biasing, Transistor Circuit Configuration; Modulation
and Demodulation; Carrier Waves; Integrated Circuits.
Reference Materials:
1. Basic Electronics Solid State by B. L. Theraja, S Chand & Co Ltd, 5th
Edition, 2007, ISBN-13: 978-8121925563
2. Electronic Principles by Albert Paul Malvino, 6th Edition, 1999, ISBN 0-07-
115604-6
135
Contents of General Education Elective Courses
Course Name: Functional English (English I)
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Punctuation Principles. Spelling Rules. Writing Mechanics. Frequently
Confused Words. Frequently Misused Words, Phrases, Synonyms,
Antonyms, Idioms. General Vocabulary. Use of  Articles and One, A Little/ A
Few, This, That, Care, Like, Love, Hate, Prefer, Wish, All, Each, Every, Both,
Neither, Either, Some, Any, No, None, etc. Interrogatives. Kins of Nouns.
Prepositions. Possessive, Personal, Reflexive, and Relative Pronouns and
Clauses. Classes of Verbs. Usage of May, Can, Ought, Should, Must, Have
To, Need for Obligation,  Must, Have, Will and Should.  The Auxiliaries Dare
and Used. The Gerund & The Participles. Commands, Requests, Invitations,
Advice, Suggestions. The Subjunctive. The Passive Voice.  Indirect Speech.
Conjunctions.  Purpose. Clauses: Noun Clauses; Clauses of Reason, Result,
Concession, Comparison, Time. Numerals, Dates, Weights and Measures.
Phrasal Verbs. Irregular Verbs. Overview of Present, Past, Future and
Perfect Tenses.
Reference Materials:
1. A Practical English Grammar by A. J. Thomson and A. V. Martinent,4th
Edition Oxford University Press (1986).
2. Basic English Usage by Michael Swan, Oxford Univ Pr (Sd) (January
1986). ISBN-10: 0194311872
3. Functional English In Aglobal Society: Vocabulary Building and
Communicative Grammar by Nicanor L. Guintomary Ann R. Sibal Brian D.
Villaverde Dept. of Languages, Literature and Humanities College of Arts
and Sciences Southern Luzon State University (2012)
4. English Composition and Grammar: Complete Course by John E.
Warriner, Harcourt Brace Jovanovich; Complete Course Benchmark
Edition (January 1988). ISBN-10: 0153117362
5. Companion to English: Vocabulary (Learners Companion) by George
Davidson, Prim-Ed Publishing (March 1, 2003). ISBN-10: 9814070904
Course Name: Communication Skills (English II)
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
What is Communication, The Importance of Communication, Communication
Skills. The Communication Process. Perspectives in Communication. Factors
Affecting Communication Perspective. Language as a Representational
System. Internal Representation of Our World: Visual, Auditory &
136
Kinaesthetic Representational System. Elements of Communication.
Communication Styles. Listening: Self-Awareness, Pseudo Listening, Active
Listening, Effective Listening, Total Listing. Types of  Expression. Rules of
Effective Expression. Body Language. Para-language and Meta-messages.
Hidden Agendas. Language Models. Communication Styles. Assertiveness.
Responding to Criticism. Making Contact. The Art of Conversation.
Negotiations. Prejudgment. The Power of Validation. Validation Strategies.
Influencing Others. Public Speaking. Preparing Formal Oral Presentations:
Design elements, elements of effective Delivery, Tension & Nerves, Handle
Questions, Handling Tough Situations, Common Mistakes & Their Remedies,
Dealing with Unexpected Disasters, Presentation for International Audience,
Dealing People with  Disabilities. Interviewing. Elements of Effective Written
Communication. Building Rapports.
Reference Materials:
1. Effective Communication Skills, MTD Training & Ventus Publishing ApS.
(2010) ISBN 978-87-7681-598-1 (TB1)
2. Messages: The Communication Skills Book by Matthew McKay PhD,
Martha Davis PhD, and Patrick Fanning, New Harbinger Publications; 3rd
Edition (March 3, 2009). ISBN-10: 1572245921
3. Secrets of Successful Presenters: A Guide for Successful Presenters by
Dr. M. A. Pasha & Dr. S. Pasha, Lambert Academic Publishing (2012).
ISBN-10:3659217557
4. Communication Skills in English by Prof P N Kharu, Dr Varinder Gandhi
Publisher: Laxmi. EAN: 9788131806920
5. Essential Communication Skills, Teacher Edition with Talking Points by
Patty Ann, Patty Ann; 1st Edition (July 5, 2012). ASIN: B008HYUDWQ
Course Name: Technical and Report Writing (English III)
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Characteristics of Academic, Public, Work and Electronic Communities.
Myths and Realities about Writing. Effective Writing: Discovering and
Planning; Purpose, Thesis, and Audience; Drafting: Drafting Collaboratively,
Drafting in Digital Environments; Revising, Editing, and Proofreading.
Paragraphs: Unfocused Paragraphs, Incoherent Paragraphs, Poorly
Developed Paragraphs, Special-Purpose Paragraphs. Unclear, Clear and
Emphatic Sentences. Reasoning Critically. Reading Critically. Arguing
Persuasively & Logically. Designing Documents. Writing in Online
Communities. Speaking Effectively. Academic Writing for Social and Natural
Sciences: Goals of Writing, Audiences, Writing Tasks, Types of Writing:
Abstract, Informative Report, Lab Report,  Research Report, Project Reports.
Public Writing:  Goals of Public Writing, Public Audiences, Public Writing
Tasks, Types of Public Writing, Public Flyer,  Letter to the Editor.
137
Researching and Writing:  Types of Research Writing, Developing a
Research Question,  Developing a Preliminary Thesis,  Creating a Research
File and a Timeline,  Reading and Note taking,  Summarizing, Paraphrasing,
and Synthesizing. Writing a Position Paper.
Reference Materials:
1. Writer's Companion – The Longman by Chris M. Anson, Robert A.
Schwegler and Marcia F. Muth, Pearson Longman, 4th Edition 2007.
ISBN10: 0-20556-252-3
2. Technical English: Writing, Reading, and Speaking by Pickett and Laster.
8th Edition
3. The Technical Writer’s Companion by Alred, Gerald, Charles T. Brusaw
and Walter E. Oliu, 3rd Edition. ISBN 0-312-25978-6.
ISLAMIC STUDIES
(Compulsory)
Objectives:
This course is aimed at:
1 To provide Basic information about Islamic Studies
2 To enhance understanding of the students regarding Islamic
Civilization
3 To improve Students skill to perform prayers and other worships
4 To enhance the skill of the students for understanding of issues related
to faith and religious life.
Detail of Courses:
Introduction to Quranic Studies
1) Basic Concepts of Quran
2) History of Quran
3) Uloom-ul-Quran
Study of Selected Text of Holly Quran
1) Verses of Surah Al-Baqra Related to Faith(Verse No-284-286)
2) Verses of Surah Al-Hujrat Related to Adab Al-Nabi
(Verse No-1-18)
3) Verses of Surah Al-Mumanoon Related to Characteristics of faithful
(Verse No-1-11)
4) Verses of Surah al-Furqan Related to Social Ethics (Verse No.63-77)
5) Verses of Surah Al-Inam Related to Ihkam(Verse No-152-154)
Study of Selected Text of Holly Quran
1) Verses of Surah Al-Ihzab Related to Adab al-Nabi (Verse
No.6,21,40,56,57,58.)
138
2) Verses of Surah Al-Hashar (18,19,20) Related to thinking, Day of
Judgment
3) Verses of Surah Al-Saf Related to Tafakar,Tadabar  (Verse No-1,14)
Seerat of Holy Prophet  (S.A.W) I
1) Life of Muhammad Bin Abdullah ( Before Prophet Hood)
2) Life of Holy Prophet (S.A.W) in Makkah
3) Important Lessons Derived from the life of Holy Prophet in Makkah
Seerat of Holy Prophet  (S.A.W) II
1) Life of Holy Prophet (S.A.W) in Madina
2) Important Events of Life Holy Prophet in  Madina
3) Important Lessons Derived from the life of Holy Prophet in Madina
Introduction To Sunnah
1) Basic Concepts of Hadith
2) History of Hadith
3) Kinds of Hadith
4) Uloom –ul-Hadith
5) Sunnah & Hadith
6) Legal Position of Sunnah
Selected Study from Text of Hadith
Introduction To Islamic Law & Jurisprudence
1) Basic Concepts of Islamic Law & Jurisprudence
2) History & Importance of Islamic Law & Jurisprudence
3) Sources of Islamic Law & Jurisprudence
4) Nature of Differences in Islamic Law
5) Islam and Sectarianism
Islamic Culture & Civilization
1) Basic Concepts of Islamic Culture & Civilization
2) Historical Development of Islamic Culture & Civilization
3) Characteristics of Islamic Culture & Civilization
4) Islamic Culture & Civilization and Contemporary Issues
Islam & Science
1) Basic Concepts of Islam & Science
2) Contributions of Muslims in the Development of Science
3) Quranic & Science
Islamic Economic System
1) Basic Concepts of Islamic Economic System
2) Means of Distribution of wealth in Islamic Economics
3) Islamic Concept of Riba
4) Islamic Ways of Trade & Commerce
139
Political System of Islam
1) Basic Concepts of Islamic Political System
2) Islamic Concept of Sovereignty
3) Basic Institutions of Govt. in Islam
Islamic History
1) Period of Khlaft-E-Rashida
2) Period of Ummayyads
3) Period of Abbasids
Social System of Islam
1) Basic Concepts of Social System of Islam
2) Elements of Family
3) Ethical Values of Islam
Reference Books:
1) Hameed ullah Muhammad, “Emergence of Islam” , IRI,
Islamabad
2) Hameed ullah Muhammad, “Muslim Conduct of State”
3) Hameed ullah Muhammad, ‘Introduction to Islam
4) Mulana Muhammad Yousaf Islahi,”
5) Hussain Hamid Hassan, “An Introduction to the Study of Islamic Law” leaf
Publication Islamabad, Pakistan.
6) Ahmad Hasan, “Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence” Islamic Research
Institute, International Islamic University, Islamabad (1993)
7) Mir Waliullah, “Muslim Jurisprudence and the Quranic Law of Crimes”
Islamic Book Service (1982)
8) H.S. Bhatia, “Studies in Islamic Law, Religion and Society” Deep & Deep
Publications New Delhi (1989)
9) Dr. Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, “Introduction to Al Sharia Al Islamia” Allama
Iqbal Open University, Islamabad (2001)
Course Name: Ethics
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Follow Institution/University syllabus
140
Pakistan Studies (Compulsory)
Introduction/Objectives:
 Develop vision of historical perspective, government, politics,
contemporary Pakistan, ideological background of Pakistan.
 Study the process of governance, national development, issues arising
in the modern age and posing challenges to Pakistan.
Course Outline:
1. Historical Perspective
a. Ideological rationale with special reference to Sir Syed Ahmed Khan,
Allama Muhammad Iqbal and Quaid-e-Azam Muhammad Ali Jinnah.
b. Factors leading to Muslim separatism
c. People and Land
i. Indus Civilization
ii. Muslim advent
iii. Location and geo-physical features.
2. Government and Politics in Pakistan
Political and constitutional phases:
a. 1947-58
b. 1958-71
c. 1971-77
d. 1977-88
e. 1988-99
f. 1999 onward
3. Contemporary Pakistan
a. Economic institutions and issues
b. Society and social structure
c. Ethnicity
d. Foreign policy of Pakistan and challenges
e. Futuristic outlook of Pakistan
Recommended Books:
1. Burki, Shahid Javed. State & Society in Pakistan, The Macmillan Press
Ltd 1980.
2. Akbar, S. Zaidi. Issue in Pakistan’s Economy. Karachi: Oxford University
Press, 2000.
3. S.M. Burke and Lawrence Ziring. Pakistan’s Foreign policy: An Historical
analysis. Karachi: Oxford University Press, 1993.
4. Mehmood, Safdar. Pakistan Political Roots & Development. Lahore,
1994.
5. Wilcox, Wayne.The Emergence of Bangladesh., Washington: American
Enterprise, Institute of Public Policy Research, 1972.
6. Mehmood, Safdar. Pakistan Kayyun Toota, Lahore: Idara-e-Saqafat-e-
Islamia, Club Road, nd.
141
7. Amin, Tahir. Ethno - National Movement in Pakistan, Islamabad: Institute
of Policy Studies, Islamabad.
8. Ziring, Lawrence. Enigma of Political Development. Kent England:
WmDawson & sons Ltd, 1980.
9. Zahid, Ansar. History & Culture of Sindh. Karachi: Royal Book Company,
1980.
10. Afzal, M. Rafique. Political Parties in Pakistan, Vol. I, II & III. Islamabad:
National Institute of Historical and cultural Research, 1998.
11. Sayeed, Khalid Bin. The Political System of Pakistan. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin, 1967.
12. Aziz, K.K. Party, Politics in Pakistan, Islamabad: National Commission on
Historical and Cultural Research, 1976.
13. Muhammad Waseem, Pakistan Under Martial Law, Lahore: Vanguard,
1987.
14. Haq, Noor ul. Making of Pakistan: The Military Perspective. Islamabad:
National Commission on Historical and Cultural Research, 1993.
Course Name: Professional Practices
Credit Hours: 2
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Computing Profession, Computing Ethics, Philosophy of Ethics. The
Structure of Organizations, Finance and Accounting, Anatomy of a Software
House, Computer Contracts, Intellectual Property Rights, The Framework of
Employee Relations Law and Changing Management Practices, Human
Resource Management and IT, Health and Safety at Work, Software Liability,
Liability and Practice, Computer Misuse and the Criminal Law, Regulation
and Control of Personal Information. Overview of the British Computer
Society Code of Conduct, IEEE Code of Ethics, ACM Code of Ethics and
Professional Conduct, ACM/IEEE Software Engineering Code of Ethics and
Professional Practice. Accountability and Auditing, Social Application of
Ethics.
Reference Materials:
1. Professional Issues in Software Engineering by Frank Bott, Allison
Coleman, Jack Eaton and Diane Rowland, CRC Press; 3rd Edition (2000).
ISBN-10: 0748409513
2. Computer Ethics by Deborah G. Johnson, Pearson; 4th Edition (January 3,
2009). ISBN-10: 0131112414
3. A Gift of Fire: Social, Legal, and Ethical Issues for Computing and the
Internet (3rd Edition) by Sara Baase, Prentice Hall; 3rd Edition (2008).
ISBN-10: 0136008488
4. Applied Professional Ethics  by  Gregory R. Beabout, University Press of
America (1993). ISBN-10: 0819193747.
142
5. The Dark Side of Software Engineering: Evil on Computing Projects by
Johann Rost and Robert L. Glass, Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Pr; 1st
Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 0470597178
University Elective Courses
Course Name: Principles of Accounting
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to Accounting, Accounting Principles, Book Keeping, Basics of
Financial Statements, Adjustments to Financial Statements, The Cash Book,
Bank Reconciliation, Control Accounts, Statement of Cash Flows, Financial
Activities, Property, Plant and Equipment (PPE), Accounting Errors,
Accounting for Partnerships, Balance Sheet.
Reference Materials:
1. Fundamentals of Accounting by Wang’ombe, D. K., Focus Publishers
(2008). ISBN-10: 9966-01-087-4
2. Fundamental Accounting Principles with Connect Plus by John Wild, Ken
Shaw, and Barbara Chiappetta, McGraw-Hill/Irwin; 20th Edition (December
27, 2010). ISBN-10: 0077505980
3. Financial & Managerial Accounting by Jan Williams, Sue Haka, Mark
Bettner and Joseph Carcello, McGraw-Hill/Irwin; 16th Edition (2011). ISBN-
10: 0078111048
4. Principles of Managerial Finance by Lawrence J. Gitman and Chad J.
Zutter, Prentice Hall; 13th Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 0136119468
5. Fundamentals of Financial Management by J. Van Horne and John M
Wachowicz, Prentice Hall; 13th Edition (2008). ISBN-10: 0273713639.
Course Name: Principles of Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to Managers and Management. Organizational Culture and
Environment. Decision Making. The Essence of Manager’s Job. Planning.
Organization Structure and Design. Motivation. Leadership. Communication.
Controlling. The Personnel Function. Job Design and Analysis. Human
Resource Planning. Recruitment and Selections/Testing and Interview. Union
and Management, Compensation Administration, Health and Safety.
Reference Materials:
1. Management by Robbins, S.P. & Coulter, Mary, Prentice Hall; 10th Edition
(November 3, 2008). ISBN-10: 0132090716
143
2. Fundamentals of Management by Robbins, S.P. & DeCenzo, David A,
Prentice Hall; 7th Edition (January 13, 2010). ISBN-13: 978-0132090711
3. Principles of Management by Charles W. L. Hill and Steven McShane,
McGraw-Hill/Irwin; 1st Edition (2006). ISBN-10: 0073530123
4. Management by Richard L. Daft, South-Western College Pub; 10th Edition
(January 27, 2011). ISBN-10: 0538479531
5. Fundamentals of Management by Stephen P. Robbins, David A. DeCenzo
and Mary Coulter, Prentice Hall; 7th Edition (January 13, 2010). ISBN-10:
0136109829.
Course Name: Human Resources Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Managing Human Resources. Understanding the External and Organizational
Environments. Ensuring Fair Treatment and Legal Compliance. HR Planning
for Alignment and Change. Using Job Analysis and Competency Modeling.
Recruiting and Retaining Qualified Employees. Selecting Employees to Fit
the Job and the Organization. Training and Developing a Competitive
Workforce. Conducting Performance Management. Developing an Approach
to Total Compensation. Using Performance-Based Pay to Achieve Strategic
Objectives. Providing Benefits and Services for Employees' Well-Being, Risk
Management. Employee Relations. Risk Management. Health, Safety, and
Employee Well-Being. Understanding Unionization and Collective Bargaining.
Reference Materials:
1. Managing Human Resources by Susan E. Jackson, Randall S. Schuler
and Steve Werner, South-Western College Pub; 11th Edition (June 16,
2011).ISBN-10: 1111580227
2. Management of Human Resources by Gary Dessler, Carolin Rekar Munro
and Nina D. Cole, Pearson Education Canada; 3rd Edition (February 28,
2010). ISBN-10: 0321687140
3. Human Resource Management by Robert L. Mathis and John H. Jackson,
South-Western Cengage Learning; 13th Edition (August 19, 2010). ISBN-
10: 053845315X
4. Human Resource Management Applications: Cases, Exercises, Incidents,
and Skill Builders by Stella M. Nkomo, Myron D. Fottler and  R. Bruce
McAfee, South-Western Cengage Learning; 7th Edition (September 29,
2010). ISBN-10: 0538468076
144
Course Name: Organizational Behaviour
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to OB. People-Centered Organizations and Ethical Conduct.
Organizational Culture. Socialization. Mentoring. Key Individual Differences.
Values. Attitudes. Job Satisfaction and Counterproductive Work Behaviors.
Social Perceptions and Attributions. Foundations of Motivation. Improving Job
Performance with Goals, Feedback, Rewards, and Positive Reinforcement.
Group Dynamics. Developing and Leading Effective Teams. Individual and
Group Decision Making. Managing Conflict and Negotiating. Communicating
in the Digital Age. Leadership, Influence, Empowerment, and Politics.
Organizational Design, Effectiveness, and Innovation.
Reference Materials:
1. Organizational Behavior by Robert Kreitner and  Angelo Kinicki, McGraw-
Hill/Irwin; 10th Edition (January 17, 2012). ISBN-10: 0078029368
2. Organizational Behavior by Stephen P. Robbins and Timothy A. Judge,
Prentice Hall; 15th Edition (January 16, 2012). ISBN-10: 0132834871
3. Meeting the Ethical Challenges of Leadership: Casting Light or Shadow by
Craig E. Johnson, SAGE Publications, Inc; 4th Edition (February 28, 2011).
ISBN-10: 1412982227
Course Name: Principles of Philosophy
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
The Nature of Philosophy. Philosophical Theories: History and Back Ground,
Realism and Idealism, Monism and Dualism, Rationalism, Empiricism,
Criticism, and Empiricism. The Start of Modern Philosophy. Perception and
Reality. Knowledge, Belief and Logic. Space, Time, Causality and Substance.
Mind & Body. Knowledge. Language. Science. Morality. Politics. Law.
Metaphysics.
Reference Materials:
1. An Introduction to Philosophy by Jon Nuttall, Polity; 1st Edition (July 29,
2002). ISBN-10: 0745616631
2. An Introduction To Philosophy by George Stuart Fullerton, CreateSpace
Independent Publishing Platform (July 18, 2011). ISBN-10: 1463688881
3. Philosophy: An Introduction to the Art of Wondering by James L. Christian,
Wadsworth Publishing; 11th Edition (January 26, 2011). ISBN-10:
1111298084
4. Pleasures of Philosophy by Durant, Touchstone; Revised Edition
(December 31, 1999). ISBN-13: 978-0671581107
145
5. Philosophy Basics: A Jargon-Free Guide for Beginners by Doug
Erlandson, Doug Erlandson (September 15, 2011). ASIN: B005NJRTUW
Course Name: Principles of Psychology
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Basics concepts of Psychology and Research Methods. Brain and Behaviour.
Human Development. Sensation and Perception. States of Consciousness.
Conditioning and Learning. Memory. Cognition, Language, Creativity, and
Intelligence. Motivation and Emotion. Sex, Gender, and Sexuality.
Personality. Health, Stress, and Coping. Social Behaviour.
Reference Materials:
1. Psychology: Modules for Active Learning by Dennis Coon and John O.
Mitterer, Wadsworth Publishing; 12th Edition (January 1, 2011). ISBN-10:
1111342849
2. Introduction to Psychology by James W. Kalat, Wadsworth Publishing; 9th
Edition (January 1, 2010). ISBN-10: 0495810762
3. Introduction to Psychology by Rod Plotnik  and  Haig Kouyoumdjian,
Wadsworth Publishing; 9th Edition (February 25, 2010). ISBN-10:
0495903442
4. Psychology by David G. Myers, Worth Publishers; 9th Edition (January 10,
2009). ISBN-10: 1429215976
Course Name: Foreign/regional Language (French/ German/
Chinese/ Arabic)
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Institution/Universities follow their approved syllabus
Course Name: Entrepreneurship
Credit Hours: 3
Pre-requisite: None
Course Outline:
Entrepreneurship and the Entrepreneurial Mind-Set. Entrepreneurial
Intentions and Corporate Entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurial Strategy.
Generating and Exploiting New Entries. Creativity and the Business Idea.
Identifying and Analyzing Domestic and International Opportunities.
Intellectual Property and Other Legal Issues for the Entrepreneur. The
Business Plan. Creating and Starting the Venture. The Marketing Plan. The
Organizational Plan. The Financial Plan. Sources of Capital. Informal Risk
146
Capital, Venture Capital, and Going Public. Strategies for Growth and
Managing the Implication of Growth. Succession Planning and Strategies for
Harvesting and Ending the Venture.
Reference Materials:
1. Entrepreneurship by Robert Hisrich, Michael Peters and Dean Shepherd,
McGraw-Hill/Irwin; 9th Edition (September 27, 2012). ISBN-10:
0078029198
2. Entrepreneurship: Ideas in Action by Cynthia L. Greene, South-Western
Educational Pub; 5th Edition (January 6, 2011). ISBN-10: 0538496894
3. Entrepreneurship by William D. Bygrave and Andrew Zacharakis, Wiley;
2nd Edition (October 12, 2010). ISBN-10: 0470450371
4. Entrepreneurship: Theory, Process, and Practice by Donald F. Kuratko,
South-Western College Pub; 8th Edition (November 14, 2008). ISBN-10:
0324590911
5. Entrepreneurship: Successfully Launching New Ventures by Bruce R.
Barringer and  Duane Ireland, Prentice Hall; 4th Edition (October 27, 2011)
Information Technology Core Courses
Course Name: Web Systems and Technologies
Credit Hours: 3*
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction to Web Applications, TCP/IP Application Services. Web Servers:
Basic Operation, Virtual hosting, Chunked transfers, Caching support,
Extensibility.  SGML, HTML5, CSS3. XML Languages and Applications: Core
XML, XHTML, XHTM MP. Web Service: SOAP, REST, WML, XSL. Web
Services: Operations, Processing HTTP Requests, Processing HTTP
Responses, Cooki Coordination, Privacy and P3P, Complex HTTP
Interactions,  Dynamic Content Delivery. Server Configuration. Server
Security. Web Browsers Architecture and Processes. Active Browser Pages:
JavaScript, DHTML, AJAX. JSON, Approaches to Web Application
Development. Programing in any Scripting language. Search Technologies.
Search Engine Optimization. XML Query Language, Semantic Web, Future
Web Application Framework.
Reference Materials:
1. Web Application Architecture:  Principles, protocols and practices by Leon
Shklar and Richard Rosen, Wiley; 2nd Edition (May 5, 2009). ISBN-10:
047051860X
2. Web Technologies: A Computer Science Perspective by Jeffrey C.
Jackson, Prentice Hall; 1st Edition (August 27, 2006). ISBN-10:
0131856030
147
3. Web Technologies by Uttam Kumar Roy, Oxford University Press, USA
(June 13, 2011). ISBN-10: 0198066228
Course Name: Multimedia Systems and Design
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
What is Multimedia? Multimedia Authoring Tools, Multimedia Authoring,
Multimedia Production, Multimedia Presentation, Automatic Authoring,
Editing and Authoring Tools- (Proprietary/open Source), VRML, Making
Multimedia: Handling Images, Sound, Animation and Video, Planning &
Costing, Designing and Producing. Multimedia Skills and Talent, The Internet
and Multimedia. Designing for the World Wide Web. Delivering Multimedia
Product.
Instructors can devise a Lab work plan using a multimedia Authoring tool in
line with the contents of the syllabus.
Reference Materials:
1. Multimedia Making It Work, 8th Edition by Tay Vaughan, McGraw-Hill
Osborne Media; 8th Edition (October 29, 2010). ISBN-10: 0071748466
2. Fundamentals of Multimedia by  Z. M. Li and  M. S. Drew,  Prentice Hall
(2004), ISBN: 0-13-127256-X
3. Digital Multimedia by N. Chapman and J. Chapman. 2nd Edition, Wiley
2004, ISBN: 0-470-85890-7
4. The Technology of Video and Audio Streaming by David Austerberry,
Focal Press; 2nd Edition (2004). ISBN-10: 0240805801
5. Multimedia Foundations: Core Concepts for Digital Design by Vic Costello,
Ed Youngblood and Susan Youngblood, Focal Press; 1st Edition (2012).
ISBN-10: 0240813944
Course Name: Systems and Network Administration
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks, Operating
Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction To System Administration. SA Components. Server Environment
(Microsoft and Linux). Reliable Products, Server Hardware Costing,
Maintenance Contracts and Spare Parts, Maintaining Data Integrity, Client
Server OS Configuration, Providing Remote Console Access. Comparative
Analysis of OS:  Important Attributes, Key Features, Pros and Cons. Linux
Installation and Verification, Configuring Local Services and Managing Basic
System Issues. Administer Users and Groups. Software Management.
Managing Network Services and Network Monitoring Tools. Boot
148
Management and Process Management. IP Tables and Filtering. Securing
Network Traffic. Advanced File Systems and Logs. Bash Shell Scripting.
Configuring Servers (FTP, NFS, Samba, DHCP, DNS and Apache).
Reference Materials:
1. The Practice of System and Network Administration, Second Edition by
Thomas Limoncelli, Christina Hogan and Strata Chalup, Addison-Wesley
Professional; 2nd Edition (2007). ISBN-10: 0321492668
2. Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 Bible: Administering Enterprise Linux Systems
by William vonHagen, 2011
3. Studyguide for Practice of System and Network Administration by Thomas
A. Limoncelli, Cram101; 2nd Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 1428851755
4. Networking Systems Design and Development by Lee Chao, CRC Press;
1st Edition (December 21, 2009). ISBN-10: 142009159X (TB2)
5. Windows Administration Latest Edition, Microsoft Press
6. Linux Administration Guide Latest Edition
Course Name: Network Security
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: System and Network Administration
Course Outline:
Security Concepts, Such as Confidentiality, Integrity, Authenticity, Availability
etc. Symmetric and Asymmetric Cryptography and Their Uses; Key
Distribution and Digital Signatures; Discretionary and Mandatory Access
Control Policies for Confidentiality and Integrity. Communication Protocols for
Authentication, Confidentiality and Message Integrity. Network Security;
System Security, Intrusion Detection and Malicious Code. Security Models
and Security Evaluation. Administration of Security. Legal Aspects of
Computer Security.
Reference Materials:
1. Security in Computing by Charles P. Pfleeger and Shari Lawrence
Pfleeger, Prentice Hall; 4th Edition (2006). ISBN-10: 0132390779
2. Network Security Fundamentals by Gert DeLaet and  Gert Schauwers,
Cisco Press; 1st Edition (September 18, 2004). ISBN-10: 1587051672
3. Network Security Bible by Eric Cole, Wiley; 2nd Edition (September 8,
2009). ISBN-10: 0470502495
4. Network Security Essentials: Applications and Standards by William
Stallings, Prentice Hall; 4th Edition (March 22, 2010). ISBN-10:
0136108059
149
Course Name: Cloud Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Internet Architecture and Protocols
Course Outline:
Overview of Distributed Computing, Emergence of Cloud Computing, Global
Nature of the Cloud, Cloud-Based Service Offerings, Grid Computing,
Reliability of Cloud Model,  Benefits of Cloud Model,  Legal Issues,  Key
Characteristics of Cloud Computing,  Challenges for the Cloud. The Evolution
of Cloud Computing. Web Services Delivered from the Cloud:
Communication-as-a-Service (CaaS), Infrastructure-as-a-Service, Monitoring-
as-a-Service (MaaS), Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS), Software-as-a-Service
(SaaS), Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS),
Software as a Service (SaaS). Building Cloud Networks. Virtualization.
Federation, Presence, Identity, and Privacy in the Cloud. Security in the
Cloud. Common Standards in Cloud Computing. End-User Access to Cloud
Computing. Mobile Internet Devices and the Cloud.
Reference Materials:
1. Cloud Computing Implementation, Management, and Security by John W.
Rittinghouse and James F. Ransome, Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
(2010). ISBN 978-1-4398-0680-7.
2. Cloud Computing Explained: Implementation Handbook for Enterprises by
John Rhoton, Recursive Press (2009). ISBN-10: 0956355609.
3. Cloud Computing Bible by Barrie Sosinsky, Wiley; 1st Edition (2011).
ISBN-10: 0470903562.
4. Securing the Cloud: Cloud Computer Security Techniques and Tactics by
Vic (J.R.) Winkler, Syngress; 1st Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 1597495921.
Course Name: System Integration and Architecture
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Enterprise Architecture (EA) and Enterprise Engineering (EE). Balanced
Scorecard and Strategy Maps (BSSM). Using Strategy Analysis (SA).
Governance Analysis Using EA. Enterprise Architecture Methods. Using
Business-Driven Data Mapping for Integrated Data. Strategic Modeling for
Rapid Delivery of EA. Strategic Alignment, Activity and Workflow Modeling,
and Business Rules. Using Business Normalization for Future Business
Needs. Menu Design, Screen Design, Performance Analysis, and Process
Modeling. Enterprise Application Integration Concepts. Enterprise Portal
Technologies for Integration. Web Services for Real-Time Integration.
Service-Oriented Architecture for Integration. Managing and Delivering EA.
Future Directions in EA and Integration.
150
Reference Materials:
1. Enterprise Architecture for Integration: Rapid Delivery Methods and
Technologies by Clive Finkelstein, Artech House Print on Demand; 1st
Edition (March 31, 2006). ISBN-10: 1580537138
2. Systems Integration (Systems Engineering) by Jeffrey Grady, CRC-Press;
1st Edition (September 30, 1994). ISBN-10: 0849378311
3. The Business of Systems Integration by Andrea Prencipe, Andrew Davies,
Mike Hobday. Oxford University Press, USA (June 30, 2005). ISBN-10:
019926323X
4. Enterprise Integration: An Architecture for Enterprise Application and
Systems Integration by Fred A. Cummins, Wiley; 1st Edition (February 14,
2002). ISBN-10: 0471400106.
Course Title: Technology Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to Technology Management, TM activities and tools, The TM
framework, TM activities behind technological capabilities. TM Activities:
Identification, Selection, Acquisition, Exploitation, Protection, Learning. TM
Tools. TM Tools-Patent Analysis. TM Tools-Portfolio Management. TM Tools-
Roadmapping. TM Tools-Value Analysis/Value Innovation. TM-Functions:
Planning and Forecasting, Decision Making, Organizing, Leading Technical
People.
Reference Materials:
1. Technology Management: Activities and Tools by Dilek Cetindamar, Rob
Phaal, and  David Probert, Palgrave Macmillan (April 27, 2010). ISBN-10:
0230233341 (TB1)
2. Managing Engineering and Technology by Lucy C. Morse  And  Daniel L.
Babcock, Prentice Hall; 5th Edition (August 20, 2009). ISBN-10:
0136098096 (TB2)
3. Management of Technology: Managing Effectively in Technology-
Intensive Organizations by Hans J. Thamhain, Wiley; 2nd Edition (May 25,
2005). ISBN-10: 0471415510
4. Managing Information Technology by Carol V. Brown, Daniel W.
DeHayes,  Jeffrey A. Hoffer, Wainright E. Martin, and William C. Perkins,
Prentice Hall; 7th Edition (March 18, 2011). ISBN-10: 0132146320
5. Technology Management: Activities and Tools by Dilek Cetindamar, Rob
Phaal, and  David Probert, Palgrave Macmillan (April 27, 2010). ISBN-10:
0230233341
151
Contents of Information Technology Supporting
Courses
Course Name: Information Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Information Systems Concepts, Types, Advantages, and Global Challenges.
System Development Life Cycle. System Investigation, Systems Analysis,
Systems Design, Environmental Design Considerations, System
Implementations, Ethical and Social Issues, Systems Operations and
Maintenance. Themes in information systems development. System
Development Techniques. Information Systems Development Tools and
toolsets. Information Systems Development Methodologies.
Reference Materials:
1. Fundamentals of Information Systems by  Ralph Stair and George
Reynolds, Course Technology; 6th Edition (January 1, 2011). ISBN-10:
0840062184
2. Information Systems Development: Methodologies, Techniques & Tools
by David Avison and Guy Fitzgerald, McGraw-Hill; 4th Edition (May 1,
2006). ISBN-10: 0077114175
3. Introduction to Information Systems: Supporting and Transforming
Business by R. Kelly Rainer  and  Casey G. Cegielski, Wiley; 3rd Edition
(June 16, 2010). ISBN-10: 0470473525
4. Information Systems by Richard T. Watson, Create Space Independent
Publishing Platform (March 20, 2012). ISBN-10: 1475074921
Course Name: Information Technology Project Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Software Engineering, Technology Management
Course Outline:
Introduction to Project Management. The Project Management and
Information Technology Context. The Project Management Process Groups.
Project Integration Management. Project Scope Management. Project Time
Management. Project Cost Management. Project Quality Management.
Project Human Resource Management. Project Communications
Management. Project Risk Management. Project Procurement Management.
Project Management Tools.
Reference Materials:
1. Information Technology Project Management by Kathy Schwalbe, Course
Technology; 6th Edition (July 22, 2010). ISBN-10: 1111221758
152
2. A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge, 3rd Edition
(PMBOK Guides), ISBN-13: 978-1930699458
3. IT Project Management: On Track from Start to Finish by Joseph Phillips,
McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 3rd Edition (February 25, 2010). ISBN-10:
0071700439
4. Information Technology Project Management by Jack T. Marche, Wiley;
3rd Edition (January 6, 2009). ISBN-10: 0470371935
5. Effective Project Management: Traditional, Agile, Extreme by Robert K.
Wysocki, Wiley; 6th Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 111801619X
Course Name: Internet Architecture and Protocols
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communications and Networks
Course Outline:
Terms and Concepts. Functioning of the Internet. Review of the TCP/IP
Model. Network Layer Addresses (IP Addresses). DHCP. DNS Servers&
Configuration. Error Recovery Operations. Internet Local Area Networks
(LANs). IEEE Standards. (CSMA/CD), (CSMA/CA) LANs. CSMA/CD Protocol
Stacks. Review of Ethernet. CSMA/CD Frames. Subnetwork Access Protocol
(SNAP). CSMA/CD. Ethernet Layers. CSMA/CD Standards. The Token Ring
Network. The Ring Configuration. FDDI. FDDI Configuration. The FDDI
Layers. FDDI Backbones. Switched LANs. Fast Ethernet. Fast Ethernet and
the Layered Model. Auto-Negotiation. Gigabit Ethernet. Internet Wide Area
Networks (WANs). Message Switching and Packet Switching. Frame Relay.
Cell Relay. Comparing WAN Technologies. X.25, Frame Relay, and ATM
Virtual Circuits. Mapping IP Addresses to “Labels”: Label or Tag Switching. IP
and ICMP. Time-to-Live. Destination Unreachable. Redirect. Router
Discovery. Pings. IPv6. TCP and UDP. Round Trip Time (RTT). Nagle's
Algorithm. The Slow Start. Congestion Window and Threshold Size. The
User Datagram Protocol (UDP). The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP) and The
Layer 2 Tunneling Protocol (L2TP). Routing Protocols. Autonomous Systems.
Multiple Routing Protocols. Operation of Internet Operates with the Routing
Protocols. Levels of Access. Peering through the Routing Protocols.
Reference Materials:
1. Internet Architecture: An Introduction to IP Protocols by Uyless D. Black,
Prentice Hall PTR; 1st Edition (2000). ISBN-10: 0130199060
2. Internet Routing Architectures by Sam Halabi, Cisco Press; 2nd Edition
(2000). ISBN-10: 157870233X
3. TCP/IP Protocol Suite by Behrouz A. Forouzan, McGraw-Hill
Science/Engineering/Math; 4th Edition (2009). ISBN-10: 0073376043
4. Next-Generation Internet: Architectures and Protocols by Andrei Gurtov,
Cambridge University Press (2011). ISBN-10: 0521113687
153
Course Name: Object-Oriented Analysis and Design
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Principles of Object Technology. OOP Review. Principles of Modeling.
OOA&D Overview. OO Development Process. Requirements Engineering,
Analysis, and Specification: Requirements Engineering, Use Cases,
Prototyping, Class Models. Interaction Diagrams. Verification and Validation.
Architectural and Detailed Design. Class Diagrams. Interaction Diagrams.
State Machines and Diagrams. Implementation, Package Diagrams. Activity
Diagrams. OO Patterns, Verification and Validation. Note: Students may also
be introduced to Object Diagram, Component Diagram, Package Diagram,
Deployment Diagram, Network Diagram.
Reference Materials:
1. Applying UML and patterns: An introduction to Object-Oriented Analysis
and Design and Iterative Development by Craig Larman, Prentice Hall; 3rd
Edition (October 30, 2004). ISBN-10: 0131489062
2. Using UML: Software Engineering with Objects and Components by
Perdita Stevens, Addison-Wesley; 2nd Edition (February 13, 2006). ISBN-
10: 0321269675
3. Fundamental of Object-Oriented Design in UML by Meiler Page-Jones,
Addison Wesley, 2000. ISBN: 020169946X.
4. The Unified Modeling Language User Guide by G. Booch, J. Rambaugh
and I. Jakobson, Addison-Wesley Professional; 2nd Edition (2005). ISBN-
10: 0321267974.
5. The Unified Modeling Language Reference Manual by James Rumbaugh,
Ivar Jacobson and Grady Booch, Addison-Wesley Professional; 2nd
Edition (2004). ISBN-10: 032171895X.
Course Name: Database Administration & Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Installation of DBMS; SQL* Plus; DBA Tools. DBMS Physical Structure &
Architectural Components: Server, Instance, SGA, Shared Pool, Library
Cache, Data Dictionary Cache, Large Pool, Processes. Startup and
Shutdown Database. Managing Instances.  Managing Files. Creating
Database and Data dictionary. Managing Tablespaces. Operations with
Tablespaces. Data File Management, Segments, Block. Managing Undo
Data, Undo Data Statistics: Managing Tables and Users. Indexes
Management, Maintaining Data Integrity, Constraints. Managing Privileges.
Server Side Configuration. Client Side Configuration. Usage and
Configuration of Oracle Shared Server. Backup and Recovery. Sizing Shared
154
Pool, Sizing Buffer Cache, I/O Issues. Tuning Rollback Segments. Tuning
Shared Servers, Types of Locks, Block Efficiency, Storage hierarchy,
Avoiding Dynamic allocation, Statistics, PCTFREE and PCTUSED,
Monitoring Index Usage.
Reference Materials:
1. Database Administration: The Complete Guide to DBA Practices and
Procedures by Craig S. Mullins, Addison-Wesley Professional; 2nd Edition
(October 21, 2012). ISBN-10: 0321822943
2. Database Systems: A Practical Approach to Design, Implementation and
Management by Thomas M. Connolly and Carolyn E. Begg, Addison-
Wesley; 5th Edition (2009). ISBN-10: 0321523067
3. Online Material URL http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/index.html (this
should be avoided)
Contents of Information Technology Elective Courses
Course Name: Telecommunication Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Communication Channel and the Communication Network Technologies.
Digital Telephony. Switching and Signaling Systems. Switching Fabric
Interfaces and ICs, Optics and the Future. Cellular Systems. Fixed Wireless
Access Technologies. Digital Subscriber Loop. Transmission Techniques.
Telecommunication Systems Testing. Embedded Systems Design for
Telecommunications.
Reference Materials:
1. Essentials of Modern Telecommunications Systems by Nihal Kularatna
and  Dileeka Dias, Artech House (May 2004). ISBN-10: 1580534910
2. The Irwin Handbook of Telecommunications by James Harry Green,
McGraw-Hill; 5th Edition (October 26, 2005). ISBN-10: 0071452222
3. Telecommunications Essentials: The Complete Global Source for
Communications Fundamentals, Data Networking and the Internet, and
Next-Generation Networks by Lillian Goleniewski, Addison-Wesley
Professional; 1st Edition (January 5, 2002). ISBN-10: 0201760320
4. Fundamentals of Communications Systems by Michael Fitz, McGraw-Hill
Professional; 1st Edition (June 27, 2007). ISBN-10: 0071482806
155
Course Name: Routing & Switching
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Internet Architecture & Protocols
Course Outline:
Ethernet Basic: Ethernet Layer 1, Ethernet Layer 2, Switching and Bridging
Logic, SPAN and RSPAN.: VLANs, VLAN Trunking Protocols, VLAN
Trunking: ISL and 802.1Q, Configuring PPPoE. Spanning Tree Protocol:
802.1d Spanning Tree Protocol, Optimizing Spanning Tree, Protecting STP,
Troubleshooting Complex Layer 2 Issues. IP Addressing. IP Services. IP
Forwarding (Routing). EIGRP. OSPF. IGP Routing. Fundamentals of BGP
Operations. BGP Routing Policies. Wide Area Network. IP Multicasting. IP
Multicast Routing.
Reference Materials:
1. CCIE Routing and Switching Certification Guide by Wendell Odom, Rus
Healy and Denise Donohue, Cisco Press; 4th Edition (December 18,
2009). ISBN-10: 1587059800
2. Packet Guide to Routing and Switching by Bruce Hartpence, O'Reilly
Media (September 3, 2011). ISBN-10: 1449306551
3. CCIE Routing and Switching v4.0 Quick Reference by Brad Ellis, Jacob
Uecker and Steven Means, Cisco Press (October 4, 2010). ASIN:
B00452V45O
Course Name: Network Design and Management
Credit Hours: 3 (Lab may be assigned or adjusted by the University)
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Analyzing Business Goals and Constraints. Top-Down Network Design
Methodology. Characterizing the Existing Internetwork. Designing a Network
Topology. Designing Models for Addressing and Numbering. Selecting
Switching and Routing Protocols. Developing Network Security Strategies.
Developing Network Management Strategies. Physical Network Design.
Selecting Technologies and Devices for Enterprise Networks. Testing
Network Design. Optimizing Network Design. Documenting  Network Design.
Network Management Standards & Models. SNMP Management. SNMP
Management. Broadband Network Management.
Reference Materials:
1. Top-Down Network Design by Priscilla Oppenheimer, Cisco Press; 3rd
Edition (September 3, 2010). ISBN-10: 1587202832  (TB1)
2. Network Management: Principles and Practice by Mani Subramanian;
Timothy A. Gonsalves; N. Usha Rani,  Pearson Education India (2010).
ISBN-10: 81-3172-759-9
156
3. Networking Systems Design and Development by Lee Chao, CRC Press;
1st Edition (December 21, 2009). ISBN-10: 142009159X (TB2)
4. Networks: Design and Management by Steven Karris, Orchard
Publications (August 2002). ISBN-10: 0970951140
5. Network Warrior by Gary A. Donahue, O'Reilly Media; 2nd Edition (May 13,
2011). ASIN: B004W8ZL3W.
Course Name: Network Programming
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Operating Systems
Course Outline:
The Network Programming course is aimed at developing Network
programming concepts and skills in general. Unix Programming Environment,
TCP Protocol suite, Socket Programming , UDP and TCP Sockets, I/O
Multiplexing including Non-blocking I/O, Advanced Socket Options, Name
and Address Conversions, IPv4 and IPv6 Interoperability, Unix Domain
Protocols, Broadcasting and Multicasting, Routing and Communication, Pipes
and FIFO’s Message Queues, Mutexes and Locks, Semaphores, POSIX
Shared Memory, Doors and RPC (Remote Procedure Calls).
Reference Materials:
1. UNIX Network Programming Volume I by Richard Steven, Prentice Hall;
2nd Edition (September 4, 1998). ISBN-10: 0130810819
2. Windows System Programming by Johnson M. Hart, Addison-Wesley
Professional; 4 Edition (February 26, 2010). ISBN-10: 0321657748
3. The Linux Programming Interface: A Linux and UNIX System
Programming Handbook by Michael Kerrisk, No Starch Press; 1st Edition
(October 28, 2010). ISBN-10: 1593272200
4. Linux Kernel Development by Robert Love, Addison-Wesley Professional;
3rd Edition (July 2, 2010). ISBN-10: 0672329468
5. System Software: An Introduction to Systems Programming (3rd Edition)
by Leland L. Beck, Addison Wesley (1996). ASIN: B0084YEEWO.
157
Course Name: Computer Game Development
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Structures & Algorithms
Course Outline:
Introduction to Game Development, Platform and Player Modes, What Is The
Framework? Goals And Genres? What Are The Possibilities? Player
Elements, Player Motivation, Geographic, Psychographics. Demographics,
Gender, Generation, Rating, Applying Player Market to Platform. Story and
Character Development: Classic Charters, Traditional Story Structure, Story
Element. Plot, Game Story Devices, Game Characters. Character
Development Element, Point-of-view, Visual Character Development, Verbal
Character Development, Movement. Visual Character Development, Verbal
Character Development, Movements, Character Description, Game
Storytelling and Documentation. Gameplay: Rules to Play, Interactivity
Modes, Game theory, Challenges, Balance. Levels: Level Design, Structure,
Time, Space. Interface: Playe-Centerd Design, Interface & Game Feature,
Interface Types, Usability. Audio: Importance of Game Audio, Sound Effect,
Voiceover, Music. Company Role, Team Roles, Tools, Business Side of
Game Development. Production and Management, Development Phases,
Game Documentation.
Reference Materials:
1. Game Development Essentials by Jeannie Novak, Delmar Cengage
Learning; 3rd Edition (August 17, 2011). ISBN-10: 1111307652
2. Game Development Essentials: An Introduction by Jeannie Novak,
Delmar Cengage Learning; 3rd Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 1111307652
3. Game Development Essentials: Mobile Game Development by Kimberly
Unger and Jeannie Novak, Delmar Cengage Learning; 1st Edition (2011).
ISBN-10: 1418052655
4. Game Development Essentials: Game Interface Design by Kevin
Saunders and Jeannie Novak, Delmar Cengage Learning; 2nd Edition
(2012). ISBN-10: 1111642885
5. Game Development Essentials: Online Game Development by Rick Hall
and Jeannie Novak, Delmar Cengage Learning; 1st Edition (2008). ISBN-
10: 1418052671
Course Title: Multimedia Technologies
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites:
Course Outline:
What is Multimedia? Text, Multimedia Authoring and Tools, Multimedia
Authoring, Multimedia Production, Multimedia Presentation,  Automatic
Authoring;  Editing and Authoring Tools- (Adobe Premiere, Macromedia
Director, Macromedia Flash, Dreamweaver), VRML, Handling Images,
158
Sound,  Making Animation and Video, Making Multimedia, Multimedia Skills,
Planning and Costing, Designing and Producing, Content and Talent, The
Internet and Multimedia, Designing for the World Wide Web, Delivering
Multimedia Product. Instructors need to devise a content delivery and Lab
work plan using a multimedia Authoring tool in line with the contents of the
textbook.
Reference Materials:
1. Multimedia Making It Work 8th Edition by Tay Vaughan, McGraw-Hill
Osborne Media; 8th Edition (October 29, 2010). ISBN-10: 0071748466
2. Fundamentals of Multimedia by  Z. M. Li and  M. S. Drew,  Prentice Hall
(2004), ISBN: 0-13-127256-X
3. Digital Multimedia by N. Chapman and J. Chapman. 2nd Edition, Wiley
2004, ISBN: 0-470-85890-7
4. The Technology of Video and Audio Streaming by David Austerberry,
Focal Press; 2nd Edition (2004). ISBN-10: 0240805801
5. Multimedia Security: WaTermarking, Steganography, and Forensics by
Frank Y. Shih, CRC Press; 1st Edition (2012), ISBN-10: 1439873313
Course Name: 3D Modeling & Animation
Credit Hours: 3*
Prerequisites: Multimedia Systems and Design
Course Outline:
Introduction to 3D Modeling & Animation, History of Computer Graphics and
Special Effects. Polygons, Polygon Meshes, Extruding, Controlling Edges
and Edges Loop, Subdividing and Simplifying, Combining Meshes, Polygon
Count, Normals, UV Coordinates. NURBS, Advantages and Disadvantages
of NURBS. Subdivision Surfaces. Deforming, Sculpting and Special
Selections, Morph Targets, Lattices and Curves, Specialized Deformers,
Managing Soft and Rigid Bodies. Managing Animation. Coloring, Shaders,
Ray Tracing, Photon Mapping. Working with Textures, Shading, UV Mapping,
Paining in 3D, Changing Geometry, Seamless Reporting Pattern, Multiple
Maps. Light Effect. Virtual Camera, Faking Camera Effects,  Matching Virtual
Cameras to Real One, Cameras and Image Planes, Animating the Camera,
Camera Views, Camera Movements. Environments, Rendering.  Procedures
and Graphs. Scripting. Animation Tools.
Reference Materials:
1. 3D Art Essentials: The Fundamentals of 3D Modeling, Texturing, and
Animation by Ami Chopine, Focal Press; 1st Edition (March 23, 2011).
ISBN-10: 0240814711
2. 3D Modeling, Animation, and Rendering: An Illustrated Lexicon, Colour
Edition by Michael E. Mortenson, Create Space Independent Publishing
Platform (2010). ISBN-10: 1453728481
159
3. The Complete Guide to Blender Graphics: Computer Modeling and
Animation by John M. Blain, A K Peters/CRC Press; 1st Edition (2012).
ISBN-10: 1466517034
4. Digital Modeling by William Vaughan, New Riders; 1st Edition (2012).
ISBN-10: 0321700899
5. Blender Game Engine: Beginner's Guide by bacone Victor kuller, Packt
Publishing (2012). ISBN-10: 1849517029
Course Name: Mobile Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Internet Architecture & Protocols, Web Systems and
Technologies
Course Outline:
Introduction to Mobile Computing, Architecture of Mobile Software
Applications, Mobile Development Frameworks and Tools. Creating
Consumable Web Services for Mobile Devices. Memory Management.
Mobile Applications. Mobile User-Interface Design. Dynamic Linking.
Concurrency. Managing Resources. Introduction to Mobile Application
Development with Android. Introduction to Mobile Application  Development
with IOS. Introduction to Mobile Application  Development with Windows
Phone. Introduction to Mobile Application Development with Blackberry.
Reference Materials:
1. Programming Mobile Devices: An Introduction for Practitioners by Tommi
Mikkonen, Wiley; 1st Edition (March 19, 2007). ISBN-10: 0470057386.
2. Professional Mobile Application Development by Jeff McWherter &  Scott
Gowell, Wrox; 1st Edition (September 4, 2012). ISBN-10: 1118203909
3. Mobile Computing Principles: Designing and Developing Mobile
Applications with UML and XML by Reza B'Far and Roy T. Fielding,
Cambridge University Press (2004). ISBN-10: 0521817331.
4. Fundamentals of Mobile and Pervasive Computing by Frank Adelstein,
Sandeep KS Gupta, Golden Richard III and Loren Schwiebert, McGraw-
Hill Professional; 1st Edition (2004). ISBN-10: 0071412379.
Course Name: Software Agents Technology
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Web Systems and Technologies
Course Outline:
Basics of Intelligent Agents. Intelligent Agents Application. Desktop Agents.
Internet Agents. Web search Agents, Information Filtering Agents,
Personalized Newspaper, Offline Delivery Agents, URL-minder, Bargain
Finder. Intranet Agents. Mobile Agents. Technology of Intelligent Agents.
Agent Machinery. Agent Content. Agent Access. Agent Security. Developing
Agent Applications.
160
Reference Materials:
1. Intelligent Agent Source book by Caglayan, Alper, John Wiley and Sons
Ltd (1997). ISBN: 9780471153276
2. Multiagent Systems: A Modern Approach to Distributed Artificial
Intelligence by Gerhard Weiss, The MIT Press (July 31, 2000). ISBN-10:
0262731312
3. Design of Agent-Based Models by Tomas Salamon, Tomas Bruckner
(September 1, 2011). ISBN-10: 8090466117
4. Intelligent Software Agents: Foundations and Applications by Walter
Brenner, Rüdiger Zarnekow, Hartmut Wittig and A.S. Rudd, Springer,
(July 31, 2012). ISBN-10: 3642804861
5. Agent Technology for E-Commerce by Maria Fasli, Wiley; 1st Edition
(March 6, 2007). ISBN-10: 0470030305.
Course Name: E-Commerce Applications Development
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Web Technologies
Course Outline:
An overview of e-Commerce & Models, Planning an e-Commerce
Framework, Managing Products and Categories, Product Variations and User
Uploads, Enhancing the User Experience, The Shopping Basket, The
Checkout and Order Process, Shipping and Tax, Discounts, Vouchers, and
Referrals, Checkout, Taking Payment for Orders, User Account
Management, Administration: Dashboard, Managing Products and
Categories, Managing Orders, Customers, Refunds, Voucher Codes,
Shipping, Deploying, Security, and Maintenance, SEO.
Reference Materials:
1. PHP 5 E-commerce Development by Michael Peacock, Packt Publishing
(January 20, 2010). ISBN-10: 184719964X
2. Introduction to E-Commerce by Jeffrey F. Rayport, McGraw-Hill,  2nd
Edition (2007). ISBN-10: 0071232664
3. E-Commerce by Kenneth Laudon and Carol Guercio Traver, Prentice Hall;
8th Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 0138018812
4. e-Business and e-Commerce How to Program by Harvey M. Deitel, Paul
J. Deitel and Tem R. Nieto, Prentice Hall; 1st Edition (2000). ISBN-10:
013028419X
5. The Complete E-Commerce Book: Design, Build & Maintain a Successful
Web-based Business by Janice Reynolds, Cmp Books (2000). ISBN-10:
157820061X
161
Course Name: Enterprise Application Development
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Object-Oriented Programming Review, Software Architectures Overview,
Challenges and Platform of Enterprise Application Development, J2EE
Scenarios, J2EE Platform Technologies, The Client Tier, The Web Tier, The
Enterprise JavaBeans Tier, Integrating with the Enterprise Information
System Tier, Packaging and Deployment, Transaction Management,
Security, J2EE Internationalization and Localization, Architecture of the
Sample Application.
Reference Materials:
1. Designing Enterprise Applications with the J2EE™ Platform by Inderjeet
Singh; Beth Stearns; Mark Johnson; 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall (March 25,
2002). Print ISBN-10: 0-201-78790-3
2. Mastering Enterprise JavaBeans 3.0 by Sriganesh, R.P., Brose, G., And
Silverman, M. Wiley Publishing, Indianapolis, (2006). ISBN 0-471-78541-
5.
3. Core J2EE Patterns: Best Practices and Design Strategies by Deepak
Alur, Dan Malks and  John Crupi, Prentice Hall; 2nd Edition (May 10,
2003). ISBN-10: 0131422464
4. Sun Certified Enterprise Architect for Java EE Study Guide by Mark Cade
and Humphrey Sheil, Prentice Hall; 2nd Edition (February 8, 2010). ISBN-
10: 0131482033
Course Name: Distributed Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Web Systems and Technologies
Course Outline:
Centralized and Decentralized Systems, Taxonomy Dependency
Considerations. Discovery Protocols. Structured Document Types.
Distributed Security Techniques. Hash Functions. Digital Signature, Secure
Channels, Secure Mobile Code. The Web as Distributed Environment: URI
Templates, HTTP and Security, Representational State Transfer, The
Semantic Web.  Peer-2-Peer Environments. Volunteer Computing. Web
Services: Architecture and Development, Service-Oriented Architecture.
Distributed Objects and Agent Technologies. Grid Computing. P2P
Applications Protocols and Architectures. Freenet. Middleware Protocols and
Architectures. Web Services Protocols. Distributed Object Deployment Using
Jini. P2P Deployment Using Jxta. Web Services Deployment.
162
Reference Materials:
1. From P2P and Grids to Services on the Web: Evolving Distributed
Communities by Ian J. Taylor  Ian J. Taylor and  Andrew Harrison,
Springer; 2nd Edition (November 14, 2008). ISBN-10: 1848001223.
2. Peer-to-Peer : Harnessing the Power of Disruptive Technologies by Andy
Oram, O'Reilly Media; 1st Edition (March 15, 2001)
3. Structured Peer-to-Peer Systems: Fundamentals of Hierarchical
Organization, Routing, Scaling, and Security by Dmitry Korzun and
Andrei  Gurtov, Springer, (November 12, 2012).
4. From P2P to Web Services and Grids by Ian Taylor, Springer-Verlag,
2005, ISBN: 1-85233-869-5.
Course Title: Mobile Application Development
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Web Technologies
Course Outline:
What is Android? Installing and Configuring the Android SDK Manager,
Creating Android Application, Anatomy of an Android Application. Eclipse.
Fragments, Calling Built-In Applications Using Intents, Displaying
Notifications. Components of a Screen, Adapting to Display Orientation,
Managing Changes to Screen Orientation, Utilizing the Action Bar, Creating
the User Interface. Listening for UI Notifications. Views, User Preferences.
Presisting Data. Sharing Data. Sending SMS Messages. Getting Feedback.
Sending E-mail. Displaying Maps, Consuming Web Services Using HTTP,
Accessing Web Services. Creating Services. Threading. Android games
Development, Publishing Android Applications. Handling Telephone Calls,
Fonts.
Reference Materials:
1. Beginning Android 4 Application Development by Wei-Menge Lee, John
Wiley & Sons, 2012
2. Beginning Android 4 by Grant Allen, Apress, (2011), ISBN: 1430239840.
3. Beginning Android games by Mario Zechner, Apress, (2011), ISBN:
1430230428
4. Pro Android 4 by Satya Komatineni and Dave MacLean, (2012),
ISBN:1430239301 Apress
5. Professional Android 4 Application Development by Reto Meier, Wiley,
(2012), ISBN:1118237226
163
Course Name: Web Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Web Systems and Technologies
Course Outline:
An Introduction to Web Engineering. Requirements Engineering for Web
Applications. Web Applications Modeling. Web Application Architectures.
Technology-away Web Application Design. Technologies for Web
Applications. Testing Web Applications. Operation and Maintenance of Web
Application. Web Project Management. Web Application Development
Process. Usability of Web Applications. Performance of Web Applications.
Security for Web Applications. The Semantic Web.
Reference Materials:
1. Web Engineering: The Discipline of Systematic Development of Web
Applications by Gerti Kappel, Birgit Pr ¨ oll, Siegfried Reich, Werner
Retschitzegger, Springer; Softcover reprint of hardcover 1st Edition. 2008
Edition (December 10, 2010). ISBN-10: 184996677X
2. Web Engineering by Emilia Mendes and Nile Mosley, Springer; Softcover
reprint of hardcover 1st Edition. 2006 Edition (November 9, 2010). ISBN-
10: 3642066453
3. Web Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach by Roger Pressman and
David Lowe, McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math; 1st Edition (January
22, 2008). ISBN-10: 0073523291
4. Web Application Architecture: Principles, Protocols and Practices by Leon
Shklar and Rich Rosen, Wiley; 2nd Edition (May 5, 2009). ISBN-10:
047051860X
5. Web Engineering by Emilia Mendes and Nile Mosley, Springer; Softcover
reprint of hardcover 1st Ed. 2006 Edition (November 9, 2010). ISBN-10:
3642066453
6. W3C Online Resources.
Course Name: Data Warehousing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Data Warehousing: History, Characteristics, Architecture, Data Staging and
ETL, Multi-Dimensional Model, Meta-data, Accessing Data Warehouse. Data
Warehouse System Lifecycle. Risk Factors, Data Mart Design Phases,
Methodological Framework. Testing Data Marts. Analysis and Reconciliation
of Data Sources. User Requirement Analysis. Conceptual Modeling.
Conceptual Design. Workload and Data Volume. Logical Modeling: MOLAP
and HOLAP Systems, ROLAP Systems, Views, Temporal Scenarios. Logical
Design. Data-staging Design: Population Reconciled Databases, Cleansing
Data, Populating Dimensional Tables, Populating Fact Tables, Populating
164
Materialized View. Indexes for the Data Warehouse: B*-Tree Indexes, Bitmap
Indexes, Projection Indexes, Join & Star Indexes, Spatial Indexes, Join-
Algorithm. Physical Design: Optimizers, Index Selection, Splitting a Database
into Tablespaces, Allocating Data Files, Disk Block Size. Data Warehouse
Project Documentation: Data Warehouse Levels,  Data Mart Level, Fact
Level. Case Studies and Tools for Data Warehousing.
Reference Materials:
1. Data Warehouse Design: Modern Principles and Methodologies by Matteo
Golfarelli   and Stefano Rizzi, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 1st Edition (May 26,
2009). ISBN-10: 0071610391
2. Building the Data Warehouse by William H. Inmon, Wiley; 4th Edition (2005).
ISBN-10: 0764599445
3. The Data Warehouse Lifecycle Toolkit : Expert Methods for Designing,
Developing, and Deploying Data Warehouses by Ralph Kimball, Laura Reeves,
Margy Ross and Warren Thornthwaite, Wiley (August 13, 1998). ISBN-10:
0471255475
4. Data Warehousing Fundamentals for IT Professionals by Paulraj Ponniah,
Wiley; 2nd Edition (2010). ISBN-10: 0470462078
Course Name: Data Mining
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Data-Mining Concepts, Preparing the Data, Data Reduction, Learning From
Data, Statistical Methods, Decision Trees and Decision Rules, Artificial
Neural Networks, Ensemble Learning, Cluster Analysis, Association Rules,
Web Mining and Text Mining, Genetic Algorithms, Fuzzy Sets and Fuzzy
Logic, Visualization Methods, Data Mining Tools: Weka, CBA and Yale, etc.
Reference Materials:
1. Data Mining: Concepts, Models, Methods, and Algorithms by Mehmed
Kantardzic, Wiley-IEEE Press; 2nd Edition (August 16, 2011). ISBN-10:
0470890452
2. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, Third Edition (The Morgan Kaufmann
Series in Data Management Systems) by Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber and
Jian Pei, Morgan Kaufmann; 3rd Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 0123814790
3. Principles of Data Mining (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning) by
David J. Hand, Heikki Mannila and Padhraic Smyth, A Bradford Book (August 1,
2001). ISBN-10: 026208290X
165
Course Name: Business Intelligence and Analytics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Warehousing, Data Mining
Course Outline:
Business Intelligence Introduction, BI Environment, Business Process and
Information Flow, Data Requirements Analysis, Data Warehouses and the
Technical BI Architecture, Data Profiling, Business Rules, Data Quality, Data
Integration, Deriving Insight from Data, Knowledge Discovery & Delivery, BI
User Types and Reports, Installations, Configuring and Maintaining the BI
Server, Creating Repositories from Relational Sources, Creating Repositories
from OLAP Data Sources, Creating Reports Using Answers and Dashboards.
Reference Materials:
1. Business Intelligence by David Loshi, Morgan Kaufmann; 2nd Edition
(October 31, 2012). ISBN-10: 0123858895
2. Delivering Business Intelligence with Microsoft SQL Server 2012 3/E by
Brian Larson, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 3rd Edition (March 16, 2012).
ISBN-10: 0071759387
3. The Data Warehouse Mentor: Practical Data Warehouse and Business
Intelligence Insights, by Robert Laberge, 1st Edition, McGraw-Hill
Companies, (2012). ASIN: B008UYJJ8C
4. Business Intelligence: A Managerial Approach by Turban, Sharda, Delen,
King, 2nd Edition, Prentice Hall (2011). ISBN: 13-978-0-136-10066-9
5. Business Intelligence in Plain Language: A practical guide to Data Mining
and Business Analytics by Jeremy Kolb, Applied Data Labs Inc. (2012).
ASIN: B009K7INOY
Course Title: Distributed Database Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Distributed Data Processing, Distributed Database Systems, Design Issues,
Distributed DBMS Architecture. Distributed Database Design. Database
Integration. Data and Access Control. Query Processing. Query
Decomposition and Data Localization. Optimization of Distributed Queries.
Multidatabase Query Processing. Transaction Management. Distributed
Concurrency Control. Distributed DBMS Reliability. Data Replication.
Reference Materials:
1. Principles of Distributed Database Systems by M. Tamer Özsu and
Patrick Valduriez, Springer, 3rd Edition, (March 2, 2011). ISBN-10:
1441988335
166
2. Distributed Database Management Systems: A Practical Approach by
Saeed K. Rahimi, and Frank S. Haug, Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Pr;
1st Edition (May 23, 2011). ASIN: B005CDYQSC
3. Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms by Andrew S. Tanenbaum
and Maarten van Steen, Prentice Hall; US Edition (January 15, 2002).
ISBN-10: 0130888931
4. Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design by Jean Dollimore, Tim
Kindberg and George Coulouris, Addison Wesley; 4th Edition (May 20,
2005). ISBN-10: 0321263545
5. Distributed Database Systems by Chhanda Ray, Pearson (October 3,
2012). ASIN: B009NEMZ0W
Course Name: Enterprise Resource Planning Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction to Enterprise Resource Planning Systems. ERP Technology.
ERP and Business Process Reengineering. Systems Diagramming and the
Process Map. ERP Life Cycle: Planning and Package Selection. ERP Life
Cycle: Implementation and Operation and Maintenance. ERP Sales, CRM
and Knowledge Management. ERP Financials. Human Capital Management,
Self-Service and Outsourcing. Manufacturing Systems and Supply Chain.
Auditing ERP. Business Intelligence and Performance Management.
Reference Materials:
1. Modern ERP: Select, Implement & Use Today's Advanced Business
Systems by Marianne Bradford, lulu.com (October 19, 2009). ISBN-10:
0557012910.
2. Managerial Issues of Enterprise Resource Planning Systems by David
Olson, McGraw-Hill/Irwin; 1st Edition (September 10, 2003). ISBN-10:
0072861126
3. Enterprise Resource Planning by Bret Wagner by Ellen Monk, Course
Technology; 3rd Edition (February 4, 2008). ISBN-10: 1423901797
4. ERP Systems by Dimpi Srivastava and Aarti Batra, I K International
Publishing House (February 15, 2010). ISBN-10: 9380578148
Course Name: Information Systems Auditing and Assurance
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Information Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction to Auditing, Assurance and Internal Control, IT Governance and
Management, Organization Structure and Responsibilities, Business
Continuity Planning, Auditing IT Governance, The Audit Process, Internal
Controls, IT Life Cycle Management, Infrastructure Development and
167
Implementation, Maintaining Information Systems, Business Processes,
Application Controls, Auditing the Software Development Life Cycle, Auditing
Business Controls, Auditing Application Controls, IT Service Delivery and
Infrastructure, Disaster Recovery Planning, Information Asset Protection,
Network Security Controls, Over view of Popular Methodologies, Framework
and Guidelines, Overview of Computer-Assisted Audit Tools and Techniques.
Reference Materials:
1. Information Systems Auditing and Assurance by James A. Hall and
Tommie Singleton, South-Western College Pub; 2nd Edition (July 27,
2004). ISBN-10: 0324191995
2. CISA® Certified Information Systems Auditor All-in-One Exam Guide By:
Peter Gregory, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 2nd Edition (August 9, 2011).
ISBN-10: 0071769102
3. Information Technology Control and Audit, 3rd Edition by Sandra Senft and
Frederick Gallegos, Auerbach Publications; 3rd Edition (2008). ISBN-10:
1420065505
4. Managing the Audit Function: A Corporate Audit Department Procedures
Guide by Michael P. Cangemi and Tommie W. Singleton, Wiley; 3rd
Edition (2003). ISBN-10: 0471281190
Course Name: Business Process Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Object Oriented Analysis and Design
Course Outline:
Introduction d BPM, Motivation and Definitions, Business Process Lifecycle,
Classification of Business Processes, Goals, Structure, and Organization.
Evolution of Enterprise Systems Architectures. Business Process Modeling.
Process Orchestrations. Process Choreographies. .Modeling in BPMN.
Properties of Business Processes. Workflow Management Architectures,
Flexible Workflow Management, Web Services and their Composition,
Advanced Service Composition, Data-Driven Processes. Business Process
Management Methodology.
Reference Materials:
1. Business Process Management: Concepts, Languages, Architectures by
Mathias Weske, Springer; 2nd Edition (May 3, 2012). ISBN-10:
3642286151.
2. Business Process Management Common Body of Knowledge by Yvonne
Lederer Antonucci, et. al., CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform
(March 8, 2009). ISBN-10: 1442105666
3. Process Management: A Guide for the Design of Business Processes by
Jörg Becker, Martin Kugeler and Michael Rosemann, Springer; 2nd Edition
(January 21, 2011). ISBN-10: 3642151892
168
4. Business Process Management, 2nd Edition: Practical Guidelines to
Successful Implementations by John Jeston and Johan Nelis, Butterworth-
Heinemann; 2nd Edition (March 24, 2008). ISBN-10: 0750686561
Course Name: Knowledge Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
History and paradigms of knowledge management. Types of knowledge.
Knowledge Revolution,  Globalization,  Knowledge Economy, Knowledge
Workers,  Knowledge Artifacts, Knowledge Agents.  Knowledge Management:
Definitions,  Knowledge management Cycles, Benefits of KM, Implications for
KM,  KM Core Competencies. KM Processes: Discovery/Detection, Capture
and Codification, Organization,  Sharing,  transfer, Acquisition, Verification,
Utilization, Creation, Reuse. KM Frameworks and Models. KM Frameworks
and Models. Knowledge Capture and Codification. Knowledge Codification.
Knowledge Taxonomies. Relationships among Knowledge Management,
Competitive Intelligence, Business Intelligence, and Strategic Intelligence.
Strategic and Practical Implications of Knowledge Capture and Codification.
Knowledge Sharing and Communities of Practice. Knowledge Application.
The Role of Organizational Culture. Knowledge Management Tools.
Knowledge Management Strategy. The Value of Knowledge Management.
Organizational Learning and Organizational Memory. The KM Team. The KM
Profession, the Ethics of KM.
Reference Materials:
1. Essentials of Knowledge Management: Concepts, Theories and Practices
by M. A. Pasha & S. Pasha, Innovators Knowledge Services (2012).
ISBN:978-969-9791-04-8
2. Knowledge Management In Theory And Practice by Kimiz Dalkir, The MIT
Press; 3rd Edition (March 4, 2011). ISBN-10: 0262015080
3. The Knowledge Management Toolkit: Orchestrating IT, Strategy, and
Knowledge Platforms by Amrit Tiwana, Prentice Hall; 2nd Edition (August
29, 2002). ISBN-10: 013009224X
4. Principles of Knowledge Management: Theory, Practice and Cases by
Elie Geisler and Nilmini Wickramasinghe, M. E. Sharpe (January 15,
2009). ISBN-10: 0765613220
5. Knowledge Management: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools and
Applications (6-volume set) by Murray E. Jennex, IGI Global; Reprint
Edition (August 10, 2007). ISBN-10: 1599049333
169
Course Name: Artificial Intelligence
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Introduction to AI, Turing Test, Strong AI vs Weak AI, Heuristics, Applications
and Methods, History of AI. Uninformed Search: Search in IS, Generate-and-
Test Paradigm, Blind Search Algorithm. Informed Search: Heuristics, The
Best-First Search, The Beam Search, The A* Search, The Bidirectional
Search. Search Using Game: Game Trees and Minimum, Game Theory.
Logic in AI: Logic and Representation, Propositional Logic, Predicate Logic,
Other Logics. Knowledge Representation: Search Tree, Production System,
Objects, Frames, Scripts & the Conceptual Dependency System,   Semantic
Networks, Recent Approaches, Agents. Prolog Programming. Production
Systems:  Strong Methods vs. Weak Methods, Production System and
Inference Methods, Stochastic Processes and Markov Chain. [Uncertainty in
AI: Fuzzy Sets, Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Inference, Probability Theory and
Uncertainty. [Expert Systems: Characteristics of ES, Knowledge Engineering,
Knowledge Acquisition, Classical ES, Case-Based Reasoning. Neural
Networks: Introduction, The Perceptron Learning Rule, Back propagation,
Discrete Hopfield Networks, Application Areas. Evolutionary Computation:
Simulated Annealing, Genetic Algorithms, Genetic, Genetic Programming.
Natural Language Processing: History of NLP, Syntax and Formal
Grammars, Syntax and Formal Grammar, Statistical Parsing, Hidden Markov
Model, Wordnet, Question Answering System. Automated Planning: Planning
Terminology, Planning as Search, Hierarchical Planning, Case-Based
Planning, Planning Approaches to Learning System. Advanced Computer
Games: Rote Learning and Generalization, Signature Table and Book
Learning, Programing Methods, Search in Machines.
Reference Materials:
1. Artificial Intelligence in the 21st Century by Stephen Lucci by Danny
Kopec, Mercury Learning and Information (May 18, 2012). ISBN-10:
1936420236
2. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 2nd Edition, by Russell and
Norvig, Prentice Hall
3. Artificial Intelligence: A Systems Approach by M. Tim Jones, Jones and
Bartlett Publishers, Inc; 1st Edition (December 26, 2008). ISBN-10:
0763773379.
170
Course Name: Formal Methods in Software Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Introduction to Formal methods, Introducing Z, Elements of Z, Logic, Using
Predicates in Z, Schemas and Schema Calculus, Formal Reasoning, Case
Studies in Z, Computer Graphics and Computational Geometry. Rule-Based
Programming, Graphical User Interface, Safety-Critical Protection System,
Modeling Large Systems, Object-Oriented Programming Model and Z,
Concurrency and Real-time, Refinement, Program Derivation and Formal
Verification, Converting Z into Code.
Reference Materials:
1. The Way of Z: Practical Programming with Formal Methods by Jonathan
Jacky, Cambridge University Press (November 28, 1996). ISBN-10:
0521559766
2. Z: An Introduction to Formal Methods by Antoni Diller, Wiley; 2nd Edition
(July 27, 1994). ISBN-10: 0471939730
3. Model Checking by  Edmund M. Clarke Jr., Orna Grumberg, Doron A.
Peled , MIT Press, 1st Edition (1999). ISBN-13: 978-0262032704.
4. Reactive Systems: Modelling, Specification and Verification by Luca
Aceto, Anna Ingólfsdóttir, Kim Guldstrand Larsen and Jiri Srba,
Cambridge University Press (August 13, 2007). ISBN-10: 0521875463
5. Fundamentals of Algebraic Specifications: Equations and Initial
Semantics, H. Ehrig & B. Mahr, Springer-Verlag (1985), ISBN 0-387-
13718-1.
6. Systems and Software Verification: Model-Checking Techniques and
Tools. By B. Berard, M. Bidoit, A. Finkel, F. Laroussinie, A. Petit, L.
Petrucci, and P. Schnoebelen, Springer, 1st Edition , 2001. ISBN-10:
3642074782
7. Algebraic Specifications in Software Engineering by I. Van Horebeek & J.
Lewi, Springer; 1st Edition (December 19, 1989). ISBN-10: 3540516263
Course Name: Software Requirements Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Intro. to Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Basics of Requirements Engineering. RE Processes. Requirements Analyst
Role, Tasks, Essential Skills & Knowledge. Dealing with Customers.
Prototype Categories. Evaluation, Risks, Validating the Requirements.
Documenting the Requirements. Non Functional Requirements. Software
Quality Attributes. Setting Requirements Priorities. Special Requirements
Challenges. Requirements Development Plans. Requirements Management
Principles and Practices. Requirements Creeping. Tracing Requirements.
171
Tools for Requirements Management. Software Requirements Risk
Management.
Reference Materials:
1. Requirements Engineering: Processes and Techniques, Kotonya and
Sommerville, John Wiley Sons, 1998. ISBN-10: 0471972088
2. Software Requirements Engineering, 2nd Edition by Richard H. Thayer
and Merlin Dorfman, Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Pr; 2nd Edition (1997).
ISBN-10: 0818677384
3. Requirements Engineering: From System Goals to UML Models to
Software Specifications by A. van Lamsweerde, Wiley; 1st Edition (2009).
ISBN-10: 0470012706.
4. Requirements Engineering: Fundamentals, Principles, and Techniques by
Klaus Pohl, Springer; 1st Edition (July 23, 2010). ISBN-10: 3642125778
5. Requirements Engineering by Hull, Jackson, and Dick, Springer; 3rd
Edition (October 11, 2010). ISBN-10: 1849964041
6. Software Requirements 2 by Karl Wiegers, 2nd Edition (2003). Microsoft
Press; ISBN-10: 0735618798
Course Name: Software Design and Architecture
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Basics of Software Architecture (SA). Characteristics of SA, Importance of
SA, SA Business Cycle and Software Processes, Architectural Patterns. SA
Case Study. Creating Architecture, Quality Attributes, Business Qualities,
Architecture Qualities. Achieving Qualities. Global Analysis. Conceptual
Architecture View. Module Architecture View. Execution Architecture View.
Code Architecture View. Designing & Documenting the Architecture.
Analyzing Architectures. The CBAM. Reconstructing Software Architectures.
Reference Materials:
1. Applied Software Architecture by Christine Hofmeister, Robert Nord and
DilipSoni, Addison-Wesley Professional (1999). ISBN-10: 0201325713.
2. Software Architecture in Practice by Len Bass, Paul Clements and Rick
Kazman, Addison-Wesley Professional; 2nd Edition (April 19, 2003). ISBN-
10: 0321154959
3. Software Architecture in Practice by Len Bass, Paul Clements and Rick
Kazman, Addison-Wesley Professional; 3rd Edition (2012). ISBN-10:
0321815734
4. Software Architecture and Design Illuminated by Kai Qian, Xiang Fu, Lixin
Tao and Chong-weiXu, Jones & Bartlett Publishers; 1st Edition (2009).
ISBN-10: 076375420X
172
5. Software Architecture: Foundations, Theory, and Practice by R. N. Taylor,
N. Medvidovic and E. M. Dashofy, Wiley; 1st Edition (2009). ISBN-10:
0470167742.
Course Name: Software Quality Engineering
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Intro. to Software Engineering
Course Outline:
A Quality Principles, Benefits of Quality, Organization and Process
Benchmarking. Ethical and Legal Compliance. Standards and Models.
Leadership Skills. Quality Management System. Methodologies for Quality
Management. Audit Types, Audit Roles and Responsibilities, Audit Process.
Project Tracking and Control, Tracking Methods, Project Reviews and
Program Reviews. Software Verification and Validation Method, Software
Product Evaluation. Testing Planning and Design. Reviews and Inspection.
Test Execution Documentation. Customer Deliverables. Configuration Control
and Status Accounting.
Reference Materials:
1. The Certified Software Quality Engineer by Linda Westfall, Quality Press;
(September 28, 2009), ISBN-10: 0873897307
2. Software Quality Assurance: Principles and Practice by Nina S. Godbole,
published by Alpha Science (2004). ISBN-10: 1842651765.
3. Software Testing: Fundamental Principles and Essential Knowledge by
James D. McCaffrey, Book Surge Publishing (2009). ISBN-10:
1439229074.
4. Perfect Software: And other illusions about testing by Gerald M.
Weinberg, published Dorest House (2008). ISBN-10: 0932633692.
5. Software Quality Engineering: Testing, Quality Assurance, and
Quantifiable Improvement by Jeff Tian, published by John Wiley & sons,
(2005). ISBN-10: 0471713457
6. Mastering Software Quality Assurance: Best Practices, Tools and
Techniques for Software Developers by Murali Chemuturi, J. Ross
Publishing (2010). ISBN-10: 1604270322.
Course Name: Software CASE Tools & Applications
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Intro. to Software Engineering
Course Outline:
Introduction to CASE, Types of CASE Tools. Approaches CASE Tool
Integration. Integration as a Design Activity. Service Based Model of a CASE
Environment. Properties and Types of Integration Mechanism. The Role of
Process in Integrated CASE Environments. Examples of Process and CASE
Tool Interactions. Replacing the Message Service in a CASE Integration
173
Framework. Integration of CASE Tools with CM Systems. Case
Environments in Practice. Object-Oriented Analysis & Design Modeling.
Design Reuse, E-Commerce, ISO. Comparison of Popular CASE Tools.
Practice Real Life Problem for Development Through CASE Tools.
Reference Materials:
1. Principles of CASE Tool Integration by Alan W. Brown, Oxford University Press,
USA; 1st Edition, (September 1, 1994)ISBN-10: 0195094786
2. Computer Aided Software Engineering by Hausi A. Muller, Ronald J. Norman
and Jacob Slonim, Springer; Softcover reprint of the original 1st Edition 1996
(September 27, 2011). ISBN-10: 1461286263.
3. Most popular software CASE tool documentation
Course Name: Software Construction
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Introduction to Software Construction. Importance of Prerequisites of Target
Software. Key Construction Decisions: Choice of Programming Language,
Programming Conventions, Localization Aspects of Technology, Selection of
Construction Practices. Design in Software Construction. Design Building
Blocks. Defensive Programming. The Software-Quality Considerations.
Collaborative Construction. Refactoring. Program Size & Software
Construction. Managing Software Construction. Integration. Programming
Tools. Layout and Style. Self-Documenting Code.
Reference Materials:
1. Code Complete: A Practical Handbook of Software Construction by Steve
McConnell, Microsoft Press; 2nd Edition (July 7, 2004). ISBN-10: 0735619670
2. Compiler Construction (International Computer Science Series) by Niklaus
Wirth, Addison-Wesley Pub (Sd); (1996). ISBN-10: 0201403536.
3. Object-Oriented Software Construction (Book/CD-ROM) (2nd Edition) by
Bertrand Meyer, Prentice Hall; 2nd Edition (2000). ISBN-10: 0136291554.
4. The Design of Well-Structured and Correct Programs, S. Alagic & M. A. Arbib,
Springer-Verlag (1978), ISBN 0-387-90299-6.
5. Object-Oriented Software Construction, by Bertrand Meyer, 2nd Edition,
Published by, Prentice Hall in 1997. Prentice Hall; 2nd Edition (March 21, 2000).
ISBN-10: 0136291554
Course Name: Software Engineering Economics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Intro. to Software Engineering/Software Construction
Course Outline:
The Software Life-Cycle. The Waterfall Model. The Software Work
Breakdown Structure (WBS) Software Maintenance. The Basic COCOMO
174
Model. Development Modes. Model-Product Level Estimates. Performance
Models & Cost Effectiveness Models. Decision Criteria. Present vs. Future
Expenditure & Income - Cost Analysis. Goals as Constraints. Coping with Un-
reconcilable & Un-quantified Goals. Statistical Decision Theory-The Value of
Information. Alternative Software Cost Estimation Methods. Detailed
COCOMO. Detailed COCOMO Cost Drivers. Detailed COCOMO Cost
Drivers-Personal Attributes: ACAP, AEXP, PCAP, VEXP, LEXP. Detailed
COCOMO Cost Drivers: Project Attributes–Modern Programming Practices,
Use of Software Tools, Schedule Constraint.
Reference Materials:
1. Software Engineering Economics by Boehm, Prentice Hall, 1981.ISBN-10:
0138221227
2. Estimating Software Costs: Bringing Realism to Estimating by Capers Jones,
McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 2nd Edition (April 19, 2007).ISBN-10: 0071483004
3. Software Cost Estimation with COCOMO II by Barry W. Boehm, Chris Abts, A.
Winsor Brown and Sunita Chulani, Prentice Hall (August 11, 2000). ISBN-10:
0130266922.
4. Software Cost Estimation and Sizing Methods, Issues, and Guidelines by Shari
Lawrence Pfleeger, Rand Publishing (September 13, 2005). ISBN-10:
0833037137.
5. Software Engineering Economics and Declining Budgets by Pamela T.
Geriner, Thomas R. Gulledge, William P. Hutzler, Springer London, Limited, 31-
Jul-2012
Course Name: Design Patterns
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamental
Course Outline:
Overview of Object-oriented design, Overview of UML & OCL. Introduction to
design patterns. Coupling and Cohesion. Why design patterns? Creational
patterns: Singleton, Abstract Factory, Builder, Prototype. Structural patterns:
Facade, Composite, Bridge, Proxy, Adapter, Decorator. Behavioural patterns:
Chain of responsibility, Visitor, Observer, Iterator, Command, Mediator,
Strategy, Interpreter, Memento. Patterns for concurrent and distributed
systems: Event handling patterns. Synchronization and Concurrency
patterns. Concurrency Controller pattern. Antipatterns: Common pitfalls and
antipattern examples, Recovering from bad designs, Refactoring to
patterns. Introduction to Aspect-Oriented design: Aspects, themes,
concerns.
Reference Materials:
1. Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object Oriented Software, E. Gamma,
R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, Addison -Wesley Professional, 1995
2. Java Design Pattern Essentials by Tony Bevis, Ability First Limited; 2nd Edition
(October 11, 2012). ISBN-10: 0956575846
175
3. Patterns in Java: A Catalog of Reusable Design Patterns Illustrated with UML by
Mark Grand, 2nd Edition, Volume 1, Wiley, 2002. ISBN-10: 0471227293
4. Object-Oriented Software Engineering: Using UML, Patterns, and Java by B.
Bruegge and A. H. Dutoit, 2nd Edition , Prentice Hall, 2003. ISBN-10:
0136061257.
5. Refactoring to Patterns by J. Kerievsky, Addison-Wesley, 2004. ISBN-10:
0321213351.
Course Title: Service-Oriented Architecture
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Programming Fundamentals
Course Outline:
Introducing SOA. Web Services & Primitive SOA. Web Services &
Contemporary SOA (Activity Management & Composition). Web Services &
Contemporary SOA (Advanced Messaging, Metadata & Security). Principles
of Service-Orientation. Service Orientation & Contemporary SOA. SOA
Delivery Strategies. Service Oriented Analysis. Service Modelling (Process).
Service Oriented Design. WSDL-Related XML Schema Language. SOAP
Language Basic, Service Interface Design Tools. Service Oriented Design
Steps to Composing SOA. Considerations for Choosing Service Layers,
Considerations for Positioning Core SOA Standards (Industry Standards, &
SOA, XML & SOA, The WS-I Baisc Profile, WDSL & SOA, XML Schema &
SOA, SOAP & SOA, Namespaces & SOA, UDDI & SOA) Considerations for
Choosing SOA Extensions (Choosing SOA Characteristics, Choosing WS*
Specifications, WS-BPEL & SOA). Entity Centric Business Service Design,
Application Service Design, Service Design Guidelines.
Reference Materials:
1. Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA): Concepts, Technology, and Design by
Thomas Erl, Prentice Hall (August 12, 2005). ISBN-10: 0131858580
2. Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA): Concepts, Technology, and Design by
Thomas Erl, Prentice Hall (August 12, 2005). ISBN-10: 0131858580
3. SOA Design Patterns by Thomas Erl, Prentice Hall PTR; 1st Edition (January 9,
2009)
4. Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA): A Planning and Implementation Guide for
Business and Technology by Eric A. Marks and Michael Bell, Wiley; 1st Edition
(April 28, 2006). ISBN-10: 0471768944
5. Applied SOA: Service-Oriented Architecture and Design Strategies by Michael
Rosen, Boris Lublinsky, Kevin T. Smith and Marc J. Balcer, Wiley; 1st Edition
(June 16, 2008). ISBN-10: 0470223650.
176
Course Name: Computer Graphics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Discrete Structures
Course Outline:
Computer Graphics Introduction, Data, Images, and Computer Graphics,
Application of computer Graphics. Geometry, Transformations and Computer
Graphics. Plane Rotations. Colour in the Physical Universe. Colour Systems
and Computer Graphics. Image Abstraction Paradigms. Graphics and Planar
Graphics Objects. Digital Geometry Processing. Objects Hierarchy. Modeling
and Representation. Classification, Partitioning, and Clipping. Visibility and
Algorithms. The Nature of light. Illumination. Sampling and Ray Tracing.
Mapping Graphics Objects.
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Graphics: Theory and Practice by Jones Gomes, CRC Press, 2012,
ISBN-10: 1568815808
2. Computer Graphics with Open GL (4th Edition) by Donald D. Hearn, Prentice
Hall, 4th Edition, 2010, ISBN-10: 0136053580
3. Introduction to Computer Graphics: Using Java 2D and 3D, Springer, 2nd
Edition,  2012, ISBN-10: 1447127323.
177
Curriculum for MS Information Technology MS (IT)
Program’s Rationale:
A high pace of innovations in technologies for communication, computation,
interactivity, and delivery of information introduced invention like the Internet,
the World Wide Web, email, bulletin board system, virtual communities, E-
commerce, and other online technologies. These inventions brought a
paradigm shift in business world - from data processing to information
processing - converting industrial society to an “information society.” This
paradigm shift not only affected the way scientists conduct their research but
also expedite the pace of inventions. As a result Computing becomes a
rapidly progressing domain. In recent years, many significant developments
have been made and many new concepts have been introduced. For
example, “Computational Lens” which articulates a new relationship between
computer science and other sciences, “Ternary Computing” dealing with
computing for the masses, “e-Science” managing massive experimental data
and collaborating via the Net, “Computational Thinking”, “Cloud Computing”,
“Biological Computing”, etc.  In parallel, the integration of computing in other
disciplines introduces new disciplines such as “Computational - x” (e.g.,
computational mathematics, computational physics, computational finance,
etc.) and “x - Informatics” (e.g., bio-informatics, dental-informatics, clinical-
informatics, health-informatics, etc.). Many such developments compel IT
graduates to update their knowledge to meet the needs of the time.  One of
the key rationales behind MS(IT) program is the development of a dynamic
curricula structure that allows IT graduates to gain a broad technical
understanding of current and evolving technologies in the IT field with an
emphasis on moving technology from the laboratory to the realm of business
development through offering Breadth-Based, Depth-Based, and Integrated
Breadth & Depth-Based courses. Students may choose a particular option,
which is the most appropriate to their planned future career.  Through offering
these options, the program develops technically competent, highly
productive, and self-motivated professionals in tune with the demands of an
ever changing market. The program will groom not only IT professionals, but
also experts from other domains offering a unique and comprehensive body
of knowledge that exposes the learners to a practical application of
information technology within an area of specialization.
Programme Aim:
MS (IT) Programme is aimed to create, expand, disseminate and teach the
information technology body of knowledge through academics, applications
and research which positively impact society locally, nationally, and
internationally.
178
Programme Objectives:
One of the key objectives of the programme is to produce well rounded
individuals who are productive and responsible members of society familiar
with the technical concepts and practices in the computing & information
technology domains. The program provides graduates with competency and
knowledge to take on appropriate professional roles in information technology
industry or to pursue further education. Following are the key objectives of
the program:
1. Use and apply current technical concepts and practices in the core
information technologies.
2. Analyze, identify and define the requirements that must be satisfied to
address problems or opportunities faced by individuals or
organizations.
3. Identify and evaluate current and emerging technologies and assess
their impact on individuals, organizations and society; including ethical,
legal and policy issues.
4. Demonstrate independent critical thinking and problem solving skills.
5. Collaborate in teams to accomplish a common goal by integrating
personal initiative and group cooperation.
6. Communicate effectively and efficiently with clients, users and peers
both verbally and in writing, using appropriate terminology.
7. Recognize the need for continued learning throughout career.
Program Structure:
The Program is designed for full-time students. The program comprises of 33
Cr. Hrs. with 4 core courses, 4 elective courses, and a research thesis of 9
Cr. Hrs. The dynamic structure of the program allows students to choose a
particular option, which is the most appropriate for planned future career.
Followings are the program details:
Eligibility Criteria:
1. BS (IT/CS/SE) 4 years degree program or equivalent (minimum 130 Cr.
Hrs. with minimum 2.5 CGPA on scale 4.0 or 60% marks);
OR
2. Computer Science conversion course two years degree program
referred to as MCS or M.Sc. (CS) or M. Sc. (IT), (minimum 2.5 CGPA
of scale 4.0 or 60% marks);
OR
3. BCS 3-year program degree applicants may be provisionally admitted
in the MS (IT) program. Candidates will be required to take additional
courses to complete credit hours requirement of minimum 130 Cr. Hrs.
before being formally enrolled in the MS (IT) program.
Under eligibility criteria 1-3, the university/department may recommend
179
additional deficiency courses/ transition courses8, from the BS (IT)
curriculum, considering the deficiency of the candidates.
OR
4. 16-years education engineering degrees (minimum 2.5 CGPA of scale
4.0 or 60% marks).
Under eligibility criterion 4, candidates will be required to complete the
deficiency coursework prior to the MS (IT) coursework to ensure the
pre-requisite competency in IT. The deficiency/transition coursework
will be determined on the basis of the core IT courses of the BS (IT)
degree.
5. Test (University/Institution rules shall be observed).
Duration:
Four (4) semesters/terms spread over two (2) calendar years with two
semesters/terms a year.
Degree Requirements:
Minimum credit hours shall be 30 Cr. Hrs. for MS (Information Technology)
program including course work and research thesis/project. In order to obtain
MS (IT) degree a student must pass a minimum of:
i. Four (4) core courses (12 credit hours).
AND
ii. Four (4) courses (12 credit hours) from graduate elective courses.
AND
iii. Satisfactorily complete a Research Thesis of 6 credit hours.
Distribution of Courses:
Followings are the distribution of total credit hours:
Category or Area Credit Hours
Core 12
Elective 12
Thesis 6
Total Credit Hours 30
8Transition courses cover essentially undergraduate material mastery of which is crucial for student
success in the program. Transition courses are assigned based on an applicant's credentials and will
not be counted towards the MS degree program.
180
List of Core Courses:
S. No Code Pre-
Req.
Course Title Credit
Hours
1 IT * Advanced Database Management Systems 3
2 IT * Information Security and Assurance 3
List of Elective Courses:
Universities/Institutions may add courses in this list.
# Code
Pre-
Req. Course Cr. Hrs.
1. IT * Mobile and Wireless Networks 3
IT * Information Technology Infrastructure 3
IT * Telecom Management 3
IT * Data Warehousing Trends & Issues 3
IT * Data Mining Trends & Issues 3
IT * Advanced Business Intelligence and Analytics 3
IT * Multimedia Databases 3
IT * Information Retrieval 3
IT * Cloud Computing 3
IT * Mobile & Pervasive Computing 3
IT * Enterprise Data Center Design and Methodology 3
IT *
Data Center Network Design, Implementation,
and Security 3
IT * Virtualized Data Center 3
IT * Advanced Computer Networks 3
IT * Network Performance Modeling and Evaluation 3
IT * Integrated Services over Packet Networks 3
IT * Stochastic Systems 3
IT * Stochastic Processes 3
IT * Knowledge-Based Systems 3
IT * Distributed Databases 3
IT * Advanced Telecommunication Networks 3
IT * Multimedia Databases 3
IT * Telecommunication Systems 3
IT * Advanced Network Security 3
IT * Principles of Multimedia Systems 3
IT * Advanced Multimedia Systems 3
IT * Distributed System 3
181
IT * Computer Graphics 3
IT * Computer Vision 3
IT * Image Processing 3
2. IT *
Sample Scheme of Study for MS (IT) Programme
2–year Programme (4 Semesters/Terms)
(30 Credit Hours)
Semester/Term 1 (9 Credit Hours)
# Code Course Title Cr.  Hrs.
1 IT Advanced Database Management Systems 3
2 IT Information Security and Assurance 3
4 IT Research Methods (University Elective-I) 3
Semester Credit Hrs. 9
Semester/Term 2 (9 Credit Hours)
# Code Course Title Cr.  Hrs.
1 IT Elective II 3
2 IT Elective III 3
3 IT Elective IV 3
Semester Credit Hrs. 9
Semester/Term 3 (6 Credit Hours)
# Code Course Title Cr.  Hrs.
1 IT Thesis (Partial Registration) 3
3 IT Elective V 3
Semester Credit Hrs. 6
Semester/Term 4 (6 Credit Hours)
# Code Course Title Cr.  Hrs.
1 IT Elective VI 3
2 IT Thesis (Full Registration) 3
Semester Credit Hrs. 6
Total Credit Hours 30
182
Course Outline for MS (IT) Programme (Core)
Course Name: Advanced Database Management Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Pre-requisites: Database Management System/Equivalent
Course Outline:
Overview of Databases Management Systems, Object-Oriented Databases,
Object-Relational Databases, Mobile Databases, Temporal, Spatial
Databases, Geographic Databases, Distributed Database Design, Distributed
Multimedia Database Systems, Data Warehouse and OLAP Systems, XML
Data Models, XML Documents and DTD, XML Query Languages, Advance
Database Designing Techniques and Trends. Modeling Tools and
Techniques for Advance Database Systems. Implementation and
Applications of Advance Database Systems. Research Trends in database
systems.
Reference Materials:
1. Advanced Database Systems by Carlo Zaniolo, Stefano Ceri, Christos
Faloutsos, Richard T. Snodgrass, V. S. Subrahmanian, Roberto Zicari,
Morgan Kaufmann; 1st Edition (May 15, 1997). ISBN-10: 155860443X
2. XQuery by Priscilla Walmsley ISBN: 0596006349
3. Spatial Databases: With Application to GIS by Hilippe Rigaux. ISBN:
1558605886
4. Advanced Database Systems by Carlo Zaniolo, Stefano Ceri (Chapter 5,
6)
5. Foundations of Semantic Web Technologies by Pascal Hitzler. ISBN:
142009050X.
Course Name: Information Security and Assurance
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Basics of Information Security, Computer Security, Security Attacks,
Computer Criminals, Methods of Defence. Cryptography: Substitution
Ciphers, Transpositions (Permutations), Encryption Algorithms, The Data
Encryption Standard, The AES Encryption Algorithm, Public Key Encryption,
The Uses of Encryption. Crypto Basics. Symmetric Key Crypto: Stream
Ciphers, Block Ciphers, Integrity. Public Key Crypto:  Knapsack, RSA, Diffie-
Hellman, Elliptic Curve Cryptography, Public Key Notation, Uses for Public
Key Crypto, Public Key Infrastructure. Hash Functions++: Cryptographic
Hash Function, Non-Cryptographic Hashes, Tiger Hash, HMAC, Uses for
Hash Functions. Advanced Cryptanalysis: Enigma, RC4 as Used in WEP,
Linear and Differential Cryptanalysis, Lattice Reduction and the Knapsack,
RSA Timing Attack. Authentications. Authorization. Access Control Matrix,
183
Multilevel Security Models, Compartments, Covert Channel, CAPTCHA,
Firewalls, Intrusion Detection Systems. Authentication Protocols: Security
Protocols, Authentication Protocols, Authentication and TCP, Zero
Knowledge Proofs, The Best Authentication Protocol. Real-World Security
Protocols: SSH, SSL, IPSec, Kerberos, WEP, GSM. Software Flaws and
Malware: Software Flaws, Malware, Botnets, Miscellaneous Software-Based
Attacks. Insecurity in Software. Research Trends in information security.
Reference Materials:
1. Security in Computing, 4th Edition by Charles P. Pfleeger and Shari
Lawrence Pfleeger, Prentice Hall; 4th Edition (2006). ISBN-10:
0132390779
2. Information Security: Principles and Practice by Mark Stamp, Wiley; 2nd
Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 0470626399
3. Computer Security: Art and Science by Matthew Bishop, Addison-Wesley
Professional; 1st Edition (2002). ISBN-10: 0201440997
4. Software Security: Building Security In by Gary McGraw, Addison-Wesley
Professional; PAP/CDR Edition (2006). ISBN-10: 0321356705
5. Network Security: The Complete Reference by Mark Rhodes-Ousley,
Roberta Bragg and Keith Strassberg, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 1st
Edition (2003). ISBN-10: 0072226978
6. Information Security Intelligence: Cryptographic Principles & Applications
by Thomas Calabrese, ISBN-10: 1401837271.
Elective Courses for IT
Course Name: Mobile and Wireless Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Internet Architecture and Protocols
Course Outline:
Basics of Wireless Local Area Networks. Radio Transmitters and Receivers,
Multiple Access Methods: FDMA, TDMA, CDMA, Random Access, ALOHA,
Slotted ALOHA, Reservation-based ALOHA. Radio Propagation. Antennas
and Transmission Lines. Communication Protocols and Modulation. High-
Speed Wireless Data. GSM/Cellular Networks. Indoor Networks. Security in
Wireless Local Area Networks. Voice Over Wi-Fi and Other Wireless
Technologies. Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. Wireless Sensor Networks. Reliable
Wireless Networks for Industrial Applications. Applications and Technologies.
Conflict and Compatibility, Ultra-wideband Technology.
Reference Materials:
1. Wireless Networking: Know It All by Praphul Chandra, Daniel M. Dobkin,
Dan Bensky, Ron Olexa, David Lide, and Farid Dowla, Newnes
(September 28, 2007). ISBN-10: 0750685824 (TB1)
2. Wireless Communications & Networks by William Stallings, Prentice Hall;
184
2nd Edition (November 22, 2004). ISBN: 0131918354.
3. CCNA Wireless Official Exam Certification Guide by Brandon James
Carroll, Cisco Press; 1st Edition (November 2, 2008). ISBN-10:
1587202115
4. Wireless Crash Course by Paul Bedell, McGraw-Hill Professional; 3rd
Edition (September 5, 2012). ISBN-10: 0071797890
5. Wireless and Mobile Data Networks  by Aftab Ahmad, Wiley-Interscience;
1st Edition (July 20, 2005). ISBN-10: 0471670758
Course Name: Advanced Web Systems & Technologies
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Web Engineering
Course Outline:
The Need for Web Engineering. Web Effort Estimation. Web Productivity
Measurement and Benchmarking. Web Quality. Web Usability. Web System
Reliability and Performance. Web Application Testing. Process Improvement
in Small Settings. Conceptual Modeling of Web Applications. Model-Based
Web Application Development. W2000: A Modeling Notation for Complex
Web Applications. Statistics Analysis. W3C Web Content Accessibility
Guidelines. Internationalization. Classroom Group Assignments:  Instructors
are advised to ask students to review  the  Current Status of W3C
Specifications: HTML5, CSS3, Best Practices for Authoring HTML5, Web
Fonts, SMIL, Media Access, Timed Text, SVG, Web Real Time
Communication, Audio, Mobile Web Authoring, Device Independence
Authoring, CSS Mobile, SVG Tiny, XHTML For Mobile, Mobile Web
Applications, Mobile Web for Social Development, Geospatial, Accessible
Rich Internet Applications (WAI-ARIA), DOM, DOM events, Declarative Web
Applications, JavaScript APIs, Mobile Web Applications, WICD, Widgets,
XBL, Web Components, Web Performance. Google Technologies. Web 2.0 &
Associated Technologies.
Classroom Group Assignments:  Instructors are advised to ask students to
review  the  Current Status of W3C Specifications: HTML, CSS, Best
Practices for Authoring HTML, Web Fonts, SMIL, Media Access, Timed Text,
SVG, Web Real Time Communication, Audio, Mobile Web Authoring, Device
Independence Authoring, CSS Mobile, SVG Tiny, XHTML For Mobile, Mobile
Web Applications, Mobile Web for Social Development, Geospatial,
Accessible Rich Internet Applications (WAI-ARIA), DOM, DOM events,
Declarative Web Applications, JavaScript APIs, Mobile Web Applications,
WICD, Widgets, XBL, Web Components, Web Performance. [W3C website]
Reference Materials:
1. Web Engineering by Emilia Mendes and Nile Mosley, Springer; Softcover
reprint of hardcover 1st Edition. 2006 edition (November 9, 2010). ISBN-
10: 3642066453
185
2. W3C Online Resources
3. Web Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach by Roger Pressman and
David Lowe, McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math; 1st Edition (January
22, 2008). ISBN-10: 0073523291
Course Name: Information Technology Infrastructure
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Definition of IT Infrastructure, Non-functional Attributes, Availability Concepts,
Sources of Unavailability, Availability Patterns. Performance. Security
Concepts. Data centres. Servers: Availability, Performance, Security.
Networking: Building Blocks, Availability, Performance, Security. Storage:
Availability, Performance, Security. Virtualization:  Availability, Performance,
Security. Operating Systems: Building Blocks, Implementing Various OSs,
OS availability, OS Performance, OS Security. End User Devises: Building
Blocks, Device Availability, Performance, Security. IT Infrastructure
Management. Service Delivery Processes. Service Support Processes.
Ethics, Trends, organizational and technical issues related to IT
infrastructure.
Reference Materials:
1. IT Infrastructure Architecture: Infrastructure building blocks and concepts
by Sjaak Laan, Lulu.com (November 5, 2011). ISBN-10: 1447881281
2. IT Infrastructure and its Management by Prof Phalguni Gupta, Tata
McGraw Hill Education Private Limited (October 6, 2009). ISBN-10:
0070699798
3. IT Architecture For Dummies by Kalani Kirk Hausman and  Susan Cook,
For Dummies; 1st Edition (November 9, 2010). ISBN-10: 0470554231
4. Standards Policy for Information Infrastructure by Brian Kahin and, Janet
Abbate, The MIT Press (August 14, 1995). ISBN-10: 026211206X
5. IT Architectures and Middleware: Strategies for Building Large, Integrated
Systems by Chris Britton  and Peter Bye, Addison-Wesley Professional;
2nd Edition (June 3, 2004). ISBN-10: 0321246942
Course Name: Telecom Management
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Introduction to Telecommunication Management and Planning.
Telecommunication Strategic Planning. Developing Requirements and
Specifications. Managing Long-Distance Services. Managing Internet
Services. Managing PBX and Key Telephone Equipment. Managing
Automatic Call Distributors. Managing  Voice Processing Equipment.
186
Managing Local Area Network and Internets. Managing Wide Area Networks.
Managing Video and Audio Conferencing Equipment. Managing
Convergence. Developing a Telecommunication Operations Plan. Disaster
Prevention and Recovery. Telecommunications Project Management.
Managing Telecommunications Security. Current Trends and Practices of
Telecom Management.
Reference Materials:
1. The Irwin Handbook of Telecommunications Management by James Harry
Green, McGraw-Hill; 3rd Edition (March 22, 2001). ISBN-10: 0071370587
2. Telecom Management Crash Course: A Telecom Company Survival
Guide by P. J. Louis, McGraw-Hill Professional; 1st Edition (June 1, 2002).
ISBN-10: 0071386203
3. The Essentials of Telecommunications Management: A Simple Guide to
Understanding a Complex Industry by Jayraj Ugarkar, Author House
(March 29, 2010). ISBN-10: 1434397254
Course Name: Data Warehousing Trends & Issues
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: *
Course Outline:
Overview of Databases and Data Warehouses: Database Concepts, The
Entity-Relationship Model, Database Design, Conventional Data
Warehouses, Spatial Databases and Spatial Data Warehouses, Temporal
Databases and Temporal Data Warehouses, Conceptual Modeling for
Databases and Data Warehouses, Data Warehouses, Logical Data
Warehouse Design, Physical Data Warehouse Design, Data Warehouse
Architecture, Variations of the Architecture, Analysis Services 2005, Oracle
10g with the OLAP Option. Conventional Data Warehouses: Multidimensional
Model, Data Warehouse Hierarchies, Advanced Modeling Aspects,
Metamodel of the Multi Dim Model, Mapping to the Relational and Object-
Relational Models, Logical Representation of Hierarchies, Implementing
Hierarchies Spatial Databases General Concepts, Spatial Data Warehouses:
Spatial Extension of the Multi Dim Model, Spatial Levels, Spatial Hierarchies,
Spatial Fact Relationships, Spatiality and Measures, Metamodel of the
Spatially Extended MultiDim Model, Rationale of the Logical-Level
Representation Object-Relational Representation of Spatial Data
Warehouses. Temporal Data Warehouses: Temporal Databases, Temporal
Extension of the MultiDim Model, Temporal Support for Levels, Temporal
Hierarchies, Temporal Fact Relationships, Temporal Measures, Managing
Different Temporal Granularities, Metamodel of the Temporally Extended
MultiDim Model, Rationale of the Logical-Level Representation, Logical
Representation of Temporal Data Warehouses. Designing Conventional Data
Warehouses: Current Approaches to Data Warehouse Design, Data
Warehouse Design, Requirements Specification, Conceptual Design,
187
Characterization of the Various Approaches, Logical Design, Physical
Design, Methods. 7 Designing Spatial and Temporal Data Warehouses:
Current Approaches to the Design of Spatial and Temporal Databases,
Spatial-Data-Warehouse Design. Research trends in Conventional Data
Warehouses, Spatial Data Warehouses, Temporal Data Warehouses,
Spatiotemporal Data Warehouses, Design Methods.
Reference Materials:
1. Advanced Data Warehouse Design: From Conventional to Spatial and
Temporal Applications (Data-Centric Systems and Applications) Elzbieta
Malinowski and Esteban Zimányi, Springer;  2nd printing 2008 edition (April
6, 2011). ISBN-10: 3540744045
2. Data Warehouse Design: Modern Principles and Methodologies by Matteo
Golfarelli   and Stefano Rizzi, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 1st Edition
(May 26, 2009). ISBN-10: 0071610391
3. WWW Resources
4. Building the Data Warehouse by William H. Inmon, Wiley; 4th Edition
(2005). ISBN-10: 0764599445
5. The Data Warehouse Lifecycle Toolkit: Expert Methods for Designing,
Developing, and Deploying Data Warehouses by Ralph Kimball, Laura
Reeves, Margy Ross and Warren Thornthwaite, Wiley (August 13, 1998).
ISBN-10: 0471255475.
Course Name: Data Mining Trends & Issues
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Management System
Course Outline:
Combining Data Warehousing and Data Mining Techniques for Web Log
Analysis Computing Dense Cubes Embedded in Sparse Data. Exploring
Similarities Across High-Dimensional Datasets. Pattern Comparison in Data
Mining. Mining Frequent Patterns Using Self-Organizing Map.  Compression
Technique for Vertical Mining Methods. Data Mining Techniques via Multiple
Criteria Optimization. Graph-Based Data Mining. Facilitating and Improving
the Use of Web Services with Data Mining.
Reference Materials:
1. Research and Trends in Data Mining Technologies and Applications
(Advanced Topics in Data Warehousing and Mining) by David Taniar, IGI
Global (February 5, 2007). ISBN-10: 1599042711
2. Principles of Data Mining by Max Bramer, Springer; 2nd Ed. (2013). ISBN-
10: 1447148835
3. Data Mining: Concepts, Models, Methods, and Algorithms by
MehmedKantardzic, Wiley-IEEE Press; 2nd Edition (August 16, 2011).
ISBN-10: 0470890452
4. Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, 3rd Edition (The Morgan
188
Kaufmann Series in Data Management Systems) by Jiawei Han,
Micheline Kamber and Jian Pei, Morgan Kaufmann; 3rd Edition (2011).
ISBN-10: 0123814790
5. Principles of Data Mining (Adaptive Computation and Machine Learning)
by David J. Hand, Heikki Mannila and Padhraic Smyth, A Bradford Book
(August 1, 2001). ISBN-10: 026208290X.
Course Name: Advanced Business Intelligence and Analytics
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Data Mining
Course Outline:
Basic principles of Business Intelligence, Development in BI Area, Position in
IS/ICT Architecture, Links to other Applications, Core OLAP (On Line
Analytical Processing) Technologies, Demonstration of Principles on
Examples, BI Application Areas, Specification of these Areas, BI in the
Company Management, Effects of BI Applications, Database Environment,
Data Warehouse in MS SQL Server-- Principles, Architecture, Components,
Management Basics, BI Tasks Management, Effect and Critical Success
Factors of BI, Planning and Analysis Design and Modeling -- Principles of
Dimensional Modeling, Relationship Between Measures And Relevant
Dimensions, Physical Design And Modeling, Data Quality Management, Data
Granularity Problems Management, BI Implementation Principles, Data
Pumps, ETL -- Principle, Documentation In MS -- DTS, Activex Script, Data
Pumps Parameters and Logging, Server Applications Solution, Basic
Principles Of MS Analysis Services, Functions and Options Client
Applications Solution, Proclarity, MS Office - Excel, Access, Export Of OLAP
Cube - Off-Line Solution, Query Tools In Multidimensional Databases, Data
Mining -- Core Principles and Application Options, Relations To BI And Other
Applications, Relationship Between CRM And BI - Customer Intelligence. BI
Market Segment, BI Trends, BI Tools - SAP, Oracle, Sharepoint.
Reference Materials:
1. Business Intelligence by David Loshi, Morgan Kaufmann; 2nd Edition
(October 31, 2012). ISBN-10: 0123858895
2. Oracle Business Intelligence 11g Developers Guide by Mark Rittman,
McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 1st Edition (September 18, 2012). ISBN-10:
0071798749
3. Delivering Business Intelligence with Microsoft SQL Server 2012 3/E  by
Brian Larson, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 3rd Edition (March 16, 2012).
ISBN-10: 0071759387
4. Business Intelligence by Elizabeth Vitt, Michael Luckevich, and Stacia
Misner, Microsoft Press (December 22, 2008). ISBN-10: 073562660X
189
Course Name: Multimedia Databases
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites:
Course Outline:
Multimedia Data, The Human Sensory System and Multimedia, Database
Approach for the Management of Multimedia Information, Multimedia
Databases, Object-Oriented Multimedia DBMS, SQL and Multimedia,
Multimedia Query Specification Language, Querying Multimedia Data,
Modeling Multimedia Databases, Using Multimedia Metadata, Multimedia
Database Architecture and Performance, Multimedia and the Internet,
Quality-of-service Issues, Dealing with Text Databases, Content-dependent
Metadata, Dealing with Image Databases, Dealing with Video Databases.
Synchronization and User Interaction in Distributed Multimedia Presentation
Systems, Model for Interactive Retrieval of Videos and Still Images, Latest
Developments and Research Trends in Multimedia Database Systems.
Reference Materials:
1. Multimedia Databases: An Object-Relational Approach by Lynne
Dunckley, Pearson Education (January 31, 2003). ISBN-10: 0201788993
2. Multimedia Database Systems: Design and Implementation Strategies by
Kingsley C. Nwosu, B. Thuraisingham and P. Bruce Berra, Springer;
(October 28, 2011). ISBN-10: 146138060X
3. Principles of Multimedia Database Systems by V.S. Subrahmanian,
Morgan Kaufmann Publishing Company, San Francisco, CA. 1998. ISBN:
1558604669.
4. Distributed Multimedia Database Technologies Supported by MPEG-7
and MPEG-21 by HaraldKosch, CRC Press; 1st Edition (November 24,
2003). ISBN-10: 0849318548.
Course Name: Information Retrieval
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Basic Concepts of IR, IR System Block, Diagram. Automatic Text Analysis,
Indexing and Classification. Measures of Association. Clustering Algorithms.
File Structures. IR Models. Search Strategies. Performance Evaluation.
Online IR Systems & Interfaces  Standards. Taxonomy and Ontology.
Distributed and Parallel IR. Query Processing. Multimedia IR Models &
Languages- Data Modeling Techniques to Represent Audio and Visual
Document, Query Languages Indexing & Searching- Generic Multimedia
Indexing Approach, Query Databases of Multimedia Documents, Display the
Results of Multimedia Searches, One Dimensional Time Series, Two
Dimensional Color Images, Automatic Feature Extraction. Searching the
Web, Challenges, Characterizing the Web, Search Engines, Browsing, Mata
190
Searchers, Web Crawlers, Robot Exclusion, Web Data Mining, Metacrawler,
Collaborative Filtering, Web Agents (Web Shopping, Bargain Finder,..),
Latest Development and  Economic, Ethical, Legal and Political Issues
related to Information Retrieval.
Reference Materials:
1. Modern Information Retrieval: The Concepts and Technology behind
Search by Ricardo Baeza-Yates and Berthier Ribeiro-Neto, Addison-
Wesley Professional; 2nd Edition (February 10, 2011). ISBN-10:
0321416910
2. The Geometry of Information Retrieval by C. J. van Rijsbergen,
Cambridge University Press (September 13, 2004). ISBN-10: 0521838053
3. Managing Gigabytes: Compressing and Indexing Documents and Images
by Ian H. Witten,  Alistair Moffat, & Timothy C. Bell, Morgan Kaufmann; 1st
Edition (May 17, 1999)
4. Information Retrieval: Algorithms and Heuristics by D. Grossman and O.
Frieder, Springer; 2nd Edition (December 20, 2004). ISBN-10: 1402030045
5. An Introduction to Search Engines and Web Navigation by Mark Levene,
Wiley; 2nd Edition (October 18, 2010). ISBN-10: 047052684X
6. Information Retrieval: Data Structures and Algorithms by William B.
Frakes and  Ricardo Baeza-Yates, Prentice Hall; 1st Edition (June 22,
1992). ISBN-10: 0134638379
Course Name: Cloud Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: *
Course Outline:
Datacenter Architectures, Cloud Stack , Technology Trends, Consistency,
Availability, Partitions, Cluster File Systems, Data-flow Computation
Frameworks, Key-Value Store and Interactive Query Systems, Big Data in
the Clouds , Geographic distributed Storage, Programming Languages for
the Cloud, DBases in the Cloud, In-Memory Frameworks, Google file system
, Hadoop file system, MapReduce, OSes and Clouds Networking: topologies,
Networking: Traffic Management, Networking: Transport Protocol
Improvements, Security, Scheduling and Resource Management in clouds,
Software Level Agreements. Cloud Computing Trends &Issues
Reference Materials:
1. Cloud Computing Implementation, Management, and Security by John W.
Rittinghouse and James F. Ransome, Taylor and Francis Group, LLC
(2010). ISBN 978-1-4398-0680-7 WWW resources
2. Cloud Computing Explained: Implementation Handbook for Enterprises by
John Rhoton, Recursive Press (2009). ISBN-10: 0956355609.
3. Cloud Computing and SOA Convergence in Your Enterprise: A Step-by-
Step Guide by David S. Linthicum, Addison-Wesley Professional; 1st
191
Edition (2009). ISBN-10: 0136009220.
4. Cloud Computing Bible by Barrie Sosinsky, Wiley; 1st Edition (2011).
ISBN-10: 0470903562.
Course Name: Mobile & Pervasive Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Operating Systems, Web Systems and Technologies
Course Outline:
Mobile and Pervasive Computing Basics, Vision And Challenges. Wireless
Technologies. Mobile and Pervasive Computing Environments: Mobile
Computing Infrastructure, Characteristics of Mobile Computing Environments,
Challenges of Mobile Computing, Infrastructure of Pervasive Computing,
Characteristics of Pervasive Computing Environments. Pervasive Computing
Applications. Requirements of Pervasive Computing Applications. Smart
Devices and Services. HCI Aspects of Smart Devices. Tagging, Sensing and
Controlling. Context-Aware Computing and Systems. Intelligent Systems and
Interaction. Ubiquitous Communication. Overview of P2P Computing, RFID,
Smart Home, Autonomic Systems and Artificial Life, Utility Computing,
Management of Smart Devices.
Reference Materials:
1. Ubiquitous Computing: Smart Devices, Environments and Interactions by
Stefan Poslad, Wiley; 1st Edition (April 27, 2009). ISBN-10: 0470035609
2. Mobile Computing Principles: Designing and Developing Mobile
Applications with UML and XML by Reza B'Far and Roy T. Fielding,
Cambridge University Press (2004). ISBN-10: 0521817331.
3. Fundamentals of Mobile and Pervasive Computing by Frank Adelstein,
Sandeep KS Gupta, Golden Richard III and Loren Schwiebert, McGraw-
Hill Professional; 1st Edition (2004). ISBN-10: 0071412379.
4. Fundamentals of Mobile and Pervasive Computing by Golden Richard,
McGraw-Hill Professional Publishing; December 2004.
Course Name: Enterprise Data Centre Design and Methodology
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Information Security and Assurance, IT Infrastructure
Course Outline:
Introduction to Data Centres, Application Architecture Models, Data Centre
Architecture, Data Centre Services. Data Centre Requirements. Server
Architecture. Application Architectures. Data Centre Design. Network
Infrastructure. Power Distribution. Data Centre Security. Server Load-
Balancing. Designing the Data Centre Infrastructure. Integrating Security into
the Infrastructure. Server Performance Metrics. Server Capacity Planning.
Performance Metrics of Data Centre Devices.
192
Reference Materials:
1. Data Center Fundamentals by Mauricio Arregoces  and  Maurizio
Portolani, Cisco Press (December 14, 2003). ISBN-10: 1587050234
2. Administering Data Centers: Servers, Storage, and Voice over IP by
Kailash Jayaswal, Wiley; 1st Edition (November 28, 2005). ISBN-10:
047177183X
3. The Datacenter as a Computer: An Introduction to the Design of
Warehouse-Scale Machines by  Urs Hoelzle and  Luiz Andre Barroso,
Morgan and Claypool Publishers; 1st Edition (May 29, 2009). ISBN-10:
159829556X.
Course Name: Data Centre Network Design, Implementation, and
Security
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Enterprise Data Centre Design and Methodology
Course Outline:
Network Devices & Technologies. IP, TCP, and UDP Protocols (In-depth
Investigation). HTTP and Related Concepts (In-depth Investigation). SSL and
TLS : Operations, Performance Implications, Authentication and Digital
Certificates, SSL, Ciphersuites, Analyzing SSL Traces. DNS Essentials and
Site-Selection Considerations. Streaming Protocols. Infrastructure Layer 2
Protocol. Infrastructure Layer 3 Protocol. Security Protocols and
Technologies. Load-Balancing. Modes and Predictors. Server Health
Management. Persistence Mechanisms on Load Balancers. Network Design.
Internet Access Technologies and VPNs. Voice over IP and Converged
Infrastructure. Disaster Recover.
Reference Materials:
1. Data Center Fundamentals by Mauricio Arregoces  and  Maurizio
Portolani, Cisco Press (December 14, 2003). ISBN-10: 1587050234
2. Administering Data Centers: Servers, Storage, and Voice over IP by
Kailash Jayaswal, Wiley; 1st Edition (November 28, 2005). ISBN-10:
047177183X
3. The Datacenter as a Computer: An Introduction to the Design of
Warehouse-Scale Machines by  Urs Hoelzle and  Luiz Andre Barroso,
Morgan and Claypool Publishers; 1st Edition (May 29, 2009). ISBN-10:
159829556X
193
Course Name: Virtualized Data Centre
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Enterprise Data Centre Design and Methodology
Course Outline:
Virtualization, Virtualization Types, Virtualization Management, Cloud
Computing, Service Models, Cloud Adoption and Barriers, Return on
Investment and Cloud Benefits; Typical Design Patterns and Use Cases,
Design Patterns, Cloud Use Cases, Deployment Models, IaaS as a
Foundation, Cloud Consumer Operating Model. Data Centre Architecture and
Technologies. IT Services. The Cisco Cloud Strategy. Cloud Management
Reference Architecture. Cloud Service Fulfilment.  Cloud Service Assurance.
Billing and Chargeback. Technical Building Blocks of IaaS. Automating and
Orchestration Resources. Cloud Capacity Management. Case Study - Hybrid
Cloud: Cisco Cloud Enablement Services, Company Profile, Business Goals,
Cloud Strategy, Cloud Maturity, IT Platform, Cloud Reference Model, Private
Cloud Services, Orchestration and Automation Transition Architecture, Telco
Solution, Solution, Out-of-the-Box Services,  Diggit Service Requirements.
Reference Materials:
1. Cloud Computing: Automating the Virtualized Data Centre by Venkata
Josyula, Malcolm Orr and Greg Page, Cisco Press; 1st Edition (December
9, 2011). ISBN-10: 1587204347.
2. IT Virtualization Best Practices: A Lean, Green Virtualized Data Centre
Approach by Mickey Iqbal, Mithkal Smadi, Chris Molloy, and Jim
Rymarczyk, Mc Press; 1st Edition (January 1, 2011). ISBN-10:
1583473548
3. Microsoft Private Cloud Computing by Aidan Finn, Hans Vredevoort,
Patrick Lownds, and  Damian Flynn, Sybex; 1st Edition (July 10, 2012).
ISBN-10: 1118251474
4. Advanced Server Virtualization: VMware and Microsoft Platforms in the
Virtual Data Centre by David Marshall , Wade A. Reynolds, and Dave
McCrory, Auerbach Publications; 1st Edition (May 17, 2006). ISBN-10:
0849339316
5. Data Center Virtualization: A practical guide to successful deployments of
a Virtualized Data Center Infrastructure by Sukento Sukirya, Pete Gore,
Brian Clay, and  Pierre Vachon, Cisco Press (December 14, 2003). ISBN-
10: 1587050234.
194
Course Name: Advanced Computer Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Network architecture, Networking principles, Network services and Layered
architecture, Future Networks. Advanced Technologies. Performance of
Networks. Advanced Routing: Routing architecture , Routing between peers (
BGP) , IP switching and Multi-Protocol Label Switching MPLS), MPLS
Architecture and related protocols,  Traffic Engineering (TE) and TE with
MPLS, NAT and Virtual Private Networks (L2, L3, and Hybrid), CIDR –
Introduction, CIDR addressing, CIDR address blocks and Bit masks. Mobile
IP- characteristics, Mobile IP operation, Security related issues. Mobility in
networks. Voice and Video over IP (RTP, RSVP, QoS) IPv6: Why IPv6, basic
protocol, extensions and options, support for QoS, security, etc., neighbor
discovery, auto-configuration, routing. Changes to other protocols.
Application Programming Interface for IPv6. Ad Hoc Networking: An
Introduction, A DoD Perspective on Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, DSDV: Routing
over a Multihop Wireless Network of Mobile Computers, Cluster-Based
Networks, DSR: The Dynamic Source Routing Protocol for Multihop Wireless
Ad Hoc Networks.
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Networks: A Systems Approach by Larry L. Peterson, Bruce S,
Morgan Kaufmann; 5th Edition (March 25, 2011). ISBN-10: 0123850592.
2. Internetworking with TCP/IP Vol –I by Douglas E. Comer, Addison-
Wesley; 5th Edition (July 10, 2005). ISBN-10: 0131876716
3. High Performance Communication Networks by Jean Walrand and Pravin
Varniya, Morgan Kaufmann; 2nd Edition (October 25, 1999). ISBN-10:
1558605746
4. Metro Ethernet by Sam Halabi  Publisher: Cisco Press ISBN: 158705096X
5. Computer Networks by A. S. Tanenbaum, Prentice Hall; 5th Edition
(October 7, 2010). ISBN-10: 0132126958
Course Name: Network Performance Modeling and Evaluation
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Introduction to Probability Theory. Random Variables. Conditional Probability.
Markov Chains. The Poisson Process. Continuous Time Markov Processes.
Queuing Theory. Modeling Complex Communication Networks -- Congestion
Control Analysis, End-to-End Analysis, Multiple Access Control, Wireless
Networks, Adhoc Networks, Simulating Complex Communication Networks –
Discrete Event Simulation, Event Derivations, Scheduler, Advancing
Simulation Clock, Terminating Simulation, Results Definition and
195
Accumulation, Selecting Input Probability Distributions, Input Traffic
Modeling. Communication Network Performance Analysis Tools - NS-2, NS-
3, Glomosim, OMNET++, Comparative Analysis of Performance Analysis
Tools.
Reference Materials:
1. Performance Analysis of Queuing and Computer Networks (Chapman &
Hall/CRC Computer & Information Science Series) by G. R. Dattatreya,
Chapman and Hall/CRC; 1st Edition (2008). ISBN-10: 1584889861
2. Performance Analysis of Network Architectures by Dietmar Tutsch,
Springer; 1st Edition (2006). ISBN-10: 3540343083
3. Network Performance Analysis (ISTE) by Thomas Bonald and Mathieu
Feuillet, Wiley-ISTE; 1st Edition (2011). ISBN-10: 1848213123
4. Modeling and Tools for Network Simulation by Klaus Wehrle, Mesut
Günes and James Gross, Springer; 1st Edition (2010). ISBN-10:
3642123309
Course Name: Integrated Services over Packet Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Multimedia Service Requirements. Speech, Image and Video Coding
Techniques. Internet and Components of Network Qos - Connectivity and
Routing, Predictable Per-Hop Behaviour, Predictable Edge-to-Edge
Behaviour. Per-Hop Packet Processing - Classification, Policing, Marking,
Queue Management, Scheduling. Transporting Multimedia (Voice) - Real
Time Transport Protocol (RTP), RTCP, H.323 Architecture, H.245 Signaling.
Session Initiation Protocol (SIP) - SIP Signaling, SDP, Interworking with
H.323. Media Gateway Control - Soft Switch Architecture, MGCP, MEGACO,
H.248. Edge To Edge Network Models - Integrated Services (Intserv),
Differentiated Services (Diffserv), MPLS. Edge to Edge IP Qos - Resource
Reservation Protocol (RSVP). Voip and SS7. IMS (IP Multimedia Subsystem)
and IP-TV. NGN (Next Generation Networks).
Reference Materials:
1. Quality of Service in IP Networks, Grenville Armitage, Macmillan
Technical Publishing. ISBN: 1578701899, 2000
2. Carrier Grade VOIP, by Irakli Natsvlishvili, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media;
3rd Edition 2010. ISBN: 0071494219
3. Carrier Grade Voice Over IP, 2nd Edition by Daniel Collins, 2003, McGraw-
Hill Publishing.
196
Course Name: Stochastic Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Probability and Statistics
Course Outline:
Overview of Probability. The Axioms of Probability. Repeated Trials. Random
Variable. Distribution and Density Functions, Specific Random Variables,
Conditional Distributions, Asymptotic Approximations for Binomial Random
Variable. Functions of One Random Variable. Two Random Variables.
Sequences of Random Variables. Stochastic Convergence and Limit
Theorems, Random Numbers,  Meaning and Generation. Essential concepts
of Statistics.
Reference Materials:
1. Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes by Athanasios
Papoulis and S. Unnikrishna Pillai, McGraw-Hill Europe; 4th Edition
(January 1, 2002). ISBN-10: 0071226613
2. Dynamics of Stochastic Systems by V. I. Klyatskin, Elsevier Science; 1st
Edition (December 15, 2005). ISBN-10: 0444517960
3. Stochastic systems by George Adomian, Academic Press (May 28, 1983).
ISBN-10: 012410956X
Course Name: Stochastic Processes
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Stochastic Systems
Course Outline:
Review of basic probability. Systems with Stochastic Inputs, The Power
Spectrum, Discrete-Time Processes, Continuity, Differentiation, Integration,
Shift Operators and Stationary Processes. Finite Markov Chains. Branching
Processes. Renewal Theory. Markov Processes. Brownian Motion. Random
Walks and Other Applications. Mean Square Estimation.
Reference Materials:
1. Classical and Spatial Stochastic Processes by Rinaldo B. Schinazi,
Birkhäuser (May 1, 1999). ISBN-10: 1461272033.
2. Probability, Random Variables and Stochastic Processes by Athanasios
Papoulis and S. Unnikrishna Pillai, McGraw-Hill Europe; 4th Edition
(January 1, 2002). ISBN-10: 0071226613
3. Basic Stochastic Processes: A Course Through Exercises by Zdzislaw
Brzezniak, Tomasz Zastawniak, Springer (September 6, 2000). ISBN-10:
3540761756
4. Stochastic Processes with Applications by Rabi N. Bhattacharya and
Edward C. Waymire, Society for Industrial & Applied (August 5, 2009).
ISBN-10: 0898716896
5. Stochastic Processes: with Applications to Reliability Theory by
197
Toshio Nakagawa, Springer; 1st Edition (June 9, 2011). ISBN-10:
0857292730
Course Name: Knowledge-Based Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Intro to Artificial Intelligence
Course Outline:
Introduction to knowledge-based systems, Logic and automatic reasoning
(forward and backward reasoning), Knowledge representation and reasoning
models, Bayesian inference and other models of reasoning and decision
making under uncertainty, Software lifecycle in knowledge-based systems,
Rule-based expert systems, Architecture of a knowledge-based system,
Feasibility analysis, Requirements specification and design, Knowledge
acquisition and system implementation, Verification and validation.
Reference Material:
1. Introduction to Expert Systems by Peter Jackson; Addison-Wesley
Longman Publishing Company;   3rd Edition (January 1999).
2. Expert Systems: Principles and Programming by Joseph C. Giarratano,
Gary D. Riley; PWS Publishing Co.; 4th Edition, Thomson/PWS Publishing
Company; or latest edition.
3. Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach (Latest Edition) by Stuart
Russel, Peter Norvig, Prentice Hall.
4. Artificial Intelligence: Structures and Strategies for Complex Problem
Solving by George F. Luger, Benjamin/Cummings Publishing.
5. The Engineering of Knowledge-Based Systems by A. Gonzalez and D.
Dankel; 2nd Edition (Preprint), Prentice Hall, 2004.
Course Name: Distributed Database Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Network Programming
Course Outline:
Distributed Data Processing,  Distributed Database Systems: Architecture,
General Systems Issues, Example Systems. Distributed Control for
Synchronization and Concurrency (Will Include the Models for Concurrent
Processing and Transactions, Theory of Serializability, Classes of
Concurrency Control Approaches, Performance Evaluation of these Classes,
Centralized Control vs. Decentralized Control). Distributed
Commitment/Termination (Involves Preservation of Atomicity of Transaction
Execution, Blocking/Non-Blocking Protocols). Resiliency in Distributed
Systems (Involves Design of Protocols for Site Failure, Network Partitioning,
Loss of Messages or Variable Transmission Delays, Consistent Recovery).
Security in Distributed Systems. (Involves Study of a Variety of Attacks on the
Components of System (Such as on Routing Protocols in Adhoc Networks),
198
Privacy Issues in Peer to Peer Systems, Trusted Collaboration and
Dissemination of Data Among Cooperative Entities). Design and
Implementation of Prototype/Commercial Systems, Experimental
Evaluations. Details of Peer to Peer System Developed at Purdue and
Several Commercial Systems. Security Issues in DDBs. Latest developments
and Research Trends in Distributed Databases.
Reference Materials:
1. Distributed Database Systems Integration: Models and Approaches by
Mohamed Osman Hegazi, LAP LAMBERT Academic Publishing (January
24, 2012). ISBN-10: 3847372971
2. Principles of Distributed Database Systems by M. Tamer Özsu and
Patrick Valduriez, Springer, 3rd Edition, (March 2, 2011). ISBN-10:
1441988335
3. Distributed Database Management Systems: A Practical Approach by
Saeed K. Rahimi, and Frank S. Haug, Wiley-IEEE Computer Society Pr;
1st Edition (May 23, 2011). ASIN: B005CDYQSC
4. Distributed Systems: Principles and Paradigms by Andrew S. Tanenbaum
and Maarten van Steen, Prentice Hall; US edition (January 15, 2002).
ISBN-10: 0130888931
5. Distributed Systems: Concepts and Design by Jean Dollimore, Tim
Kindberg and George Coulouris, Addison Wesley; 4th Edition (May 20,
2005). ISBN-10: 0321263545.
Course Name: Advanced Telecommunication Networks
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Next Generation Wireless Networks: ZigBee, Personalized and Extended
WiFi, Wireless Mesh Networks (IEEE 802.11s for WMN), M-WiMAX, Long
Term Evolution (LTE), Evolution Data Optimized (EVDO), Cognitive (and
Software Defined) Radios and their internetworking. Wireless Sensor
Networks (WSN) and their Management. Broadband Wireless Networks
(IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16). Quality of Service (QoS) in NGNs. Quality of
Service (QoS) in New Generation Networks. Research Trends in networks.
Advanced topics need to be covered.
Reference Materials:
1. Telecommunications and Data Communications Handbook by Ray Horak,
Wiley-Interscience; 2nd Edition (July 21, 2008). ISBN-10: 0470396075
2. Next Generation Telecommunications Networks, Services, and
Management by Thomas Plevyak, Veli Sahin; IEEE Press Series on
Network Management 1st Edition 2010. ISBN-10: 047057528X
3. The Essential Guide to Telecommunications by Annabel Z. Dodd, Prentice
hall; 5th Edition (July 1, 2012). ISBN-10: 0137058918
199
4. Business Data Networks and Telecommunications by Panko, Raymond
R., Panko Julia L. 8th Edition, Prentice Hall: 2009. ISBN: 0136153402
Course Name: Multimedia Databases
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Database Systems
Course Outline:
Introduction to Multimedia Databases, Multimedia Data, The Human Sensory
System and Multimedia, Introduction to SQL and Multimedia, Querying
Multimedia Data, Modeling Multimedia Databases, Using Multimedia
Metadata, Multimedia Database Architecture and Performance, Multimedia
and the Internet, Quality-of-service Issues, Dealing with Text Databases,
Content-dependent Metadata, Dealing with Image Databases, Dealing with
Video Databases.
Reference Material:
1. Multimedia Databases: An Object-Relational Approach by Lynne
Dunckley, Pearson Education (January 31, 2003). ISBN-10: 0201788993
2. Multimedia Database Systems: Design and Implementation Strategies by
Kingsley C. Nwosu, B. Thuraisingham and P. Bruce Berra, Springer;
(October 28, 2011). ISBN-10: 146138060X
3. Principles of Multimedia Database Systems by V.S. Subrahmanian,
Morgan Kaufmann Publishing Company, San Francisco, CA. 1998. ISBN:
1558604669.
4. Distributed Multimedia Database Technologies Supported by MPEG-7
and MPEG-21 by HaraldKosch, CRC Press; 1st Edition (November 24,
2003). ISBN-10: 0849318548.
Course Name: Telecommunication Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Communication Channel and the Communication Network Technologies.
Digital Telephony. Switching and Signaling Systems.  Switching Fabric
Interfaces and ICs, Optics and the Future. Cellular Systems. Fixed Wireless
Access Technologies. Digital Subscriber Loop. Transmission Techniques.
Telecommunication Systems Testing. Embedded Systems Design for
Telecommunications: AMR Speech Codecs and the GSM Environment,
Digital Signal Processor Architecture,  AD6526 Multiprocessor  Architecture,
AMR Speech Codec, Algorithmic Complexity of the AMR Speech Codec,
Implementation considerations of AMR Speech Codec and porting the Code.
Emerging Technologies in Telecommunication Systems.
200
Reference Materials:
1. Essentials of Modern Telecommunications Systems by Nihal Kularatna
and  Dileeka Dias, Artech House (May 2004). ISBN-10: 1580534910
2. The Irwin Handbook of Telecommunications by James Harry Green,
McGraw-Hill; 5th Edition (October 26, 2005). ISBN-10: 0071452222
3. Telecommunications Essentials: The Complete Global Source for
Communications Fundamentals, Data Networking and the Internet, and
Next-Generation Networks by Lillian Goleniewski, Addison-Wesley
Professional; 1st Edition (January 5, 2002). ISBN-10: 0201760320.
Course Name: Advanced Network Security
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Computer Communication and Networks
Course Outline:
Network Security Overview. Data Encryption Algorithms. Public-Key
Cryptography and Key Management. Data Authentication. Network Security
Protocols in Practice. Wireless Network Security. Network Perimeter
Security. Anti Malicious Software. Intrusion Detection, Network-Based
Detections and Host-Based Detections, Signature Detections, Statistical
Analysis, Behavioral Data Forensics, Honeypots. Latest Development in
Network Security.
Reference Materials:
1. Computer Network Security: Theory and Practice by Jie Wang, Springer;
(March 16, 2009). ISBN-10: 3540796975
2. Network Security: The Complete Reference by Mark Rhodes-Ousley,
Roberta Bragg, and Keith Strassberg, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media; 1st
Edition (November 17, 2003). ISBN-10: 0072226978
3. Network Security and Management by  Brijendra Singh, PHI Learning
Private Limited; 3rd Edition (April 13, 2012). ASIN: B007U49118
4. Network Security Bible by Eric Cole, Wiley; 2nd Edition (September 8,
2009). ISBN-10: 0470502495
5. Network Warrior by Gary A. Donahue, O'Reilly Media; 2nd Edition (June 2,
2011). ISBN-10: 1449387861
Course Name: Principles of Multimedia Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: None
Course Outline:
Introduction to Multimedia and Tools, Graphics and Image Data
Representations, Colour in Image and Video, Basics of Digital Audio,
Lossless Compression Algorithms, Lossy Compression Algorithms, Image
Compression Standards, Basic Video Compression Techniques, MPEG
Video Coding MPEG-1, 2, 4-7; Basic Audio Compression Techniques, MPEG
201
Audio Compression. Latest Compression techniques and Research Trends in
Multimedia systems.
Reference Materials:
1. Fundamentals of Multimedia by  Z. M. Li and  M. S. Drew,  Prentice Hall
(2004), ISBN: 0-13-127256-X
2. Digital Multimedia by N. Chapman and J. Chapman. 2nd Edition, Wiley
2004, ISBN: 0-470-85890-7
3. The Technology of Video and Audio Streaming by David Austerberry,
Focal Press; 2nd Edition (2004). ISBN-10: 0240805801
4. Multimedia Security: Watermarking, Steganography, and Forensics by
Frank Y. Shih, CRC Press; 1st Edition (2012), ISBN-10: 1439873313
5. Multimedia Computing by Daniel Cunliffe and Geoff Elliott, Lexden
Publishing Ltd (2005). ISBN-10: 1904995055
6. Multimedia Foundations: Core Concepts for Digital Design by Vic Costello,
Ed Youngblood and Susan Youngblood, Focal Press; 1st Edition (2012).
ISBN-10: 0240813944.
Course Name: Advanced Multimedia Systems
Credit Hours: 3
Pre-requisites: Multimedia Systems: Theory & Principles
Course Outline:
Multimedia Basic Concepts. Multimedia Building Blocks. Windows Multimedia
Support. Multimedia Database Systems, Multimedia Authoring Tools. Text:
Types Of Text, Text Compression. Digital Image Processing. Image Data
Types, and Image File Formats. Image Acquisition, Storage Processing,
Communication, And Display, Image Enhancement. Image Compression.
Audio and Audio Compression. Video: Video Signal Formats, Video
Transmission Standards. Video Recording Systems. Video File Formats.
Virtual Reality and Multimedia. VR Applications, VR Devices. Virtual Objects
Basics of VRML. Animation: Uses of Animation, Types of Animation,
Principles of Animation, Techniques and Technologies of Animation.
Animation on the Web, 3D Animation, Creating Animation Using Flash,
3DMAX, Maya. Latest developments and Research Trends in Animations
Technologies.
Reference Materials:
1. Principles of Multimedia by Ranjan Parekh, McGraw-Hill Higher
Education. ISBN-10: 0070588333
2. Multimedia Computing, Communication and Applications by Ralf
Steinmetz and Klara Nahrstedt, Prentice Hall; US edition (July 27, 1995).
ISBN-10: 0133244350
3. Multimedia Making It Work by Tay Vaughan, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media;
8th Edition (October 29, 2010). ISBN-10: 0071748466
4. Fundamentals of Multimedia by Ze-Nian Li, Marks S. Drew, Prentice Hall;
202
1st Edition (November 1, 2003). ISBN-10: 0130618721
5. Digital Multimedia by Nigel Chapman and Jenny Chapman, Wiley; 3rd
Edition (March 31, 2009). ISBN-10: 0470512164
Course Name: Principles of Soft Computing
Credit Hours: 3
Prerequisites: Intro. to Artificial Intelligence
Course Outline:
Introduction to Soft Computing: Soft-Computing, Intelligent Systems and Soft
Computing, Importance, Decision Support Systems, Soft Computing for
Smart Machine Design. Fuzzy Set Theory: Fuzzy Systems, Fuzzy Sets,
Fuzzy Logic, Fuzzy Rules/Relations, Membership Functions, Fuzzification
and Defuzzification, Fuzzy System Design, Fuzzy Arithmetic, Decision
Making With Fuzzy Information, Fuzzy Classification and Clustering. Neural
Networks: Single-Layer Networks, The Multi-Layer Perceptron, Radial Basis
Functions, Error Functions, Parameter Optimization Algorithms, Learning and
Generalization, Bayesian Nets: Symmetric Matrices, Dynamic Neural
Networks and their Applications, Neuro-Fuzzy Systems. Evolutionary
Computation and Genetic Fuzzy Systems: Introduction GA For Problem
Solving, Theoretical Foundations. Machine Learning: Concept Learning and
the General-to-Specific Ordering, Decision Tree Learning, Evaluating
Hypotheses, Computational Learning Theory, Instance-Based Learning,
Learning Sets of Rules, Analytical Learning, Combining Inductive and
Analytical Learning. Programming with Matlab.
Reference Materials:
1. Soft Computing and Intelligent Systems Design: Theory, Tools, and
Applications by F. Karray, C. De Silva, Addison-Wesley; 1st Edition (June
4, 2004). ISBN-10: 0321116178
2. Fuzzy Logic with Engineering Applications by T. Ross, 3rd Edition, Wiley;
3rd Edition (March 1, 2010). ISBN-10: 047074376X
3. Neural Networks and Pattern Recognition by C. Bishop, Oxford University
Press, 1996. ISBN-10: 0198538642
4. An Introduction to Genetic Algorithms by M. Mitchell. A Bradford Book;
Third Printing Edition (February 6, 1998). ISBN-10: 0262631857
5. Machine Learning by T. Mitchell, McGraw-Hill Science/Engineering/Math;
1st Edition (March 1, 1997). ISBN-10: 0070428077.

