In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
Content-based Multimedia Information Retrieval:
State of the Art and Challenges
MICHAEL S. LEW
Leiden University, The Netherlands
and
NICU SEBE
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
and
CHABANE DJERABA
LIFL, France
and
RAMESH JAIN
University of California at Irvine, USA
________________________________________________________________________
Extending beyond the boundaries of science, art, and culture, content-based multimedia information retrieval
provides new paradigms and methods for searching through the myriad variety of media over the world. This
survey reviews 100+ recent articles on content-based multimedia information retrieval and discusses their role
in current research directions which include browsing and search paradigms, user studies, affective computing,
learning, semantic queries, new features and media types, high performance indexing, and evaluation
techniques. Based on the current state of the art, we discuss the major challenges for the future.
Categories and Subject Descriptors: H.3.3 [Information Storage and Retrieval]: Information Search and
Retrieval; I.2.6 [Computing Methodologies]: Artificial Intelligence; I.4.9 [Image processing and computer
vision]: Applications
General Terms: Design, Experimentation, Human Factors, Performance
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Multimedia information retrieval, image search, video retrieval, audio
retrieval, image databases, multimedia indexing, human-computer interaction
________________________________________________________________
1. INTRODUCTION
Multimedia information retrieval (MIR) is about the search for knowledge in all its
forms, everywhere. Indeed, what good is all the knowledge in the world if it is not
possible to find anything? This sentiment is mirrored as an ACM SIGMM grand
challenge [Rowe and Jain 2005]: “make capturing, storing, finding, and using digital
media an everyday occurrence in our computing environment.”
This paper is meant for researchers in the area of content-based retrieval of
multimedia. Currently, the fundamental problem has been how to enable or improve
multimedia retrieval using content-based methods. Content-based methods are necessary
when text annotations are nonexistent or incomplete. Furthermore, content-based
methods can potentially improve retrieval accuracy even when text annotations are
present by giving additional insight into the media collections.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
Our search for digital knowledge began several decades ago when the idea of
digitizing media was commonplace, but when books were still the primary medium for
storing knowledge. Before the field of multimedia information retrieval coalesced into a
scientific community, there were many contributory advances from a wide set of
established scientific fields. From a theoretical perspective, areas such as artificial
intelligence, optimization theory, computational vision, and pattern recognition
contributed significantly to the underlying mathematical foundation of MIR. Psychology
and related areas such as aesthetics and ergonomics provided basic foundations for the
interaction with the user. Furthermore, applications of pictorial search into a database of
imagery already existed in niche forms such as face recognition, robotic guidance, and
character recognition.
The earliest years of MIR were frequently based on computer vision (three excellent
books: [Ballard and Brown 1982]; [Levine 1985]; [Haralick and Shapiro 1993])
algorithms focused on feature based similarity search over images, video, and audio.
Influential and popular examples of these systems would be QBIC [Flickner, et al. 1995]
and Virage [Bach, et al. 1996] circa mid 90s. Within a few years the basic concept of the
similarity search was transferred to several Internet image search engines including
Webseek [Smith and Chang 1997] and Webseer [Frankel, et al. 1996]. Significant effort
was also placed into direct integration of the feature based similarity search into
enterprise level databases such as Informix datablades, IBM DB2 Extenders, or Oracle
Cartridges [Bliujute, et al. 1999; Egas, et al. 1999] towards making MIR more accessible
to private industry.
In the area of video retrieval, the main focus in the mid 90s was toward robust shot
boundary detection of which the most common approaches involved thresholding the
distance between color histograms corresponding to two consecutive frames in a video
[Flickner, et al. 1995]. Hanjalic, et al. [1997] proposed a method which overcame the
problem of subjective user thresholds. Their approach was not dependent on any manual
parameters. It gave a set of keyframes based on an objective model for the video
information flow. Haas, et al. [1997] described a method to use the motion within the
video to determine the shot boundary locations. Their method outperformed the
histogram approaches of the period and also performed semantic classification of the
video shots into categories such as zoom-in, zoom-out, pan, etc. A more recent
practitioner's guide to video transition detection is given by Lienhart [2001].
Starting near the turn of the 21st century, researchers noticed that the feature based
similarity search algorithms were not as intuitive nor user-friendly as they had expected.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
One could say that systems built by research scientists were essentially systems which
could only be used effectively by scientists. The new direction was toward designing
systems which would be user friendly and could bring the vast multimedia knowledge
from libraries, databases, and collections to the world. To do this it was noted that the
next evolution of systems would need to understand the semantics of a query, not simply
the low level underlying computational features. This general problem was called
“bridging the semantic gap”. From a pattern recognition perspective, this roughly meant
translating the easily computable low level content-based media features to high level
concepts or terms which would be intuitive to the user. Examples of bridging the
semantic gap for the single concept of human faces were demonstrated by Rowley, et al.
[1996] and Lew and Huijsmans [1996]. Perhaps the earliest pictorial content-based
retrieval system which addressed the semantic gap problem in the query interface,
indexing, and results was the ImageScape search engine [Lew 2000]. In this system, the
user could make direct queries for multiple visual objects such as sky, trees, water, etc.
using spatially positioned icons in a WWW index containing 10+ million images and
videos using keyframes. The system used information theory to determine the best
features for minimizing uncertainty in the classification.
At this point it is important to note that the feature based similarity search engines
were useful in a variety of contexts  [Smeulders, et al. 2000] such as searching trademark
databases [Eakins, et al. 2003], finding video shots with similar visual content and motion
or for DJs searching for music with similar rhythms [Foote 1999], and automatic
detection of pornographic content [Forsyth and Fleck 1999; Bosson, et al. 2002].
Intuitively, the most pertinent applications are those where the basic features such as
color and texture in images and video; or dominant rhythm, melody, or frequency
spectrum in audio [Foote 1999] are highly correlated to the search goals of the particular
application.
2. RECENT WORK
In this section we discuss representative work [Dimitrova 2003; Lew 2001; Sebe, et al.
2003 (CIVR)] done in content-based multimedia retrieval in the recent years. Sections 3
and 4 discuss and directly address important challenges for the future. The two
fundamental necessities for a multimedia information retrieval system are (1) Searching
for a particular media item; and (2) Browsing and summarizing a media collection. In
searching for a particular media item, the current systems have significant limitations
such as an inability to understand a wide user vocabulary, understand the user's
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
satisfaction level, nor do there exist credible representative real world test sets for
evaluation nor even benchmarking measures which are clearly correlated with user
satisfaction. In general current systems have not yet had significant impact on society due
to an inability to bridge the semantic gap between computers and humans.
The prevalent research topics which have potential for improving multimedia retrieval
by bridging the semantic gap are human-centered computing, new features, new media,
browsing and summarization, and evaluation/benchmarking.  In human-centered
computing, the main idea is to satisfy the user and allow the user to make queries in their
own terminology. User studies give us insight directly into the interactions between
human and computer. Experiential computing also focusses on methods for allowing the
user to explore and gain insights in media collections. On a fundamental level, the notion
of user satisfaction is inherently emotional. Affective computing is fascinating because it
focusses on understanding the user's emotional state and intelligently reacting to it. It can
also be beneficial toward measuring user satisfaction in the retrieval process.
Learning algorithms are interesting because they potentially allow the computer to
understand the media collection on a semantic level. Furthermore, learning algorithms
may be able to adapt and compensate for the noise and clutter in real world contexts.
New features are pertinent in that they can potentially improve the detection and
recognition process or be correlated with human perception. New media types address the
changing nature of the media in the collections or databases. Some of the recent new
media include 3D models (i.e. for virtual reality or games)) and biological imaging data
(i.e. towards understanding the machinery of life). As scientists, we need to objectively
evaluate and benchmark the performance of the systems and take into account factors
such as user satisfaction with results. Currently, there are no large international test sets
for the wide problems such as searching personal media collections, so significant effort
has been addressed toward developing paradigms which are effective for evaluation.
Furthermore, as collections grow from gigabyte to terabyte to petabyte sizes, high
performance algorithms will be necessary toward responding to a query in an acceptable
time period.
Currently, the most commonly used test sets include collections involving personal
photos, web images and videos, cultural heritage images, news video, and the Corel stock
photography collection, which is also the most frequently mentioned collection. We are
not asserting that the Corel collection is a good test set. We suspect it is popular simply
because it is widely available and related loosely to real world usage. Furthermore, we
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
think that it is only representative and suitable if the main goal of the particular retrieval
system is to find professional stock photography.
For the most recent research, there currently are several conferences dedicated to the
field of MIR such as the ACM SIGMM Workshop on Multimedia Information Retrieval
(http://www.liacs.nl/~mir) and the International Conference on Image and Video
Retrieval (http://www.civr.org). For a searchable MIR library, we suggest the community
driven digital library at the Association for Multimedia Search and Retrieval
(http://www.amsr.org). Additionally, the general multimedia conferences such as ACM
Multimedia (http://www.sigmm.org) and the IEEE International Conference on
Multimedia and Expo (ICME) typically have MIR related tracks.
2.1 Human-centered
By human-centered we mean systems which consider the behavior and needs of the
human user [Jaimes and Sebe, 2006]. As noted earlier, the foundational areas of MIR
were often in computing-centric fields. However, since the primary goal is to provide
effective browsing and search tools for the user, it is clear that the design of the systems
should be human-centric. There have been several major recent initiatives in this
direction such as user understanding, experiential computing, and affective computing.
One of the most fascinating studies was done on whether organization by similarity
assists image browsing [Rodden 2001]. The users were asked to illustrate a set of
destination guide articles for a travel website. The similarity by visual content view was
compared with a text caption similarity view. In 40 of the 54 searches, users chose to use
the text caption view with comments such as “it gave me a breakdown of the subject.” In
many cases the users began with the text caption view to ensure sufficient diversity. Also,
it was noted by the users that they would want both possibilities simultaneously. In
another experiment, the visual similarity view was compared with a random set. Most
users were slightly more satisfied with the visual similarity view, but there was one user
who preferred the random images view. Specifically, the visual similarity view was
preferred in 66% of the searches.
A nice description of user requirements for photoware is discussed in [Frohlich 2002]
and Lim, et al. [2003]. The importance of time in user interfaces is discussed in Graham,
et al. [2002]. By understanding user types [Enser and Sandom 2003; Rubin 2004, Enser,
et al. 2005], it is clear that the current work has not addressed the full plurality of image
and user types and that a broad evaluation is important. In specific cases there has been
niche work such as the use of general purpose documentary images by generalist and
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
specialist users [Markkula and Sormunen 2000] and the use of creative images by
specialist users [Hastings 1999]. Other interesting studies have been done on the process
of managing personal photograph collections [Rodden and Wood 2003]. Worring and
Gevers [2001] describe a concise analysis of methodologies for interactive retrieval of
color images which includes guidelines for selecting methods based on the domain and
the type of search goal. Also, Worring, et al. [2004] gave useful insights into how users
apply the steps of indexing, filtering, browsing, and ranking in video retrieval.  Usage
mining in large multimedia databases is another emerging problem. The objective is to
extract the hidden information in user behaviors on large multimedia databases. A
framework for video usage mining has been presented in Mongy, et al. [2005].
The idea behind experiential computing [Jain 2003; Jain, et al. 2003] is that decision
makers routinely need insights that come purely from their own experience and
experimentation with media and applications. These insights come from multiple
perspectives and exploration [Gong, et al. 2004]. Instead of analyzing an experience,
experiential environments provide support for naturally understanding events. In the
context of MIR, experiential environments provide interfaces for creatively exploring sets
of data, giving multiple perspectives and allowing the user to follow his insights.
Affective computing [Picard 2000; Berthouze and Kato 1998; Hanjalic and Xu 2005]
seeks to provide better interaction with the user by understanding the user's emotional
state and responding in a way which influences or takes into account the user's emotions.
For example, Sebe, et al. [2002] recognize emotions automatically using a Cauchy
classifier on an interactive 3D wireframe model of the face. Wang, et al. [2004] examine
the problem of grouping images into emotional categories. They introduce a novel feature
based on line direction-length which works effectively on a set of art paintings. Salway
and Graham [2003] develop a method for extracting character emotions from film which
is based on a model that links character emotions to the events in their environment.
2.2 Learning and Semantics
The potential for learning in multimedia retrieval is quite compelling toward bridging the
semantic gap and the recent research literature has seen significant interest in applying
classification and learning [Therrien 1989; Winston 1992; Haralick and Shapiro 1993]
algorithms to MIR. The Karhunen-Loeve (KL) transform or principal components
method [Therrien 1989] has the property of representational optimality for a linear
description of the media. It is important to distinguish between representational
optimality versus classification optimality. The ability to optimally represent a class does
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
not necessarily lead to optimally classifying an instance of the class. An example of an
improvement on the principal component approach was proposed by Capelli, et al. [2001]
where they suggest a multispace KL for classification purposes. The multispace KL
directly addresses the problem of when a class is represented by multiple clusters in
feature space and can be used in most cases where the normal KL would be appropriate.
Zhou and Huang [2001] compared discriminating transforms and SVM for image
retrieval. They found that the biased discriminating transform (BDT) outperformed the
SVM. Lew and Denteneer [2001] found that the optimal linear keys in the sense of
minimizing the distance between two relevant images could be found directly from
Fisher's Linear Discriminant. Liu, et al. [2003] find optimal linear subspaces by
formulating the retrieval problem as optimization on a Grassman manifold. Balakrishnan,
et al. [2005] propose a new representation based on biological vision which uses
complementary subspaces. They compare their new representation with principal
component analysis, the discrete cosine transform and the independent component
transform.
Another approach toward learning semantics is to determine the associations behind
features and the semantic descriptions. Djeraba [2002 and 2003] examines the problem of
data mining and discovering hidden associations during image indexing and consider a
visual dictionary which groups together similar colors and textures. A learning approach
is explored by Krishnapuram, et al. [2004] in which they introduce a fuzzy graph
matching algorithm. Greenspan, et al. [2004] performs clustering on space-time regions
in feature space toward creating a piece-wise GMM framework which allows for the
detection of video events.
2.2.1 Concept Detection in Complex Backgrounds
One of the most important challenges and perhaps the most difficult problem in
semantic understanding of media is visual concept detection in the presence of complex
backgrounds. Many researchers have looked at classifying whole images, but the
granularity is often too coarse to be useful in real world applications. Its typically
necessary to find the human in the picture, not simply global features. Another limiting
case is where researchers have examined the problem of detecting visual concepts in
laboratory conditions where the background is simple and therefore can be easily
segmented. Thus, the challenge is to detect all of the semantic content within an image
such as faces, trees, animals, etc. with emphasis on the presence of complex backgrounds.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
In the mid 90s, there was a great deal of success in the special case of detecting the
locations of human faces in grayscale images with complex backgrounds. Lew and
Huijsmans [1996] used Shannon's information theory to minimize the uncertainty in the
face detection process. Rowley, et al. [1996] applied several neural networks toward
detecting faces. Both methods had the limitation of searching for whole faces which
prompted later component based model approaches which combined separate detectors
for the eyes and nose regions. For the case of near frontal face views in high quality
photographs, the early systems generally performed near 95% accuracy with minimal
false positives. Non-frontal views and low quality or older images from cultural heritage
collections are still considered to be very difficult. An early example of designing a
simple detector for city pictures was demonstrated by Vailaya, et al. [1998]. They used a
nearest neighbor classifier in conjunction with edge histograms. In more recent work,
Schneiderman and Kanade [2004] proposed a system for component based face detection
using the statistics of parts. Chua, et al. [2002] used the gradient energy directly from the
video representation to detect faces based on the high contrast areas such as the eyes,
nose, and mouth. They also compared a rules based classifier with a neural network and
found that the neural network gave superior accuracy. For a good overview, Yang, et al.
[2002] did a comprehensive survey on the area of face detection.
Detecting a wider set of concepts other than human faces turned out to be fairly
difficult. In the context of image search over the Internet, Lew [2000] showed a system
for detecting sky, trees, mountains, grass, and faces in images with complex
backgrounds. Fan, et al. [2004] used multi-level annotation of natural scenes using
dominant image components and semantic concepts. Li and Wang [2003] used a
statistical modeling approach toward converting images to keywords. Rautianinen, et al.
[2001] used temporal gradients and audio analysis in video to detect semantic concepts.
In certain contexts, there may be several media type available which allows for
multimodal analysis. Shen, et al. [2000] discussed a method for giving descriptions of
WWW images by using lexical chain analysis of the nearby text on webpages. Benitez
and Chang [2002] exploit WordNet to disambiguate descriptive words. They also found
3-15% improvement from combining pictorial search with text analysis. Amir, et al.
[2004] proposed a framework for a multi-modal system for video event detection which
combined speech recognition and annotated video. Dimitrova, et al. [2000] proposed a
Hidden Markov Model based using text and faces for video classification.  In the
TRECVID [Smeaton and Over 2003] project, the current focus is on multiple domain
concept detection for video retrieval.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
2.2.2 Relevance Feedback
Beyond the one-shot queries in the early similarity based search systems, the next
generation of systems attempted to integrate continuous feedback from the user toward
learning more about the user query. The interactive process of asking the user a
sequential set of questions after each round of results was called relevance feedback due
to the similarity with older pure text approaches. Relevance feedback can be considered a
special case of emergent semantics. Other names have included query refinement,
interactive search, and active learning from the computer vision literature.
The fundamental idea behind relevance feedback is to show the user a list of
candidate images, ask the user to decide whether each image is relevant or irrelevant, and
modify the parameter space, semantic space, feature space, or classification space to
reflect the relevant and irrelevant examples. In the simplest relevance feedback method
from Rocchio [Rocchio 1971], the idea is to move the query point toward the relevant
examples and away from the irrelevant examples. In principle, one general view is to
view relevance feedback as a particular type of pattern classification in which the positive
and negative examples are found from the relevant and irrelevant labels, respectively.
Therefore, it is possible to apply any learning algorithm into the relevance feedback
loop. One of the major problems in relevance feedback is how to address the small
training set. A typical user may only want to label 50 images when the algorithm really
needs 5000 examples instead. If we compare the simple Rocchio algorithm to more
sophisticated learning algorithms such as neural networks, its clear that one reason the
Rocchio algorithm is popular is that it requires very few examples. However, one
challenging limitation of the Rocchio algorithm is that there is a single query point which
would refer to a single cluster of results. In the discussion below we briefly describe
some of the recent innovations in relevance feedback.
Chang, et al. [1998] proposed a framework which allows for interactive construction
of a set of queries which detect visual concepts such as sunsets. Sclaroff, et al. [2001]
describe the first WWW image search engine which focussed on relevance feedback
based improvement of the results. In their initial system, where they used relevance
feedback to guide the feature selection process, it was found that the positive examples
were more important towards maximizing accuracy than the negative examples. Rui and
Huang [2001] compare heuristic to optimization based parameter updating and find that
the optimization based method achieves higher accuracy.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
Chen, et al. [2001] described a one-class SVM method for updating the feedback
space which shows substantially improved results over previous work. He, et al. [2002]
use both short term and long term perspectives to infer a semantic space from user’s
relevance feedback for image retrieval. The short term perspective was found by marking
the top 3 incorrect examples from the results as irrelevant and selecting at most 3 images
as relevant examples from the current iteration. The long term perspective was found by
updating the semantic space from the results of the short term perspective. Yin, et
al. [2005] found that combining multiple relevance feedback strategies gives superior
results as opposed to any single strategy. Tieu and Viola [2004] proposed a method for
applying the AdaBoost learning algorithm and noted that it is quite suitable for relevance
feedback due to the fact that AdaBoost works well with small training sets. Howe [2003]
compares different strategies using AdaBoost. Dy, et al. [2003] use a two level approach
via customized queries and introduce a new unsupervised learning method called feature
subset selection using expectation-maximization clustering. Their method doubled the
accuracy for the case of a set of lung images. Guo, et al. [2001] performed a comparison
between AdaBoost and SVM and found that SVM gives superior retrieval results. Haas,
et al. [2004] described a general paradigm which integrates external knowledge sources
with a relevance feedback mechanism and demonstrated on real test sets that the external
knowledge substantially improves the relevance of the results. A good overview can also
be found from Muller, et al. [2000].
2.3 New Features & Similarity Measures
Research did not only proceed along the lines of improved search algorithms, but also
toward creating new features and similarity measures based on color, texture, and shape.
One of the recent interesting additions to the set of features are from the MPEG-7
standard [Pereira and Koenen 2001]. The new color features [Lew 2001, Gevers2001]
such as the NF, rgb, and m color spaces have specific benefits in areas such as lighting
invariance, intuitiveness, and perceptual uniformity. A quantitative comparison of
influential color models is performed in Sebe and Lew [2001].
In texture understanding, Ojala, et al. [1996] found that combining relatively simple
texture histograms outperformed traditional texture models such as Gaussian or Markov
features. Jafari-Khouzani and Soltanian-Zadeh [2005] proposed a new texture feature
based on the Radon transform orientation which has the significant advantage of being
rotationally invariant. Insight into the MPEG-7 texture descriptors has been given by Wu,
et al. [2001].
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
Veltkamp and Hagedoorn [2001] describe the state of the art in shape matching from
the perspective of computational geometry. Sebe and Lew [2002] evaluate a wide set of
shape measures in the context of image retrieval. Srivastava, et al. [2005] describes some
novel approaches to learning shape. Sebastian, et al. [2004] introduce the notion of shape
recognition using shock graphs. Bartolini, et al. [2005] suggest using the Fourier phase
and time warping distance.
Foote [2000] introduces a feature for audio based on local self-similarity. The
important benefit of the feature is that it can be computed for any audio signal and works
well on a wide variety of audio segmentation and retrieval applications. Bakker and Lew
[2002] suggest several new audio features called the frequency spectrum differentials and
the differential swap rate. They evaluate the new audio features in the context of
automatic labeling the sample as either speech, music, piano, organ, guitar, automobile,
explosion, or silence and achieve promising results.
Equally important to novel features is the method to determine similarity between
them. Jolion [2001] gives an excellent overview of the common similarity measures.
Sebe, et al. [2000] discuss how to derive an optimal similarity measure given a training
set. In particular they find that the sum of squared distance tends to be the worst
similarity measure and that the Cauchy metric outperforms the commonly used distance
measures. Jacobs, et al. [2000] investigates non-metric distances and evaluates their
performance. Beretti, et al. [2001] proposes an algorithm which relies on graph matching
for a similarity measure. Cooper, et al. [2005] suggest measuring image similarity using
time and pictorial content.
In the last decades, a lot of research has been done on the matching of images and
their structures [Schmid, et al. 2000, Mikolajczyk and Schmid 2004]. Although the
approaches are very different, most methods use some kind of point selection from which
descriptors are derived. Most of these approaches address the detection of points and
regions that can be detected in an affine invariant way.
Lindeberg [1998] proposed an “interesting scale level” detector which is based on
determining maxima over scale of a normalized blob measure. The Laplacian-of-
Gaussian (LoG) function is used for building the scale space. Mikolajczyk and Schmid
[2004] showed that this function is very suitable for automatic scale selection of
structures. An efficient algorithm to be used in object recognition was proposed by Lowe
[2004]. This algorithm constructs a scale space pyramid using difference-of-Gaussian
(doG) filters. The doG can be used to obtain an efficient approximation of the LoG. From
the local 3D maxima a robust descriptor is build for matching purposes. The disadvantage
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
of using doG or LoG as feature detectors is that the repeatability is not optimal since they
not only respond to blobs, but also to high gradients in one direction. Because of this, the
localization of the features may not be very accurate.
An approach that intuitively arises from this observation is the separation of the
feature detector and the scale selection. The commonly used Harris detector [Harris and
Stephens 1988] is robust to noise and lighting variations, but only to a very limited extent
to scale changes [Schmid, et al. 2000]. To deal with this Dufournoud, et al. [2000]
proposed the scale adapted Harris operator. Given the scale adapted Harris operator, a
scale space can be created. Local 3D maxima in this scale space can be taken as salient
points but this scale adapted Harris operator rarely attains a maximum over scales. This
results in very few points, which are not representative enough for the image. To address
this problem, Mikolajczyk and Schmid [2004] proposed the Harris-Laplace detector that
merges the scale-adapted Harris corner detector and the Laplacian based scale selection.
During the last years much of the research on scale invariance has been generalized to
affine invariance. Affine invariance is defined here as invariance to non-uniform scaling
in different directions. This allows for matching of descriptors under perspective
transformations since a global perspective transformation can be locally approximated by
an affine transformation [Tuytelaars and van Gool 2000]. The use of the second moment
matrix (or autocorrelation matrix) of a point for affine normalization was explored by
Lindeberg and Garding [1997]. A similar approach was used by Baumberg [2000] for
feature matching.
All the above methods were designed to be used in the context of object-class
recognition application. However, it was found that wavelet-based salient points [Tian, et
al. 2001] outperform traditional interest operators such as corner detectors when they are
applied to general content-based image retrieval. For a good overview, we refer the
reader to Sebe, et al. [IVC 2003].
2.4 New Media
In the early years of MIR, most research focussed on content-based image retrieval.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in a wide variety of media. An excellent
example, “life records”, which encompasses all types of media simultaneously is being
actively promoted by Bell [2004]. He is investigating the issues and challenges in
processing life records - all the text, audio, video, and media related to a person's life.
Beyond text, audio, images, and video, there has been significant recent interest in
new media such as 3D models. Assfalg, et al. [2004] discuss using spin-images, which
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
essentially encode the density of mesh vertices projected onto a 2D space, resulting in a
2D histogram. It was found that they give an effective view-independent representation
for searching through a database of cultural artifacts. Funkhouser, et al. [2003] develop a
search engine for 3D models based on shape matching using spherical harmonics to
compute discriminating similarity measures which are effective even in the presence of
model degeneracies. An overview of how 3D models are used in content-based retrieval
systems can be found in Tangelder and Veltkamp [2004].
Another fascinating area is peering into biological databases consisting of imagery
from the atomic through the visible light range. Applications can range from
understanding the machinery of life to fast identification of dangerous bacteria or viruses.
The aspect of particular interest is how to combine the data from different imaging
methods such as electron microscopes, MRI, X-ray, etc. Each imaging method uses a
fundamentally different technique however the underlying content is the same. For
example, Haas, et al. [2004] used a genetic algorithm learning approach combined with
additional knowledge sources to search through virus databases and video collections.
Toward supporting imprecise queries in bio-databases, Chen, et al. [2002] used fuzzy
equivalence classes to support query relaxation in biological imagery collections.
2.5 Browsing and Summarization
There have been a wide variety of innovative ways of browsing and summarizing
multimedia information. Spierenburg and Huijsmans [1997] proposed a method for
converting an image database into a movie. The intuition was that one could cluster a
sufficiently large image database so that visually similar images would be in the same
cluster. After the cluster process, one can order the clusters by the inter-cluster similarity,
arrange the images in sequential order and then convert to a video. This allows a user to
have a gestalt understanding of a large image database in minutes.
Sundaram, et al. [2002] took a similar approach toward summarizing video. They
introduced the idea of a video skim which is a shortened video composed of informative
scenes from the original video. The fundamental idea is for the user to be able to receive
an abstract of the story but in video format.
Snoek, et al. [2005] propose several methods for summarizing video such as grouping
by categories and browsing by category and in time. Chiu, et al. [2005] created a system
for texturing a 3D city with relevant frames from video shots. The user would then be
able to fly through the 3D city and browse all of the videos in a directory. The most
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
important frames would be located on the roofs of the buildings in the city so that a high
altitude fly through would result in viewing a single frame per video.
Uchihashi, et al. [1999] suggested a method for converting a movie into a cartoon
strip in the Manga style from Japan. This means altering the size and position of the
relevant keyframes from the video based on their importance. Tian, et al. [2002] took the
concept of variable size and positions of images to the next level by posing the problem
as a general optimization criterion problem. What is the optimal arrangement of images
on the screen so that the user can optimally browse an image database.
Liu, et al. [2004] address the problem of effective summarization of images from
WWW image search engines. They compare a rank list summarization method to an
image clustering scheme and find that their users find the clustering scheme allows them
to explore the image results more naturally and effectively.
2.6 High Performance Indexing
In the early multimedia database systems, the multimedia items such as images or
video were frequently simply files in a directory or entries in an SQL database table.
From a computational efficiency perspective, both options exhibited poor performance
because most filesystems use linear search within directories and most databases could
only perform efficient operations on fixed size elements. Thus, as the size of the
multimedia databases or collections grew from hundreds to thousands to millions of
variable sized items, the computers could not respond in an acceptable time period.
Even as the typical SQL database systems began to implement higher performance
table searches, the search keys had to be exact such as in text search. Audio, images, and
video were stored as blobs which could not be indexed effectively. Therefore, researchers
[Egas, et al. 1999; Lew 2000] turned to similarity based databases which used tree-based
indexes to achieve logarithmic performance. Even in the case of multimedia oriented
databases such as the Informix database, it was still necessary to create custom datablades
to handle efficient similarity searching such as k-d trees [Egas, et al. 1999]. In general the
k-d tree methods had linear worst case performance and logarithmic average case
performance in the context of feature based similarity searches. A recent improvement to
the k-d tree method is to integrate entropy based balancing [Scott and Shyu 2003].
Other data representations have also been suggested besides k-d trees. Ye and Xu
[2003] show that vector quantization can be used effectively for searching large
databases. Elkwae and Kabuka [2000] propose a 2-tier signature based method for
indexing large image databases. Type 1 signatures represent the properties of the objects
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
found in the images. Type 2 signatures capture the inter-object spatial positioning.
Together these signatures allow them to achieve a 98% performance improvement. Shao,
et al. [2003] use invariant features together with efficient indexing to achieve near real-
time performance in the context of k nearest neighbor searching.
Other kinds of high performance indexing problems appear when searching peer to
peer (P2P) networks due to the curse of dimensionality, the high communication
overhead and that all searches within the network are based on nearest neighbor methods.
Muller and Henrich [2003] suggest an effective P2P search algorithm based on compact
peer data summaries. They show that their model allows peers to only communicate with
a small sample and still retain high quality of results.
2.7 Evaluation
Perhaps the most complete evaluation project in the last decade has been the TRECVID
[Smeaton and Over 2003] evaluation. In TRECVID, there is a close connection between
private industry and academic research where a realistic task specific test set is gathered,
discussed, agreed upon, and then numerous research teams attempt to provide the best
video retrieval system for the test set. The main strengths are assembling a series of test
collections for a certain type of user with a certain type of information need,  and a set of
relevance judgments on the topics for shots taken from  the video reflecting a single real-
world scenario.  Test collections could include video with speech  transcripts, machine
translation of non-English speech, closed  captions, metadata, common shot bounds,
commonly used keyframes, and a  set of automatically extracted features plus a set of
multimedia  topics (text, image, video).  Important aspects have also been  the process for
creating realistic test sets, testing the research systems, and most importantly, the
continual evolution toward improving the test each year.
The most general recent work toward benchmarking has been on improving or
completing performance graphs [Huijsmans and Sebe 2005]. They explain the limitations
of the typical precision-recall graphs and develop additional performance indicators to
cover the limitations. Normalization is suggested with respect to relevant class size and
restriction to specific normalized scope values.
Keyframe based retrieval techniques are the most popular in video retrieval systems.
They represent a video as a small set of frames taken from the video content. Pickering
and Ruger [2003] perform an evaluation of two learning methods (boosting and k-means)
versus a vector space model. In the case of category searches, the k-means outperformed
the other methods due to better handling of visually disparate queries. The boosting
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
algorithm performed best at finding video keyframes with similar compositions. Silva, et
al. [2005] discuss evaluation of video summarization for a large number of cameras in the
context of a ubiquitous home. They implemented several keyframe extraction algorithms
and found that using an adaptive algorithm based on camera changes and footsteps gives
high quality results. Smeaton and Over [2003] discuss a complete evaluation of video
retrieval systems which considers usage patterns, realistic test sets, and compares a wide
set of contributed systems.
Evaluation of multimedia retrieval has been an ongoing challenging problem
[Huisman and Sebe 2005; Foote 1999; Downie 2003; Smeaton and Over 2003]. Audio,
images, and video share distinct similarities such as: the complex nature of content-based
queries, overcoming intellectual property hurdles and determination of what a reasonable
person would find as relevant results. Furthermore in the case of image retrieval it has
been shown that commonly used test databases such as the Corel stock image set are not
necessarily effective performance indicators for real world problems [Muller, et al. 2002].
3. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Despite the considerable progress of academic research in multimedia information
retrieval, there has been relatively little impact of MIR research into commercial
applications with some niche exceptions such as video segmentation. One example of an
attempt to merge academic and commercial interests would be Riya (www.riya.com).
Their goal is to have a commercial product that uses the academic research in face
detection and recognition and allows the users to search through their own photo
collection or through the Internet for particular persons. Another example is the
MagicVideo Browser (www.magicbot.com) which transfers MIR research in video
summarization to household desktop computers and has a plug-in architecture intended
for easily adding new promising summarization methods as they appear in the research
community.  An interesting long-term initiative is the launching of Yahoo! Research
Berkeley (research.yahoo.com/Berkeley), a new research partnership between Yahoo!
Inc. and UC Berkeley with the declared scope to explore and invent social media and
mobile media technology and applications that will enable people to create, describe,
find, share, and remix media on the web. Nevenvision (www.nevenvision.com) is
developing technology for mobile phones that utilizes visual recognition algorithms for
bringing in ambient finding technology. However, these efforts are just in their infancy
and there is a need for avoiding a future where the MIR community is isolated from real
world interests. We believe that the MIR community has a golden opportunity to the
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
growth of the multimedia search field that is commonly considered the next major
frontier of search [Battelle 2005].
An issue in collaboration among academic researchers and industry is the opaqueness
of private industry. Frequently it is difficult to assess if commercial projects are using
methods from the field of content-based MIR. In the current atmosphere of intellectual
property lawsuits, many companies are reluctant to publish the details of their systems in
open academic circles for fear of being served with a lawsuit. Nondisclosure can be a
protective shield, but it does impede open scientific progress. This is a small hurdle if the
techniques developed by researchers are of significant direct application in practical
systems.
To assess research effectively in multimedia retrieval, task-related standardized
databases on which different groups can apply their algorithms are needed. In text
retrieval, it has been relatively straightforward to obtain large collections of old
newspaper texts because the copyright owners do not see the raw text being of much
value, however image, video, and speech libraries do see great value in their collections
and consequently are much more cautious in releasing their content. While it is not a
research challenge, obtaining large multimedia collections for widespread evaluation
benchmarking is a practical and important step that needs to be addressed. One possible
solution is that task-related image and video databases with appropriate relevance
judgments are included and made available to groups for research purposes as is it done
with TRECVID. Useful video collections could include news video (in multiple
languages), collections of personal videos, and possibly movie collections. Image
collections would include image databases (maybe on specific topics) along with
annotated text - the use of library image collections should also be explored. One critical
point here is that sometimes the artificial collections like Corel might do more harm than
good to the field by misleading people into believing that their techniques work, while
they do not necessarily work with more general image collections.
Therefore, cooperation between private industry and academia is strongly
encouraged. The key point here is to focus on efforts which mutually benefit both
industry and academia. As was noted earlier, it is of clear importance to keep in mind the
needs of the users in retrieval system design and it is logical that industry can contribute
substantially to our understanding of the end-user and also aid in realistic evaluation of
research algorithms. Furthermore, by having closer communication with private industry
we can potentially find out what parts of their systems need additional improvements
toward increasing user satisfaction. In the example of Riya, they clearly need to perform
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
object detection (faces) in complex backgrounds and then object recognition (who the
face is). For the context of consumer digital photograph collections, the MIR community
might attempt to create a solid test set which could be used to assess the efficacy of
different algorithms in both detection and recognition in real world media.
The potential landscape of multimedia information retrieval is quite wide and diverse.
Below are some potential areas for additional MIR research challenges.
Human Centered Methods. We should focus as much as possible on the user, who
may want to explore instead of search for media. It has been noted that decision makers
need to explore an area to acquire valuable insight, thus experiential systems which stress
the exploration aspect are strongly encouraged. Studies on the needs of the user are also
highly encouraged toward giving us understanding of their patterns and desires. New
interactive devices (e.g., force, olfactory, and facial expression detectors) have largely
been overlooked and should be tested to provide new possibilities, such as human
emotional state detection and tracking.
Multimedia Collaboration. Discovering more effective means of human-human
computer-mediated interaction is increasingly important as our world becomes more
wired or wirelessly connected. In a multimodal collaboration environment many
questions remain: How do people find one another? How does an individual discover
meetings/collaborations? What are the most effective multimedia interfaces in these
environments for different purposes, individuals, and groups? Multimodal processing has
many potential roles ranging from transcribing and summarizing meetings to correlating
voices, names, and faces, to tracking individual (or group) attention and intention across
media. Careful and clever instrumentation and evaluation of collaboration environments
will be key to learning more about just how people collaborate.
Very important here is the query model which should benefit from the collaboration
environment. One solution would be to use an event-based query approach [Liu, et al.
2005] that can provide the users a more feasible way to access the related media content
with the domain knowledge provided by the environment model. This approach would be
extremely important when dealing with live multimedia where the multimedia
information is captured in a real-life setting by different sensors and streamed to a central
processor.
Interactive Search and Agent Interfaces. Emergent semantics and its special case of
relevance feedback methods are quite popular because they potentially allow the system
to learn the goals of the user in an interactive way. Another perspective is that relevance
feedback is serving as a special type of smart agent interface. Agents are present in
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
learning environments, games, and customer service applications. They can mitigate
complex tasks, bring expertise to the user, and provide more natural interaction. For
example, they might be able to adapt sessions to a user, deal with dialog interruptions or
follow-up questions, and help manage focus of attention. Agents raise important technical
and social questions but equally provide opportunities for research in representing,
reasoning about, and realizing agent belief and attitudes (including emotions). Creating
natural behaviors and supporting speaking and gesturing agent displays are important
user interface requirements. Research issues include what the agents can and should do,
how and when they should do it (e.g., implicit versus explicit tasking, activity, and
reporting), and by what means should they carry out communications (e.g., text, audio,
video). Other important issues include how do we instruct agents to change their future
behavior and who is responsible when things go wrong.
Neuroscience and New Learning Models. Observations of child learning and
neuroscience suggest that exploiting information from multiple modalities (i.e., audio,
imagery, haptic) reduces processing complexity. For example, researchers have begun to
explore early word acquisition from natural acoustic descriptions and visual images (e.g.,
shape, color) of everyday objects in which mutual information appears to dramatically
reduce computational complexity. This work, which exploits results from speech
processing, computer vision, and machine learning, is being validated by observing
mothers in play with their pre-linguistic infants performing the same task. Neuroscientists
and cognitive psychologists are only beginning to discover and, in some cases, validate
abstract functional architectures of the human mind. However, even the relatively
abstract models available from today’s measurement techniques (e.g., low fidelity
measures of gross neuroanatomy via indirect measurement of neural activity such as
cortical blood flow) promise to provide us with new insight and inspire innovative
processing architectures and machine learning strategies.
Caution should be used when such neuroscience-inspired models are considered.
These models are good for inspiration and high level ideas. However, they should not be
carried too far because the computational machinery is very different. The
neuroscience/cognition community tries to form the model of human machine and we are
trying to develop tools that will be useful for humans. There is some overlap, but the
goals are rather different.
In general, there is great potential in tapping or collaborating with the artificial
intelligence and learning research community for new paradigms and models of which
neuro-based learning is only one candidate. Learning methods have great potential for
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
synergistically combining multiple media at different levels of abstraction. Note that the
current search engines (e.g., Yahoo!, Google, etc) use only text for indexing images and
video. Therefore, approaches which demonstrate synergy of text with image and video
features have significant potential. Note that learning must be applied at the right level as
it is done in some hierarchical approaches and also in the human brain. An arbitrary
application of learning might result in techniques that are very fragile and are useless
except for some niche cases.  Furthermore, services such as Blinkx and Riya currently
utilize learning approaches toward extracting words in movies from complex, noisy audio
tracks (Blinkx) or detecting and recognizing faces from photos with complex
backgrounds (Riya). In both cases only methods which are robust to the presence of real
world noise and complexity will be beneficial toward improving the effectiveness of
similar services.
Folksonomies. It is clear that the problem of automatically extracting content
multimedia data is a difficult problem. Even in text we could not do it completely. As a
consequence, all the existing search engines are using simple keyword based approaches
or are developing approaches that have a significant manual component and address only
specific areas. Another interesting finding is that for an amorphous and large collection of
information, a taxonomy based approach could be too rigid for navigation. Since it is
relatively easier to develop inverted file structures to search for keywords in large
collections, people found the idea of tags attractive: by somehow assigning tags, we
could organize relatively unstructured files and search. About the same time, the idea of
the wisdom of crowd became popular. So it is easy to argue that tags could be assigned
by people and will result in ‘wise tags’ (because they are assigned by the crowd) and this
will be a better approach than the dictatorial taxonomy. The idea is appealing and made
flickr.com and Del.icio.us useful and popular.
The main question arises: Is this approach really working – or can it be made to work?
If everybody assigns several appropriate tags to a photo and then the crowd seeing that
photo also assigns appropriate tags then the wisdom of crowd may come in action. But if
the uploader rarely assigns tags and the viewers, if any, assign tags even more rarely, then
there is no crowd and there is no wisdom. Interesting game like approaches (see for
example www.espgame.org) are being developed to assign these tags to images. Based
on ad hoc analysis it seems that very few tags are being assigned to photos on flickr.com
by people who upload images and fewer are being assigned by the viewers. Moreover, it
may happen that without any guidance people become confused about how to assign tags.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
It appears that the success may come from some interesting combination of taxonomy
and folksonomy.
No Solved Problems. From the most recent panel discussions at the major MIR
scientific conferences including ACM MIR and CIVR, it is generally agreed that there
are no “solved” problems. In some cases a general problem is reduced to a smaller niche
problem where high accuracy and precision can be quantitatively demonstrated, but the
general problem remains largely unsolved. In summary, all of the general problems need
significant further research.
4. MAJOR CHALLENGES
In conclusion, these major research challenges are noteworthy of particular importance to
the MIR research community. (1) Semantic search with emphasis on the detection of
concepts in media with complex backgrounds; (2) Multi-modal analysis and retrieval
algorithms especially towards exploiting the synergy between the various media
including text and context information; (3) Experiential multimedia exploration systems
toward allowing users to gain insight and explore media collections; (4) Interactive
search, emergent semantics, or relevance feedback systems; and (5) Evaluation with
emphasis on representative test sets and usage patterns.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Alberto del Bimbo, Shih-Fu Chang, Nevenka Dimitrova, Theo
Gevers, William Grosky, Thomas Huang, John Kender, Lawrence Rowe, Alan Smeaton,
and Arnold Smeulders for excellent discussions on the future of MIR.
REFERENCES
AMIR, A., BASU, S., IYENGAR, G., LIN, C.-Y., NAPHADE, M., SMITH, J.R., SRINIVASAN S., AND
TSENG, B. 2004. A Multi-modal System for the Retrieval of Semantic Video Events. Computer Vision and
Image Understanding 96(2), 216-236.
ASSFALG, J., DEL BIMBO, A., AND PALA, P. 2004. Retrieval of 3D Objects by Visual Similarity. In
Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Multimedia Information Retrieval, New York, October
2004, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, C. DJERABA, Eds. ACM, New York, 77-83.
BACH, J.R., FULLER, C., GUPTA, A., HAMPAPUR, A., HOROWITZ, B., HUMPHREY, R., JAIN, R., AND
SHU, C.F. 1996. Virage image search engine: An open framework for image management. In Proceedings of
the SPIE Storage and Retrieval for Still Image and Video Databases, California, USA, 76-87.
BALAKRISHNAN, N., HARIHARAKRISHNAN, K., AND SCHONFELD, D. 2005. A New Image
Representation Algorithm Inspired by Image Submodality Models, Redundancy Reduction, and Learning in
Biological Vision. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 27(9), 1367-1378.
BALLARD, D.H. AND BROWN, C.M. 1982. Computer Vision. Prentice Hall, New Jersey, USA.
BAKKER, E.M. AND LEW, M.S. 2002. Semantic Video Retrieval Using Audio Analysis. In Proceedings of
the 1st International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, London, July 2002, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE,
AND J.P. EAKINS, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 262-270.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
BARTOLINI, I., CIACCIA, P., AND PATELLA, M. 2005. WARP: Accurate Retrieval of Shapes Using Phase
of Fourier Descriptors and Time Warping Distance. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 27(1), 142-147.
BATTELLE, J. 2005. The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and Transformed
Our Culture. Portfolio Hardcover, USA.
BAUMBERG, A. 2000, Reliable feature matching across widely separated views, IEEE Conference of
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 774–781.
BELL, G. 2004. A New Relevance for Multimedia When We Record Everything Personal. In Proceedings of
the 12th annual ACM international conference on Multimedia, ACM, New York, 1.
BENITEZ, A. B. AND CHANG, S.-F. 2002. Semantic knowledge construction from annotated image
collection. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Multimedia. IEEE Computer Society
Press, Los Alamitos, Calif.
BERETTI, S., DEL BIMBO, A., AND VICARIO, E. 2001. Efficient Matching and Indexing of Graph Models
in Content-Based Retrieval. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 23(10), 1089-
1105.
BERTHOUZE, N.B. AND KATO, T. 1998. Towards a comprehensive integration of subjective parameters in
database browsing. In Advanced Database Systems for Integration of Media and User Environments, Y.
KAMBAYASHI, A. MAKINOUCHI, S. UEMURA, K. TANAKA, AND Y. MASUNAGA, Eds, World
Scientific: Singapore, 227–232.
BLIUJUTE, R., SALTENIS, S., SLIVINSKAS, G., AND JENSEN, C.S. 1999. Developing a DataBlade for a
New Index. In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering, IEEE, Sydney, March
1999, 314-323.
BOSSON, A., CAWLEY, G.C., CHAN, Y., AND HARVEY, R. 2002. Non-retrieval: Blocking Pornographic
Images. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, London, July 2002,
M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND J.P. EAKINS, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 50-60.
CAPPELLI, R., MAIO, D., AND MALTONI. D. 2001. Multispace KL for Pattern Representation and
Classification. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 23(9), 977-996.
CHANG, S.-F.,CHEN,W., AND SUNDARAM,H. 1998. Semantic visual templates: Linking visual features to
semantics. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, IEEE Computer
Society Press, Los Alamitos, Calif. 531–535.
CHEN,Y., CHE, D., ABERER, K. 2002. On the efficient evaluation of relaxed queries in biological databases.
Proceedings of the eleventh international conference on Information and knowledge management, McLean,
Virginia, 227-236.
CHEN, Y., ZHOU, X.S., AND HUANG, T.S. 2001. One-class SVM for Learning in Image Retrieval, In
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Image Processing, Thessaloniki, Greece, October, 815-818.
CHIU, P., GIRGENSOH, A., LERTSITHICHAI, S., POLAK, W., AND SHIPMAN, F. 2005. MediaMetro:
browsing multimedia document collections with a 3D city metaphor. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM
international conference on Multimedia, Singapore, November, 213-214.
CHUA, T.S., ZHAO, Y., AND KANKANHALLI, M.S. 2002.  Detection of human faces in a compressed
domain for video stratification, The Visual Computer 18(2), 121-133.
COOPER, M., FOOTE, J., GIRGENSOHN, A., AND WILCOX, L. 2005. Temporal event clustering for digital
photo collections. ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications 1(3).
269-288.
DIMITROVA, N., AGNIHOTRI, L., AND WEI, G. 2000. Video Classification Based on HMM Using Text and
Faces. European Signal Processing Conference, Tampere, Finland.
DIMITROVA, N., ZHANG, H. J., SHAHRARAY, B., SEZAN, I., HUANG, T., AND ZAKHOR, A. 2002.
Applications of video-content analysis and retrieval. IEEE Multimedia 9(3), 42-55.
DIMITROVA, N. 2003. Multimedia Content Analysis: The Next Wave. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July 2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N.
SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 9-18.
DJERABA, C. 2002. Content-based Multimedia Indexing and Retrieval, IEEE Multimedia 9, 18-22.
DJERABA, C. 2003. Association and Content-Based Retrieval, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering 15(1), 118-135.
DOWNIE, J.S. 2003. Toward the scientific evaluation of music information retrieval systems. In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Music Information Retrieval, Baltimore, USA, 25-32.
DUFOURNAUD, Y., SCHMID, C., AND HORAUD, R. 2000, Matching images with different resolutions,
IEEE Conference of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 612–618.
DY, J.G., BRODLEY, C.E., KAK, A., BRODERICK, L.S., AND AISEN, A.M. 2003. Unsupervised Feature
Selection Applied to Content-Based Retrieval of Lung Images, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence 25(3), 373-378.
EAKINS, J.P., RILEY, K.J., AND EDWARDS, J.D. 2003. Shape Feature Matching for Trademark Image
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July
2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London,
28-38.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
EGAS, R., HUIJSMANS, N., LEW, M.S., AND SEBE, N. 1999. Adapting k-d Trees to Visual Retrieval. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Visual Information Systems, Amsterdam, June 1999, A.
SMEULDERS AND R. JAIN, Eds., 533-540.
EITER, T., AND LIBKIN, L. 2005.  Database Theory.  Springer, London. 2005.
ELKWAE, E.A. AND KABUKA, M.R., 2000. Efficient content-based indexing of large image databases. ACM
Transactions on Information Systems 18(2), 171-210.
ENSER, P.G.B, AND SANDOM, C.J. 2003. Towards a Comprehensive Survey of the Semantic Gap in Visual
Information Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval,
Urbana, Illinois, USA, July 2003, E. M. BAKKER, T. S. HUANG, M. S. LEW, N. SEBE AND X. ZHOU,
Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 291-299.
ENSER, P.G.B., SANDOM, C.J. AND LEWIS, P.H. 2005. Automatic annotation of images from the
practitioner perspective. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval,
Singapore, July 2005, W. LEOW, M.S. LEW, T.-S. CHUA, W.-Y. MA, E.M. BAKKER, AND L.
CHAISORN, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 497-506.
FAN, J., GAO, Y., AND LUO, H. 2004. Multi-level annotation of natural scenes using dominant image
components and semantic concepts. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia.
ACM, New York, 540 –547.
FLICKNER, M. SAWHNEY, H. NIBLACK, W. ASHLEY, J. QIAN HUANG DOM, B. GORKANI, M.
HAFNER, J. LEE, D. PETKOVIC, D. STEELE, D. YANKER, P. 1995. Query by image and video content:
the QBIC system, IEEE Computer, September, 23-32.
FOOTE, J. 1999. An Overview of Audio Information Retrieval. ACM Multimedia Systems 7(1), 42-51.
FOOTE, J. 2000. Automatic audio segmentation using a measure of audio novelty. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Multimedia and Expo. IEEE, Computer Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 452–
455.
FORSYTH, D.A., AND FLECK, M.M. 1999. Automatic Detection of Human Nudes, International Journal of
Computer Vision 32(1), 63-77.
FRANKEL, C., SWAIN, M.J., AND ATHITSOS, V. 1996. WebSeer: An Image Search Engine for the World
Wide Web. University of Chicago Technical Report 96-14, University of Chicago, USA.
FROHLICH, D., KUCHINSKY, A., PERING, C., DON, A., AND ARISS, S. 2002. Requirements for
photoware. In Proceedings of the ACM Conference on CSCW. ACM Press, New York, NY, 166–175.
FUNKHOUSER, T., MIN, P., KAZHDAN, M., CHEN, J., HALDERMAN, A., DOBKIN, D., AND JACOBS,
D. 2003. A search engine for 3D models. ACM Transactions on Graphics 22(1), 83-105.
GEVERS, T. 2001. Color-based Retrieval. In Principles of Visual Information Retrieval, M.S. LEW, Ed.
Springer-Verlag, London, 11-49.
GONG, B. SINGH, R. AND JAIN, R. 2004. ResearchExplorer: Gaining Insights through Exploration in
Multimedia Scientific Data. In Proceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Multimedia Information
Retrieval, New York, October 2004, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, C. DJERABA, Eds. ACM, New York, 7-14.
GRAHAM, A., GARCIA-MOLINA, H., PAEPCKE, A., AND WINOGRAD, T. 2002. Time as the essence for
photo browsing through personal digital libraries. In Proceedings of the Joint Conference on Digital Libraries.
ACM Press, New York, NY, 326–335.
GREENSPAN, H., GOLDBERGER, J., AND MAYER, A. 2004. Probabilistic Space-Time Video Modeling via
Piecewise GMM. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 26(3), 384-396.
GUO, G., ZHANG, H.J., AND LI, S.Z. 2001. Boosting for Content-Based Audio Classification and Retrieval:
An Evaluation, In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Multimedia and Expo, Tokyo, Japan, August.
HAAS, M., LEW, M.S. AND HUIJSMANS, D.P.  1997. A New Method for Key Frame based Video Content
Representation.  In Image Databases and Multimedia Search, A. SMEULDERS AND R. JAIN, Eds., World
Scientific. 191-200.
HAAS, M., RIJSDAM, J. AND LEW, M. 2004. Relevance feedback: perceptual learning and retrieval in bio-
computing, photos, and video, In Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGMM international workshop on Multimedia
information retrieval, New York, October, 151-156.
HANJALIC, A., LAGENDIJK, R.L., AND BIEMOND, J. 1997. A New Method for Key Frame based Video
Content Representation. In Image Databases and Multimedia Search, A. SMEULDERS AND R. JAIN, Eds.,
World Scientific. 97-107.
HANJALIC, A. AND XU, L-Q. 2005. Affective Video Content Representation and Modeling, IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, 7(1):171-180.
HARALICK, R.M. AND SHAPIRO, L.G. 1993. Computer and Robot Vision. Addison-Wesley, New York,
USA.
HARRIS, C. AND STEPHENS, M. 1988, A combined corner and edge detector, 4th Alvey Vision Conference,
147–151
HASTINGS, S.K. 1999. Evaluation of Image Retrieval Systems: Role of User Feedback. Library Trends 48(2),
438-452.
HE, X., MA, W.-Y., KING, O. LI, M., AND ZHANG, H. 2002. Learning and inferring a semantic space from
user’s relevance feedback for image retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM Multimedia. ACM, New York,
343–347.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
HOWE, N. 2003. A Closer Look at Boosted Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2nd International
Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July 2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N.
SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 61-70.
HUIJSMANS, D.P. AND SEBE, N. 2005. How to Complete Performance Graphs in Content-Based Image
Retrieval: Add Generality and Normalize Scope. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 27(2), 245-251.
JACOBS, D.W., WEINSHALL, D., AND GDALYAHU, Y. 2000. Classification with Nonmetric Distances:
Image Retrieval and Class Representation. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
22(6), 583-600.
JAFARI-KHOUZANI, K. AND SOLTANIAN-ZADEH, H. 2005. Radon Transform Orientation Estimation for
Rotation Invariant Texture Analysis. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 27(6),
1004-1008.
JAIMES A., SEBE N. 2006, Multimodal Human-computer Interaction: A survey, Computer Vision and Image
Understanding, in press.
JAIN, R. 2003. A Game Experience in Every Application: Experiential Computing. Communications of the
ACM 46(7), 48-54.
JAIN, R., KIM, P., AND LI, Z. 2003. Experiential Meeting System. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM SIGMM
Workshop on Experiential Telepresence, Berkeley, USA, 1-12.
JOLION, J.M. 2001. Feature Similarity. In Principles of Visual Information Retrieval, M.S. LEW, Ed. Springer-
Verlag, London, 122-162.
KRISHNAPURAM, R., MEDASANI, S., JUNG, S.H., CHOI, Y.S., AND BALASUBRAMANIAM, R. 2004.
Content-Based Image Retrieval Based on a Fuzzy Approach. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering 16(10), 1185-1199.
LEVINE, M. 1985. Vision in Man and Machine, Mcgraw Hill, Columbus.
LEW, M.S. AND HUIJSMANS, N. 1996. Information Theory and Face Detection. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Pattern Recogntion, Vienna, Austria, 601-605.
LEW, M.S. 2000. Next Generation Web Searches for Visual Content. IEEE Computer, November, 46-53.
LEW, M.S. 2001. Principles of Visual Information Retrieval. Springer, London, UK.
LEW, M.S. AND DENTENEER, D. 2001. Fisher Keys for Content Based Retrieval. Image and Vision
Computing 19, 561-566.
LI, J. AND WANG, J.Z. 2003. Automatic Linguistic Indexing of Pictures by a Statistical Modeling Approach.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 25(9), 1075-1088.
LIENHART, R. 2001. Reliable Transition Detection in Videos: A Survey and Practitioner's Guide.
International Journal of Image and Graphics 1(3), 469-486.
LIM, J.-H., TIAN, Q., AND MULHELM, P. 2003. Home photo content modeling for personalized event-based
retrieval. IEEE Multimedia 10, 4, 28–37.
LINDEBERG, T. 1998, Feature detection with automatic scale selection, International Journal of Computer
Vision, 30(2):79–116
LINDEBERG, T. AND GARDING, J. 1997, Shape-adapted smoothing in estimation of the 3D shape cues from
affine deformations of local 2D brightness structure, Image and Vision Computing, 15(6):415–434,1997
LIU, B., GUPTA, A., AND JAIN, R. 2005. MedSMan: A Streaming Data Management System over Live
Multimedia, ACM Multimedia, 171-180.
LIU, H., XIE, X., TANG, X., LI, Z.W., MA, W.Y. 2004. Effective browsing of web image search results. In
Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGMM International Workshop on Multimedia Information Retrieval, ACM,
New York, 84-90.
LIU, X., SRIVASTAVA, A., AND SUN, D. 2003. Learning Optimal Representations for Image Retrieval
Applications. In Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July
2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London,
50-60.
LOWE, D. 2004, Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints, International Journal of Computer
Vision, 60(2), 91–110.
MARKKULA, M. AND SORMUNEN, E. 2000. End-user Searching Challenges Indexing Practices in the
Digital Newspaper Photo Archive. Information Retrieval 1(4), 259-285.
MIKOLAJCZYK K. AND SCHMID, C. 2004, Scale and affine invariant interest point detectors International
Journal of Computer Vision, 60(1), 63–86.
MONGY, S., BOUALI, F., AND DJERABA C., 2005. "Analyzing user’s behavior on a video database", In
Proceedings of ACM MDM/KDD Workshop on Multimedia Data Mining. Chicago, IL, USA.
MULLER, H., MULLER, W., MARCHAND-MAILLET, S., PUN, T., AND SQUIRE, D. 2000. Strategies for
Positive and Negative Relevance Feedback in Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of 15th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition, Barcelona, Spain, September, 1043-1046.
MULLER, H., MARCHAND-MAILLET, S., AND PUN, T. 2002. The Truth about Corel - Evaluation in Image
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, London, July
2002, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND J.P. EAKINS, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 38-49.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
MÜLLER, W. AND HENRICH, A. 2003. Fast retrieval of high-dimensional feature vectors in P2P networks
using compact peer data summaries. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGMM international workshop on
Multimedia information retrieval, Berkeley, USA, 79-86.
OJALA, T., PIETIKAINEN, M., AND HARWOOD, D. 1996. Comparative study of texture measures with
classification based on feature distributions, Pattern Recognition 29(1), 51-59.
PEREIRA, F. AND KOENEN, R. 2001.  MPEG-7: A Standard for Multimedia Content Description.
International Journal of Image and Graphics 1(3), 527-546.
PICARD, R.W. 2000. Affective Computing, MIT Press, Cambridge, USA.
PICKERING, M.J. AND RÜGER, S. 2003. Evaluation of key-frame based retrieval techniques for video.
Computer Vision and Image Understanding 92(2), 217-235.
RAUTIAINEN, M., SEPPANEN, T., PENTTILA, J., AND PELTOLA, J. 2003. Detecting Semantic Concepts
from Video Using Temporal Gradients and Audio Classification. In Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July 2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N.
SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 260-270.
ROCCHIO, 1971. Relevance Feedback in Information Retrieval. In The Smart Retrieval System: Experiments in
Automatic Document Processing, G. Salton, Ed. Prentice Hall, Englewoods Cliffs.
RODDEN, K., BASALAJ, W., SINCLAIR, D., AND WOOD, K. 2001. Does organisation by similarity assist
image browsing?, In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems, March
2001, Seattle. 190-197.
RODDEN, K. AND WOOD, K. 2003. How do people manage their digital photographs? In Proceedings of the
ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM Press, New York, NY, 409–416.
ROWE, L.A. AND JAIN, R. 2005. ACM SIGMM retreat report on future directions in multimedia research.
ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Application 1(1), 3-13.
ROWLEY, H., BALUJA, S., AND KANADE, K. 1996. Human Face Detection in Visual Scenes. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 8 (Proceedings of NIPS), Denver, USA, November, 875-881.
RUBIN, R. 2004.  Foundations of Library and Information Science. Neal-Schuman Publishers, New York.
RUI, Y. AND HUANG, T.S. 2001. Relevance Feedback Techniques in Image Retrieval. In Principles of Visual
Information Retrieval, M.S. LEW, Ed. Springer-Verlag, London, 219-258.
SALWAY, A. AND GRAHAM, M. 2003. Extracting Information about Emotions in Films. In Proceedings of
the ACM International Conference on Multimedia, Berkeley, USA, November, 299-302.
SCHMID, C., MOHR, R., BAUCKAGE, C. 2000, Evaluation of interest point detectors, International Journal
of Computer Vision, 37(2), 151–172
SCHNEIDERMAN, H. AND KANADE, T. 2004. Object Detection Using the Statistics of Parts, International
Journal of Computer Vision 56(3), 151-177.
SCLAROFF, S., LA CASCIA, M., SETHI, S., AND TAYCHER, L. 2001. Mix and Match Features in the
ImageRover Search Engine. In Principles of Visual Information Retrieval, M.S. LEW, Ed. Springer-Verlag,
London, 259-277.
SCOTT, G.J. AND SHYU, C.R. 2003. EBS k-d Tree: An Entropy Balanced Statistical k-d Tree for Image
Databases with Ground-Truth Labels. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Image and Video
Retrieval, Urbana, July 2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds.
Springer-Verlag, London, 467-476.
SEBASTIAN, T.B., KLEIN, P.N., AND KIMIA, B.B. 2004. Recognition of Shapes by Editing Their Shock
Graphs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 26(5), 550-571.
SEBE, N., LEW, M.S., AND HUIJSMANS, D.P. 2000. Toward Improved Ranking Metrics. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 22(10), 1132-1143.
SEBE, N., AND LEW, M.S. 2001. Color Based Retrieval, Pattern Recognition Letters 22(2), 223-230.
SEBE, N., AND LEW, M.S. 2002. Robust Shape Matching. In Proceedings of the 1st International Conference
on Image and Video Retrieval, London, July 2002, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND J.P. EAKINS, Eds. Springer-
Verlag, London, 17-28.
SEBE, N., COHEN, I., GARG, A., LEW, M.S., AND HUANG, T.S. 2002. Emotion recognition using a Cauchy
naive Bayes classifier. In Proceedings of International Conference on Pattern Recognition, Quebec, August,
17-20.
SEBE, N., TIAN, Q., LOUPIAS, E., LEW, M.S., AND HUANG, T.S. 2003. Evaluation of Salient Point
Techniques. Image and Vision Computing 21(13-14), 1087-1095.
SEBE, N., LEW, M.S., ZHOU, X., AND HUANG, T.S. 2003. The State of the Art in Image and Video
Retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July
2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London.
SHAO, H., SVOBODA, T., TUYTELAARS, T., AND VAN GOOL, L. 2003. HPAT Indexing for Fast
Object/Scene Recognition Based on Local Appearance. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July 2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND X.
ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 71-80.
SHEN, H. T., OOI, B. C., AND TAN, K. L. 2000. Giving meanings to www images. In Proceedings of ACM
Multimedia, ACM, New York, 39–48.
In ACM Transactions on Multimedia Computing, Communications, and Applications, Feb. 2006
SILVA, G.C. DE, YAMASAKI, T., AND AIZAWA, K. 2005. Evaluation of video summarization for a large
number of cameras in ubiquitous home, In Proceedings of the 13th ACM international conference on
Multimedia, ACM, Singapore, November, 820-828.
SMEATON, A.F. AND OVER, P. 2003. Benchmarking the Effectiveness of Information Retrieval Tasks on
Digital Video. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana,
July 2003, E.M. BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag,
London, 10-27.
SMEULDERS, A., WORRING, M., SANTINI, S., GUPTA, A., AND JAIN, R. 2000. Content based image
retrieval at the end of the early years. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
22(12), 1349-1380.
SMITH, J. R. AND CHANG, S.F. 1997. Visually Searching the Web for Content. IEEE Multimedia 4(3), 12-
20.
SNOEK, C.G.M., WORRING, M., VAN GEMERT, J., GEUSEBROEK, J.M., KOELMA, D., NGUYEN, G.P.,
DE ROOIJ, O., AND SEINSTRA, F. 2005. MediaMill: exploring news video archives based on learned
semantics. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM international conference on Multimedia, Singapore, November,
225-226.
SPIERENBURG, J.A. AND HUIJSMANS, D.P. 1997. VOICI: Video Overview for Image Cluster Indexing. In
Proceedings of the Eight British Machine Vision Conference, Colchester, June.
SRIVASTAVA, A., JOSHI, S.H., MIO, W., AND LIU, X. 2005. Statistical Shape Analysis: Clustering,
Learning, and Testing. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 27(4), 590-602.
SUNDARAM, H., XIE, L., AND CHANG, S.F. 2002. A utility framework for the automatic generation of
audio-visual skims. Proceedings of the tenth ACM international conference on Multimedia, Juan-les-Pins,
France, 189-198.
TANGELDER, J. AND VELTKAMP, R.C. 2004. A survey of content based 3d shape retrieval methods, In
Proceedings of International Conference on Shape Modeling and Applications, Genova, Italy, June 2004,
IEEE, New York, 157-166.
TIAN, Q., SEBE, N., LEW, M.S., LOUPIAS, E., AND HUANG, T.S. 2001. Image Retrieval using Wavelet-
based Salient Points. Journal of Electronic Imaging 10(4), 835-849.
TIAN, Q., MOGHADDAM, B., AND HUANG, T.S. 2002. Visualization, Estimation and User-Modeling. In
Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, London, July 2002, M.S.
LEW, N. SEBE, AND J.P. EAKINS, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 7-16.
TIEU, K. AND VIOLA, P. 2004. Boosting Image Retrieval, International Journal of Computer Vision 56(1),
17-36.
THERRIEN, C.W. 1989. Decision, Estimation, and Classification, Wiley, New York, USA.
TUYTELAARS, T. AND VAN GOOL, L. 2000, Wide baseline stereo matching based on local affinely
invariant regions, British Machine Vision Conference, 412–425.
UCHIHASHI, S., FOOTE, J., GIRGENSOHN, A., AND BORECZKY, J. 1999. Video Manga: generating
semantically meaningful video summaries. In Proceedings of the seventh ACM international conference on
Multimedia, Orlando, USA, 383-392.
VAILAYA, A., JAIN, A., AND ZHANG, H. 1998. On Image Classification: City vs Landscape. In Proceedings
of Workshop on Content-based Access of Image and Video Libraries, 3-8.
VELTKAMP, R.C. AND HAGEDOORN, M. 2001. State of the Art in Shape Matching. In Principles of Visual
Information Retrieval, M.S. LEW, Ed. Springer-Verlag, London, 87-119.
WANG, W., YU, Y., AND ZHANG, J. 2004. Image Emotional Classification: Static vs. Dynamic. In
Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, October, 6407-6411.
WINSTON, P. 1992. Artificial Intelligence, Addison-Wesley, New York, USA.
WORRING, M. AND GEVERS, T.  2001.  Interactive Retrieval of Color Images.  International Journal of
Image and Graphics 1(3), 387-414.
WORRING, M., NGUYEN, G.P., HOLLINK, L., GEMERT, J.C. AND KOELMA, D.C. 2004.  Accessing
video archives using interactive search.  In Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and
Expo, IEEE, Taiwan, June, 297-300.
WU, P., CHOI, Y., RO., Y.M., AND WON, C.S. 2001. MPEG-7 Texture Descriptors. International Journal of
Image and Graphics 1(3), 547-563.
YANG, M.H., KRIEGMAN, D.J., AND AHUJA. N. 2002. Detecting Faces in Images: A Survey. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 24(1), 34-58.
YE, H. AND XU, G. 2003. Fast Search in Large-Scale Image Database Using Vector Quantization. In
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Image and Video Retrieval, Urbana, July 2003, E.M.
BAKKER, T.S. HUANG, M.S. LEW, N. SEBE, AND X. ZHOU, Eds. Springer-Verlag, London, 477-487.
YIN, P.Y., BHANU, B., CHANG, K.C., AND DONG, A. 2005. Integrating Relevance Feedback Techniques
for Image Retrieval Using Reinforcement Learning. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 27(10), 1536-1551.
ZHOU, X.S. AND HUANG, T.S. 2001. Comparing discriminating transformations and SVM for learning
during multimedia retrieval. In Proceedings of the ninth ACM international conference on Multimedia, ACM,
Ottawa, Canada, 137-146.

