 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advancing Cybersecurity  
Research and Education in Europe 
Major Drivers of Growth in the Digital Landscape 
 
Cybersecurity Policy White Paper  
 
Europe Policy Committee 
Association for Computing Machinery 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
October 2016  
 
  
 
 
Association for Computing Machinery 
ACM brings together computing educators, 
researchers, and professionals to inspire 
dialogue, share resources, and address the 
field's challenges. As the world’s largest 
computing society, ACM strengthens the 
profession's collective voice through strong 
leadership, promotion of the highest 
standards, and recognition of technical 
excellence. ACM supports the professional 
growth of its members by providing 
opportunities for life‐long learning, career 
development, and professional networking.  
ACM’s Councils in Europe, India, and China 
foster networking opportunities that 
strengthen ties within and across countries 
and technical communities. Their actions 
enhance ACM’s ability to raise awareness 
of computing’s important technical, 
educational, and social issues around the 
world. 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee 
The ACM Europe Policy Committee serves 
as the focal point for ACM’s interaction with 
the EU and member states’ governmental 
bodies, the computing community, and the 
public in matters of European public policy 
related to computing, informatics, and 
technology. Its membership reflects a 
diverse community of computing 
practitioners, scientists, educators, 
researchers, and other technology 
professionals from government, business, 
academia, and the nonprofit sector. The 
committee’s contributions to public policy 
draw from the deep scientific and technical 
expertise of the computing community. 
 
 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee 
Fabrizio Gagliardi (Chair) 
 
Report Authors 
Fabrizio Gagliardi (Chair) 
Barcelona Supercomputing Center 
 
Chris Hankin  
Imperial College London 
 
Judith Gal-Ezer 
Open University, Israel 
 
Andrew McGettrick  
University of Strathclyde Glasgow 
 
Maarja Meitern  
ACM Europe Research Assistant 
 
Report Reviewers 
Gerhard Schimpf 
Chair, ACM Europe Council of European 
Chapter Leaders 
 
Hervé Bourlard 
Idiap Research Institute 
 
Manel Medina 
APWG.eu R&D coordinator, esCERT-UPC 
 
Robert B. Schnabel 
ACM Executive Director and CEO 
 
Renee Dopplick 
ACM Global Policy Director 
 
https://www.acm.org/public-policy/euacm 
 
Copyright © 2016  
C
o
p
y
r
i
g
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe  |  i  
 
 
Contents 
Introduction 1 
● Enhancing and Strengthening Cybersecurity  
● Cybersecurity in Europe  
● Guiding Principles for Policy Approaches  
Cybersecurity Challenges and Approaches 5 
● Multifaceted, Multidisciplinary Nature of Cybersecurity  
● Understanding Technical Vulnerabilities  
● Future Trends and Emergent Technologies  
Cybersecurity Research 10 
● Enhancing the Research Pipeline  
● Coordination of Public and Private Sectors  
● Priority Cybersecurity Research Areas  
Cybersecurity Education and Workforce 15 
● Computing and Cybersecurity Education at All Levels  
● Cybersecurity Workforce Development  
Cybersecurity Ethics 18 
● Cybersecurity Ethics in Modern Society  
● Public Awareness Campaigns  
Conclusions 22 
Acknowledgements 23 
References 24 
 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  1  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
● Enhancing and Strengthening Cybersecurity 
● Cybersecurity in Europe 
● Guiding Principles for Policy Approaches 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  2  
About This White Paper 
Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe: Major Drivers of Growth in the 
Digital Landscape explores the important role of cybersecurity research and education in 
enhancing cybersecurity. The paper provides an overview of cybersecurity challenges, explores 
its multifaceted and multidisciplinary nature, and covers some emergent trends generating new 
privacy and security concerns. The paper discusses approaches to addressing those challenges 
through strategic investments in cybersecurity research and development, strengthening the 
education and workforce pipelines, and improving the integration of ethics and professional 
responsibility throughout the cybersecurity landscape. The paper identifies twelve guiding 
principles for public policies to advance cybersecurity research, education, and workforce 
development. 
 
Contributors and reviewers included a high-level experts group of computing professionals, 
scientists, researchers, educators, and other technology professionals with backgrounds in a 
range of computing disciplines, cybersecurity education, and computing education. The paper is 
informed by their expertise, leading reports and publications of ACM members, government 
reports, and key industry best practices, standards, and resources. 
 
The paper represents the views of the ACM Europe Policy Committee and does not necessarily 
represent the views of the Association. 
 
Introduction
Governments and industry leaders from 
every major sector widely recognize the 
importance of strengthening the 
cybersecurity landscape. The rate of 
technological development is producing a 
rapidly changing set of challenges. 
 
Transformative developments in computing 
power, cloud computing, mobile, artificial 
intelligence, ubiquitous interconnectivity, 
and large-scale automated systems are 
bringing novel and powerful concerns for 
cybersecurity, privacy, and safety. The 
implications for future privacy and security 
threats are ominous and could have 
implications for decades to come. 
 
Public trust in the integrity of our global 
financial systems, information networks, and 
other critical infrastructure systems is 
essential for continued economic growth, 
public safety, and innovation. Maintaining 
and providing improved, secure, resilient, 
and trustworthy digital ecosystems is vital to 
protecting organizational and personal data 
against a growing range of cyber threats 
and vulnerabilities.  
 
Achieving strong cyber resilience and 
cybersecurity leadership in Europe will 
require coordinated individual and collective 
action to safeguard and continually 
strengthen the cybersecurity ecosystem. 
 
The adoption of the first EU-wide 
cybersecurity legislation on 6 July 2016 
marked a significant advancement in 
fostering crossborder cooperation by 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  3  
Member States and boosting enhanced 
security by businesses providing essential 
services and critical infrastructures. The 
Directive on security of network and 
information systems (the NIS Directive) 
entered into force in August 2016. 
 
The European Commission’s Digital Single 
Market Strategy and the advisory Scientific 
Advice Mechanism recognize cybersecurity 
as a core policy priority. The EU Cyber 
Security Strategy provides a policy 
framework for EU initiatives. 
 
The ability to address legacy vulnerabilities, 
weaknesses in current infrastructures, and 
future threats depends on growing a strong 
research and development community.  
 
The European Union, through its Horizon 
2020 research agenda, has invested €160 
million in cybersecurity research and 
innovation projects. The European 
Commission also plans to invest an 
additional €450 million during 2017-2020 in 
a new public-private partnership on 
cybersecurity, the Cybersecurity cPPP.  
 
Increased government-funded research and 
public-private coordination is needed, 
particularly in the expanding fields of new 
secure networking and computing 
architectures, high-performance computing, 
encryption, data integrity, artificial 
intelligence, big data, privacy, and risk 
management strategies. 
 
Governments should provide legal 
protections for legitimate and beneficial 
computing privacy and security research.  
 
Satisfying the growing demand for a skilled 
computing and cybersecurity workforce 
requires expanding educational 
opportunities for students at all levels, 
increasing the number of qualified 
educators, providing training opportunities 
throughout employment, and aligning 
educational pathways with advanced 
education and careers in computing and 
cybersecurity. Cybersecurity education and 
workforce development plans should 
address diversity and inclusiveness. 
 
 
Cybersecurity Objectives  
of the European Commission 
 
 Increase cybersecurity capabilities 
and cooperation 
 
 Make EU a strong player in 
cybersecurity 
 
 Mainstream cybersecurity in EU 
policies 
 
 
Cyberspace crosses geographic and 
governance boundaries. Continued efforts 
are needed to advance and coordinate 
cybersecurity policies, laws, regulations, 
guidelines, and best practices. 
Governments, industry, academia, and 
organizations play individual and integrated 
roles in protecting the privacy and security 
of data, networks, computers, and devices. 
 
Intergovernmental cooperation at the local, 
national, regional, and international levels 
can facilitate effective and harmonized legal 
and policy frameworks.  
 
Outreach efforts are needed to raise 
awareness among governments, 
companies, organizations, and individuals 
about the importance of cybersecurity and 
technical and ethical best practices to 
ensuring a strong cyberspace. 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  4  
12 Guiding Principles for Public Policies  
to Advance Cybersecurity Research and Education 
 
1. Cybersecurity Research and 
Education as Public Policy Priorities 
Strengthening cybersecurity research, 
education, and workforce development 
are vital to achieving overall 
cybersecurity policy objectives. 
 
2. Cybersecurity as Multifaceted and 
Multidisciplinary 
Research and education policy 
approaches will be effective only if they 
encompass the multifaceted and 
multidisciplinary nature of cybersecurity. 
 
3. Cybersecurity and Privacy as 
Complementary 
Security and privacy are complementary 
concerns, rather than tradeoffs. 
Planning should address both aspects.  
 
4. Build in Security and Privacy 
Security and privacy should be built in 
as part of the culture, approaches, 
processes, systems, and technical 
infrastructures. 
   
5. Cybersecurity Research and 
Development Funding 
Research and development funding is 
indispensable to cybersecurity and 
innovation and needs to address both 
security and privacy.  
 
6. Cybersecurity Research 
Opportunities in Higher Education 
Expanded opportunities for students and 
faculty to engage in cutting-edge and 
high-impact research are important to 
growing a strong research community. 
7. Legal Protections for Privacy and 
Security Researchers 
Governments should provide legal 
protections for individuals conducting 
legitimate and beneficial computing 
privacy and security research. 
 
8. Cybersecurity Education and 
Workforce Pipelines 
Expanded access to cybersecurity and 
computing education at all levels is 
needed to prepare, build, and improve 
the workforce. Policy approaches should 
address diversity and inclusiveness. 
 
9. Educator Professional Development 
Ongoing professional development 
enables educators to gain and update 
their knowledge and skills, and supports 
high-quality instruction to improve 
student learning. 
 
10. Public-Private Coordination  
Improved coordination of the public and 
private sectors is needed to address 
cybersecurity research and education.  
 
11. Public Engagement 
Cybersecurity public advisory boards, 
research review boards, and public 
forums should include representation 
from the computing field. 
 
12. International Cooperation 
International cooperation plays a key 
role. Cybersecurity challenges and 
benefits flow across borders and 
globally interconnected systems.  
 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  5  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Challenges and Approaches 
 
● Multifaceted, Multidisciplinary Nature of Cybersecurity 
● Understanding Technical Vulnerabilities 
● Future Trends and Emergent Technologies 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  6  
Cybersecurity Challenges and Approaches
Digital systems are pervasive and cover a 
large spectrum from personal devices, to 
large corporate systems, to control systems 
operating our critical infrastructures.  
 
Government, industry, academia, and 
organizations play individual and integrated 
roles in information sharing, prevention, 
detection, investigation, crisis response and 
recovery, and risk management strategies 
to safeguard data, networks, computers, 
and devices. 
 
Multifaceted and Multidisciplinary Nature 
of Cybersecurity 
 
Cybersecurity is a multi-faceted and 
multidisciplinary computing-based discipline 
involving technology, people, information, 
and processes to enable assured and 
trustworthy operations.1 It involves the 
creation, operation, analysis, testing, 
monitoring, and improvements of secure 
computer systems.  
 
Cybersecurity includes aspects of policy, 
law, ethics, risk management, and human 
factors. Legal, regulatory, and policy 
frameworks need to address security while 
protecting public safety, ensuring 
confidentiality and privacy of information, 
and enabling innovation.  
 
Cybersecurity is an inherently 
multidisciplinary endeavor requiring policy 
leaders, computing professionals, 
researchers, mathematicians, engineers, 
social scientists, ethicists and psychologists 
to achieve its objectives.  
 
Why Is Cybersecurity Important? 
 
In its 2015 Cyber Threat Report Symantec 
Corporation reports that, as a conservative 
estimate over half a billion personal records 
were lost or destroyed in 2015, there were 
over one million cyber attacks against 
people each day, 75% of all legitimate web 
sites were vulnerable to attack in such a 
way as to potentially infect users, a new 
form of attack was appearing roughly once 
every week.2  
 
The recent Cyber Security Breaches Survey 
from the UK government reports that two 
thirds of large UK businesses were hit by a 
cyber breach or cyber attack in the past 
year, with one in four being hit by a breach 
at least once per month. The cost of these 
attacks often runs into millions of 
pounds/euros/dollars. 
 
In short, cyber issues pose a serious threat 
to everyone and to all organisations.  
 
Standing back from the financial and 
economic arguments, advances in 
computers and computing technology are 
shaping the world and society and that 
brings huge challenges and a huge 
responsibility. There are many ethical 
issues involved and being sensitive to these 
is vital for the development of a fair, just, 
safe and secure society which at a digital 
level is being fashioned for future 
generations.  
 
A secondary aspect of this is ensuring that 
businesses are secure and that individuals 
feel safe and comfortable with the use of the 
technology. 
 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  7  
Understanding Technical Vulnerabilities 
 
Cyber vulnerabilities arise in a number of 
different ways. Cybersecurity covers a 
spectra of technologies, networks, and 
related infrastructures and provides 
protection from intrusion, data theft, and 
interference with or damage to systems, 
networks, data, and other cyber and 
physical infrastructures.  
 
The ITU Study Group in 2008 adopted the 
following definition of cybersecurity:  
 
“Cybersecurity is the collection of tools, 
policies, security concepts, security 
safeguards, guidelines, risk management 
approaches, actions, training, best 
practices, assurance and technologies that 
can be used to protect the cyber 
environment and organization and user’s 
assets. Organization and user’s assets 
include connected computing devices, 
personnel, infrastructure, applications, 
services, telecommunications systems, and 
the totality of transmitted and/or stored 
information in the cyber environment. 
Cybersecurity strives to ensure the 
attainment and maintenance of the security 
properties of the organization and user’s 
assets against relevant security risks in the 
cyber environment. The general security 
objectives comprise the following: 
availability, integrity, confidentiality.”3  
 
Availability is having assets available when 
needed. Integrity ensures data is protected 
from accidental or unauthorized modification 
or deletion. Where required, it can be 
ensured that the data is what its “packaging” 
claims it to be (authentication) and that in a 
two-party transaction, neither party can 
deny their involvement (non-repudiation). 
Confidentiality is ensuring information is not 
made available to unauthorized actors 
(people, entities or processes). 
 
In combating threats, a number of 
observations should be made. The area is 
complex, in a state of constant change and 
becoming ever more sophisticated. 
 
Risk assessment methods can be used to 
evaluate risk against the value of the assets 
to be protected, and to gauge the 
(proportionate) level of protection required; 
both quantitative and qualitative approaches 
can be utilized. Standards such as ISO 
27001, and voluntary frameworks, such as 
the US NIST Cybersecurity Framework, and 
the SANS Critical Controls are relevant in 
this regard. 
 
Methods employed in computer security 
include: the use of (effective) passwords, 
two factor authentication, biometrics, 
permissions associated with file access, 
encrypting of information, the use of 
mathematical models of information flow, 
firewalls, intrusion detection, penetration 
testing and (controlled) offensive activities; 
 
Best practice in software and systems 
engineering including design principles for 
secure systems (least privilege, fail-safe 
defaults, separation of privilege, complete 
mediation, least common mechanisms, 
open design) should be used. 
 
The use of multiple diverse methods can be 
employed using fault tolerant and resilience 
approaches which ensure that, although 
one defense may be compromised, the 
others will maintain overall security; when 
compromise takes place that defense 
should then be strengthened or replaced in 
a timely fashion.  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  8  
Critical information (e.g. passwords) may be 
divulged inadvertently or by taking 
inadequate precautions; problems can arise 
with poor software practices including using 
software that has not been properly tested; 
viruses or other malware (malicious 
software) can travel between computers; 
spyware seeks to extract information about 
users by devious means; communications 
may be intercepted; overloaded sites can 
generate problems. The possible existence 
of ‘insider threats’, i.e. threats from people 
such as employees or consultants must be 
recognised. 
 
Cyber breaches can result in all aspects of 
computer operation being compromised. 
This includes bringing down or interfering 
with, e.g. defacing, web sites (resulting in 
loss of business or general chaos), 
compromising critical infrastructure, 
reductions in safety and security in certain 
applications (e.g. cars or transport, health) 
loss of privacy to individuals (e.g. with 
banking details being accessed), loss of 
service, changes to information, and so on.  
In considering these issues, it is important 
to recognize that: computers can be used to 
attack other computers resulting in many 
rapid attempts at finding vulnerabilities; 
computers themselves are becoming ever 
more sophisticated and exhibiting aspects 
of intelligence; with developments involving 
the internet-of-things many small devices 
will be connected to the internet and there is 
the possibility that many of these will exhibit 
lower quality security than larger systems. 
 
Future Trends and Emergent 
Technologies 
 
 Internet of Things 
 
The Internet of Things (IoT) incorporates a 
wide variety and significantly increased 
number of interconnected devices, sensors 
and infrastructures. The growing IoT 
landscape is across differing technical 
systems, networks, protocols, and 
standards, and spans into control of objects 
in the physical world. The pervasiveness, 
decentralized nature, and variety of 
interactions create new complexities and 
implications for safety, security, privacy, 
reliability, and resilience. 
 
Some of the vulnerabilities in Internet of 
Things products have had exposure by 
attacks on high-end automotive systems.4 
The objective of cyberattacks on these 
systems is often sabotage rather than 
stealing data. The links between 
cybersecurity and the physical effects is 
often quite subtle. The systems are often 
managed by control engineers who have 
other concerns than cybersecurity and 
cybersecurity solutions are often 
inappropriate, particularly in safety critical 
systems. For example, one of the most 
effective controls in traditional cybersecurity 
is aggressive patch (vendor software 
updates) management, whereas in some 
cyber physical systems patches are never 
deployed because their deployment 
destroys any safety case.   
 
 Cyber Physical Systems 
 
A relatively recent phenomenon, which will 
accelerate with the roll-out of the Internet of 
Things, is the interaction between digital 
systems and the physical world. One of the 
earliest indications of the cybersecurity 
challenges that this might pose was the 
identification of Stuxnet in 2010.5 Since then 
there have been a number of high profile 
attacks on industrial control systems 
including the destruction of a German steel 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  9  
mill blast furnace in 2014 and the Ukrainian 
power outages in 2015.  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  10  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Research 
 
● Enhancing the Research Pipeline 
● Coordination of Public and Private Sectors 
● Priority Cybersecurity Research Areas 
 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  11  
Cybersecurity Research and Development 
Dedicated public and private funding for 
cybersecurity research and development is 
indispensable to Europe’s cybersecurity and 
innovation. Investments are needed to 
expand the speed and scale of research 
and development. 
 
Security and privacy are complementary 
concerns, rather than tradeoffs. Research 
priorities should address both aspects. 
 
Enhancing the Research Pipeline 
 
Because of the ever-evolving nature of the 
cyber world and its importance, funding is 
needed to support top-class fundamental 
and applied research and the pipeline of 
researchers within the public sector, 
academia, and industry. 
 
Cybersecurity research should cover a 
broad spectrum from challenge-led long-
term research through to more applied 
research which can lead to immediate 
improvements in practice. An example of 
the former is the DARPA Grand Challenge 
in Cybersecurity which called for automatic 
defensive systems which could reason 
about flaws, formulate patches and deploy 
them in real-time. An example of the latter is 
work from the UK’s Research Institute in 
Science of Cybersecurity which has 
informed new password advice from the UK 
Government. 
 
Cybersecurity research calls for a diverse 
range of skills from engineering, 
mathematics, computer science and human 
sciences such as psychology. 
 
 
 
Public-Private Coordination 
 
Coordination of public and private 
investments in research and development 
will help spur the necessary scope and 
scale of research vital to developing next 
generation cybersecurity technologies, 
ecosystems, tools, solutions, and 
processes. To be successful a close 
partnership across government, academia, 
and industry is essential. 
 
Cybersecurity public advisory boards for 
research agendas and research review 
boards should include representation from 
the computing field. 
 
Priority Cybersecurity Research Areas 
 
The rate of technological development is 
producing a rapidly changing set of 
challenges. The following are a few priority 
areas where further and new research could 
encourage the development of more secure 
digital ecosystems and inspire innovation. 
 
 Developing a Science of 
Cybersecurity 
 
As Fred Schneider has observed, a science 
of cybersecurity should provide a body of 
knowledge that enables the prediction of the 
outcome of design and implementation 
choices.6 Many scientific disciplines include 
some notion of measurement. However, the 
lack of constraints on the behaviours of both 
attackers and defenders make good 
cybersecurity metrics quite elusive.  
 
A first step could be to establish research 
protocols to ensure that experiments are 
reproducible.7  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  12  
 
A science of cybersecurity might ultimately 
enable the quantification of improvements in 
security achieved by certain measures and 
also generally support better risk-based 
decision making. 
 
 Verification and Validation 
 
Society’s increasing reliance on digital 
technologies which are driven by software, 
often provided as binary code by third party 
suppliers, raises the importance of being 
able to verify, or at least validate, the 
security of systems. There have been some 
impressive results already in using program 
analysis and bounded model checking tools. 
Despite these promising developments, 
generic solutions which operate at 
appropriate industrial scale remain a 
significant challenge. Progress in this area 
depends also on the vision of the DARPA 
Cyber Grand Challenge mentioned earlier. 
 
 Cyber Physical Systems 
 
Cyber-physical systems integrate 
computing, networking, and physical 
components and processes. There are a 
number of challenging privacy, security, and 
public safety research problems to be 
addressed in this area, including the use of 
algorithms and feedback loops where the 
physical processes impact the 
computations, with substantial programmes 
in the EU (both H2020 and national 
programmes) and the US. 
 
 Secure Hardware 
 
Traditionally, much of the cybersecurity 
technology has been in the form of 
software. Increasingly mechanisms are 
being implemented in hardware. Typical 
candidates for hardware implementation are 
controls which involve network monitoring 
such as hardware firewalls and hardware 
security modules employed in tamper-proof 
cryptography. Some authors have 
suggested that the deployment of Internet of 
Things may lead to a greater need for 
hardware security technologies.8 Some of 
the research challenges include developing 
a better understanding of the scope and 
limitations of hardware security technologies 
and identifying and understanding barriers 
to exploitation. 
 
 Network Security 
 
Software Defined Networks (SDN) are 
currently attracting a lot of attention. The 
key idea is that high-level flow routing 
decisions are made at control layer, which is 
software controlled and decoupled from the 
lower level data handling layer. Many of the 
early approaches to SDN were based on 
the OpenFlow protocol. The decoupling of 
high-level routing decisions from data 
handling raises the possibility of innovative 
approaches to network security as 
exemplified in the Fresco system.9 
 
The concept of Total Network Defence is 
also attracting some attention as a research 
challenge. This involves developing new 
ways to detect, classify and defend an 
entire network against malicious software, 
by combining data from several sources 
such as: network captures; firewall activity; 
virtual machine images; host-based 
sensors; etc. 
 
 New Computing and Network 
Architectures 
 
If we do not succeed to build more 
trustworthy components and systems, 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  13  
sooner or later we will run into a 
cybersecurity crisis on a national or 
international level. Given the rising number 
of successful attacks (e.g. the German 
Bundestag) and breaches it is clear that the 
current arsenal of security measures are not 
effective enough. The current IT 
architectures are too complex and the 
increased complexity translates into growing 
numbers of attack vectors. The present 
defense strategies build on what we 
understand and do not entirely address the 
fundamental weakness in system 
architecture design and implementation. 
 
 Security and Privacy by Design 
 
Security and privacy must be built in from 
the outset, very much like engineers 
address safety when they build airplanes or 
other safety-critical systems. These new-
type systems must be deployed when it 
comes to critical infrastructures, such as the 
electric grid, manufacturing facilities, 
transportation vehicles, financial institutions, 
water treatment facilities and water supply, 
food supply, and weapon systems. 
Research is needed on improved ways to 
approach security and privacy by design 
and effective instructional pedagogical 
practices in this area.  
 
 Cryptography 
 
Cryptography is a very active area of 
research, particularly concerning proofs of 
the computational complexity of 
cryptographic systems. Two more recent 
areas that are receiving increasing attention 
are: Homomorphic Encryption and Quantum 
resistant cryptography. 
 
The ability to process encrypted data 
without the need to decrypt it first promises 
huge gains in security and privacy. The 
cryptographic approaches which support 
this capability are collectively known as 
Homomorphic Encryption.10 Whilst there has 
been a substantial amount of work in this 
area, performance issues remain a 
significant barrier to widespread adoption. 
 
 
 
Public and private  
investment in cybersecurity 
research and development 
is indispensable to Europe’s 
cybersecurity, competitiveness, 
and innovation. 
 
 
 
Many traditional approaches to 
cryptography rely on the computation 
intractability of factoring large numbers or 
other hard problems in number theory such 
as solving the elliptic curve discrete 
logarithm problem. Should Quantum 
Computing become a practical proposition, 
Shor’s integer factorisation algorithm11 
would break these approaches. There is 
hence a challenge to develop quantum 
resistant approaches to cryptography; the 
key is to find intractable problems which are 
not amenable to fast quantum computer-
based solutions. Lattice-based approaches 
to cryptography are one promising avenue 
of work and also may provide an approach 
to Homomorphic Encryption too.12 
 
 Identity Management 
 
Since a White House report in 2011, there 
has been substantial interest in the creation 
of an Identity ecosystem which would help 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  14  
with the creation of privacy-enhancing 
trusted digital identities.13 This seems to be 
a prerequisite for the establishment of a 
truly digital society; the alternative seems to 
be the status quo where authentication is 
done on an ad hoc basis with all citizens 
having to cope with the cognitive load of 
multiple strong passwords. Central to this 
notion of an identity ecosystem is the 
development of anonymous credentials.14 
Work on this has concentrated on the 
development of next generation biometrics. 
There has been quite a lot of work done on 
anonymous identification of fingerprints – 
this is achieved by the selection of a small 
number of features which are sufficient to 
authenticate for the purpose at hand. 
Questions remain as to whether such 
approaches are scalable and commercially 
viable. This is likely to be a very active area 
of research for the foreseeable future. 
 
 Human and Social Sciences 
 
Many of the most significant security failures 
involve humans and can often be attributed 
to poor design that fails to take the human 
factor into account. The earlier cited 
guidance on password choice is an 
excellent example of an attempt to rectify 
this situation. Few security solutions are 
likely to succeed without involvement of 
human factors specialists. Cybersecurity is 
a truly multi-disciplinary endeavour and 
much more research is needed on the 
human dimensions of cybersecurity. This 
work requires input from psychologists and 
the social sciences as well as computer 
scientists, mathematicians and engineers. 
 
 Ethics in Research  
 
We need to bear in mind that working with 
malware is not ethically neutral. One needs 
to “think like the criminal who wrote it in the 
first place.”15 Therefore, the professionals 
and students working with these topics 
should be trained to “think nefariously so 
that it does not overtake their ability to 
reason morally.”16  
 
In addition, to these concerns malware 
research might affect the real lives of 
people, as the researchers might have 
access to private compromised machines 
while studying malware in situ. Thus, there 
is also a need to prepare the cybersecurity 
community to those novel and often 
unexpected situations which are not related 
to the subjects of their initial research. 
Cybersecurity researchers are facing 
without a doubt novel ethical challenges 
“that exert a strong influence on online 
trust.”17 
 
  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  15  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Education and Workforce 
 
● Computing and Cybersecurity Education at All Levels 
● Cybersecurity Workforce Development 
 
 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  16  
Cybersecurity Education and Workforce Development 
Providing inclusive access to computing and 
cybersecurity education at all levels and 
strengthening workforce development are 
vital to achieving cybersecurity policy 
objectives. Local, state, national, and 
regional education and workforce 
development plans should align policy, 
programs, and resources to support growth 
in cybersecurity education and jobs. 
 
Pre-University Cybersecurity Education  
 
There are many different approaches to the 
teaching of computing at the pre-university 
school level (primary and secondary). If, in 
addition, computing is taught in such a way 
that the use of computers by pupils is safe, 
secure, and responsible and yet disciplined, 
useful and stimulating, then cybersecurity 
concerns will be addressed. 
 
Teachers are the key to the success of any 
study program, thus it is expected that 
teachers teaching cybersecurity have formal 
education and are well trained on the 
subject. However, many teachers of 
computing do not possess a first degree in 
computer science or they have graduated in 
computing some years ago. The teaching of 
issues related to cybersecurity is nontrivial 
and changing with time. The dynamic and 
evolving nature of computing and 
cybersecurity require ongoing training of 
teachers. Appropriate formal education for 
teachers with relevant in-service or pre-
service education is desirable. 
 
Higher Education 
 
The computing curriculum in higher 
education needs to address cybersecurity 
concerns to ensure that graduates: (a) enter 
the workplace with a strong ethical code 
and capable of developing systems without 
cybersecurity vulnerabilities, (b) are well 
placed to help combat cybersecurity threats, 
and (c) understand that security is a 
complete systems issue.  
 
ACM produces and keeps current 
international curricula recommendations 
and guidelines in all areas of computing, 
including cybersecurity.18 These guidelines 
are used in the United States and worldwide 
to standardize and assist in the 
accreditation of college and university 
programs.  
 
 
 
ACM’s Cybersecurity  
Curricula Recommendations  
and Guidelines 
are used around the world. 
 
 
 
The ACM Joint Task Force on 
Cybersecurity Education, launched in 
September 2015, currently is developing 
comprehensive international curricular 
guidance in cybersecurity education to  
support future educational efforts.19 The 
Joint Task Force is a collaboration between 
major international computing societies: 
ACM, the IEEE Computer Society (IEEE 
CS), the Association for Information 
Systems Special Interest Group on Security 
(AIS SIGSEC), and the International 
Federation for Information Processing 
Working Group on Information Security 
Education (IFIP WG 11.8). The Joint Task 
Force grew out of the foundational efforts of 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  17  
the Cyber Education Project.20 
 
The implications of these observations have 
a profound impact on all phases of the 
computing curriculum, perhaps most 
obviously in programming, software 
development, the human computer 
interface, communications, databases, 
operating systems, concurrency, security, 
information management, professional 
ethics, systems engineering and even in 
hardware courses. Both theoretical and 
practical or hands-on aspects, and the 
important link between these, need to be 
addressed. 
 
These considerations provoke the question: 
should cybersecurity be offered as an 
autonomous discipline at undergraduate 
level? Thinking on this is divided and 
changing, but generally it seems too early to 
give cybersecurity this status; but a variety 
of authoritative courses in cybersecurity at 
Masters level is desirable, with prerequisites 
being a sound background in disciplines 
such as computer science, software 
engineering, business computing, etc.  
For students in disciplines other than 
computing, often a general course on 
computational thinking is offered and these 
can address cybersecurity considerations. 
More generally cybersecurity issues can be 
integrated into general study programmes to 
prepare attendees to use computers and 
the Internet intelligently, safely and 
securely. 
 
The rate of change and the increasingly 
sophisticated threats are on-going issues for 
educators and researchers at colleges and 
universities. Ongoing professional 
development enables educators to gain and 
update their knowledge and skills, and 
supports high-quality instruction to improve 
student learning. 
 
Expanding research opportunities for 
students and faculty to engage in cutting-
edge and high-impact research is important 
to growing a strong research community. 
 
 
Cybersecurity Workforce Development 
 
Given the rate of developments in 
cybersecurity, there is an ever pressing 
need to keep software professionals up-to-
date with developments in cybersecurity.  
Senior managers need to be keep abreast 
of the latest best advice. In all these cases, 
educational issues are ever present.  
 
Professional bodies, professional societies 
or support groups are typically well placed 
to offer access to appropriate education, 
even issuing certificates to ensure currency. 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  18  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cybersecurity Ethics 
 
● Cybersecurity Ethics in Modern Society 
● Public Awareness Campaigns 
 
 
  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  19  
Cybersecurity Ethics 
  
With the accelerating convergence of the 
physical world and the cyber world, 
computing ethics is now becoming a 
general concern for all stakeholders 
including end-users, service providers and 
authorities. 
 
Autonomous driven cars, robots performing 
surgical operations, social networks, etc., all 
are manifestations of the new cyber world 
which requires a responsible and ethical 
approach from everybody involved and not 
just from the system developers. 
 
Cybersecurity Ethics in Modern Society 
 
In all cases, public outreach and education 
need to be imbued with ethical and legal 
considerations that serve to guide the 
development of a society that is in tune with 
the best principles of safety, security, 
fairness and justice. 
 
 ACM Code of Ethics and 
Professional Conduct 
 
The ACM Code of Ethics and Professional 
Conduct, adopted on 1992 and currently 
going through a review process, covers well 
the ethical responsibilities of computer 
professionals and academics. 
 
Two principles from the ACM Code of Ethics 
are especially important for cybersecurity: 
first, principle 1.2 “avoid harm to others” and 
second, principle 1.7 “respect the privacy of 
others”. Computer professionals are 
requested by code of ethics to operate 
taking into account the potential harm that 
lack of ethical standards might cause. 
However, the specific role of cybersecurity 
professionals might be very different from 
one to another. For this reason a code of 
ethics,21 although a good start, might not 
always be sufficient and should be enforce 
also by educational means. In addition, like 
in other professions where ethics plays an 
important role, such as journalism, there is 
the dilemma whether a breach of the ethical 
code should be sanctioned. Although so far 
this has not been the case, the ACM Code 
of Ethics has played a role in court 
proceedings in the US (e.g. Oracle v. 
Google).22 
 
Nonetheless, until these dilemmas are 
solved one thing is for sure - education and 
training can help the professionals to further 
understand the wider impact of their work 
when dealing with ethical issues.23 
 
 Critical Infrastructure Ethics 
 
National Governments have the 
responsibility to promote the implementation 
of cybersecurity mechanisms in public 
administrations and private sectors, through 
legislation, regulations, and also economic 
incentives. They have also responsibility to 
take care of citizens’ and enterprises’ 
cybersecurity, reinforcing the skills and 
capabilities of Law Enforcement Authorities, 
and creating adequate supervisory 
agencies. Some research is being made to 
support those decision makers, to evaluate 
the impact of cybersecurity strategies at 
national level, e.g. APWG, STC, 
CyberGreen. 
 
Critical Infrastructure operators must 
perform risk analysis of their infrastructures, 
in order to demonstrate the adequacy of the 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  20  
cybersecurity measures set in place to 
protect the infrastructure. They should be 
aware that the issues analysed in the risk 
management process, should include the 
potential damages caused to the Society by 
discontinuity or irregularities in the provision 
of the critical services, even if those have 
small direct economic cost in the critical 
infrastructures themselves. The research 
being made in this area addressed two 
focuses: a) real time vulnerability and 
impact analysis; b) intelligence analysis of 
environmental and situational scenarios. 
 
 Developers’ responsibility 
 
Cyber systems developers have the prime 
responsibility to develop safe systems 
based on sound ethical principles. In 
general, we expect developers to produce 
high quality software with high safety 
standards. If economic or personal interest 
lead to badly written code or even worse 
malicious code, severe consequences to 
others may result. For example, the case of 
Volkswagen’s “defeat device”, where the 
programmed software algorithm enabled the 
cars to cheat the emission tests.24 
 
Computers in their pervasive and powerful 
presence are allowing new possibilities to 
harm others which are often difficult to 
detect. Developers have therefore, the 
responsibility to make sure that what they 
produce will not cause harm to others and 
are in accordance with the fundamental 
society’s ethical principles.  
 
 Ethics in education 
 
For the abovementioned reasons, ethics 
should be a mandatory part of computer 
science education. Therefore, it is important 
to educate students and to involve 
institutional ethical committees in education 
systems. Preparing students for dealing with 
ethical dilemmas prior to graduation would 
prepare them at least for some possible 
ethical dilemmas they might face. There are 
many ways how to approach ethics in the 
computer science curricula, for example if 
the subject is dealing with building secure 
systems the material on these aspects has 
a value for the community and should be 
shared as good practice. Another example 
is when certain forms of attack are taught, 
as it is also important to show the students 
the appropriate restrictions. Just as medical 
researchers study viruses in safe 
environment it might be necessary and 
useful to teach how to build viruses and 
worms to cybersecurity students. Students 
need to understand the working of these 
mechanisms if they were to combat them, 
but at the same time it will be necessary to 
explain the consequences and the ethical 
issues that their actions can cause in real 
people lives and not just in the virtual 
world.25  
 
 General public and ethics 
 
It is not just the professionals who bear the 
burden to act ethically when developing 
programs, the end-users as well have an 
ethical responsibility. It is important to raise 
public awareness of the dangers and assist 
in ensuring that computer use by the 
general public is safe and secure as well as 
being interesting and rewarding. For 
example, people should care about 
protecting their own data, either as an 
individual or as a company. Different 
datasets may contain information that could 
harm others and not only the end-user itself. 
For example, it is widely recognized that 
cloud computing’s expectations of 
trustworthiness may be unrealistic.26 
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity Research and Education in Europe |  21  
Therefore, companies should evaluate what 
kind of information is ethically responsible to 
share through cloud. Although at the end 
each individual has to decide on the 
legitimacy of his\her actions, we need to be 
aware that in order to live in a safer 
connected world everybody need to make a 
morally correct decisions and help others to 
understand the importance of ethics in the 
cyber environment.27  
 
Public Awareness Campaigns 
 
Within the general public there ought to 
exist a culture of cybersecurity awareness. 
This includes, for example, realizing that 
identity theft and / or financial loss can be 
the consequences of attacks. To guard 
against these, computers and data have to 
be protected. The means of access, e.g. 
passwords, have to be thoroughly secure 
and not shared with other parties. Up-to-
date anti-viral software has to be installed 
and system software has to be kept current 
since updates are often provided to address 
security breaches.  
 
The duty of parents / guardians or folk in 
positions of responsibility, includes being 
alert to the pitfalls of uncontrolled access 
and be able to take positive steps to ensure 
safety, security and positive interaction by 
their clients with computer systems. In order 
to be able to fulfil their duty, they have to 
acquire the relevant knowledge or take 
appropriate steps and this includes being 
ever vigilant to change.  
 
 
 
Analogy to Public Health Awareness 
Campaigns 
 
Public health and cybersecurity can be 
viewed as involving ‘infection control’, one in 
the real world, the other in the digital world. 
In both cases threats exist and need to be 
assessed. These threats can spread and 
become widespread, they mutate and 
change, and they need to be closely 
controlled. In cybersecurity just as in the 
area of public health, authorities need to be 
alert and prepared to fight the threats that 
can spread, mutate and change, in order to 
prevent harm to the public. 
 
Public health is relatively mature as an area 
of endeavor. But authorities will typically 
embark on a range of activities such as: for 
a virus such as norovirus, explaining what 
the symptoms are, how it spreads, how to 
reduce its impact; publishing weekly reports 
on an outbreak of, say norovirus; providing 
control measures when there is an influenza 
outbreak, say; providing general infection 
prevention and control precautions not just 
for viruses but for other harmful organisms. 
In addition, they will investigate the causes 
of infection (and act on the results), they will 
carry out audits on institutions (or parts 
thereof), and they will educate staff.  
In addition to the above, public health 
authorities ensure that steps are taken to 
inoculate and to guard against serious 
illness and they will provide health advice 
and services to the public, e.g. through 
immunization, so reflecting a community 
role. Generally, all these public health 
activities are publicly financed.  
 
  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity in Europe 22 
Conclusions  
We hope with the present paper to have contributed to the current ongoing discussion in Europe 
on a subject like cybersecurity, which is becoming of vital importance for the implementation of 
the digital European strategy. The ACM policy committee in Europe will continue researching on 
this subject and will remain available to consult with the European Union authorities in Brussels 
and in the member states.  
  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity in Europe 23 
Acknowledgements 
We are grateful for the review and input from our colleagues in the ACM U.S. Public Policy 
Council and Renee Dopplick, ACM Global Policy Director. They suggested a number of subjects 
for future work, which will be pursued further. 
  
 
 
ACM Europe Policy Committee Advancing Cybersecurity in Europe 24 
References 
                                               
1
 ACM Joint Task Force on Cybersecurity Education, http://www.csec2017.org. 
2
 Symantec, http://www.symantec.com. 
3
 ITU, http://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/studygroups/com17/Pages/cybersecurity.aspx. 
4
 A cyber attack on a Jeep can be viewed at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MK0SrxBC1xs (accessed 
on 17
th 
August 2016). 
5
 Langner, R (2016) To kill a centrifuge accessed at http://www.langner.com/en/wp-
content/uploads/2013/11/To-kill-a-centrifuge.pdf on 17th August 2016.  
6
 Schneider, F. (2012) Blueprint for a Science of Cybersecurity, The Next Wave, 19(2), 47—57. 
7
 http://nsarchive.gwu.edu/NSAEBB/NSAEBB424/docs/Cyber-039.pdf accessed on 15th August 2016. 
8
 Lesjak, C. et al (2015) Hardware-security technologies for industrial IoT: TrustZone and security 
controller, IECON 2015, IEEE Press. 
9
 Shin, S. et al (2013) FRESCO: Modular Composable Security Services for Software-Defined Networks, 
ISOC Network and Distributed Systems Security Symposium. 
10
 Gentry, C. (2009) A Fully Homomorphic Encryption Scheme, Stanford University PhD dissertation, 
September. Available at https://crypto.stanford.edu/craig/craig-thesis.pdf. 
11
 Shor, P. (1999) Polynomial-Time Algorithms for Prime Factorization and Discrete Logarithms on a 
Quantum Computer, SIAM Rev 41(2). 
12
 D. Micciancio and O. Regev: Lattice based Cryptography, accessed at 
https://www.cims.nyu.edu/~regev/papers/pqc.pdf. 
13
 http://www.idesg.org/About/Overview. 
14
 http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/ir/2015/NIST.IR.8054.pdf. 
15
 Sullins, J.P (2014) A Case Study in Malware Research Ethics Education When teaching bad is good, 
IEEE Security and Privacy Workshops, Retrieved 18/08/2016 at: http://www.ieee-
security.org/TC/SPW2014/papers/5103a001.PDF. 
16
 Sullins, 2014, p.2. 
17
 Kenneally, E. & Bailey, M. (2014) Cyber-security Research Ethics Dialogue & Strategy Workshop, ACM 
SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, volume 44, number 2, April. Retrieved 08/22/2016 at: 
https://www.caida.org/publications/papers/2014/creds2013_report/creds2013_report.pdf. 
18
 ACM Curricula Recommendations and Guidelines, http://www.acm.org/education/curricula-
recommendations. 
19
 ACM Joint Task Force on Cybersecurity Education, http://www.csec2017.org. 
20
 Cyber Education Project, http://www.cybereducationproject.org. 
21
 http://web.cs.wpi.edu/~hofri/Readings/ImpactAcmCode.pdf accessed on 19th August 2016. 
22
 http://ethics.acm.org/code-of-ethics/using-the-code/ accessed on 22nd August 2016. 
23
 Brey, P (2007) Ethical Aspects of Information Security and Privacy, Security, Privacy and Trust in 
Modern Data Management, M.Petkovic & W. Jonker (eds.). 
24
 http://www.theregister.co.uk/2015/09/19/volkswagen_pollution_cheat_claims_epa/ accessed on 20th 
August 2016. 
25
 http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2005/1/6327-not-teaching-viruses-and-worms-is-harmful/fulltext 
accessed on 19th August 2016. 
26
 http://cacm.acm.org/magazines/2014/10/178776-risks-and-myths-of-cloud-computing-and-cloud-
storage/fulltext accessed on 19th August 2016. 
27
 Peslak, A. R. (2007). A Review of the Impact of ACM Code of Conduct on Information Technology 
Moral Judgement. Journal of Computer Information Systems. Retrieved 3/27/2014 at: 
http://web.cs.wpi.edu/~hofri/Readings/ImpactAcmCode.pdf. 
 
 

