Computer Security and 
Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Chapter Eleven
Objectives
  After completing this chapter, you will be able to:
 1 Define the term, computer security risks, and briefly describe the types 
of cybercrime perpetrators: hacker, cracker, script kiddie, corporate spy, 
unethical employee, cyberextortionist, and cyberterrorist
 2 Describe various types of Internet and network attacks (computer viruses, 
worms, Trojan horses, rootkits, botnets, denial of service attacks, back 
doors, and spoofing), and identify ways to safeguard against these attacks, 
including firewalls, intrusion detection software, and honeypots
 3 Discuss techniques to prevent unauthorized computer access and use
 4 Identify safeguards against hardware theft and vandalism
 5 Explain the ways software manufacturers protect against software piracy
 6 Discuss how encryption works, and explain why it is necessary
  7 Discuss the types of devices available that protect computers from 
system failure
 8 Explain the options available for backing up computer resources
 9 Identify risks and safeguards associated with wireless communications
 10 Discuss ways to prevent health-related disorders and injuries due to 
computer use
 11 Recognize issues related to information accuracy, intellectual property 
rights, codes of conduct, and green computing
 12 Discuss issues surrounding information privacy, including electronic 
profiles, cookies, spyware and adware, spam, phishing, privacy laws, social 
engineering, employee monitoring, and content filtering
556 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Computer Security Risks
Today, people rely on computers to create, 
store, and manage critical information. Thus, it 
is important that computers and the data they 
store are accessible and available when needed. 
It also is crucial that users take measures to 
protect their computers and data from loss, 
damage, and misuse. For example, organizations 
must ensure that sensitive data and information 
such as credit records, employee and customer 
data, and purchase information is secure. Home 
users must ensure that their credit card number 
is secure when they use it for online purchases.
A computer security risk is any event or 
action that could cause a loss of or damage to 
computer hardware, software, data, information, 
or processing capability. While some breaches 
to computer security are accidental, many are 
intentional. Some intruders do no damage; they 
merely access data, information, or programs 
on the computer before logging off. Other 
intruders indicate some evidence of their pres-
ence either by leaving a message or by deliber-
ately altering or damaging data.
An intentional breach of computer security 
often involves a deliberate act that is against 
the law. Any illegal act involving a computer 
generally is referred to as a computer crime. 
The term cybercrime refers to online or 
Internet-based illegal acts. Software used by 
cybercriminals sometimes is called crimeware. 
Today, cybercrime is one of the FBI’s top three 
priorities.
Perpetrators of cybercrime and other intru-
sions fall into seven basic categories: hacker, 
cracker, script kiddie, corporate spy, unethical 
employee, cyberextortionist, and cyberterrorist.
• The term hacker, although originally a  
com plimentary word for a computer 
enthusiast, now has a derogatory meaning 
and refers to someone who accesses a 
computer or network illegally. Some hackers 
claim the intent of their security breaches is 
to improve security.
• A cracker also is someone who accesses 
a computer or network illegally but has 
the intent of destroying data, stealing 
information, or other malicious action. 
Both hackers and crackers have advanced 
computer and network skills.
• A script kiddie has the same intent as a 
cracker but does not have the technical skills 
and knowledge. Script kiddies often use 
prewritten hacking and cracking programs 
to break into computers.
• Some corporate spies have excellent 
computer and networking skills and are 
hired to break into a specific computer and 
steal its proprietary data and information, or 
to help identify security risks in their own 
organization. Unscrupulous companies 
hire corporate spies, a practice known as 
corporate espionage, to gain a competitive 
advantage.
• Unethical employees may break into their 
employers’ computers for a variety of rea-
sons. Some simply want to exploit a security 
weakness. Others seek financial gains from 
selling confidential information. Disgruntled 
employees may want revenge.
system 
   failure
Internet and 
   network attacks VIRUSATTACK
LIGHTNING
STRIKE
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 557
• A cyberextortionist is someone who uses 
e-mail as a vehicle for extortion. These 
perpetrators send an organization a 
threatening e-mail message indicating they 
will expose confidential information, exploit 
a security flaw, or launch an attack that will 
compromise the organization’s network — if 
they are not paid a sum of money. 
• A cyberterrorist is someone who uses the 
Internet or network to destroy or damage 
computers for political reasons. The 
cyberterrorist might target the nation’s air 
traffic control system, electricity-generating 
com panies, or a telecommunications infra-
structure. The term, cyberwarfare, describes 
an attack whose goal ranges from disabling a 
government’s computer network to crippling 
a country. Cyberterrorism and cyberwarfare 
usually require a team of highly skilled 
individuals, millions of dollars, and several years 
of planning.
Business and home users must protect, or 
safeguard, their computers from breaches of secu-
rity and other computer security risks. Some orga-
nizations hire individuals previously convicted of 
computer crimes to help identify security risks and 
implement safeguards because these individuals 
know how criminals attempt to breach security.
The more common computer security risks 
include Internet and network attacks, unauthor-
ized access and use, hardware theft, software 
theft, information theft, and system failure 
(Figure 11-1). The following pages describe 
these computer  security risks and also discuss 
safeguards users might take to minimize or 
 prevent their  consequences.
Figure 11-1 Computers and computer users are exposed to several types of security risks.
software theft
unauthorized access 
       and use
hardware theft
information theft
ILLEGAL COPYING
STOLEN COMPUTER
STOLEN 
IDENTITY
INTERCEPTING 
WIRELESS 
COMMUNICATIONS
SECURITY
RISKS
558 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
• A computer virus is a potentially damaging 
computer program that affects, or infects, a 
computer negatively by altering the way 
the computer works without the user’s 
knowledge or permission. Once the virus 
infects the computer, it can spread throughout 
and may damage files and system software, 
including the operating system.
• A worm is a program that copies itself 
repeatedly, for example in memory or on a 
network, using up resources and possibly 
shutting down the computer or network.
• A Trojan horse (named after the Greek 
myth) is a program that hides within or looks 
like a legitimate program. A certain condition 
or action usually triggers the Trojan horse. 
Unlike a virus or worm, a Trojan horse does 
not replicate itself to other computers.
• A rootkit is a program that hides in a computer 
and allows someone from a remote location 
to take full control of the computer. Once 
the rootkit is installed, the rootkit author can 
execute programs, change settings, monitor 
activity, and access files on the remote 
computer. Although rootkits can have legitimate 
uses, such as in law enforcement, their use in 
nefarious and illegal activities is growing rapidly.
Computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, and 
rootkits are classified as malware (short for 
malicious  software), which are programs that act 
without a user’s knowledge and deliberately 
alter the computer’s operations. Other classes of 
malware include back doors and spyware, which 
are discussed later in this chapter. Although 
malware often falls in one of these classes 
(virus, worm, Trojan horse, rootkit, back door, 
or spyware), some malware has characteristics 
of two or more classes. For example, MyDoom 
and Blaster are worms; Melissa has elements of 
a virus, worm, and Trojan horse.
Unscrupulous programmers write malware 
and then test it to ensure it can deliver its pay-
load. The payload is the destructive event or 
prank the program is intended to deliver. 
A computer infected by a virus, worm, Trojan 
horse, or rootkit often has one or more of the 
following symptoms:
• Operating system runs much slower than usual
• Available memory is less than expected
• Files become corrupted
• Screen displays unusual message or image
• Music or unusual sound plays randomly
AUTHORS
Internet and Network Attacks
Information transmitted over networks has a 
higher degree of security risk than information 
kept on an organization’s premises. In an orga-
nization, network administrators usually take 
measures to protect a network from security 
risks. On the Internet, where no central admin-
istrator is present, the security risk is greater.
To determine if your computer is vulner-
able to an Internet or network attack, you 
could use an online security service. An online 
 security service is a Web site that evaluates 
your computer to check for Internet and e-mail 
vulnera bilities (Figure 11-2). The service then 
provides recommenda tions of how to address 
the  vulnerabilities.
Companies and individuals requiring assis-
tance or information about Internet security 
breaches can contact or visit the Web site 
for the Computer Emergency Response Team 
Coordination Center, or CERT/CC, which is a 
federally funded Internet security research and 
development center.
Internet and network attacks that jeopardize 
security include computer viruses, worms, Trojan 
horses, and rootkits; botnets; denial of service 
attacks; back doors; and spoofing. The following 
pages address these computer security risks and 
suggest measures organizations and individuals 
can take to protect their computers while on the 
Internet or connected to a network.
 Computer Emergency 
Response Team 
Coordination Center
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click Computer Emergency 
Response Team Coordination 
Center.
Figure 11-2 Some popular online security services.
Popular Online Security Services 
for Personal Computers
Name of Online Service Web Address
Audit My PC http://www.auditmypc.com/firewall-test.asp 
McAfee FreeScan http://home.mcafee.com/Downloads/FreeScan.aspx 
Symantec Security Check http://security.symantec.com/sscv6/home.asp 
Trend Micro House Call http://housecall.trendmicro.com/ 
Computer Viruses, Worms, 
Trojan Horses, and Rootkits
Every unprotected computer is susceptible 
to the first type of computer security risk — a 
computer virus, worm, Trojan horse, and/or 
rootkit.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 559
How a Virus Can Spread through an E-Mail Message
Step 3a
Some users open the attachment and their computers 
become infected with the virus.
Step 3b
Other users do not recognize the name of the sender of the e-mail 
message. These users do not open the e-mail message — instead 
they immediately delete the e-mail message and continue using their 
computers. These users’ computers are not infected with the virus.
Step 2
They send the e-mail message 
to thousands of users around 
the world.
Step 1
Unscrupulous programmers 
create a virus program that 
deletes all files. They hide the 
virus in a word processing 
document and attach the 
document to an e-mail 
message.
AUTHORS
Figure 11-3 This figure shows how a virus can spread through an e-mail message.
• Existing programs and files disappear
• Programs or files do not work properly
• Unknown programs or files mysteriously appear
• System properties change
• Operating system does not start up
• Operating system shuts down unexpectedly
Malware delivers its payload on a computer 
in a variety of ways: when a user (1) opens an 
infected file, (2) runs an infected program, 
(3) boots the computer with infected removable 
media inserted in a drive or plugged in a port, 
(4) connects an unprotected computer to a net-
work, or (5) when a certain condition or event 
occurs, such as the computer’s clock changing to 
a specific date. Today, a common way computers 
become infected with viruses and other malware 
is through users opening infected e-mail attach-
ments (Figure 11-3). 
Currently, more than 300,000 Web sites can 
infect your computer with known viruses, worms, 
Trojan horses, rootkits, and other malware. 
Many Web sites maintain lists of all known 
malware. For a more technical discussion about 
these types of malware, read the High-Tech Talk 
article on page 178 in Chapter 3.
Can multimedia files be infected with 
a virus?
Yes. The increase in popularity of media  sharing 
Web sites provides a great opportunity to 
 distribute malicious programs. During one year, 
approximately 500,000 people downloaded 
what they thought was a media file from the 
Internet. In fact, the file was a Trojan horse that 
infected many computers with spyware. For 
this reason, it is important to scan all media 
files for malware before playing them.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/faq and then click Infected Media Files.
FAQ 11-1
How a Virus Can Spread through an E-Mail Message
560 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Some viruses are hidden in macros, which 
are instructions saved in software such as a word 
processing or spreadsheet program. In programs 
that allow users to write macros, you should set 
the macro security level so that the application 
software warns users that a document they are 
attempting to open contains a macro (Figure 
11-4). From this warning, a user chooses to dis-
able or enable the macro. If the document is 
from a trusted source, the user can enable the 
macro. Otherwise, it should be disabled.
Users should install an antivirus program and 
update it frequently. As Chapter 8 discussed, an 
antivirus program protects a computer against 
viruses by identifying and removing any  computer 
viruses found in memory, on storage media, 
or on incoming files. Most antivirus programs 
also  protect against other malware. When you 
 purchase a new computer, it often includes anti-
virus software. Many e-mail servers also have anti-
virus programs installed to check incoming and 
outgoing e-mail messages for malware. The table 
in Figure 11-5 lists popular antivirus programs.
An antivirus program scans for programs that 
attempt to modify the boot program, the oper-
ating system, and other programs that normally 
are read from but not modified. In addition, 
many antivirus programs automatically scan files 
downloaded from the Web, e-mail attachments, 
opened files, and all types of removable media 
inserted in the computer.
One technique that antivirus programs use to 
identify a virus is to look for virus signatures. A 
virus signature, also called a virus definition, is 
a known specific pattern of virus code. Computer 
users should update their antivirus program’s 
 signature files regularly (Figure 11-6). This 
Safeguards against Computer Viruses 
and Other Malware
Methods that guarantee a computer or 
network is safe from computer viruses and other 
malware simply do not exist. Users can take sev-
eral precautions, however, to protect their home 
and work computers and mobile devices from 
these malicious infections. The following para-
graphs discuss these precautionary measures.
Do not start a computer with removable media 
inserted in the drives or plugged in the ports. 
For example, optical disc drives should be empty, 
and a USB port should not contain a USB flash 
drive. During the startup process, a computer 
may attempt to execute the boot sector on media 
in certain drives and ports. Even if the attempt is 
unsuccessful, a virus on the boot sector of remov-
able media can infect the computer’s hard disk. 
If you must start the computer with media in a 
drive or port, be  certain the media are uninfected 
or from a trusted source. A trusted source is an 
organization or person you believe will not send a 
virus infected file knowingly. 
Never open an e-mail attachment unless you 
are expecting the attachment and it is from a 
trusted source. If the e-mail message is from an 
unknown source or untrusted source, delete the 
e-mail message immediately — without open-
ing or executing any attachments. If the e-mail 
message is from a trusted source, but you were 
not expecting an attachment, carefully check 
the spelling of the e-mail address and contents 
of the message for errors because perpetrators 
often make typographical errors. If the message 
is error-free, verify with the source that he or she 
intended to send you an attachment — before 
opening it.
Figure 11-5 Popular antivirus 
programs.
Popular Antivirus 
Programs
• AVG Anti-Virus
• avast! antivirus
• CA Anti-Virus
• F-Secure Anti-Virus
• Kaspersky Anti-Virus
• McAfee VirusScan
• Norton AntiVirus
• Trend Micro AntiVirus
• Vexira AntiVirus
Figure 11-4 Many application programs, such as Microsoft Word, can be configured 
to display a warning if a user attempts to open a file that contains a macro.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 561
 important activity allows the antivirus program 
to protect against viruses written since the 
antivirus program was released and/or its last 
update. Most antivirus programs contain an 
automatic update feature that regularly prompts 
users to download the virus signature, usually at 
least once a week. The vendor usually provides 
this service to registered users at no cost for a 
 specified time.
Another technique that antivirus programs use 
to detect viruses is to inoculate existing program 
files. To inoculate a program file, the antivirus 
program records information such as the file size 
and file creation date in a separate inoculation file. 
The antivirus program then uses this information 
to detect if a virus tam pers with the data describ-
ing the inoculated  program file.
If an antivirus program identifies an infected 
file, it attempts to remove the malware. If the 
antivirus program  cannot remove the infection, it 
often quarantines the infected file. A  quarantine 
is a separate area of a hard disk that holds the 
infected file until the infection can be removed. 
This step ensures other files will not become 
infected. Users also can  quaran tine suspicious 
files themselves. Quarantined files remain on 
your computer until you delete them or restore 
them. Restore a quarantined file only if you are 
certain the antivirus program has removed the 
infection from the quarantined file. 
In extreme cases, you may need to reformat the 
hard disk to remove malware from an infected 
computer. Having uninfected, or clean, backups 
of all files is important. In addition to an antivirus 
program, users often install a personal firewall 
program to protect a computer and its data from 
unauthorized intrusions. Later sections in this 
chapter discuss backup techniques and firewalls.
Finally, stay informed about new virus alerts and 
virus hoaxes. A virus hoax is an e-mail message 
that warns users of a nonexistent virus or other 
malware. Often, these hoaxes are in the form of a 
chain letter that requests the user to send a copy of 
the e-mail message to as many people as possible. 
The content of the hoax message, for example, 
may inform users that an important operating sys-
tem file on their computer is a virus and encourage 
them to delete the file, which could make their 
computer  unusable. Instead of forwarding the 
 message, visit a Web site that publishes a list of 
virus alerts and virus hoaxes.
The list in Figure 11-7 summarizes important 
tips for protecting your computer from viruses 
and other malware.
Figure 11-6 This antivirus program, which protects a computer from a 
variety of malware, regularly checks for the latest virus signatures and other 
important updates.
Tips for Preventing Viruses and Other Malware
1. Never start a computer with removable media inserted in the drives or 
plugged in the ports, unless the media are uninfected.
2. Never open an e-mail attachment unless you are expecting it and it is 
from a trusted source. 
3. Set the macro security in programs so that you can enable or disable 
macros. Enable macros only if the document is from a trusted source 
and you are expecting it.
4. Install an antivirus program on all of your computers. Update the software 
and the virus signature files regularly. 
5. Scan all downloaded programs for viruses and other malware.
6. If the antivirus program flags an e-mail attachment as infected, delete or 
quarantine the attachment immediately. 
7. Before using any removable media, scan the media for malware. Follow 
this procedure even for shrink-wrapped software from major developers. 
Some commercial software has been infected and distributed to 
unsuspecting users.
8. Install a personal firewall program.
9. Stay informed about new virus alerts and virus hoaxes.
signature files are 
up-to-date
dates indicate when 
signature files were last 
updated and when 
computer was last scanned
Figure 11-7 With the growing number of new viruses and other 
malware, it is crucial that users take steps to protect their computers.
562 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Botnets
A botnet is a group of compromised 
 computers connected to a network such as the 
Internet that are used as part of a network that 
attacks other networks, usually for nefarious 
purposes. A compromised computer, known as 
a zombie, is one whose owner is unaware the 
computer is being controlled remotely by an 
outsider.
A bot is a program that performs a repeti-
tive task on a network. Cybercriminals install 
malicious bots on  unprotected computers to 
create a botnet, also called a zombie army. The 
 perpetrator then uses the botnet to send spam 
via e-mail, spread viruses and other malware, 
or commit a distributed denial of service attack, 
which is discussed in the next section.
Back Doors
A back door is a program or set of instructions 
in a program that allow users to bypass security 
controls when accessing a program, computer, or 
network. Once perpetrators gain access to unse-
cure computers, they often install a back door 
or modify an existing program to include a back 
door, which allows them to continue to access the 
computer remotely without the user’s knowledge. 
A rootkit can be a back door. Some worms leave 
back doors, which have been used to spread other 
worms or to distribute junk e-mail from the 
unsuspecting victim computers.
search engines lose revenue from advertisers, 
and time-sensitive information may be delayed. 
Repeated attacks could tarnish reputations, 
causing even greater losses.
Perpetrators have a variety of motives for 
carrying out a DoS or DDoS attack. Those who 
disagree with the beliefs or actions of a particu-
lar organization claim political anger motivates 
their attacks. Some perpetrators use the attack 
as a vehicle for extortion. Others simply want 
the recognition, even though it is negative.
How can I tell if my computer is a zombie or in a botnet?
The number of zombie computers is increasing at a rapid rate. Your computer 
may be a zombie or part of a botnet if you notice unusually high disk activ-
ity, a slower than normal Internet connection, or devices connected to your 
computer becoming increasingly unresponsive. The chances of your computer 
becoming a zombie or part of a botnet greatly increase if you do not have 
an effective firewall. 
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/faq and then click 
Zombies and Botnets.
FAQ 11-2
Denial of Service Attacks
A denial of service attack, or DoS attack, is 
an assault whose purpose is to disrupt computer 
access to an Internet service such as the Web or 
e-mail. Perpetrators carry out a DoS attack in 
a variety of ways. For example, they may use 
an unsuspecting computer to send an influx of 
confusing data messages or useless traffic to a 
computer network. The victim computer network 
slows down considerably and eventually becomes 
unresponsive or unavailable, blocking legitimate 
visitors from accessing the network.
A more devastating type of DoS attack is the 
DDoS (distributed DoS) attack, in which a zombie 
army is used to attack computers or computer 
networks. DDoS attacks have been able to stop 
 operations temporarily at numerous Web sites, 
including powerhouses such as Yahoo!, eBay, 
Amazon.com, and CNN.com. Read Ethics & 
Issues 11-1 for a related discussion. 
The damage caused by a DoS or DDoS attack 
usually is extensive. During the outage, retail-
ers lose sales from customers, news sites and 
ETHICS & ISSUES 11-1
Recently, a hacker was sentenced to 41 months in jail 
for illegally using hundreds of a company’s computers 
as part of a money-making botnet. The punishment is 
about the same for auto theft, despite the hundreds 
of thousands of dollars in damages caused in addi-
tion to the thousands of dollars the scheme netted 
the criminal. Viruses, DDoS attacks, adware, and other 
malware continue to disrupt businesses and cause 
damages that are difficult to estimate. 
Many experts and computer administrators claim 
that the punishment for cybercrime often is out of 
proportion with the damages caused by the crime. 
Some legal experts claim that lax security on the 
part of Internet users is to blame, and perhaps those 
who practice lax security should be punished as well. 
Others claim that many  organizations provide exor-
bitant estimates of true damages that  cybercriminals 
cause and that these alleged  damages provoke an 
emotional overreaction to the crimes. The types of 
crimes and international extent of possible damages 
are relatively new territories in criminal law. 
Should the government create new laws specifically 
aimed at punishing cybercriminals? Why or why 
not? Should cybercriminals be punished in propor-
tion to the alleged damages that they cause? Why 
or why not? Who should decide the extent of the 
true damages caused by a  cybercrime? Why?
How Should Cybercriminals Be Punished?
 DoS Attacks
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click DoS Attacks.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 563
personal computer
personal 
computer
personal 
computer
corporate
network
software firewall
personal 
computer
personal 
computer
printer
hardware firewall
Internet
Programmers often build back doors into 
 programs during system development. These 
back doors save development time because the 
programmer can bypass security controls while 
writing and testing programs. Similarly, a com-
puter repair technician may install a back door 
while troubleshooting problems on a computer. 
If a programmer or computer repair technician 
fails to remove a back door, a perpetrator could 
use the back door to gain entry to a computer 
or network.
Spoofing
Spoofing is a technique intruders use to make 
their network or Internet transmission appear 
legitimate to a victim computer or network. 
Several types of spoofing schemes exist. One 
type, called e-mail spoofing, occurs when the 
sender’s address or other components of the 
e-mail header are altered so that it appears the 
e-mail originated from a different sender. E-mail 
spoofing commonly is used for virus hoaxes, 
spam, and phishing scams; the latter two are 
 discussed later in the chapter.
Another type, called IP spoofing, occurs when 
an intruder computer fools a network into 
believing its IP address is associated with a 
trusted source. Perpetrators of IP spoofing trick 
their victims into interacting with the phony 
Web site. For example, the victim may provide 
confidential information or download files 
 containing viruses, worms, or other malware.
Safeguards against Botnets, DoS/DDoS 
Attacks, Back Doors, and Spoofing
Some of the latest antivirus programs include 
provisions to protect a computer from DoS and 
DDoS attacks. To further defend against these 
and other Internet and network attacks, users can 
implement firewall solutions, install intrusion 
detection software, and set up honeypots.
Firewalls
A firewall is hardware and/or software that 
protects a network’s resources from  intrusion by 
users on another network such as the Internet 
(Figure 11-8). All networked and online computer 
users should implement a firewall solution.
Figure 11-8 A firewall is hardware and/or software 
that protects a network’s resources from intrusion by 
users on another network such as the Internet. 
564 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Organizations use firewalls to protect network 
resources from outsiders and to restrict employ-
ees’ access to sensitive data such as payroll or 
 personnel records. They can implement a fire-
wall solution themselves or outsource their needs 
to a company specializing in providing firewall 
protection.
Large organizations often route all their 
communications through a proxy server, which 
 typically is a component of the firewall. A proxy 
server is a server outside the organization’s net-
work that controls which communications pass 
into the organization’s network. That is, a proxy 
server carefully screens all incoming and out-
going messages. Proxy servers use a variety of 
screening techniques. Some check the domain 
name or IP address of the message for legitimacy. 
Others require that the messages have digital sig-
natures. A section later in this chapter discusses 
digital signatures.
Home and small office/home office users often 
protect their computers with a personal firewall. 
As discussed in Chapter 8, a personal firewall 
is a utility program that detects and protects a 
 personal computer and its data from unauthorized 
intrusions. Personal firewalls constantly  monitor 
all transmissions to and from the  computer and 
may inform a user of any attempted  intrusion. 
Some operating systems, such as Windows, 
include personal firewalls. For enhanced firewall 
protection, many users purchase stand-alone 
personal firewall software (Figure 11-9), usually 
for less than $50. Many new computers include a 
free trial version of antivirus software, a personal 
firewall, and other similar software. To learn more 
about how to use the Windows firewall, complete 
the Learn How To 2 activity on page 603.
Some small office/home office users pur-
chase a hardware firewall, such as a router or 
other device that has a built-in firewall, in addi-
tion to or instead of personal firewall software. 
Hardware firewalls stop intrusions before they 
attempt to affect your computer maliciously.
Intrusion Detection Software
To provide extra protection against hackers 
and other intruders, large organizations may use 
intrusion detection software to identify possible 
security breaches. Intrusion detection software 
automatically analyzes all network traffic, assesses 
system vulnerabilities, identifies any unauthor-
ized intrusions, and notifies network administra-
tors of suspicious behavior patterns or system 
breaches. 
To utilize intrusion detection software requires 
the expertise of a network administrator because 
the programs are complex and difficult to use and 
interpret. These programs also are quite expen-
sive. This software, however, when combined with 
a firewall, provides an added layer of protection to 
companies with highly sensitive data such as credit 
card  databases.
Honeypots
Some organizations use  honeypots so that 
they can analyze an attack being perpetrated. A 
honeypot is a vulnerable computer that is set up to 
entice an intruder to break into it. These com-
puters, which appear real to the intruder, actually 
are separated safely from the organization’s net-
work. Honeypots allow the organization to learn 
how intruders are exploiting their network and 
also attempt to catch perpetrators who have been 
doing damage elsewhere on their network. Large 
Web hosting companies, such as Yahoo! and 
AT&T, law enforcement  agencies, and computer 
security researchers often use honeypots.
Unauthorized Access 
and Use
Another type of computer security risk is 
unauthorized access and use. Unauthorized 
access is the use of a computer or network with-
out permission. Unauthorized use is the use of 
a computer or its data for unapproved or pos-
sibly illegal activities. Unauthorized use includes 
a variety of activities: an employee using an 
organization’s computer to send  personal e-mail 
messages, an employee using the organization’s 
word processing software to track his or her 
child’s soccer league scores, or someone gaining 
access to a bank computer and performing an 
unauthorized transfer. For the home user, most 
unauthorized use occurs on computers that have 
always-on Internet connections, such as through 
Internet cable or DSL.
Stand-Alone Personal 
Firewall Software
BitDefender Internet Security
CA Personal Firewall
McAfee Internet Security
Norton Personal Firewall
Webroot Desktop Firewall
ZoneAlarm Pro
Figure 11-9 
Popular personal 
firewall software.
 Firewalls
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click Firewalls.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 565
they are not intentional breaches of security. 
They also should review successful access for 
irregularities, such as use of the computer 
after normal working hours or from remote 
com puters. In addition, an organization reg-
ularly should review users’ access privilege 
levels to determine whether they still are 
appropriate.
Many systems implement access controls 
using a two-phase process called identi-
fication and authentication. Identification 
verifies that an  individual is a valid user. 
Authentication  verifies that the individual is 
the person he or she claims to be. Three 
methods of identification and authentica-
tion include user names and passwords, pos-
sessed objects, and bio metric devices. The 
technique(s) an organization uses should 
correspond to the degree of risk that is asso-
ciated with the unauthorized access. The next 
sections discuss each of the  identification and 
authentication methods.
Safeguards against Unauthorized 
Access and Use
Organizations take several measures to 
help prevent unauthorized access and use. 
At a mini mum, they should have a written 
acceptable use policy (AUP) that outlines the 
computer activities for which the computer 
and network may and may not be used. An 
organization’s AUP should specify the accept-
able use of computers by employees for per-
sonal reasons. Some organizations prohibit 
such use entirely. Others allow personal use 
on the employee’s own time such as a lunch 
hour. Whatever the policy, an organization 
should document and explain it to employees. 
To protect your personal computer from 
unauthorized intrusions, you should disable 
file and printer sharing on your Internet 
connection (Figure 11-10). This security 
measure attempts to ensure that others 
 cannot access your files or your printer. 
To open the window shown in Figure 11-10 
in Windows 7, click the Start button on 
the taskbar, click Control Panel on the 
Start menu, and then click the ‘Choose 
homegroup and sharing options’ link in the 
Network and Internet area of the dialog box.
Other measures that safeguard against unau-
thorized access and use include firewalls and 
intrusion detection software, which were dis-
cussed in the previous section, and identifying 
and authenticating users.
Identifying and Authenticating Users
Many organizations use access controls to 
minimize the chance that a perpetrator inten-
tionally may access or an employee acciden-
tally may access  confidential information on 
a computer. An access control is a security mea-
sure that defines who can access a computer, 
when they can access it, and what actions 
they can take while accessing the computer. 
In addition, the computer should maintain 
an audit trail that records in a file both suc-
cessful and unsuccessful access attempts. An 
unsuccessful access attempt could result from 
a user mistyping his or her password, or it 
could result from a hacker trying thousands 
of passwords.
Organizations should investigate unsuc-
cessful access attempts immediately to ensure 
Figure 11-10 To protect files on your local hard disk from hackers and 
other intruders, turn off file and printer sharing on your Internet connection.
check boxes 
not selected 
means sharing 
is turned off
566 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
User Names and Passwords A user name, 
or user ID (identification), is a unique combina-
tion of characters, such as letters of the alphabet 
or numbers, that identifies one specific user. A 
password is a private combination of characters 
associated with the user name that allows access 
to certain computer resources.
Most multiuser (networked) operating systems 
require that users correctly enter a user name and 
a password before they can access the data, infor-
mation, and programs stored on a computer or 
network. Many other systems that maintain finan-
cial, personal, and other confidential information 
also require a user name and password as part of 
their logon procedure (Figure 11-11).
Some systems assign a user name or user ID 
to each user. For example, a school may use the 
student identification number as a user ID. Some 
Web sites use your e-mail address as the user ID. 
With other systems, users select their own user 
name or user ID. Many users select a combina-
tion of their first and last names.
Most systems require that users select their own 
passwords. If a program or device has a default or 
preset password, such as admin, be sure to change 
it to prevent unauthorized access. Users typically 
choose an easy-to-remember word or series of 
characters for  passwords. If your password is too 
obvious, however, such as your initials or birthday, 
others can guess it easily. 
Easy passwords make it simple for hackers and 
other intruders to break into a system. Hackers 
often use computer auto mated tools to assist them 
with guessing passwords. Thus, you should select 
a password carefully. Longer passwords provide 
greater security than shorter ones. Each character 
added to a password significantly increases the 
number of possible combinations and the length 
of time it might take for someone or for a hacker’s 
computer to guess the password (Figure 11-12). 
Passwords typically range from 6 to 16 characters.
In addition to a user name and password, some 
systems ask users to enter one of several pieces of 
personal information. Such items can include a 
spouse’s first name, a birth date, a place of birth, 
or a mother’s maiden name. As with a password, if 
the user’s response does not match information on 
file, the system denies access. 
Instead of passwords, some organizations use 
passphrases to authenticate users. A passphrase 
is a private combination of words, often con-
taining mixed capitalization and punctuation, 
associated with a user name that allows access to 
certain computer resources. Passphrases, which 
Figure 11-12 This 
table shows the effect of 
increasing the length of 
a password that consists 
of letters and numbers. 
The longer the password, 
the more effort required 
to discover it. Long 
passwords, however, are 
more difficult for users to 
remember.
Password Protection
Number of 
Characters
Possible
Combinations
AVERAGE TIME TO DISCOVER
Human Computer
 1 36 3 minutes .000018 second
 2 1,300 2 hours .00065 second
 3 47,000 3 days .02 second
 4 1,700,000 3 months 1 second
 5 60,000,000 10 years 30 seconds
10 3,700,000,000,000,000 580 million years 59 years
• Possible characters include the letters A–Z and numbers 0–9
• Human discovery assumes 1 try every 10 seconds
• Computer discovery assumes 1 million tries per second
•  Average time assumes the password would be discovered in approximately half the time it would take to try 
all possible combinations
Figure 11-11 Many Web sites that maintain 
personal and confidential data require a user to enter 
a user name and password. 
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 567
often can be up to 100 characters in length, are 
more secure than passwords, yet can be easy to 
remember because they contain words.
Some Web sites use a CAPTCHA to further 
protect a user’s password. A CAPTCHA, which 
stands for Completely Auto mated Public Turing 
test to tell Computers and Humans Apart, is a pro-
gram developed at Carnegie Mellon University to 
verify that user input is not computer  generated. 
A CAPTCHA displays a series of distorted 
characters and requires the user enter the char-
acters correctly to continue using the Web site 
(Figure 11-13). For visually impaired users, the 
CAPTCHA text can be read aloud. Because 
unscrupulous individuals attempt to circumvent 
or decode CAPTCHAs, developers continually 
are seeking ways to make them more secure or 
develop alternative authentication techniques. 
Read Innovative Computing 11-1 to find out how 
CAPTCHA digitizes newspapers and books.
Figure 11-13 
To continue with 
the ticket order 
process at this 
Web site, the 
user must enter 
the characters in 
the CAPTCHA, 
which consists of 
the letters, Court 
engineer, in this 
case.
More than 47,000 editions of The New 
York Times were published from 1851 
to 1980, and a major movement is 
underway to digitize each paper by 
scanning every page. Occasionally, the 
computer cannot decipher a faded or 
blurry word. When this occurs, the actual 
image, called a RECAPTCHA, is given an 
identification number and placed on a 
Web site such as Ticketmaster, Craigslist, 
Twitter, LastFM, and Facebook. Visitors 
must type the correct letters that appear 
in two images in order to enter the site. 
When they do, the deciphered words are 
placed back in their original location in 
the article being digitized.
Carnegie-Mellon Professor Luis von 
Ahn created RECAPTCHAs to digitize the 
millions of words printed in the Times’ 
archives. He estimates 
that people worldwide 
type up to 16 million 
RECAPTCHAs each day 
in 1.9 seconds with 
100 percent accuracy. 
Each word has six to 
eight characters.
In 2000, von Ahn developed single-
word CAPTCHAs in an effort to prevent 
spammers from attacking the Yahoo! 
Web site. He expanded the venture to 
help various humanitarian projects, 
including the Internet Archive, which uses 
RECAPTCHAs to digitize books.
 For more information, visit scsite
.com/dc2011/ch11/innovative and 
then click RECAPTCHA.
RECAPTCHAs Help Digitize Newspapers, Books
INNOVATIVE COMPUTING 11-1
Once you select a password, change it  frequently. Do not disclose it to anyone or write it on a slip of paper 
kept near the computer,  especially taped to the monitor or under the keyboard. E-mail and telemarketing 
scams often ask unsuspecting users to disclose their password, so be wary if you did not  initiate the inquiry or 
telephone call. One research study indicates that having too many passwords might compromise security. The 
average person can remember approximately two secure passwords. Using more than two passwords results in 
an increased number of calls to the Help desk to reset lost or forgotten passwords.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/faq and then click Protecting Passwords.
How can I protect my password?
FAQ 11-3
user enters characters 
in CAPTCHA here
CAPTCHA
Copyright 2010 Cengage Learning, Inc. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part.
568 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Possessed Objects A possessed object is any 
item that you must carry to gain access to a 
 computer or computer facility. Examples of 
possessed objects are badges, cards, smart cards, 
and keys. The card you use in an automated 
teller machine (ATM) is a possessed object that 
allows access to your bank account.
Possessed objects often are used in combina-
tion with personal identification numbers. 
A personal identification number (PIN) 
is a numeric password, either assigned by a 
company or selected by a user. PINs provide 
an additional level of security. An ATM card 
 typically requires a four-digit PIN. Most debit 
cards and some credit cards use PINs. If some-
one steals these cards, the thief must enter the 
user’s PIN to access the account. PINs are pass-
words. Select them carefully and protect them 
as you do any other password.
Biometric Devices As Chapter 5 discussed, a 
biometric device authenticates a person’s iden-
tity by translating a personal characteristic, such 
as a fingerprint, into a digital code that is com-
pared with a digital code stored in the computer 
verifying a physical or behavioral characteristic. If 
the digital code in the computer does not match 
the personal characteristic code, the computer 
denies access to the individual. 
Biometric devices grant access to programs, 
computers, or rooms using computer analysis of 
some biometric identifier. Examples of biometric 
devices and systems include fingerprint read-
ers (Figure 11-14), hand geometry systems, face 
recognition systems, voice verification systems, 
signature verification systems, iris recognition 
systems, and retinal scanners. For a more techni-
cal discussion about biometrics, specifically fin-
gerprint readers, read the High-Tech Talk article 
on page 288 in Chapter 5.
Biometric devices are gaining popularity as 
a security precaution because they are a  virtually 
foolproof method of identification and authen-
tication (read Ethics & Issues 11-2 for a related 
discussion). For example, many grocery stores, 
retail stores, and gas stations now use  biometric 
payment, where the customer’s fingerprint is 
read by a  fingerprint reader that is linked to a 
payment method such as a checking account or 
credit card. Users can forget their user names 
and passwords. Pos sessed objects can be lost, 
copied, duplicated, or stolen. Personal charac-
teristics, by contrast, are unique and  cannot be 
forgotten or misplaced.
Biometric devices do have disadvantages. If you 
cut your finger, a fingerprint reader might reject 
you as a legitimate user. Hand geometry readers 
can transmit germs. If you are  nervous, a signa-
ture might not match the one on file. If you have 
a sore throat, a voice recognition  system might 
reject you. Many people are uncomfortable with 
the thought of using an iris scanner.
Figure 11-14 
A fingerprint reader 
verifies this traveler’s 
identity.
ETHICS & ISSUES 11-2
Hundreds of thousands of students use a biometric 
thumbprint to pay for their school lunches each day. 
School administrators cite the need for biometrics to 
better track the number of free and  subsidized lunches 
that the schools provide. In an attempt to increase 
security and track attendance, many school districts 
require thumbprint identification to enter classrooms 
or participate in school activities. Retail stores, theme 
parks, and even physicians' offices use biometric devices 
to identify customers and patients. Some privacy advo-
cates believe that the devices store too much personal 
information. Many are concerned that individuals’ habits 
more easily can be tracked and then used against them 
in the future, or that the information could end up in the 
wrong hands. Some health experts are concerned about 
the sanitary issue of people passing germs to each other 
over the biometric devices. 
Should children be required to provide biometric 
information to engage in common public school-related 
activities? Why or why not? Should anyone who pro-
vides products and services be allowed to collect bio-
metric information from a customer? Why or why not? 
What are the privacy and sanitary issues involved and 
should they be a concern?
Should You Be Concerned about the Use 
of Biometric Devices in Public Places?
 Biometric Devices
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click Biometric Devices.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 569
A digital forensics examiner must have 
knowledge of the law, technical experience with 
many types of hardware and software products, 
superior communication skills, familiarity with 
corporate structures and policies, a willingness 
to learn and update skills, and a knack for prob-
lem solving. For more information about digital 
forensics, read the Digital Forensics Special 
Feature that follows this chapter. For a look at 
the next generation of forensics, read Looking 
Ahead 11-1.
Digital Forensics
Digital forensics, also called computer 
forensics, network forensics, or cyberforensics, is the 
discovery, collection, and analysis of evidence 
found on computers and networks. Digital 
forensics involves the examination of computer 
media, programs, data and log files on com-
puters, servers, and networks. Many areas use 
digital forensics, including law enforcement, 
criminal prosecutors, military intelligence, 
insurance agencies, and information security 
departments in the private sector.
How many people are victims of identity theft each year?
Studies reveal that identity theft is the fastest grow ing crime in the United States. 
In fact, identity theft costs banks, victims, and the government millions of dollars each 
year, with that amount continually increasing. The chart to the right illustrates the 
reported number of identity theft cases grouped by age. 
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/faq and then click Identity Theft.
FAQ 11-4
29%
Identity Theft — Complaints by Victim Age
13%
50–59
20%
40–49
24%
30–39
9%
60 and over
5%
Under 18
 Source: FTC.gov
Brain Waves, Behavior Tracked to Prevent and Solve Crimes
The brain may one day become part of a 
crime scene investigation. When a person 
has committed a criminal or fraudulent 
act, his brain generates unique waves 
involuntarily when confronted with pic-
tures, sounds, and words related to the 
crime scene. Computers can capture and 
analyze this brain fingerprint of distinctive 
brain waves to determine if a person has stored critical details of 
a particular felony or misdemeanor situation.
Similarly, behavior detection systems study a person’s body 
language, facial expressions, speech, and emotions to isolate 
specific patterns that criminals commonly exhibit. The 
surveillance systems can recognize microexpressions, which are 
the split-second emotions lasting one-fifteenth of a second, on a 
person’s face.
The U.S. Department of Homeland Security is testing its Future 
Attribute Screening Technologies (FAST) program, which uses 
cameras, infrared heat sensors, and lasers to measure pulse and 
breathing rates. The trial technology is being tested for use at 
airports and sporting and music events.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/looking 
and then click Brain Fingerprinting.
LOOKING AHEAD 11-1
Instructions: Find the true statement below. Then, rewrite the remaining false statements so that they are true.
1. A back door attack is an assault whose purpose is to disrupt computer access to an Internet service such as the Web or e-mail.
2. All networked and online computer users should implement a firewall solution.
3. A biometric device translates a personal  characteristic into an analog code that is compared with a digital code stored in the 
 computer.
4. Computer viruses, worms, Trojan horses, and rootkits are malware that acts with a user’s knowledge.
5. Perpetrators of cybercrime and other intrusions fall into seven basic categories: hacker, cracker, CERT/CC, corporate spy, unethical 
employee, trusted source, and cyberterrorist.
6. Shorter passwords provide greater security than longer ones.
7. Updating an antivirus program’s quarantine protects a computer against viruses written since the antivirus program was released.
 Quiz Yourself Online: To further check your knowledge of pages 556 through 569, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/quiz and then click 
Objectives 1 – 3.
QUIZ YOURSELF 11-1
570 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
attach a physical device such as a cable to lock 
a mobile computer temporarily to a stationary 
object. For example, a hotel guest could lock a 
notebook computer to a desk or table in a hotel 
room when he or she leaves the room. Other 
mobile users install a mini-security system in 
the notebook computer. Some of these security 
systems shut down the computer and sound an 
alarm if the computer moves outside a specified 
distance. Others can be configured to photo-
graph the thieves when they use the computer. 
Notebook computer security systems and track-
ing software also can track the location of a 
stolen notebook computer.
Some notebook computers use passwords, 
possessed objects, and biometrics as methods 
of security. When you start up these comput-
ers, you must enter a password, slide a card in 
a card reader, or press your finger on a finger-
print reader before the hard disk unlocks. This 
type of security does not prevent theft, but it 
renders the computer useless if it is stolen.
You also can password-protect many portable 
storage devices such as USB flash drives, smart 
phones, and other mobile devices. This allows 
only authorized users to access the device’s data. 
Some can be set to destroy data if an incorrect 
password is entered a certain number of times. 
You usually can instruct the password screen to 
display your name and telephone number, so 
that a Good Samaritan can return it to you if 
lost. Several models also allow you to encrypt 
data in the device. A later section in this chapter 
discusses encryption.
Hardware Theft and Vandalism
Hardware theft and vandalism are other types 
of computer security risks. Hardware theft 
is the act of stealing computer equipment. 
Hardware vandalism is the act of defacing or 
destroying computer equipment. Hardware 
vandalism takes many forms, from someone 
cutting a computer cable to individuals break-
ing into a business or school computer lab and 
aimlessly smashing computers.
Hardware theft and vandalism do not really 
pose a threat to the home desktop computer 
user. Companies, schools, and other organiza-
tions that house many computers, however, are 
at risk of hardware theft and vandalism, espe-
cially those that have smaller system units that 
easily can fit in a backpack or briefcase.
Mobile users also are susceptible to hardware 
theft. It is estimated that more than 600,000 
notebook computers are stolen each year. The 
size and weight of these computers, especially 
netbooks, make them easy to steal. Thieves often 
target notebook computers of company execu-
tives, so that they can use the stolen computer to 
access confidential company infor mation illegally. 
In this case, hardware theft is  combined with 
software and information theft.
Safeguards against Hardware Theft 
and Vandalism
To help reduce the chances of theft, companies 
and schools use a variety of security measures. 
Physical access controls, such as locked doors 
and windows, usually are adequate to protect the 
equipment. Many businesses, schools, and some 
homeowners install alarm systems for additional 
security. School computer labs and other areas 
with a large number of semifrequent users often 
attach additional physical security devices such as 
cables that lock the equipment to a desk (Figure 
11-15), cabinet, or floor. Small locking devices 
also exist that require a key to access a hard disk 
or optical disc drive.
Some businesses use a real time location system 
(RTLS) to track and identify the location of 
 high-risk or high-value items. One implementa-
tion of RTLS places RFID tags in items to be 
tracked.
Mobile computer users must take special 
care to protect their equipment. The best 
preventive measures are common sense and 
a constant awareness of the risk. Some users 
 RTLS
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click RTLS.
Figure 11-15 Using cables to lock computers 
can help prevent the theft of computer equipment.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 571
Software Theft
Another computer security risk is software theft. 
Software theft occurs when someone (1) steals 
software media, (2) intentionally erases programs, 
(3) illegally copies a program, or (4) illegally reg-
isters and/or activates a program. 
The first type of software theft involves a 
 perpetrator physically stealing the media that 
contain the software or the hardware that con-
tains the media, as described in the previous 
section. For example, an unscrupu lous library 
patron might steal the Encyclopedia Britannica 
optical disc.
The second type of software theft can occur 
when a programmer is  ter minated from, or stops 
working for, a company. Although the pro grams 
are company property, some dishonest program-
mers intentionally remove or disable the programs 
they have written from company computers.
The third type of software theft occurs when 
software is stolen from software manufacturers. 
This type of theft, called piracy, is by far the 
most common form of software theft. Software 
piracy is the unauthorized and illegal duplica-
tion of copyrighted software.
The fourth type of software theft involves 
users illegally obtaining registration numbers 
and/or activation codes. A program called a 
keygen, short for key generator, creates software 
registration numbers and sometimes activation 
codes. Some unscrupulous individuals create and 
post keygens so that users can install  software 
without legally purchasing it.
Safeguards against Software Theft
To protect software media from being stolen, 
owners should keep original software boxes and 
media in a secure location, out of sight of prying 
eyes. All computer users should back up their files 
and disks regularly, in the event of theft. When 
some companies terminate a programmer or if 
the programmer quits, they escort the employee 
off the premises immediately. These companies 
believe that allowing terminated employees 
to remain on the premises gives them time to 
 sabotage files and other network procedures.
To protect themselves from software piracy, 
software manufacturers issue users license 
agreements. A license agreement is the right 
to use the software. That is, you do not own 
the software. The license agreement provides 
specific conditions for use of the software, 
which a user must accept before using the 
 software (Figure 11-16). 
These terms usually 
are  displayed when you 
install the software. Use 
of the software consti-
tutes  acceptance of the 
terms on the user’s part.
The most common 
type of license included 
with software purchased 
by individual users 
is a single-user license 
 agreement, also called an 
end-user license agreement 
(EULA). A single-user 
license agreement typi-
cally includes many of 
the following condi-
tions that specify a user’s 
responsibility upon acceptance of the agreement.
Users are permitted to:
• Install the software on only one computer. 
(Some license agreements allow users to install 
the software on one desktop computer and one 
notebook computer.)
• Make one copy of the software as a backup.
• Give or sell the software to another individual, 
but only if the software is removed from the 
user’s computer first.
Users are not permitted to:
• Install the software on a network, such as a 
school computer lab.
• Give copies to friends and colleagues, while 
continuing to use the software.
• Export the software.
• Rent or lease the software.
Unless otherwise specified by a license 
 agreement, you do not have the right to copy, 
loan, borrow, rent, or in any way distribute  soft-
ware. Doing so is a violation of copyright law. It 
also is a federal crime. Despite this, some experts 
estimate for every authorized copy of software in 
use, at least one unauthorized copy exists. 
Software piracy continues for several reasons. 
In some countries, legal protection for software 
does not exist. In other countries, laws rarely are 
enforced. In addition, many buyers believe they 
have the right to copy the software for which they 
pay hundreds, even thousands, of dollars. Finally, 
software piracy is a fairly simple crime to commit.
Software piracy, however, is a serious offense. 
For one, it introduces a number of risks into 
Figure 11-16 A user must accept the terms in 
the license agreement before using the software.
572 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
the software market. It increases the chance of 
spreading viruses, reduces your ability to receive 
technical support, and drives up the price of 
software for all users. Further, software com-
panies take illegal copying seriously. In some 
cases, offenders have been prosecuted to the 
fullest extent of the law with penalties including 
fines up to $250,000 and five years in jail. Read 
Ethics & Issues 11-3 for a related discussion.
To promote a better understanding of soft-
ware piracy problems and, if necessary, to take 
legal action, a number of major worldwide soft-
ware companies formed the Business Software 
Alliance (BSA). The BSA operates a Web site 
and antipiracy hotlines in the United States and 
more than 40 other countries.
In an attempt to prevent software piracy, 
Microsoft and other manufacturers have incor-
porated an activation process into many of their 
consumer products. During the  product 
activation, which is conducted either online 
or by telephone, users provide the software 
product’s 25-character identification number 
to receive an installation identification number 
unique to the computer on which the software 
is installed. Usually, the software does not 
 function or has limited functionality until you 
activate it via the Internet or telephone.
Many organizations and businesses also have 
strict written policies governing the installation 
and use of software and enforce their rules by 
checking networked or online computers peri-
odically to ensure that all software is licensed 
properly. If you are not completely familiar with 
your school or employer’s policies governing 
installation of software, check with the informa-
tion technology department or your school’s 
technology coordinator.
Information Theft
Information theft is yet another type of 
 computer security risk. Information theft 
occurs when someone steals personal or con-
fidential information. If stolen, the loss of 
information can cause as much damage as (if 
not more than) hardware or software theft.
Both business and home users can fall victim 
to information theft. An unethical company 
executive may steal or buy stolen information 
to learn about a competitor. A corrupt indi-
vidual may steal credit card numbers to make 
fraudulent purchases. Information theft often 
is linked to other types of computer crime. 
For example, an individual first might gain 
unauthorized access to a computer and then 
steal credit card numbers stored in a firm’s 
 accounting department. 
Information transmitted over networks 
offers a higher degree of risk because unscru-
pulous users can intercept it during trans-
mission. Every computer along the path of 
your data can see what you send and receive. 
Ironically, though, studies show that the big-
gest threat to a business's information is its 
internal employees.
Safeguards against Information Theft
Most organizations will attempt to prevent 
information theft by implementing the user 
identification and authentication controls dis-
cussed earlier in this chapter. These controls are 
best suited for protecting information on com-
puters located on an organization’s premises. 
To protect information on the Internet and 
networks, organizations and individuals use a 
variety of encryption techniques.
 Business Software 
Alliance
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/
weblink and then click 
Business Software Alliance.
ETHICS & ISSUES 11-3
Currently, software companies patrol online 
auction sites looking for pirated copies of 
their software that might be for sale. When 
they find such activity, the software com-
pany takes legal action against the seller 
of the pirated software. With the explosion 
of online auctions, however, the compa-
nies are fighting an uphill battle given the 
amount of time it takes to discover the 
sales, find the perpetrators, and then indi-
vidually bring each perpetrator to justice. 
Many software companies have joined 
forces to demand that auction sites, such 
as eBay, legally be held liable for pirated 
software sold on their Web sites, and they 
have offered more than 20 suggestions as 
to how auction sites could better police 
their Web sites for pirated software. Online 
auction Web sites claim that the law 
clearly states they are not responsible for 
such sales, but that the software compa-
nies legally are responsible for controlling 
pirated sales. For its part, eBay claims 
already to enforce more than 13,000 rules 
to check for suspicious activity on its Web 
site, and offers trademark holders a special 
program in which they can enroll and have 
additional rules enforced.
Should online auctions be liable for pirated 
software sales on their Web sites? Why or 
why not? Should new or clearer laws be 
written to force online auctions to check 
whether software for sale on their Web 
sites is pirated? Why? Would you purchase 
software at an online auction being sold 
at a substantial discount to prices offered 
elsewhere? Why or why not?
Should Online Auctions Be Liable for Pirated Software Sales?
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 573
 typically use more than one encryption algorithm, 
along with an encryption key. An encryption key is 
a set of characters that the originator of the data 
uses to encrypt the plaintext and the recipient of 
the data uses to decrypt the ciphertext. 
Two basic types of encryption are private key 
and public key. With private key encryption, also 
called symmetric key encryption, both the origina-
tor and the recipient use the same secret key to 
encrypt and decrypt the data. Public key encryption, 
also called asymmetric key encryption, uses two 
encryption keys: a public key and a private key 
(Figure 11-18). Public key encryption software 
generates both the private key and the public key. 
A message encrypted with a public key can be 
Encryption
Encryption is a process of converting 
readable data into unreadable characters to pre-
vent unauthorized access. You treat encrypted 
data just like any other data. That is, you can 
store it or send it in an e-mail message. To read 
the data, the recipient must decrypt, or decipher, 
it into a readable form.
In the encryption process, the unencrypted, 
readable data is called plaintext. The encrypted 
(scrambled) data is called ciphertext. An  encryption 
algorithm, or cypher, is a set of steps that can con-
vert readable plaintext into unreadable ciphertext. 
Figure 11-17 shows examples of some simple 
encryption algorithms. Encryption programs 
Simple Encryption Algorithms
Name Algorithm Plaintext Ciphertext Explanation
Transposition  Switch the order of characters SOFTWARE OSTFAWER Adjacent characters swapped
Substitution  Replace characters with other 
characters
INFORMATION WLDIMXQUWIL Each letter replaced with another 
Expansion  Insert characters between existing 
characters
USER UYSYEYRY Letter Y inserted after each character
Compaction  Remove characters and store 
elsewhere 
ACTIVATION ACIVTIN Every third letter removed (T, A, O)
Figure 11-17 This table shows four simple encryption algorithms. Most encryption keys use a combination of algorithms.
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
_ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
Step 1 
The sender creates a document 
to be e-mailed to the receiver.
Step 2 
The sender uses the 
receiver’s public key 
to encrypt a message.
Step 3
The receiver uses his 
or her private key to 
decrypt the message.
Step 4 
The receiver can read or print 
the decrypted message.
CONFIDENTIAL _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
The new
plant will
be located...
The new
plant will
be located...
CONFIDENTIAL
Figure 11-18 This figure shows an example of public key encryption.
An Example of Public Key Encryption
sender
receiver
private key
decrypted messagemessage to be sent
encrypted message
public key
574 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
decrypted only with the corresponding private key, 
and vice versa. The public key is made known to 
message originators and recipients. For example, 
public keys may be posted on a secure Web page 
or a public-key server, or they may be e-mailed. 
The private key, by contrast, should be kept con-
fidential. For a more technical discussion about 
encryption  algorithms and keys, read the High-
Tech Talk article on page 592.
Some operating systems and e-mail  programs 
allow you to encrypt the contents of files and 
messages that are stored on your computer. You 
also can purchase an encryption program, such as 
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP). 
A digital signature is an encrypted code that 
a person, Web site, or organization attaches to an 
electronic message to verify the identity of the 
message sender. The code usually consists of the 
user’s name and a hash of all or part of the mes-
sage. A hash is a mathematical formula that gen-
erates a code from the contents of the message. 
Thus, the hash differs for each message. Receivers 
of the message decrypt the digital signature. The 
recipient generates a new hash of the received 
message and compares it with one in the digital 
signature to ensure they match.
Digital signatures often are used to ensure 
that an impostor is not participating in an 
Internet transaction. That is, digital signatures 
help to prevent e-mail forgery. A digital  sig nature 
also can verify that the content of a message has 
not changed.
Many Web browsers also use encryption. Some 
browsers offer a protection level known as 40-bit 
encryption. Many also offer 128-bit encryption and 
1024-bit encryption, which are even higher levels 
of protection because they have longer encryption 
keys. Applications requiring more security, such as 
banks, brokerage firms, or online retailers that use 
credit card or other financial information, require 
128-bit or 1024-bit encryption.
A Web site that uses encryption techniques to 
secure its data is known as a secure site. Secure 
sites use digital certificates along with a security 
protocol. Two popular security protocols are 
Transport Layer Security and Secure HTTP. 
Organizations often use VPNs. The following 
paragraphs briefly discuss security techniques.
Digital Certificates A digital certificate is 
a notice that guarantees a user or a Web site 
is legitimate. E-commerce applications com-
monly use digital certificates. Web browsers, 
such as Internet Explorer, often display a warn-
ing  message if a Web site does not have a valid 
 digital certificate.
A certificate authority (CA) is an authorized 
 person or a company that issues and verifies 
 digital certificates. Users apply for a digital 
certificate from a CA (Figure 11-19). A digital 
 certificate typically contains information such as 
the user’s name, the issuing CA’s name and signa-
ture, and the serial number of the certificate. The 
information in a digital certificate is encrypted.
Figure 11-19  
A certificate authority 
issues and verifies 
digital certificates.
 Digital Certificates
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click Digital Certificates.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 575
Transport Layer Security Transport Layer 
Security (TLS), a successor to Secure Sockets 
Layer (SSL), provides encryption of all data that 
passes between a client and an Internet server. 
TLS requires the client have a digital certificate. 
Once the server has a digital certificate, the 
Web browser communicates securely with the 
client. TLS prevents perpetrators from access-
ing or tampering with communications. Web 
addresses of pages that use TLS typically begin 
with https, instead of http (Figure 11-20). TLS 
is available in 128-bit encryption and higher.
Secure HTTP Secure HTTP (S-HTTP) allows 
users to choose an encryption scheme for data 
that passes between a client and a server. With 
S-HTTP, the client and server both must have 
digital certificates. S-HTTP is more difficult to 
use than TLS, but it is more secure. Applications 
that must verify the authenticity of a client, 
such as for online banking, use S-HTTP.
VPN Mobile users today often access their 
company networks through a virtual private 
network. When a mobile user connects to a 
main office using a standard Internet connec-
tion, a  virtual  private network (VPN) provides 
the mobile user with a secure connection to the 
company network server, as if the user has a 
private line. VPNs help ensure that data is safe 
from being intercepted by unauthorized people 
by encrypting data as it transmits from a note-
book computer, smart phone, or other mobile 
device.
System Failure
System failure is yet another type of computer 
security risk. A system failure is the prolonged 
malfunction of a computer. System failure also 
can cause loss of hardware, software, data, or 
information. A variety of causes can lead to sys-
tem failure. These include aging hardware; nat-
ural disasters such as fires, floods, or hurricanes; 
random events such as electrical power prob-
lems; and even errors in computer programs.
One of the more common causes of system 
failure is an electrical power variation.  Elec trical 
power variations can cause loss of data and loss 
of equipment. If the computer equipment is 
 networked, a single power disturbance can 
Figure 11-20 Web addresses of secure sites often begin with https 
instead of http. Browsers also often display a lock symbol in the window.
indicates secure 
Web page
damage multiple systems. Electrical disturbances 
include noise, undervoltages, and overvoltages.
Noise is any unwanted signal, usually varying 
quickly, that is mixed with the normal voltage 
entering the computer. Noise is caused by exter-
nal devices such as fluorescent lighting, radios, 
and televisions, as well as by components within 
the computer itself. Noise generally is not a risk 
to hardware, software, or data. Computer power 
supplies, however, do filter out noise.
An undervoltage occurs when the electrical 
supply drops. In North America, a wall plug 
usually supplies electricity at approximately 
120 volts. An undervoltage occurs when the 
voltage drops, often defined as more than five 
percent, below the normal volts. A brownout is 
a prolonged (more than a minute) undervolt-
age. A blackout is a complete power failure. 
Undervoltages can cause data loss but generally 
do not cause equipment damage.
An overvoltage, or power surge, occurs 
when the incoming electrical power increases, 
often defined as more than five percent, above 
the normal volts. A momentary overvoltage, 
which is called a spike, occurs when the increase 
in power lasts for less than one millisecond 
(one thousandth of a second). Uncontrollable 
disturbances such as lightning bolts can cause 
spikes. Overvoltages can cause immediate and 
 permanent damage to hardware.
576 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Safeguards against System Failure
To protect against electrical power  variations, 
use a surge protector. A surge protector, also 
called a surge suppressor, uses special electri-
cal components to smooth out minor noise, 
provide a stable  current flow, and keep an 
overvoltage from reaching the computer and 
other electronic equipment (Figure 11-21). 
Sometimes resembling a power strip, the com-
puter and other devices plug in the surge pro-
tector, which plugs in the power source. The 
surge protector absorbs small overvoltages — 
generally without damage to the computer and 
equipment. To protect the computer and other 
equipment from large overvoltages, such as 
those caused by a lightning strike, some surge 
protectors completely stop working when an 
overvoltage reaches a certain level. Surge pro-
tectors also usually  protect the computer from 
undervoltages.
No surge protectors are 100 percent effective. 
Large power surges can bypass the protector. 
Repeated small overvoltages can weaken a surge 
protector permanently. Some experts recom-
mend replacing a surge protector every two to 
three years. Typically, the amount of protection 
offered by a surge protector is proportional to 
its cost. That is, the more expensive, the more 
protection the protector offers. Be sure to review 
the manufacturer’s guarantee when purchasing 
a surge protector. Some will replace equipment 
damaged by a power surge, if the equipment was 
connected to their surge  protector.
The surge protector you purchase should 
meet the safety specification for surge suppres-
sion products. This specification, which is called 
the Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 1449 standard, 
allows no more than 500 maximum volts to 
pass through the line. The response time of 
the surge protector should be less than one 
nanosecond. The surge protector also should 
have a Joule rating of at least 200. A Joule is the 
unit of energy a surge protection device can 
absorb before it can be damaged. The higher 
the Joule rating, the better the protection.
If your computer connects to a network or 
the Internet, also be sure to have protection 
for your modem, telephone lines, DSL lines, 
Internet cable lines, and network lines. Many 
surge protectors include plug-ins for telephone 
lines and other cables. If yours does not, you can 
purchase separate devices to protect these lines.
For additional electrical protection, some 
users connect an uninterruptible power supply 
to the computer. An uninterruptible power 
supply (UPS) is a device that contains surge 
protection circuits and one or more batteries 
that can provide power during a temporary 
or permanent loss of power (Figure 11-22). A 
UPS connects between your computer and a 
power source.
Two types of UPS devices are standby and 
online. A standby UPS, sometimes called an 
offline UPS, switches to battery power when a 
problem occurs in the power line. The amount 
of time a standby UPS allows a user to continue 
working depends on the electrical requirements 
of the computer and the size of the batteries 
in the UPS. A UPS for a personal computer 
should provide from 10 to 50 minutes of use 
in the event of a total power loss. This should 
Figure 11-21 Circuits inside a surge 
protector safeguard against electrical power variations.
Figure 11-22 If power fails, an uninterruptible 
power supply (UPS) uses batteries to provide 
electricity for a limited amount of time. 
 Surge Protectors
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click Surge Protectors.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 577
be enough time to save current work and shut 
down the computer properly. An online UPS 
always runs off the battery, which provides 
continuous protection. An online UPS is much 
more expensive than a standby UPS.
Some companies use duplicate components or 
computers to protect against system failure. A 
fault-tolerant computer has duplicate components 
so that it can continue to operate when one of 
its main components fail. Companies that must 
have their computers operational at all times 
may have two separate duplicate computers run-
ning simultaneously. Airline reservation systems, 
communications networks, and automated teller 
machines are examples of systems that duplicate 
components or computers to ensure that no 
data is lost in the event of a system failure.
Backing Up — The Ultimate 
Safeguard
To protect against data loss caused by system 
 failure or hardware/software/information theft, 
computer users should back up files regularly. 
A backup is a duplicate of a file, program, or 
disk that can be used if the original is lost, 
 damaged, or destroyed. Thus, to back up a file 
means to make a copy of it. In the case of system 
failure or the discovery of corrupted files, you 
restore the files by copying the backed up files 
to their original location on the computer.
You can use just about any media to store back-
ups. Be sure to use high-quality media. A good 
choice for a home user might be optical discs or 
external hard disks. Some home users also set up a 
RAID configuration, as described in Chapter 7, to 
automatically back up the  contents of a disk.
Keep backup copies in a fireproof and heat-
proof safe or vault, or offsite. Offsite means in 
a location separate from the computer site. 
Home and business users keep backup cop-
ies offsite so that a single disaster, such as a 
fire, does not destroy both the original and the 
backup copy of the data. An offsite location can 
be a safe deposit box at a bank or a briefcase. 
A growing trend is to use cloud storage as an 
offsite location. As discussed in Chapter 7, cloud 
storage is an Internet service that provides stor-
age to computer users. To learn more about 
how to back up files using an Internet service, 
complete the Learn How To 1 activity on pages 
602 and 603.
Most backup programs for the home user 
provide for a full backup and a selective backup. 
A full backup copies all of the files in the com-
puter. With a selective backup, users choose which 
folders and files to include in a backup.
Some users implement a three-generation 
backup policy to preserve three copies of impor-
tant files. The grandparent is the oldest copy of 
the file. The parent is the second oldest copy 
of the file. The child is the most recent copy of 
the file. Others use RAID to duplicate the con-
tents of a disk. Instead of multiple backup copies, 
some users choose continuous backup, where 
data is backed up whenever a change is made. 
Backup programs are available from many 
sources. Most operating systems include a backup 
program. Backup devices, such as  external disk 
drives, also include backup  programs. Numerous 
stand-alone backup utilities exist. Many of these 
can be downloaded from the Web at no cost.
Wireless Security
Wireless technology has made dramatic 
changes in the way computer users commu-
nicate worldwide. Billions of home and busi-
ness users have notebook computers, smart 
phones, and other mobile devices to access 
the Internet, send e-mail and instant messages, 
Should I use a surge protector on 
electronic equipment, appliances, or 
even my entire house?
It is a good idea to use a surge protector on 
high-end, expensive electronic equipment such 
as entertainment systems, DVD/Blu-ray Disc 
players, computers, and copy machines, and on 
any household appliance or device that includes 
a circuit board or computer such as a stove, 
dishwasher, and microwave. You also can hire 
an electrician to install a surge protector that 
protects your entire house. This type of surge 
protector is installed where the power lines 
connect to your house’s electrical system. A 
lightning strike or other substantial power surge 
could damage electrical devices in your house. 
In addition to protecting the equipment in your 
house, it also is a good idea to carry a portable 
surge protector when you travel, so that you 
can protect your cell phone and other mobile 
devices when you plug them in to charge.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch11/faq and then click Surge 
Protectors.
FAQ 11-5
578 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
chat online, or share network connections — all 
without wires. Home users set up wireless 
home networks. Mobile users access wireless 
networks in hot spots at airports, hotels, shop-
ping malls, bookstores, restaurants, and coffee 
shops. Schools have wireless networks so that 
students can access the school network using 
their mobile computers and devices as they 
move from building to building.
Although wireless access provides many 
conveniences to users, it also poses additional 
security risks. One study showed that about 
80 percent of wireless networks have no security 
protection. Some perpetrators connect to other’s 
wireless networks to gain free Internet access; 
others may try to access an organization’s confi-
dential data.
To access the network, the individual must be 
in range of the wireless network. Some intrud-
ers intercept and monitor communications as 
they transmit through the air. Others connect 
to a network through an unsecured wireless 
access point (WAP). In one technique, called 
war driving or access point mapping, individuals 
attempt to detect wireless networks via their 
notebook computer or mobile device while driv-
ing a vehicle through areas they suspect have 
a wireless network. Some individuals instead 
use war  flying, where they use airplanes instead 
of vehicles to detect unsecured wireless net-
works. Once located, some individuals use a 
GPS device to add the WAP to a war driving 
access point map on the Internet (Figure 11-23), 
 making the wireless network vulner able.
In addition to using firewalls, some 
 safeguards that improve the security of 
wireless networks include reconfiguring the 
wireless access point and ensuring equip-
ment uses one or more wireless security 
standards such as Wi-Fi Protected Access 
and 802.11i.
• A wireless access point (WAP) should be 
configured so that it does not broadcast a 
network name, known as an SSID (service 
set identifier). Users should change the 
default SSID to prevent unauthorized users 
from accessing their wireless network. The 
WAP also can be programmed so that only 
certain devices can access it.
• Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) is a security 
standard that improves on older security 
standards by authenticating network users 
and providing more advanced encryption 
techniques.
• An 802.11i network, sometimes called 
WPA2, the most recent network secu-
rity standard, conforms to the govern-
ment’s security standards and uses more 
sophisticated encryption techniques than 
WPA.
By implementing these security measures, 
you can help to prevent unauthorized access 
to  wireless networks.
Figure 11-23 This Web site marks all unsecured wireless 
networks located during a war drive. 
Can you detect if someone is 
 accessing your wireless 
home network?
Yes. If you notice that the speed of your 
wireless network connection is slower than 
normal, it may be a sign that someone else 
is accessing your network. You also may 
notice indicator lights on your wireless 
router flashing rapidly when you are not 
connected to your wireless network. Most 
wireless routers have a built-in utility that 
allows you to view the computers currently 
connected to your network. If you notice 
a computer that does not belong to you, 
consult your wireless router’s documenta-
tion to determine how to remove it from 
the network. 
 For more information, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch11/faq and then click Wireless 
Home Networks.
FAQ 11-6
 War Driving
For more information, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/weblink and then 
click War Driving.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 579
Health Concerns of 
Computer Use
Users are a key component in any information 
system. Thus, protecting users is just as impor-
tant as protecting hardware, software, and data. 
The widespread use of computers has led to 
some important user health  concerns. Users 
should be proactive and minimize their chance 
of risk. The following sections discuss health 
risks and preventions, along with measures users 
can take to keep the environment healthy.
Computers and Health Risks
A repetitive strain injury (RSI) is an injury 
or disorder of the muscles, nerves, tendons, 
 ligaments, and joints. Computer-related RSIs 
include tendonitis and carpal tunnel syndrome. 
RSIs are the largest job-related injury and 
 illness problem in the United States today. 
For this reason, OSHA (Occupa tional Safety 
and Health Administration) has developed 
industry-specific and task-specific guidelines 
designed to prevent workplace injuries with 
respect to computer usage.
Tendonitis is inflammation of a tendon due 
to repeated motion or stress on that tendon. 
Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) is inflammation of 
the nerve that connects the forearm to the palm 
of the wrist. Repeated or forceful bending of the 
wrist can cause CTS or tendonitis of the wrist. 
Symptoms of tendonitis of the wrist include 
extreme pain that extends from the forearm to the 
hand, along with tingling in the fingers. Symptoms 
of CTS include burning pain when the nerve is 
compressed, along with numbness and tingling in 
the thumb and first two fingers.
Long-term computer work can lead to tendon-
itis or CTS. Factors that cause these disorders 
include prolonged typing, prolonged mouse 
usage, or continual shifting between the mouse 
and the keyboard. If untreated, these disorders 
can lead to permanent physical damage.
You can take many precautions to prevent these 
types of injuries. Take frequent breaks during the 
computer session to exercise your hands and arms 
(Figure 11-24). To prevent injury due to typing, 
place a wrist rest between the keyboard and the 
edge of your desk. To prevent injury while using 
a mouse, place the mouse at least six inches from 
the edge of the desk. In this position, your wrist is 
flat on the desk. Finally, minimize the number of 
times you switch between the mouse and the key-
board, and avoid using the heel of your hand as a 
pivot point while typing or using the mouse.
Another type of health-related condition due to 
computer usage is computer vision syndrome 
(CVS). You may have CVS if you have sore, tired, 
burning, itching, or dry eyes; blurred or double 
vision; distance blurred vision after prolonged 
Instructions: Find the true statement below. 
Then, rewrite the remaining false statements so 
that they are true.
1.  An end-user license agreement (EULA) 
permits users to give copies to friends and 
colleagues, while continuing to use the 
software.
2.  Encryption is a process of converting 
 ciphertext into plaintext to prevent 
 unauthorized access.
3.  Mobile users are not susceptible to 
 hardware theft.
4.  Overvoltages can cause immediate and 
 permanent damage to hardware.
5.  Two backup security standards are Wi-Fi 
Protected Access and 802.11i.
6.  To protect against data loss caused by 
a system failure, computer users should 
restore files regularly.
 Quiz Yourself Online: To further check your 
knowledge of pages 570 through 578, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/quiz and then click 
Objectives 4 – 9.
QUIZ YOURSELF 11-2
Figure 11-24 To reduce the chance of developing 
tendonitis or carpal tunnel syndrome, take frequent breaks 
during computer sessions to exercise your hands and arms.
Hand Exercises
• Spread fi ngers apart for several seconds while 
keeping wrists straight.
• Gently push back fi ngers and then thumb.
• Dangle arms loosely at sides and then shake 
arms and hands.
580 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
arms: 
elbows at about 
90° and arms and 
hands approximately 
parallel to floor
keyboard height: 
23 to 28 inches 
depending on 
height of user
adjustable height 
chair with 4 or 5 
legs for stability
feet flat on floor
viewing angle: 20° 
to center of screen
viewing distance:
18 to 28 inches
Figure 11-26 A well-designed 
work area should be flexible to 
allow adjustments to the height 
and build of different individuals. 
Good lighting and air quality also 
are important considerations.
People who spend their workday using the 
computer sometimes complain of lower back 
pain, muscle fatigue, and emotional fatigue. 
Lower back pain sometimes is caused from 
poor posture. Always sit properly in the chair 
while you work. To alleviate back pain, muscle 
fatigue, and emotional fatigue, take a 15- to 
30-minute break every 2 hours — stand up, 
walk around, stretch, and relax. Another way to 
help prevent these injuries is to be sure your 
workplace is designed  ergonomically.
Ergonomics and Workplace Design
Ergonomics is an applied science devoted to 
incorporating comfort, efficiency, and safety 
into the design of items in the workplace. 
Ergonomic studies have shown that using the 
correct type and configuration of chair, key-
board, display device, and work surface helps 
users work comfortably and efficiently and 
helps protect their health. For the computer 
work space, experts recommend an area of at 
least two feet by four feet. Figure 11-26 illus-
trates additional guidelines for setting up the 
work area.
Figure 11-25 Following these 
tips may help reduce eyestrain while 
working on a computer.
• Every 10 to 15 minutes, take an eye break. 
 -  Look into the distance and focus on an object for 20 to 30 seconds.
 -  Roll your eyes in a complete circle.
 -  Close your eyes and rest them for at least one minute.
• Blink your eyes every fi ve seconds.
• Place your display device about an arm’s length away from your eyes 
with the top of the screen at eye level or below.
• Use large fonts.
• If you wear glasses, ask your doctor about computer glasses.
• Adjust the lighting.
Techniques to Ease Eyestrain
staring at a display device; headache or sore neck; 
difficulty shifting focus between a display device 
and documents; difficulty focusing on the screen 
image; color fringes or after-images when you 
look away from the display device; and increased 
sensitivity to light. Eyestrain associated with CVS 
is not thought to have serious or long-term con-
sequences. Figure 11-25 outlines some techniques 
you can follow to ease eyestrain.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 581
Computer Addiction
Computers can provide entertainment and 
enjoyment. Some computer users, however, 
become obsessed with the computer and the 
Internet. Computer addiction occurs when the 
computer consumes someone’s entire social life. 
Computer addiction is a growing health problem 
but can be treated through therapy and support 
groups. 
Symptoms of a user with computer addiction 
include the following:
• Craves computer time
• Overjoyed when at the computer
• Unable to stop computer activity
• Irritable when not at the computer
• Neglects family and friends
• Problems at work or school
Ethics and Society
As with any powerful technology, computers can 
be used for both good and bad intentions. The 
standards that determine whether an action is 
good or bad are known as ethics.
Computer ethics are the moral guidelines that 
govern the use of computers and information 
systems. Seven frequently discussed areas of com-
puter ethics are unauthorized use of computers 
and networks, software theft (piracy), information 
accuracy, intellectual property rights, codes of 
conduct, information privacy, and green comput-
ing. The questionnaire in Figure 11-27 raises 
issues in each of these areas.
Previous sections in this chapter discussed 
unauthorized use of computers and networks, and 
software theft (piracy). The following sections 
Your Thoughts?
Ethical Unethical
 1. An organization requires employees to wear badges that track their whereabouts while at work.
 2. A supervisor reads an employee’s e-mail.
 3. An employee uses his computer at work to send e-mail messages to a friend.
 4. An employee sends an e-mail message to several coworkers and blind copies his supervisor.
 5. An employee forwards an e-mail message to a third party without permission from the sender.
 6. An employee uses her computer at work to complete a homework assignment for school.
 7. The vice president of your Student Government Association (SGA) downloads a photo from the Web and uses it 
in a flyer recruiting SGA members. 
 8. A student copies text from the Web and uses it in a research paper for his English Composition class.
 9. An employee sends political campaign material to individuals on her employer’s mailing list.
 10. As an employee in the registration office, you have access to student grades. You look up grades for your 
friends, so that they do not have to wait for delivery of grade reports from the postal service.
 11. An employee makes a copy of software and installs it on her home computer. No one uses her home computer 
while she is at work, and she uses her home computer only to finish projects from work.
 12. An employee who has been laid off installs a computer virus on his employer’s computer.
 13. A person designing a Web page finds one on the Web similar to his requirements, copies it, modifies it, and 
publishes it as his own Web page.
 14. A student researches using only the Web to write a report.
 15. In a society in which all transactions occur online (a cashless society), the government tracks every transaction 
you make and automatically deducts taxes from your bank account.
 16. Someone copies a well-known novel to the Web and encourages others to read it.
 17. A person accesses an organization’s network and reports to the organization any vulnerabilities discovered.
 18. Your friend uses a neighbor’s wireless network to connect to the Internet and check e-mail.
 19. A company uses recycled paper to print a 50-page employee benefits manual that is distributed to 425 employees.
 20. Your friend donates her old computers and mobile devices to local schools when she purchases newer models.
Figure 11-27 Indicate whether you think the situation described is ethical or unethical. Discuss your answers with your instructor 
and other students.
582 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
discuss issues related to information accuracy, 
intellectual property rights, codes of conduct, 
green computing, and information privacy.
Information Accuracy
Information accuracy today is a concern 
because many users access information main-
tained by other people or companies, such as on 
the Internet. Do not assume that because the 
information is on the Web that it is correct. As 
Chapter 2 discussed, users should evaluate the 
value of a Web page before relying on its con-
tent. Be aware that the organization providing 
access to the information may not be the 
creator of the information.
In addition to concerns about the accuracy 
of computer input, some individuals and orga-
nizations raise questions about the ethics of 
using computers to alter output, primarily 
graphical output such as a retouched photo. 
Using graphics equipment and software, users 
easily can digitize photos and then add, change, 
or remove images (Figure 11-28).
One group that completely opposes any 
manipulation of an image is the National Press 
Photographers Association. It believes that 
 allowing even the slightest alteration  eventually 
could lead to misrepresentative photos. Others 
believe that digital photo retouching is acceptable 
as long as the  significant content or meaning of 
the photo does not change. Digital retouching is 
an area in which legal precedents so far have not 
been established.
Intellectual Property Rights
Intellectual property (IP) refers to unique 
and original works such as ideas, inventions, 
art, writings, processes, company and product 
names, and logos. Intellectual property rights 
are the rights to which creators are entitled for 
their work. Certain issues arise surrounding IP 
today because many of these works are available 
digitally. 
A copyright gives authors and artists exclusive 
rights to duplicate, publish, and sell their materi-
als. A copyright protects any tangible form of 
expression.
A common infringement of copyright is 
piracy. People pirate (illegally copy) software, 
movies, and music. Many areas are not clear-
cut with respect to the law, because copyright 
law gives the public fair use to copyrighted 
material. The issues surround the phrase, fair 
use, which allows use for educational and 
 critical purposes. This vague definition is 
 subject to widespread interpretation and raises 
many questions:
• Should individuals be able to download 
contents of your Web site, modify it, and then 
put it on the Web again as their own?
• Should a faculty member have the right to 
print material from the Web and distribute 
it to all members of the class for teaching 
purposes only?
• Should someone be able to scan photos or 
pages from a book, publish them to the Web, 
and allow others to download them?
• Should someone be able to put the lyrics of 
a song on the Web?
• Should students be able to post term papers 
they have written on the Web, making it 
tempting for other students to download 
and submit them as their own work?
These issues with copyright law led to the 
 development of digital rights management (DRM), 
a strategy designed to prevent illegal distribution 
of movies, music, and other digital content. 
Codes of Conduct
Recognizing that individuals need specific 
 standards for the ethical use of computers, a 
number of computer-related organizations have 
established IT (information technology) codes of 
conduct (Figure 11-29). An IT code of  conduct 
is a written guideline that helps determine 
whether a specific computer action is ethical or 
unethical.
Figure 11-28 A digitally altered photo shows sports legend Michael Jordan 
(born in 1963) meeting the famous scientist Albert Einstein (who died in 1955).
 Digital Rights 
Management
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/
weblink and then click 
Digital Rights Management.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 583
Green Computing
Green computing involves reducing the 
 electricity and environmental waste while using a 
computer. People use, and often waste, resources 
such as electricity and paper while using a com-
puter. Society has become aware of this waste and 
is taking measures to combat it.
Personal computers, display devices, and 
printers should comply with guidelines of the 
ENERGY STAR program. The United States 
Department of Energy (DOE) and the United 
States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
developed the ENERGY STAR program to help 
reduce the amount of electricity used by comput-
ers and related devices. This program encourages 
manufacturers to create energy- efficient devices 
that require little power when they are not in use. 
For example, many devices switch to sleep or 
power save mode after a specified number of inac-
tive minutes or hours. Computers and devices that 
meet the ENERGY STAR guidelines display an 
ENERGY STAR label.
A recent study showed that organizational 
computer facilities, or data centers, in the United 
States consumed as much power as about six mil-
lion households, and if no measures are taken to 
reduce consumption, the number is expected to 
continue rising quickly. Data center resources that 
consume power include computer hardware and 
associated devices, uninterruptible power supplies, 
and utilities such as air condi tioning, coolers, light-
ing, etc. Organizations can implement a variety of 
 measures to reduce electrical waste.
• Consolidate servers by using virtualization 
(discussed in Chapter 8)
• Purchase high-efficiency equipment, such 
as uninterruptible power supplies and 
storage devices
• Use sleep modes and other power management 
features for computers and devices
• Buy computers with low power consumption 
processors and power supplies
• When possible, use outside air to cool the 
data center
Some organizations continually review their 
power usage effectiveness (PUE), which is a ratio 
that measures how much power enters the com-
puter facility, or data center, against the amount 
of power required to run the computers.
Users should not store obsolete  computers and 
devices in their basement, storage room, attic, 
warehouse, or any other location. Computers, 
monitors, and other equipment contain toxic 
materials and potentially dangerous elements 
including lead, mercury, and flame retardants. 
In a landfill, these materials release into the 
 environment. Recycling and refurbishing old 
equipment are much safer alternatives for the 
environment. Manufacturers can use the mil-
lions of pounds of recycled raw materials to 
make products such as outdoor furniture and 
 automotive parts.
Experts estimate that more than 700 million 
personal computers are obsolete. Because of 
the huge volumes of electronic waste, the U.S. 
federal government has proposed a bill that 
would require computer recycling across the 
country. Many state and local governments have 
methods in place to make it easy for consumers 
to recycle this type of equipment. Many com-
puter manufacturers, office supply stores, and 
other agencies offer free recycling to consumers 
and organizations.
IT Code of Conduct
 1. Computers may not be used to harm other people.
 2. Employees may not interfere with others’  computer work.
 3. Employees may not meddle in others’ computer files.
 4. Computers may not be used to steal.
 5. Computers may not be used to bear false witness.
 6. Employees may not copy or use software illegally.
 7. Employees may not use others’ computer resources without authorization.
 8. Employees may not use others’ intellectual  property as their own.
 9. Employees shall consider the social impact of  programs and systems they design.
 10. Employees always should use computers in a way that demonstrates  consideration and respect for fellow humans.
Figure 11-29 Sample IT code of conduct employers may distribute to employees.
584 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
To reduce the environmental impact of 
 computing further, users simply can alter a 
few habits. Figure 11-30 lists the ways you can 
 contribute to green computing. To learn more 
about green computing, complete the Green 
Computing exercise on the Web Research page 
in each chapter of this book.
Figure 11-31 lists measures you can take to 
make your personal data more private. The 
 following sections address techniques companies 
and employers use to collect your personal data. 
Read Innovative Computing 11-2 to find out 
how merchants watch shoppers’ behaviors.
Information Privacy
Information privacy refers to the right of 
individuals and companies to deny or restrict 
the collection and use of information about 
them. In the past, information privacy was easier 
to maintain because information was kept in 
separate locations. Each retail store had its own 
credit files. Each government agency main-
tained separate records. Doctors had their own 
patient files.
Today, huge databases store this data online. 
Much of the data is personal and confidential 
and should be accessible only to authorized 
users. Many individuals and organizations, 
however, question whether this data really is 
private. That is, some companies and individuals 
collect and use this information without your 
authorization. Web sites often collect data about 
you, so that they can customize advertisements 
and send you personalized e-mail messages. 
Some employers monitor your  computer usage 
and e-mail messages. 
 1.  Use computers and devices that comply 
with the ENERGY STAR program.
 2.  Do not leave the computer running 
overnight.
 3.  Turn off the monitor, printer, and 
other devices when not in use.
 4.  Use LCD monitors instead of CRT monitors.
 5. Use paperless methods to communicate.
 6. Recycle paper.
 7. Buy recycled paper.
 8. Recycle toner cartridges.
 9.  Recycle old computers, printers, and other devices.
10.  Telecommute to save gas.
11.  Use video conferencing and VoIP for meetings.
How to Safeguard Personal Information
 1. Fill in only necessary information on rebate, warranty, 
and registration forms.
 2. Do not preprint your telephone number or Social 
 Security number on personal checks.
 3. Have an unlisted or unpublished telephone number.
 4. If Caller ID is available in your area, find out how to 
block your number from displaying on the receiver’s 
system.
 5. Do not write your telephone number on charge or 
credit receipts.
 6. Ask merchants not to write credit card numbers, 
 telephone numbers, Social Security numbers, and driver’s 
license numbers on the back of your personal checks.
 7. Purchase goods with cash, rather than credit or checks.
 8. Avoid shopping club and buyer cards.
 9. If merchants ask personal questions, find out why 
they want to know before releasing the information.
 10. Inform merchants that you do not want them to 
 distribute your personal information.
 11. Request, in writing, to be removed from mailing lists.
 12. Obtain your credit report once a year from each of 
the three major credit reporting agencies (Equifax, 
Experian, and TransUnion) and correct any errors.
 13. Request a free copy of your medical records once a 
year from the Medical Information Bureau.
 14. Limit the amount of information you provide to Web 
sites. Fill in only required information.
 15. Install a cookie manager to filter cookies.
 16. Clear your history file when you are finished browsing.
 17. Set up a free e-mail account. Use this e-mail address 
for merchant forms.
 18. Turn off file and printer sharing on your Internet 
 connection.
 19. Install a personal firewall.
 20. Sign up for e-mail filtering through your Internet 
access provider or use an anti-spam program such 
as Brightmail.
 21. Do not reply to spam for any reason.
 22. Surf the Web anonymously with a program such as 
Freedom WebSecure or through an anonymous Web 
site such as Anonymizer.com.
Figure 11-31 Techniques to keep personal data 
private.
Green Computing Suggestions
Figure 11-30 A list of suggestions to make computing healthy for the 
environment.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 585
Electronic Profiles
When you fill out a form such as a 
 magazine subscription, product warranty reg-
istration card, or contest entry form, the mer-
chant that receives the form usually enters it 
into a database. Likewise, every time you click 
an advertisement on the Web or register soft-
ware online, your information and preferences 
enter a database. Merchants then sell the con-
tents of their databases to national marketing 
firms and Internet advertising firms. By com-
bining this data with information from public 
sources such as driver’s licenses and vehicle 
registrations, these firms create an electronic 
profile of individuals. The information in 
these electronic profiles includes personal 
details such as your age, address, telephone 
number, spending habits, marital status, 
number of dependents, ages of dependents, 
and so on.
Direct marketing supporters say that using 
information in this way lowers overall selling 
costs, which lowers product prices. Critics 
contend that the information in an electronic 
profile reveals more about an individual than 
anyone has a right to know. They claim that 
companies should inform people if they plan 
to provide personal information to others, and 
people should have the right to deny such 
use. Many companies today allow people to 
specify whether they want their personal 
information distributed (Figure 11-32).
Figure 11-32 Many companies today allow people to specify whether they 
want their personal information distributed.
selecting these options indicates 
you want to be contacted
Customers’ Behavior, Conversations Monitored
Deciding whether to display peanut butter next to jelly on a 
supermarket shelf is made easier with consumer-monitoring 
technology. Leading stores, including Best Buy, Walmart, 
Walgreens, Office Depot, and Abercrombie & Fitch, have 
installed video cameras and  recorders, heat sensors, and some-
times microphones to track customers’ movement  throughout 
the store and their buying  patterns.
One system, called Smartlane, counts the number of people, 
known as “hot blobs,”  entering and exiting the store and 
records how quickly clerks are completing transactions at 
cash registers. It alerts management when many hot blobs are 
waiting in checkout lanes or have entered the store in a short 
period of time so that additional clerks can be made  available 
to reduce checkout  waiting times.
Another system, BehaviorIQ, collects data on where custom-
ers walk throughout the store, when and for how long they 
stop to browse, and what they 
take from shelves and racks. 
Some stores claim information 
gleaned from these monitoring 
systems has increased sales 
300 percent.
Privacy experts warn that 
consumers might object to 
being recorded and analyzed. 
The monitoring companies, 
however, dispel these concerns 
by explaining that the data 
actually resembles audio record-
ings made when calling customer-service hotlines and when 
being observed for loss prevention purposes.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/
innovative and then click Shopping Behavior.
INNOVATIVE COMPUTING 11-2
Cookies
E-commerce and other Web applications 
often rely on cookies to identify users and 
customize Web pages. A cookie is a small text 
file that a Web server stores on your computer. 
Cookie files typically contain data about you, 
such as your user name or viewing preferences. 
586 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
INTERNET
Step 1
When you type the Web address of a 
Web site in a browser window, the 
browser program searches your hard 
disk for a cookie associated with 
the Web site.
Step 2
If the browser finds 
a cookie, it sends 
information in the 
cookie file to the 
Web site.
Step 3
If the Web site does not receive cookie information, and is 
expecting it, the site creates an identification number for you in 
its database and sends that number to your browser. The browser 
in turn creates a cookie file based on that number and stores 
the cookie file on your hard disk. The Web site now can update 
information in the cookie file whenever you access the site.
identification number
 
cookie information 
Web server for 
www.omahasteaks.com
Web sites use cookies for a variety of purposes:
• Most Web sites that allow for personalization 
use cookies to track user preferences. On 
such sites, users may be asked to fill in a form 
requesting personal information, such as their 
name, postal code, or site preferences. A news 
Web site, for example, might allow users to 
customize their viewing preferences to display 
certain stock quotes or the local weather fore-
cast. The Web site stores their preferences in a 
cookie on the users’ hard disks.
• Some Web sites use cookies to store users’ 
passwords, so that they do not need to enter 
it every time they log in to the Web site.
• Online shopping sites generally use a session 
cookie to keep track of items in a user’s 
shopping cart. This way, users can start an 
order during one Web session and finish it 
on another day in another session. Session 
cookies usually expire after a certain time, 
such as a week or a month.
• Some Web sites use cookies to track how 
often users visit a site and the Web pages 
they visit while at the site.
• Web sites may use cookies to target 
advertisements. These sites store a 
user’s interests and browsing habits in 
the cookie.
Many commercial Web sites send a cookie 
to your browser, and then your computer’s 
hard disk stores the cookie. The next time 
you visit the Web site, your browser retrieves 
the cookie from your hard disk and sends the 
data in the cookie to the Web site. Figure 
11-33 illustrates how Web sites work with 
cookies. A Web site can read data only from 
its own cookie file stored on your hard disk. 
That is, it cannot access or view any other 
data on your hard disk — including another 
cookie file.
Some Web sites do sell or trade informa-
tion stored in your cookie to advertisers — 
a practice many believe to be unethical. If 
you do not want your personal information 
distributed, you should limit the amount of 
information you provide to a Web site.
Figure 11-33 This figure shows how cookies work.
How Cookies Work
 Cookies
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/
weblink and then click 
Cookies.
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 587
Figure 11-34 An example of spam.
You can set your browser to accept cookies 
automatically, prompt you if you want to accept 
a cookie, or disable cookie use altogether. Keep 
in mind if you disable cookie use, you may 
not be able to use many of the e-commerce 
Web sites. As an alternative, you can purchase 
 software that selectively blocks cookies. 
Spam
Spam is an unsolicited e-mail message or 
newsgroup posting sent to many recipients or 
newsgroups at once. Spam is Internet junk mail 
(Figure 11-34). The content of spam ranges 
from selling a product or service, to promoting 
a business opportunity, to advertising offensive 
material. One study indicates more than 92 
percent of e-mail is spam. Instead of via e-mail, 
some spam is sent through an instant messaging 
system and, thus, is called spim. Another type, 
called spit, is spam sent via VoIP.
Users can reduce the amount of spam they 
receive with a number of techniques. Some 
e-mail programs have built-in settings that 
allow users to delete spam automatically. Users 
also can sign up for e-mail filtering from their 
Internet access provider. E-mail filtering is a 
service that blocks e-mail messages from desig-
nated sources. These services typically collect the 
spam in a central location that users can view at 
any time. An alternative to e-mail filtering is to 
purchase an anti-spam program that attempts 
to remove spam before it reaches your inbox. 
The disadvantage of e-mail filters and anti-spam 
 programs is that sometimes they remove valid 
e-mail messages. Thus, users should review the 
contents of the spam messages periodically to 
ensure they do not contain valid messages.
Phishing
Phishing is a scam in which a perpetrator 
sends an official looking e-mail message that 
attempts to obtain your personal and financial 
information (Figure 11-35). Some phishing 
e-mail messages ask you to reply with your 
information; others direct you to a phony Web 
site, or a pop-up window that looks like a Web 
site, that collects the information.
If you receive an e-mail message that looks 
legitimate and requests you update credit card 
numbers, Social Security numbers, bank account 
numbers, passwords, or other private informa-
tion, the FTC recommends you visit the Web 
site directly to determine if the request is valid. 
Never click a link in an e-mail message; instead, 
retype the Web address in your browser.
A phishing filter is a program that warns or 
blocks you from potentially fraudulent or suspi-
cious Web sites. Some Web browsers include 
phishing filters. To further help deter spam and 
phishing scams, Microsoft and others are devel-
oping standards that require e-mail messages 
How prevalent is spam?
The amount of spam on the Internet has continued to increase for several years. 
One research study indicates that during one three-month period, more than 
92 percent of all e-mail messages were spam. The study also estimates that the 
United States relays more spam than any other country.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/faq and then click Spam.
FAQ 11-7
Figure 11-35 An example of a phishing e-mail message.
588 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
ETHICS & ISSUES 11-4
If you respond to a phishing attempt, the information you submit ends up 
in the hands of a scammer, who then either uses the information to access 
your accounts and take money or sells and trades the information with 
other criminals. Sadly, the result often is identity theft. Law enforcement 
agencies believe that many of the phishing schemes are related to orga-
nized crime. Some phishing operations result in up to 20 percent of those 
targeted providing the requested information. More than $2 billion is lost 
to phishing attacks each year, and the figure is on the rise as the growing 
amount of ill-gained profits emboldens the scammers. Law enforcement 
agencies claim that these scams are difficult to stop and that people sim-
ply need to learn to ignore the requests for information. Computer users 
find that the scams often are impossible to distinguish from legitimate 
requests for information, and that the fault lies with Internet access pro-
viders or the makers of e-mail programs and Web browsers. Many modern 
Web browsers include tools that fight phishing.
Who should be responsible for stopping the phishing phenomenon? What 
can a person do to protect against phishing when e-mail messages are 
received from what appear to be legitimate organizations? What can 
be done to limit or stop the practice of phishing? Are companies and/or 
 consumers to share in the blame for the success of phishing? Why or 
why not?
Who Should Protect You from Phishing Scams?
contain sender identification so that recipients 
can verify the legitimacy of messages. Read 
Ethics & Issues 11-4 for a related discussion.
Pharming is a scam, similar to phishing, 
where a perpetrator attempts to obtain your 
 personal and financial information, except they 
do so via spoofing. That is, when you type a 
Web address in the Web browser, you are redi-
rected to a phony Web site that looks legitimate. 
The phony Web site requests you enter confi-
dential information.
Clickjacking is yet another similar scam. With 
clickjacking, an object that can be clicked on a Web 
site, such as a button, image, or link, contains a 
malicious program. When a user clicks the dis-
guised object, a variety of nefarious events may 
occur. For example, the user may be redirected to 
a phony Web site that requests personal informa-
tion, or a virus may download to the computer.
Spyware and Adware
Recall from Chapter 8 that spyware is a  program 
placed on a computer without the user’s knowledge 
that secretly collects information about the user. 
Some vendors or employers use spyware to collect 
information about program usage or employees. 
Internet advertising firms often collect information 
about users’ Web browsing habits by hiding spy-
ware in adware. Adware is a program that displays an 
online advertisement in a banner or pop-up window 
on Web pages, e-mail messages, or other Internet 
services.
Another type of spyware, called a Web bug, is 
 hidden on Web pages or in e-mail messages in the 
form of graphical images. Web businesses use Web 
bugs to monitor online habits of Web site visitors. 
Often, Web bugs link to a cookie stored on the hard 
disk. (Cookies are not con sidered spyware because 
you know they exist.)
To remove spyware and adware, you can obtain 
spyware and adware removers that can detect and 
delete spyware and adware. Some operating systems 
and Web browsers include spyware removers. 
Privacy Laws
The concern about privacy has led to the 
 enactment of federal and state laws regarding the 
storage and disclosure of personal data (Figure 
11-36). Common points in some of these laws are 
outlined at the top of the next page.
 1. Information collected and stored about  individuals 
should be limited to what is necessary to carry 
out the function of the business or government 
agency collecting the data.
 2. Once collected, provisions should be made to 
restrict access to the data to those employees 
within the organization who need access to it 
to perform their job duties.
 3. Personal information should be released outside 
the organization collecting the data only when 
the person has agreed to its disclosure.
 4. When information is collected about an 
individual, the individual should know that the 
data is being collected and have the oppor tunity 
to determine the accuracy of the data.
One law with an apparent legal loophole is the 
1970 Fair Credit Reporting Act. The act  limits 
the rights of others viewing a credit report to only 
those with a legitimate business need. The problem 
is that it does not define a legitimate business need. 
The result is that just about anyone can claim a 
legitimate business need and gain access to your 
credit report.
What do I do if I have been caught in a phishing scam?
If you have been trapped in a phishing scam, immediately change any 
 passwords that may have been compromised. If you have disclosed your debit 
or credit card numbers, contact your financial institutions. You also should visit 
http://www.ftc.gov or call the FTC help line at this number: 1-877-FTC-HELP. 
If you are an employee and suspect that confidential information about your 
 organization has been compromised, immediately notify your supervisor.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/faq and then click 
Phishing Scams.
FAQ 11-8
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 589
Date Law Purpose
2006  Telephone Records and Privacy 
Protection Act
Makes it illegal to use fraudulent means to obtain someone’s telephone 
records.
2003 CAN-SPAM Act Gives law enforcement the right to impose penalties on people using the 
Internet to distribute spam.
2002 Sarbanes-Oxley Act Requires corporate officers, auditors, and attorneys of publicly-traded 
companies follow strict financial reporting guidelines.
2001 Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA) Protects minors from inappropriate content when accessing the Internet in 
schools and libraries.
2001  Provide Appropriate Tools Required 
to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism 
(PATRIOT) Act
Gives law enforcement the right to monitor people’s activities, including Web 
and e-mail habits.
1999 Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) or Financial 
 Modernization Act
Protects consumers from disclosure of their personal financial information 
and requires institutions to alert customers of information disclosure policies.
1998  Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act 
(COPPA)
Requires Web sites protect personal information of children under 13 years 
of age.
1998 Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) Makes it illegal to circumvent antipiracy schemes in commercial software; 
outlaws sale of devices that copy software illegally.
1997 No Electronic Theft (NET) Act Closes a narrow loophole in the law that allowed people to give away 
 copyrighted material (such as software) on the Internet without legal 
repercussions.
1996 Health Insurance Portability and 
 Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Protects individuals against the wrongful disclosure of their health 
 information.
1996 National Information Infrastructure 
 Protection Act
Penalizes theft of information across state lines, threats against networks, 
and computer system trespassing.
1994 Computer Abuse Amendments Act Amends 1984 act to outlaw transmission of harmful computer code such as 
viruses.
1992 Cable Act Extends the privacy of the Cable Commun ications Policy Act of 1984 to 
include cellular and other wireless services.
1991 Telephone Consumer Protection Act Restricts activities of telemarketers.
1988 Computer Matching and Privacy 
 Protection Act
Regulates the use of government data to determine the eligibility of 
 individuals for federal benefits.
1988 Video Privacy Protection Act Forbids retailers from releasing or selling video-rental records without 
 customer consent or a court order.
1986  Electronic Communications Privacy Act 
(ECPA)
Provides the same right of privacy protection for the postal delivery service 
and telephone companies to the new forms of electronic communications, 
such as voice mail, e-mail, and cell phones.
1984 Cable Communications Policy Act Regulates disclosure of cable television subscriber records.
1984 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act Outlaws unauthorized access of federal government computers.
1978 Right to Financial Privacy Act Strictly outlines procedures federal agencies must follow when looking at 
 customer records in banks.
1974 Privacy Act Forbids federal agencies from allowing information to be used for a reason 
other than that for which it was collected.
1974 Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act Gives students and parents access to school records and limits disclosure of 
records to unauthorized parties.
1970 Fair Credit Reporting Act Prohibits credit reporting agencies from releasing credit information to 
unauthorized people and allows consumers to review their own credit 
records.
Figure 11-36 Summary of the major U.S. government laws concerning privacy.
590 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Social Engineering
As related to the use of computers, social 
engineering is defined as gaining unauthorized 
access or obtaining confidential information by 
taking advantage of the trusting human nature 
of some victims and the naivety of others. Some 
social engineers trick their victims into revealing 
confidential information such as user names and 
passwords on the telephone, in person, or on the 
Internet. Techniques they use include pretend-
ing to be an administrator or other authoritative 
figure, feigning an emergency  situation, or imper-
sonating an acquaintance. Social engineers also 
obtain information from users who do not destroy 
or conceal information properly. These perpetra-
tors sift through company dumpsters, watch or 
film people dialing telephone numbers or using 
ATMs, and snoop around computers looking for 
openly displayed confidential  information.
Employee Monitoring
Employee monitoring involves the use of 
computers to observe, record, and review an 
employee’s use of a computer, including com-
munications such as e-mail messages,  keyboard 
activity (used to measure  productivity), and Web 
sites visited. Many  programs exist that easily 
allow employers to monitor employees. Further, 
it is legal for employers to use these programs.
A frequently debated issue is whether an 
employer has the right to read employee e-mail 
messages. Actual policies vary widely. Some 
companies declare that they will review e-mail 
messages regularly, and others state that e-mail 
messages are private. In some states, if a company 
does not have a formal e-mail policy, it can read 
 Social Engineering
For more information, visit 
scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/
weblink and then click 
Social Engineering.
ETHICS & ISSUES 11-5
When an employee sends or receives an e-mail 
 message using his or her employer’s e-mail server, 
the company most likely retains a backup of the 
message, which can be used as evidence against the 
employee if the employee is suspected of engag-
ing in unscrupulous activity. When an employee 
sends a text message using a company-issued smart 
phone for such activity, however, the smart phone 
provider may store a record of the message. Even 
if an employer requires an employee to disclose 
all text message communications with custom-
ers, vendors, and  competitors, the employee is not 
required legally to divulge those communications. If 
the employer accuses an employee of possibly vio-
lating only company policy, rather than a law, then 
the smart phone provider is not allowed to disclose 
the communications. While recent court  rulings 
only confuse the issue further, the courts seem to 
side with employee privacy regarding the content 
of sent text messages. Employers argue, however, 
that because they provide the devices and service to 
the employee, they should have a right to view the 
 content of the messages.
Should text messages sent by employees be  private? 
Why or why not? How can employers create and 
enforce policies regarding the content of text mes-
sages sent on employer-issued smart phones? Should 
employers demand that smart phone providers offer 
the option to send all employee text message com-
munications to the company on a monthly basis? 
Why or why not?
Should Text Messages Sent by Employees Be Private?
e-mail messages without employee notification. 
One survey discovered that more than 73 per-
cent of companies search and/or read employee 
files, voice mail, e-mail messages, Web connec-
tions, and other networking communications. 
Several lawsuits have been filed against employ-
ers because many believe that such internal 
 communications should be private. Read Ethics 
& Issues 11-5 for a related discussion.
Another controversial issue relates to the use 
of cameras to monitor employees, customers, 
and the public. Many people feel that this use of 
video cameras is a violation of privacy. 
Content Filtering
One of the more controversial issues that 
surround the Internet is its widespread avail-
ability of objectionable material, such as racist 
 literature, violence, and obscene pictures. Some 
believe that such materials should be banned. 
Others believe that the materials should be fil-
tered, that is, restricted. Content filtering is the 
process of restricting access to certain material 
on the Web. Content filtering opponents argue 
that banning any materials violates constitutional 
guarantees of free speech and personal rights.
Many businesses use content filtering to limit 
employees’ Web access. These businesses argue 
that employees are unproductive when visiting 
inappropriate or objectionable Web sites. Some 
schools, libraries, and parents use content filtering 
to restrict access to minors.
One approach to content filtering is through 
a rating system of the Internet Content Rating 
Association (ICRA), which is similar to those used 
for movies and videos. Major Web sites such as 
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 591
Figure 11-37 
Many Internet 
security programs 
include content 
filtering capabilities, 
where users can 
block specified Web 
sites and applications.
Yahoo!, AOL, and MSN use the rating system 
established by the ICRA. If content at the Web 
site goes beyond the rating limits set in the 
Web browser software, a user cannot access the 
Web site. Concerned parents can set the rat-
ing limits and prevent these limits from being 
changed by using a password.
Another approach to content filtering is to 
use filtering software. Web filtering software 
is a program that restricts access to specified 
Web sites. Some also filter sites that use spe-
cific words. Others allow you to filter e-mail 
messages, chat rooms, and programs. Many 
Internet security programs include a firewall, 
antivirus program, and filtering capabilities 
combined (Figure 11-37).
Since 2001, the federal government, local governments, 
 businesses, and individuals have been implementing 
 aggressive new security measures because of the increase 
in terrorist activity. A security threat can exist anywhere, 
and it is nearly impossible for humans alone to protect the 
country. As a result, computers now assist governments, 
law  enforcement officials, business owners, and other indi-
viduals with monitoring and maintaining security.
Advancements in computer vision enable computers 
to monitor indoor and outdoor areas that might be sub-
ject to a high amount of criminal activity. For example, 
some cities are installing cameras in problematic areas. 
A computer program analyzes the output from the 
camera and can determine whether two or more people 
in close proximity to one another might be engaged 
in a physical confrontation. If the computer detects 
suspicious behavior, it automatically notifies local law 
enforcement.
Computers also use facial recognition to identify 
individuals who do not belong in a particular area. 
For example, one theme park in Florida often takes a 
picture of individuals they escort out of and ban from 
the park. As visitors walk from their cars to the park, 
 surveillance cameras positioned in strategic locations 
scan visitors’ faces and compare them to the database 
containing images of those who are banned from the 
park. If the computer finds a match, it alerts a security 
officer who then can investigate the situation. Thousands 
of people visit theme parks each day, and computers 
make it easier to perform the otherwise impossible task 
of identifying those who might be trespassing.
The federal government, particularly the Department 
of Homeland Security, uses a computerized No Fly List 
to track individuals who are not authorized to travel on 
commercial flights within the United States. When an 
individual makes a reservation, a computer compares 
his or her name to the names on the No Fly List. If the 
computer finds a match, the individual must prove that 
he or she is not the person on the list before being 
allowed to board an aircraft. 
Whether you are walking outside, visiting an attrac-
tion, or traveling, the chances are good that computers 
are, in some way, ensuring your safety.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/
work and then click National and Local Security.
National and Local Security
Computer Usage @ Work 
Instructions: Find the true statement below. Then, rewrite the remaining false 
statements so that they are true.
1.  A code of conduct gives authors and artists exclusive rights to duplicate, publish, 
and sell their materials.
2.  Factors that cause CVS include prolonged typing, prolonged mouse usage, or 
 continual shifting between the mouse and the keyboard.
3.  Phishing is the discovery, collection, and analysis of evidence found on 
 computers and networks.
4.  Spam is Internet junk mail.
5.  Users should store obsolete computers and devices in their basement or attic.
6.  You can assume that information on the Web is correct.
 Quiz Yourself Online: To further check your knowledge of pages 579 through 
591, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/quiz and then click Objectives 10 – 12.
QUIZ YOURSELF 11-3
Chapter Summary
This chapter identified some potential computer risks 
and the safeguards that organizations and individu-
als can implement to minimize these risks. Wireless 
security risks and safeguards also were discussed. 
The chapter presented computer-related health 
issues and their preventions. The chapter ended with 
a discussion about ethical issues surrounding infor-
mation accuracy, intellectual property rights, codes of 
conduct, green computing, and  information privacy. 
As mentioned in this chapter, encryption is 
a process of converting readable data into 
unreadable characters to prevent unauthor-
ized access. Various encryption algorithms 
are used to encrypt data, with some more 
secure than others. The chapter showed a 
few simple encryption algorithms. Individuals 
and organizations often desire more secure 
encryption, which requires a complex encryp-
tion algorithm. Thousands of encryption 
 algorithms exist, and it even is possible to 
write your own. Commonly used secure 
encryption algorithms include Blowfish, DES, 
3DES, and IDEA.
The Blowfish encryption algorithm was 
introduced in 1993 as a free alternative to 
other encryption algorithms that were avail-
able at that time. Blowfish, which has been 
thoroughly tested since its development and 
has proven to be a strong algorithm, uses a 
key length varying between 32 and 448 bits 
and is applied to a block of data as opposed 
to single bits of data.
The DES (Data Encryption Standard) 
encryption algorithm in the late 1970s was 
developed by the United States government 
and IBM. This standard uses a 56-bit key 
to encrypt 64-bit blocks of data at a time. 
The  encryption  process requires that each 
block of the message go through 16 different 
stages, adding to the strength of the algo-
rithm. Advancements in technology, however, 
made it easier and faster for computers with 
increased processing capabilities to decrypt 
these 56-bit keys, which were only 7 charac-
ters long. As a result, the Triple-DES (3DES) 
encryption algorithm was developed. This 
algorithm uses the original Data Encryption 
Standard to encrypt the data with the first 
56-bit key and then decrypts the data with 
another 56-bit key. Finally, a third 56-bit key 
encrypts the data once again. This process 
creates a total key length of 168 bits, which 
is significantly more difficult to compromise. 
IDEA (International Data Encryption 
Algorithm) was developed in the early 1990s 
to replace the DES encryption algorithm. This 
algorithm uses the same key for encryption 
and decryption on blocks of data that are 64 
bits long. Unlike the DES algorithm, IDEA uses 
a 128-bit key, greatly increasing the complex-
ity and security of the encrypted data.
The U.S. government uses the Advanced 
Encryption Standard (AES), mostly for 
unclassified data. In addition, various other 
organizations use AES. Windows 7 Ultimate 
edition includes BitLocker Drive Encryption 
(Figure 11-38), a security feature using the 
Encrypting File System (EFS ) to encrypt data. 
EFS uses the Advanced Encryption Standard 
to protect files and data from almost any 
method of unauthorized access. When a user 
encrypts a file, EFS generates a random num-
ber for the file that EFS calls the file’s FEK 
(file encryption key) to encrypt the data. EFS 
then uses FEK to encrypt the file’s contents 
with the encryption algorithm. The user’s 
public key then encrypts the FEK using the 
RSA public-key-based encryption algorithm, 
and the encrypted FEK then is stored with 
the file. The entire encryption process hap-
pens behind the scenes for the user, who 
simply completes a few mouse clicks to 
encrypt a folder or file. That is part of the 
elegance of EFS: while it is simple for a user, 
it is very difficult for any unauthorized user 
without the correct keys to crack the encryp-
tion. In the end, that is the key to keeping 
your data safe and sound. 
 For more information, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch11/tech and then click 
Encryption Algorithms.
High-Tech Talk
Encryption Algorithms: The Brains behind Encryption
encrypted 
volume key
encrypted 
data
plaintext
data
encrypted
full volume 
encryption key
+
+ +
PIN
trusted
computing
module 
USB
flash drive
volume 
master key
full volume
encryption key
= = =
Figure 11-38 One authentication scenario in BitLocker Drive Encryption.
592 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 593
Symantec ’s programmers analyzed every line of code, 
rewrote programs, and developed a new security 
model to create its latest versions of Norton AntiVirus 
and Norton Internet Security. The results are programs 
that use less hard disk space, decrease starting and 
scanning time, and average less than 7 MB of memory. 
The more than 100 performance improvements offer 
advanced protection for millions of computer users 
worldwide.
The California-based company is one of the ten  largest 
software corporations in the world. It was founded in 
1982 and has offices in more than 40 countries. Its pri-
mary manufacturing facility is located in Dublin, Ireland.
In 2009, Symantec released the latest version of its 
Norton Internet Security software. A rating service tested 
the level of protection provided by 10 different security 
products and gave Norton Internet Security the only 
perfect score.
Companies on the Cutting Edge
The McAfee Initiative to Fight Cybercrime is a global 
effort to thwart security threats and criminal activity. The 
world’s largest dedicated security technology company 
has partnered with experts in law enforcement, educa-
tion, government, and society to investigate, prosecute, 
and attempt to prevent security breaches.
McAfee products protect more than 60 million con-
sumers, small- and medium-sized businesses, govern-
mental agencies, and large corporations from malware, 
spam, and unauthorized access. In addition, more than 
100 million mobile devices are protected with McAfee 
software. The corporation takes its name from its 
founder, John McAfee, who started the company in 1987 
from his Santa Clara, California, home.
In 2009, McAfee launched a new online backup 
 service with unlimited capacity that allows consumers 
to back up and encrypt their important files such as 
documents, photos, music, and e-mail messages.
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/companies.
MCAFEE Intrusion Prevention Products Developer
SYMANTEC Computer Security Solutions Leader
RICHARD STALLMAN Software Freedom Advocate
GENE SPAFFORD Computer Security Expert
Technology Trailblazers
 For more information, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/trailblazers.
The Morris Worm, also called the MBDF virus, is 
 considered the first computer worm distributed on 
the Internet, and Gene Spafford gained fame for 
deconstructing and analyzing this 1988 attack. His 
work led to the conviction of a Cornell University 
student, Robert Morris. Today, Spafford, who also is 
known as Spaf, is recognized as one of the world’s 
foremost experts in the computer security, intelligence, 
 cybercrime, and software engineering fields.
For 30 years, he has advised major corporations, 
including Microsoft, Intel, and Unisys, the U.S. Air 
Force, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and two 
U.S.  presidents. He is noted for several firsts in the 
computer security field. For example, he defined the 
terms, software forensics and firewall, wrote the first 
English-language book on the topics of viruses and 
malware, and founded the world’s first multidisci-
plinary academic security awareness group: the Center 
for Education and Research in Information Assurance 
and Security (CERIAS).
The relationship between software and freedom is key 
to Richard Stallman’s philosophy. Since his days as a 
physics student at Harvard University, he has advocated 
free software and campaigned against software patents 
and copyright laws. His pioneering work developed the 
concept of copyleft, which gives each person who has 
purchased a software product the ability to copy, adapt, 
and distribute the program as long as the new software 
also has the same lack of restrictions.
Stallman began the GNU/Linux Project in 1983 as an 
effort to develop and use the copyleft concept. Linux is 
an outgrowth of this project, which continues to be a 
forum for software development, ethical practices, and 
political campaigning. He also started the Free Software 
Foundation (FSF) in 1985 to promote writing free soft-
ware for the GNU Project. The Free Software Directory 
catalogs more than 5,300 packages that run on the 
Linux and GNU operating systems. 
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
594 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
The Chapter Review reinforces the main concepts presented in this chapter. 
 To listen to an audio version of this Chapter Review, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/review. 
To obtain help from other students about any concept in this chapter, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch11/forum and post your thoughts and questions.
Chapter Review
1. What Are Computer Security Risks, and What Are the 
Types of Cybercrime Perpetrators? A computer 
 security risk is any event or action that could cause a loss 
of or damage to computer hardware, software, data, infor-
mation, or processing capability. Any illegal act involving 
a computer is a computer crime; the term cybercrime 
refers to online or Internet-based illegal acts. Perpetrators 
of cybercrime include: hacker, cracker, script kiddie, 
corporate spy, unethical employee, cyberextortionist, 
and cyberterrorist.
 2. What Are Various Internet and Network Attacks, and 
How Can Users Safeguard against These Attacks? A 
computer virus is a potentially  damaging program that 
 affects, or infects, a computer negatively by altering the 
way the computer works without the user’s knowledge 
or permission. A worm is a program that copies itself 
repeatedly, using up resources and possibly shutting down 
the computer or network. A Trojan horse is a program 
that hides within or looks like a legitimate program. A 
rootkit is a program that hides in a computer and allows 
someone from a remote location to take full control of the 
computer. To take precautions against this malware, do 
not start a computer with removable media in the drives 
or ports. Never open an e-mail attachment unless you are 
expecting the attachment and it is from a trusted source. 
Disable macros in documents that are not from a trusted 
source. Install an antivirus program and a personal 
fi rewall. Stay informed about any new virus alert or virus 
hoax. To defend against a botnet, a denial of service 
attack, improper use of a back door, and spoofing, users 
can install a firewall, install intrusion detection software, and 
set up a honeypot.
3. What Are Techniques to Prevent Unauthorized Computer 
Access and Use? Unauthorized access is the use of a 
computer or network without permission. Unauthorized 
use is the use of a computer or its data for unapproved 
or illegal activities. Organizations can take measures such 
as implementing a written acceptable use policy (AUP), 
a firewall, intrusion detection software, an access control, and 
an audit trail. Access controls include a user name and 
password or passphrase, a CAPTCHA, a possessed object, and 
a biometric device. 
 Visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/quiz and then click Objectives 
1 – 3. 
 4. What Are Safeguards against Hardware Theft and 
Vandalism? Hardware theft is the act of stealing 
computer equipment. Hardware vandalism is the act of 
defacing or destroying computer equipment. The best 
preventive measures against hardware theft and vandal-
ism are common sense and a constant awareness of the 
risk. Physical devices and practical security measures, such 
as locked doors and windows, can help protect equip-
ment. Passwords, possessed objects, and biometrics can 
reduce the risk of theft or render a computer useless if it 
is stolen.
 5. How Do Software Manufacturers Protect against Software 
Piracy? Software piracy is the unauthorized and illegal 
duplication of copyrighted software. To protect them-
selves from software piracy, manufacturers issue a license 
 agreement and require product activation.
 6. How Does Encryption Work, and Why Is It Necessary? 
Encryption prevents information theft and unauthor-
ized access by converting readable data into unreadable 
characters. To read the data, a recipient must decrypt, or 
decipher, it into a readable form. An encryption algorithm, 
or cypher, converts readable plaintext into unreadable 
ciphertext. Encryption is used to protect information on 
the Internet and networks.
 7. What Types of Devices Are Available to Protect 
 Computers from System Failure? A system failure is the 
prolonged malfunction of a computer. A common cause 
of system failure is an electrical power variation such 
as noise, an undervoltage, or an overvoltage. A surge 
protector, also called a surge suppressor, uses special 
electrical components to smooth out minor noise, pro-
vide a stable current fl ow, and keep an overvoltage from 
reaching the computer and other electronic equipment. 
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 595
Chapter Review
 workplace. Computer addiction occurs when the 
 computer consumes someone’s entire social life. 
 11. What Are Issues Related to Information Accuracy, 
 Intellectual Property Rights, Codes of Conduct, and 
Green Computing? Computer ethics govern the 
use of computers and information systems. Issues in 
computer ethics include the responsibility for informa-
tion accuracy and the intellectual property rights 
to which creators are entitled for their works. An IT 
(information technology) code of conduct helps deter-
mine whether a specifi c computer action is ethical or 
unethical. Green computing reduces the electricity 
and environmental waste while using a computer.
 12. What Are Issues Surrounding Information Privacy? 
Information privacy is the right of individuals and 
companies to deny or restrict the collection and use of 
information about them. Issues surrounding information 
privacy include the following. An electronic profi le com-
bines data about an individual’s Web use with data from 
public sources, which then is sold. A cookie is a fi le that 
a Web server stores on a computer to collect data about 
the user. Spyware is a program placed on a computer that 
secretly collects information about the user. Adware is a 
program that displays an online advertisement in a banner 
or pop-up window. Spam is an unsolicited e-mail message 
or newsgroup posting sent to many recipients or news-
groups at once. Phishing is a scam in which a perpetrator 
attempts to obtain personal or fi nancial information. The 
concern about privacy has led to the enactment of many 
federal and state laws regarding the disclosure of data. As 
related to the use of computers, social engineering is 
defi ned as gaining unauthorized access or obtaining con-
fi dential information by taking advantage of the trusting 
human nature of some victims and the naivety of oth-
ers. Employee monitoring uses computers to observe, 
record, and review an employee’s computer use. Content 
fi ltering restricts access to certain materials on the Web.
 Visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/quiz and then click Objectives 
10 – 12.
An uninterruptible power supply (UPS) contains surge 
protection circuits and one or more batteries that can 
provide power during a temporary loss of power.
 8. What Are Options for Backing Up Computer Resources? 
A backup is a duplicate of a fi le, program, or disk that 
can be used to restore the fi le if the original is lost, 
damaged, or destroyed. Users can opt for a full backup or 
a selective backup. Some users implement a three-generation 
backup policy that preserves three copies of important 
fi les: the grandparent, the parent, and the child. Others use 
RAID or continuous backup. Most operating systems and 
backup devices include a backup program.
 9. What Risks and Safeguards Are Associated with 
Wireless Communications? Wireless access poses addi-
tional security risks. Intruders connect to other wireless 
networks to gain free Internet access or an organization’s 
confi dential data. Some individuals intercept and moni-
tor communications as they transmit. Others connect to 
a network through an unsecured wireless access point 
(WAP), sometimes using the techniques of war driving or 
war flying. Some safeguards include fi rewalls, reconfi gur-
ing the WAP, and ensuring equipment uses a wireless 
security standard, such as Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) 
and 802.11i.
 Visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/quiz and then click Objectives 
4 – 9.
 10. How Can Health-Related Disorders and Injuries Due to 
Computer Use Be Prevented? A computer-related 
repetitive strain injury (RSI) can include tendonitis and 
carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). Another health-related 
condition is eyestrain associated with computer vision 
syndrome (CVS). To prevent health-related disorders, 
take frequent breaks, use precautionary exercises and 
techniques, and use ergonomics when planning the 
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
596 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Key Terms You should know the Primary Terms and be familiar with the Secondary Terms. The list below helps focus 
your study.
 To see an example of and a definition for each term, and to access current and additional information 
from the Web, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/terms.
anti-spam program (587)
antivirus program (560)
audit trail (565)
back door (562)
back up (577)
backup (577)
biometric device (568)
botnet (562)
code of conduct (582)
computer addiction (581)
computer crime (556)
computer ethics (581)
computer security risk (556)
computer vision syndrome 
(579)
content filtering (590)
cookie (585)
copyright (582)
cracker (556)
cybercrime (556)
cyberextortionist (557)
cyberterrorist (557)
decrypt (573)
denial of service attack (562)
digital certificate (574)
digital forensics (569)
digital signature (574)
DoS attack (562)
e-mail filtering (587)
employee monitoring (590)
encryption (573)
Fair Credit Reporting Act 
(588)
firewall (563)
green computing (583)
hacker (556)
hardware theft (570)
hardware vandalism (570)
information privacy (584)
information theft (572)
inoculate (561)
intellectual property rights 
(582)
license agreement (571)
noise (575)
online security service (558)
overvoltage (575)
password (566)
personal firewall (564)
personal identification 
number (PIN) (568)
pharming (588)
phishing (587)
piracy (571)
power surge (575)
product activation (572)
quarantine (561)
repetitive strain injury (RSI) 
(579)
restore (577)
rootkit (558)
script kiddie (556)
secure site (574)
social engineering (590)
software theft (571)
spam (587)
spoofing (563)
surge protector (576)
Trojan horse (558)
trusted source (560)
unauthorized access (564)
unauthorized use (564)
undervoltage (575)
uninterruptible power supply 
(UPS) (576)
user name (566)
virus (558)
virus definition (560)
virus hoax (561)
virus signature (560)
Web filtering software (591)
worm (558)
zombie (562)
1024-bit encryption (574)
128-bit encryption (574)
40-bit encryption (574)
802.11i (578)
access control (565)
access point mapping (578)
adware (588)
asymmetric key encryption (573)
authentication (565)
biometric payment (568)
blackout (575)
bot (562)
brownout (575)
Business Software Alliance (BSA) 
(572)
CAPTCHA (567)
carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) (579)
CERT/CC (558)
certificate authority (CA) (574)
child (577)
ciphertext (573)
clickjacking (588)
Computer Emergency Response 
Team Coordination Center (558)
computer forensics (569)
crimeware (556)
CVS (579)
cyberforensics (569)
cyberwarfare (557)
cypher (573)
DDoS (distributed DoS) attack (562)
digital rights management (DRM) 
(582)
e-mail spoofing (563)
encryption algorithm (573)
encryption key (573)
end-user license agreement 
(EULA) (571)
ENERGY STAR program (583)
ergonomics (580)
fault-tolerant computer (577)
full backup (577)
grandparent (577)
hash (574)
honeypot (564)
identification (565)
intellectual property (IP) (582)
Internet Content Rating 
Association (ICRA) (590)
intrusion detection software (564)
IP spoofing (563)
Joule (576)
keygen (571)
macros (560)
malicious software (558)
malware (558)
network forensics (569)
offline UPS (576)
offsite (577)
online UPS (577)
parent (577)
passphrase (566)
payload (558)
phishing filter (587)
plaintext (573)
possessed object (568)
power usage effectiveness (583)
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP) (574)
private key encryption (573)
proxy server (564)
public key encryption (573)
real time location system (RTLS) 
(570)
Secure HTTP (S-HTTP) (575)
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) (575)
selective backup (577)
session cookie (586)
single-user license agreement (571)
spike (575)
spim (587)
spit (587)
spyware (588)
SSID (578)
standby UPS (576)
surge suppressor (576)
symmetric key encryption (573)
system failure (575)
tendonitis (579)
three-generation backup (577)
Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
(575)
Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 
1449 standard (576)
user ID (566)
virtual private network (VPN) 
(575)
war driving (578)
war flying (578)
Web bug (588)
Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) 
(578)
zombie army (562)
Primary Terms
(shown in bold-black characters in the chapter)
Secondary Terms
(shown in italic characters in the chapter)
surge 
protector (576)
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 597
The Checkpoint exercises test your knowledge of the chapter concepts. The page number containing 
the answer appears in parentheses after each exercise. The Beyond the Book exercises will help 
broaden your understanding of the concepts presented in this chapter.
 To complete the Checkpoint exercises interactively, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/check.
True/False  Mark T for True and F for False.
Multiple Choice  Select the best answer. 
Checkpoint
 1. A _____ is a program that hides in a computer and 
allows someone from a remote location to take full 
control of the computer. (558)
 a. worm b. rootkit
 c. payload d. cookie
 2. Malware is a term that can be used to describe _____. (558)
 a. worms b. rootkits
 c. back doors d. all of the above
 3. A _____ is an assault whose purpose is to disrupt computer 
access to an Internet service such as the Web or e-mail. (562)
 a. denial of service attack b. zombie
 c. Trojan horse d. virus hoax
 4. _____ involves the examination of computer media, 
programs, data and log files on computers, servers, and 
networks. (569)
 a. Encryption key b. E-mail filtering
 c. Digital forensics d. Trusted source
 5. Physical access controls, such as locked doors and windows, 
usually are adequate to protect against _____. (570)
 a. software piracy b. unauthorized access
 c. hardware theft d. all of the above
 6. A(n) _____ is a programmed formula that the originator 
of the data uses to encrypt the plaintext and the 
recipient of the data uses to decrypt the ciphertext. (573)
 a. botnet
 b. certificate authority
 c. encryption algorithm
 d. encryption key
 7. Some organizations continually review their _____, 
which is a ratio that measures how much power enters 
the computer facility, or data center, against the amount 
of power required to run the computers. (583)
 a. uninterruptible power supplies
 b. public key encryption
 c. ENERGY STAR program
 d. power usage effectiveness (PUE)
 8. As related to the use of computers, _____ is defined as 
gaining unauthorized access or obtaining confidential 
information by taking advantage of the trusting human 
nature of some victims and the naivety of others. (590)
 a. phishing b. pharming
 c. social engineering d. a virus hoax
_____ 1. Not all breaches to computer security are planned. (556)
_____ 2.  The term, cyberwarfare, describes an attack whose goal ranges from disabling a government’s computer network 
to crippling a country. (557)
_____ 3.  Many methods exist to guarantee completely a computer or network is safe from computer viruses and other 
malware. (560)
_____ 4.  Cybercriminals install malicious bots on unprotected computers to create a zombie army. (562)
_____ 5. A honeypot is a computer that is isolated and, therefore, immune to attack. (564)
_____ 6.  Biometric payment involves a customer’s fingerprint being read by a fingerprint reader that is linked to a payment 
method such as a checking account or credit card. (568)
_____ 7.  Some businesses use a real time location system (RTLS) to track and identify the location of high-risk or 
high-value items. (570) 
_____ 8.  A program called a keygen, short for key generator, creates software registration numbers and sometimes 
activation codes. (571)
_____ 9.  With public key encryption, both the originator and the recipient use the same secret key to encrypt and decrypt 
the data. (573)
_____ 10.  A digitial signature is a mathematical formula that generates a code from the contents of the message. (574)
_____ 11.  Digital rights management (DRM) is a strategy designed to prevent illegal distribution of movies, music, and 
other digital content. (582)
_____ 12.  Green computing involves reducing the electricity while using a computer, but the practice increases 
environmental waste. (583)
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
598 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Matching  Match the terms with their definitions.
Short Answer  Write a brief answer to each of the following questions.
Beyond the Book  Follow the book element instructions below; present your findings (brief report, presentation, discussion, or other means).
Checkpoint
 a. set of steps that can convert readable plaintext into unreadable ciphertext
 b.  private combination of words, often containing mixed capitalization and punctuation, 
associated with a user name that allows access to certain computer resources
 c. protects a personal computer and its data from unauthorized intrusions
 d. organization or person you believe will not send a virus infected file knowingly
 e. area of the hard disk that holds an infected file until the infection can be removed
 f.  uses special electrical components to smooth out minor noise, provide a stable current 
flow, and keep an overvoltage from reaching the computer and other electronic equipment
 g.  group of compromised computers connected to a network such as the Internet that is 
being used as part of a network that attacks other networks, usually for nefarious purposes
 h.  translates a personal characteristic into digital code
 i.  technique intruders use to make their network or Internet transmission appear 
legitimate to a victim computer or network
 j.  potentially damaging computer program that affects, or infects, a computer negatively 
by altering the way the computer works without the user’s knowledge or permission
_____ 1. virus (558)
_____ 2.  trusted source 
(560)
_____ 3. quarantine (561)
_____ 4. botnet (562)
_____ 5. spoofing (563)
_____ 6.  personal firewall 
(564)
_____ 7.  passphrase (566)
_____ 8.  encryption 
algorithm (573)
_____ 9.  biometric device 
(568)
_____ 10.  surge protector 
(576)
 1.  Ethics & Issues — Select an Ethics & Issues in 
this chapter (562, 568, 572, 588, 590), find a recent 
newspaper/magazine article that supports one point of 
view presented, and then evaluate the article.
 2.  Computer Usage @ Work — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to locate three additional unique 
usages of computer technology in the national and 
local security field (591). What makes the use of these 
technologies unique to the national and local security 
field?
 3.  Companies on the Cutting Edge and Technology 
Trailblazers — Use the Web or a recent newspaper/
magazine to locate an interesting fact about McAfee, 
Symantec, Richard Stallman, or Gene Spafford that 
was not presented in the chapter (593). 
 4.  High-Tech Talk — Locate a recent newspaper/
magazine article that discusses topics related to 
Encryption Algorithms (592). Would you recommend 
the article you found? Why or why not?
 5.  FAQs and Web Links — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to locate three additional facts 
about an FAQ (559, 562, 567, 569, 577, 578, 587, 588) 
and Web Link (558, 562, 564, 568, 570, 572, 574, 576, 
578, 582, 586, 590) that were not presented in the 
chapter.
 6.  Looking Ahead — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to discover additional uses of 
the technology presented in Brain Waves, Behavior 
Tracked to Prevent and Solve Crimes (569).
 7. Innovative Computing — Use the Web or a recent 
newspaper/magazine to locate two additional 
interesting facts about RECAPTCHAs Help Digitize 
Newspapers, Books (567) or Customers’ Behavior, 
Conversations Monitored (585).
 8.  Making Use of the Web — Visit three of the Learning 
sites (135) and outline the information on each Web 
site and the possible uses for each Web site.
 9.  Digital Forensics — Select a topic from the Digital 
Forensics feature (606) and then create a presentation 
about the topic using the Web or a magazine article. 
Discuss how the tools and techniques in the feature were 
used to solve a real crime.
 l. How do antivirus programs detect and identify a virus? ____________ What is a virus hoax? ____________
 2. Describe the ENERGY STAR program. ____________ How should users handle obsolete computers? ____________
 3.  What is information privacy? ____________ List five ways to safeguard your personal information. ____________
 4. What are two methods for avoiding phishing attacks? ____________ How does clickjacking work? ____________
 5.  Who uses content filtering and why? ____________ Describe a rating system used for content filtering. ___________
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 599
Learn It Online The Learn It Online exercises are interactive Web exercises designed to reinforce and expand your 
understanding of the chapter concepts. The descriptions below briefly summarize each exercise.
 To access the Learn It Online exercises and for specific exercise instructions, visit scsite.com/
dc2011/ch11/learn.
1  At the Movies — Attack of the Mobile 
Viruses
Watch a movie to learn about the recent wave 
of viruses plaguing mobile device users and then 
answer questions about the movie. 
2  Video and Audio: You Review It — Green 
Computing
Search for, choose, and write a review of a video, 
podcast, or vodcast that discusses green computing. 
3  Student Edition Labs — Protecting Your 
Privacy Online and Computer Ethics
Enhance your understanding and knowledge about 
online privacy and computer ethics by completing 
the Protecting Your Privacy Online and Computer 
Ethics Labs.
4  Practice Test
Take a multiple choice test that checks your 
 knowledge of the chapter concepts and review the 
resulting study guide.
5  Who Wants To Be a Computer Genius2?
Play the Shelly Cashman Series version of this 
 popular game by answering questions to find out 
if you are a computer genius. Panic buttons are 
 available to provide assistance during game play.
6  Wheel of Terms
Identify important key terms presented in this 
chapter by playing the Shelly Cashman Series 
 version of this popular game. 
7  DC Track and Field
Practice or compete against other students in three 
track and field events by answering multiple choice, 
true/false, and short answer questions related to 
concepts discussed in this chapter.
8  You’re Hired!
Embark on the path to a career in computers by 
answering questions and solving puzzles related to 
concepts discussed in this chapter. 
9  Crossword Puzzle Challenge
Complete an interactive crossword puzzle to 
 reinforce concepts presented in this chapter. 
10  Windows Exercises
Step through the Windows 7 exercises to learn 
about playing audio compact discs, understand-
ing multimedia properties, dragging and dropping 
Windows objects, and checking for system updates.
11  Exploring Computer Careers
Read about a career as a digital forensics examiner, 
search for related employment advertisements, and 
then answer related questions.
12  Web Apps — Dictionary.com
Learn how to use Dictionary.com to search for 
a dictionary entry, translate a word to other lan-
guages, and search for Web pages containing your 
search term.
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
600 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Problem Solving @ Home
Collaboration
The Problem Solving @ Home exercises extend your knowledge of the 
chapter concepts by seeking solutions to practical computer problems that 
you may encounter at home or school. The Collaboration exercise should be 
completed with a team.
 To discuss the Problem Solving @ Home exercises with other students, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/forum and post your thoughts or questions.
1.  Infected File Detected A message appears 
on your computer screen stating that your 
antivirus program detected an infected file 
on your computer and is unable to move 
it to quarantine. What are your next 
steps?
 2. Unsolicited E-Mail Attachment You have 
opened an e-mail message from your best friend 
stating that he has attached a photo from his 
recent Caribbean vacation. You are unaware that 
your friend had taken a vacation, but you attempt 
to open the photo anyway. After double-clicking 
the attachment, the photo does not open. You 
immediately call your friend to ask for help, and 
he informs you that he did not send that e-mail 
message to you. What might have happened?
3. Product Key in Use While installing the latest 
version of Microsoft Office, the installation 
program prompts you to enter the product key. 
Once you finish entering the product key, you 
receive an error message stating that the product 
key already is in use. What might be causing this?
4. Questionable Fair Use A media company’s 
attorney has sent you a letter stating that you are 
violating their rights by including a short movie 
clip from one of their movies in one of your 
videos posted on YouTube. You believe that you 
are within fair use guidelines by including the 
movie clip but also feel that you should respond 
to the attorney’s letter. What are your next steps?
 5. Shutting Down Safely While working on your 
computer, the power suddenly fails. Luckily, your 
computer is connected to a UPS and you are able 
to continue working; however, you are not certain 
how much time you have before the UPS battery 
runs out. What steps will you take to shut down 
your computer safely without losing data?
 6. Unauthorized Computer on Network You 
are viewing the configuration for your wireless 
router, as well as the computers that are connected 
to your wireless network. In addition to the two 
desktop computers and one notebook computer 
in your house, you notice that another computer 
is connected to your wireless network. How could 
this be?
 7. Verifying Photo Validity You are writing a 
research paper for your history class and have 
found a photo on the Web that you would like to 
use. You are cautious about using photos on the 
Web because of copyright issues and photos that 
have been altered digitally. How might you verify 
the validity of a photo on the Web?
In the real world, practical problems often can be solved in multiple ways. Provide one solution to each of the following 
problems using available resources, such as articles on the Web or in print, blogs, podcasts, videos, television, user guides, 
other individuals, and electronics and computer stores. You may need to use multiple resources to obtain an answer. 
Present your solutions in the form requested by your instructor (brief report, presentation, discussion, or other means).
 8. Minimizing Computer Threats Because you have just started college, your parents purchased a new 
computer for you. You wish to protect it as much as possible from threats such as power surges and power 
outages, unauthorized use and vandalism, and hard disk failure. Form a team of three classmates who will 
research how to minimize potential threats. One team member should research ways to safeguard your 
computer from power surges, power outages, and other electrical variations. Another team member will 
research ways to safeguard your computer from unauthorized use and vandalism, and the third team member 
will research two backup strategies that will be used to store important backups in the event of a hard disk 
failure. The three team members should locate and suggest products that will help to safeguard your new 
computer, discuss their findings, compile them into a brief report, and then submit it to the instructor.
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 601
Problem Solving @ Work The Problem Solving @ Work exercises extend your knowledge of the 
chapter concepts by seeking solutions to practical computer problems 
that you may encounter at work. The Collaboration exercise should be 
 completed with a team.
 To discuss the Problem Solving @ Work exercises with other students, 
visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/forum and post your thoughts or questions.
Collaboration
In the real world, practical problems often can be solved in multiple ways. Provide one solution to each of the following 
problems using available resources, such as articles on the Web or in print, blogs, podcasts, videos, television, user guides, 
other individuals, and electronics and computer stores. You may need to use multiple resources to obtain an answer. 
Present your solutions in the form requested by your instructor (brief report, presentation, discussion, or other means).
 1. Unknown Computer User When you arrive to 
work each day, you frequently notice that your 
keyboard and mouse have been moved from the 
location you left it in the previous day. In addition, 
your Web browser’s history lists sites that you have 
not visited. You suspect that someone uses your 
computer while you are out of the office. What are 
some ways to prevent this?
 2. Forgot Decryption Password To safeguard 
some of your important files from others, you 
decide to encrypt them. Upon attempting to 
decrypt the files so that you can access them, 
however, you are unable to remember the correct 
password. What are your next steps?
 3.  Password Management You must remember 
multiple user names and passwords to access 
various computer resources within your company. 
Each time your company introduces a new 
system, you must remember a new user name 
and password, some of which you are unable to 
customize. What steps will you take to manage 
your passwords?
 4. Problem Reinstalling Software After recovering 
from a computer crash, you attempt to reinstall 
a program that was previously installed. When 
you insert the installation media, begin the 
installation, and type the product key, you receive 
an indication that you are unable to continue 
installing the software because you have installed it 
the maximum number of allowable times. What are 
your next steps?
 5.  Surge Protector Malfunctioning While picking 
up a dropped item from the floor, you notice 
that the lights on your surge protector are not 
illuminated. All the devices plugged into the surge 
protector appear to be functioning without issue, 
but you are curious as to why the lights are off. 
What might be wrong?
 6.  Missing Security Cable Key 
To protect your notebook 
computer from theft, you use a 
security cable to secure it to the 
desk in your cubicle. Your boss 
assigns you some work to take 
home and suggests that you take 
home your notebook computer. 
You discover, however, that you 
are unable to locate the key that 
releases the security cable from 
the computer. What are your next steps?
 7. Setting Up an Ergonomic Environment After 
moving to a new office building, your company 
takes the opportunity to suggest that everyone set 
up an ergonomic working environment in their 
new office. What are some ways that you can set 
up an ergonomic work environment in your office?
 8. Monitored Computer Activities You receive an 
e-mail message from the IT department stating 
that it randomly will monitor employee computers 
throughout the workday to ensure that they 
are being used for legitimate purposes. Shortly 
thereafter, you begin to notice that your computer 
slows significantly at random times once or twice 
per week. You suspect the performance decrease is 
a result of the computer monitoring. How will you 
address this?
 9. Computers in National and Local Security National and local security agencies often use computers 
to protect citizens. For example, computers are used to maintain a list of individuals not cleared to board a 
commercial aircraft. Form a team of three people to create a list of the various ways computers help to keep 
us safe. One team member should research how local agencies, such as police departments, use computers 
to ensure security. Another team member should research ways national security agencies use computers 
to protect us from threats, and the last team member should research ways that private businesses use 
computers to guarantee security. Compile these findings into a report and submit it to your instructor.
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
602 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Learn How To The Learn How To activities step you through fundamental technology skills when using a 
computer. The Learn How To exercises enable you to become more proficient with these skills.
 Premium Activity: To relate this Learn How To activity to your everyday life, see a visual demonstration 
of the activity, and then complete a short assessment, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/howto.
Learn How To 1: Back Up Files on an Offsite Internet Server
Note: The service described in this exercise allows 15 days of free access. After that time, you may be billed automatically 
for service unless you cancel your service in the given time frame.
Backing up files stored on your computer on another disk 
or computer located in a different geographical location is 
the ultimate safeguard for data on your computer. A good 
way to back up data is to use one of the services available 
on the Web. A leading service is found at IBackup.com. 
To subscribe to the IBackup service, complete the 
following steps:
 1.  Start a Web browser, type the Web address IBackup
.com in the Address bar and then press the enter key.
 2.  When the IBackup Web page is displayed, click 
Signup on the top horizontal toolbar.
 3.  Enter your e-mail address in the E-mail Address text 
box and then click the Continue with Registration 
button to display a form (Figure 11-39).
 4. Fill in the form. Select the plan you want in the Select 
a Storage Plan list. If you want to try the service for a 
short period of time before subscribing, select 5 GB 
15 day Free Trial Plan.
 5. To continue, you must enter credit card information. 
If you select the 15-day trial, your credit card 
will not be charged at this time, and an automatic 
billing at the end of 15 days will occur. After 
entering the required information, click the 
Continue button at the bottom of the page.
 6. A message is displayed that confirms that you have 
signed up with IBackup and also provides a link 
for you to download the IBackup for Windows 
program.
 7. Click the DOWNLOAD button to download the 
IBackup for Windows program and then follow 
the instructions to install the program on your 
computer.
After establishing an account, you can use it for 
the time for which you subscribed. Complete the 
 following steps to use the service:
 1.  Start the IBackup for Windows program.
 2.  Enter your user name and password and then click 
the Connect button to open a window containing 
your files, as well as the contents of your My 
IBackup folder (Figure 11-40).
 3.  To upload a file, locate the file in the left pane of the 
IBackup window and drag it to the right pane. The 
Backup Progress dialog box will be displayed while 
the file is uploading. The file will be placed in the My 
IBackup folder.
 4.  For further activities you can accomplish in this 
program for backing up your files, click the buttons 
on the top horizontal toolbar and experiment.
Figure 11-39
Figure 11-40
IBackup window top horizontal 
toolbar
My IBackup folderfiles and folders 
on your computer
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 603
Learn How To
 1.  Open the Windows Firewall window. Click the ‘How does a firewall help protect my computer?’ link. Read the information about 
Windows Firewall. What did you learn that you did not know? What is malicious software? What are some examples of malicious 
software? Submit your answers to your instructor.
Exercise
When you use the Internet, data is sent both from 
your computer to the Internet and from computers on 
the Internet to your computer. A firewall is a  barrier 
that checks information coming from the Internet and 
either turns it away or allows it to pass through to your 
computer, based on your firewall settings. It also checks 
data being sent from your computer to the Internet to 
ensure your computer is not sending unsolicited mes-
sages to other computers on the Internet. A firewall 
can be implemented using hardware or software.
Windows contains a software firewall that starts 
automatically when you boot your computer. To con-
trol the firewall usage on your computer, complete 
the following steps:
 1.  Click the Start button on the Windows taskbar 
and then click Control Panel on the Start menu.
 2.  Click the System and Security link and then click 
Windows Firewall in the System and Security 
window to open the Windows Firewall window 
(Figure 11-41).
 3.  Click the Allow a program or feature through Windows 
Firewall link to open the Allowed Programs window 
(Figure 11-42). The programs and features that are checked 
can communicate with the Internet without your clicking 
a link.
 4.  You may want to allow programs and features that routinely 
communicate with the Internet, such as sports programs 
that display updated game scores, to have full access to your 
computer. To add a program to the ‘Allowed programs and 
features’ list, click the ‘Allow another program’ button. The Add 
a Program dialog box is displayed. Select a program and then 
click the Add button.
Exercises
 1. Visit the IBackup Web site. Click View Demo and then follow the screen prompts to view all the services offered by IBackup. Which service 
is most appropriate for your home computer? Which service is most useful for the server that is used in the computer lab at your school? If 
you had critical data you needed to back up, would you use a service like this? Why or why not? Submit your answers to your instructor.
 2. Optional: Perform this exercise only for your own computer. Do not perform this exercise on a school computer. Establish 
an account on IBackup.com. Upload two or more files from your computer. Download the files you uploaded back to your computer. Is 
this an efficient way to back up your files? Do you think the IBackup service would be useful for businesses? Submit your answers to 
your instructor.
Learn How To 2: Use the Windows Firewall
Figure 11-41
Allow a program 
or feature through 
Windows Firewall link
Windows Firewall 
window
Turn Windows 
Firewall on or off link
How does a firewall 
help protect my 
computer? link
Figure  11-42
Allowed programs 
and features list
Allow another 
program button
Allowed Programs window
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
604 Chapter 11 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy
Web Research
1  Search Sleuth 
Use one of the search engines listed in Figure 2-10 
in Chapter 2 on page 85 or your own favorite search 
engine to find the answers to the following questions. 
Copy and paste the Web address from the Web page 
where you found the answer. Some questions may 
have more than one answer. If required, submit your 
answers to your instructor. (1) Which five words 
are among the most commonly used  passwords? 
(2) What do e-mail messages with the subject lines 
“Sending You All My Love,” “Laughing Kitty,” 
and “You’ve Received a Postcard from a Family 
Member” have in common? (3) T’ai chi, yoga, and 
the Alexander technique might offer some relief to 
computer users suffering from which injury? 
(4) For which purpose is a gas discharge arrestor 
used? (5) How many computers in the business 
world have  antivirus software that has been disabled 
or never was installed properly?
2  Green Computing 
The more than 1 billion computers in the world each 
emit an average of 1,000 pounds of carbon dioxide 
each year. Many home computer users can help 
reduce their carbon footprint with the help 
of devices that monitor energy consumption. 
Computers are not the only home devices 
that draw a lot of current; the average home 
has 27 products that always are turned on, 
including the television, appliances, and 
heating and cooling systems. Verdiem’s free 
download, Edison, helps consumers manage 
their computer power usage. Smart metering devices 
made by Control4, Colorado vNet, and ZigBee 
track power usage and give automated tips on how 
to reduce energy costs. View online Web sites that 
provide information about reducing home electricity 
consumption. How do the  monitoring devices work? 
How much do they cost? How do they calculate the 
money and energy saved per year? Write a report 
summarizing your findings, and include a table of 
links to Web sites that provide additional details.
3  Social Networking 
People with unique and special talents often desire to 
share their passions and pastimes with others. Online 
social networks provide them an opportunity to share 
their hobbies and creations. In fact, 69  percent of 
online social networking members say they have a 
connection with special-interest Web sites. For 
example, members of the Sports MatchMaker 
(sportsmatchmaker.com) community can find people 
who want to play any sport or participate in any 
hobby at a specific date and time. ShowOffDemo 
(showoffdemo.com) members spotlight their talents 
on a virtual stage, and the Instructables community 
(instructables.com) collaborates to provide instruc-
tions for arts, crafts, food, electronics, and games. 
Visit these Web sites and view the members’ prod-
ucts. Which items are popular? Which are unusual? 
Which photos provide details on documenting the 
steps necessary to complete a project? How do mem-
bers share project ideas and requests for information? 
Summarize the information you read and viewed.
4  Blogs 
More than 80,000 blogs are created daily according 
to Umbria Communications, a service that tracks new 
Internet media. Many information technology (IT) 
professionals maintain these blogs to tout companies’ 
products and express personal observations. IT blog-
gers include Robert Scoble on video (scobleizer.com); 
Jeff Jaffe, Novell’s chief technical officer (novell.com/
ctoblog); Ed Brill on IBM (edbrill.com); and Tom 
Kyte on Oracle (tkyte.blogspot.com). Visit these blogs 
and read some of the posts. What new products are 
mentioned? What are the bloggers’ backgrounds? 
What controversial topics are discussed? What 
 personal views do the bloggers express?
5  Ethics in Action 
Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags are 
expected to help merchants in many ways. By placing 
these tags on such items as prescriptions, computer 
peripherals, and clothing, retailers hope to reduce 
theft, track inventory, reduce labor costs, and keep 
their shelves stocked. Privacy experts, however, claim 
the tags can store information about consumers’ 
shopping habits and whereabouts. Law enforcement 
officials, lawyers, marketers, and even thieves could 
use this detailed electronic data to track people at all 
times of the day. View Web sites that discuss using 
RFID tags in stores and the privacy issues that arise 
from their use. Write a report summarizing your 
findings, and include a table of links to Web sites that 
provide additional details.
The Web Research exercises broaden your understanding of the chapter concepts by 
presenting questions that require you to search the Web for answers.
 To discuss the Web Research exercises with other students, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/
forum and post your thoughts or questions.
1          2         3         4          5          6          7         8         9         10       11       12        13        14       15
S
T
U
D
E
N
T
  
A
S
S
IG
N
M
E
N
T
S
Critical Thinking
 Computer Security and Safety, Ethics, and Privacy Chapter 11 605
The Critical Thinking exercises challenge your assessment and decision-making skills by 
presenting real-world situations associated with the chapter concepts. The Collaboration 
exercise should be completed with a team.
 To discuss the Critical Thinking exercises with other students, visit scsite.com/dc2011/
ch11/forum and post your thoughts or questions.
Collaboration
4. Privacy Information Policy Your company has been hired by a major retailer to create a privacy information 
policy for the company’s Web site. Your team of three classmates has been instructed to assemble a policy that not 
only respects an individual’s privacy rights but also enables the company to collect data that can be used in targeted 
marketing. The company would like to collect the following information: who visits the Web site, how often they 
visit, which pages they view, and the amount of time they spend viewing a particular page. Using the Web and/or 
print media, create a policy that will include all of the preceding information. Each team member should justify 
a component within the policy and explain how the policy will not violate the individual’s privacy rights. Include 
in your report examples of lawsuits brought against companies that have implemented similar policies. If any 
judgments were against the company, cite the specific reasons why.
1. Class Discussion — Unscrupulous Programmers 
Your best friend, Jonathon, spends all his free time 
writing computer programs that interact with the 
Windows operating system. He recently informed 
you that during fall break he had written malware 
that randomly erases files and displays weird messages 
the day before Independence Day (  July 3) at exactly 
1:00 p.m. He plans to distribute the Trojan horse, 
called Happy Birthday America, via an attachment 
to an e-mail message. Also included with the e-mail 
message is a hidden program that sends the same 
e-mail message to all the e-mail addresses in the user’s 
address list. The e-mail message with the attachment 
will be sent as spam the day after finals in May, so that 
it will have ample time to be distributed to millions 
of computers worldwide before July 3. You know that 
a large software company offers a hefty reward of 
$250,000 for turning in unscrupulous programmers. 
Discuss if you think it is right to inform on a friend 
when no profit is involved in the crime. Include in 
your discussion who you would notify (i.e., Jonathon’s 
parents, the dean of students, the police, or the 
software company offering the reward) if you choose 
to turn him in. 
2. Class Presentation — Ensuring Safety and 
Security Online
You work in an information technology department 
for a large enterprise. You notice that an increasing 
number of users are contacting the help desk com -
plaining of slow computer performance. When a 
help desk representative troubleshoots the problem, 
he or she nearly always attributes the decreased 
performance to malware that is installed on the 
computer. Although security software is installed 
on each computer, users also must do their part 
in making sure that their computers do not 
become compromised. Technical support is 
spending too much time and money trouble-
shooting and cleaning these computers. As a 
result, they have asked you to prepare a presen-
tation for employees that will teach them how to 
guard against malware and other security threats. 
This presentation should include information 
such as which Web sites are safe and unsafe, 
whether it is okay to download programs from 
the Internet and install them, and how users can 
protect their computers when they are away from 
their desks.
3. Research — Threats to Operating Systems 
You work as a network analyst for a large 
manufacturing company that uses Windows. After 
the most recent virus attack, your manager asked you 
to analyze the feasibility of switching to a different 
operating system, such as Linux or UNIX. Use the 
Web and/or print media to research the advantages 
and disadvantages of switching operating systems. 
Create a report based on your findings to answer the 
following questions: Are alternative operating systems 
any less susceptible to viruses than Windows? Why or 
why not? What is Microsoft’s approach to eliminating 
virus attacks? What types of costs are involved in 
changing operating systems?
To evaluate the situations below, use personal experiences and available resources such as articles on the Web or in print, 
blogs, podcasts, videos, television, user guides, other individuals, and electronics and computer stores. You may need to use 
multiple resources to form conclusions and make recommendations.
Special Feature606
FORENSICS USES SCIENCE to investigate 
and establish facts in criminal or civil 
courts. Digital forensics, the newest 
and fastest growing discipline in the 
forensics fi eld, also can be referred to as 
computer forensics, network forensics, 
or cyberforensics. Digital forensics is 
the discovery, collection, analysis, and 
reporting of evidence found on computers 
and digital devices (Figure 1).
As a student in a digital forensics 
class, you will investigate a crime scene 
and observe law enforcement offi cials 
collecting evidence. After arriving at the 
crime scene, you expect a relatively short 
process that mainly involves confi scating 
a computer. You are surprised that the 
process of collecting evidence actually 
takes much longer than what is portrayed 
on the television shows you have 
watched. 
This feature introduces students to 
digital forensics by presenting two real-
world scenarios that involve the use 
of digital forensics. Throughout each 
scenario, students will learn the steps 
required to solve computer crimes by 
using digital forensics techniques.
Digital Forensics
  Digital Forensics 607
S
P
E
C
IA
L
 F
E
A
T
U
R
E
Figure 1 Digital forensics is the discovery, collection, analysis, 
and reporting of evidence found on computers, digital devices, 
and networks. 
track packet routes
analyze chat room logs
analyze deleted fi les
Session Start: Tue Mar 23 15:50:33 2010.
Session Ident: #Strong&40
* Now talking in #Strong&40
* Topic is 'Welcome to the BEST little channel on the net!   
www.40plus.com  '
* Set by Bunni on Tue Mar 23 10:31:01
<BettyF> It sure beats the 20's we've been having, Cary
<BettyF> Hi, billy
<billy89> Hi
<abc_m> hi Cary:)
<abc_m> hi billy89
<`Cary> hey cd  how  be?
<billy89> Hi
<abc_m> not bad a bit cold but doing okay
<BettyF> How ya doing, billy?
<billy89> So... I'm just lookin' around irc...
<BettyF> and lo and behold you found us
<billy89> Doin' ok... also cold where I am... Minnesota... 
Where're you?
<BettyF> Maine here
digital forensics 
examiner
analyze log fi les
1) Feb 12 03:11:55 watson ipop3d[16319]: pop3
   service init from 192.168.187.35
2) Feb 12 03:11:55 watson ipop3d[16319]: Login
   user=hammer host=holmes.example.net
   [192.168.187.35] nmsgs=0/0
3) Feb 12 03:12:16 watson ipop3d[16319]: Logout
   user=hammer host=holmes.example.net
   [192.168.187.35] nmsgs=0 ndele=0
S
P
E
C
IA
L
 F
E
A
T
U
R
E
Introduction to Digital Forensics
Digital forensics focuses on computers, digital devices, and 
networks, and requires the collection and analysis of digital 
evidence. Digital evidence exists on a variety of computers 
and digital devices, such as flash memory mobile media, 
external hard disks, cell phones, PDAs, copy machines, 
fax machines, answering machines, and GPS receivers. 
Depending on the type of crime, other digital devices, such 
as routers, portable media players, and digital cameras, also 
might need further examination for evidence that supports 
the criminal or civil case. Once the evidence is collected, 
law enforcement officials or digital forensics examiners will 
transport it to a forensics lab for investigation.
The forensic analysis of computers and digital devices 
specifically involves the examination of media, programs, 
and data and log files. Some computers and digital devices 
maintain log files, which track some or all activity on the 
computer or digital device. Digital forensics examiners 
use log files to reconstruct a perpetrator’s activity with a 
computer or digital device, such as instant messaging (IM) 
conversations, Internet chat room sessions, e-mail messages, 
Web sites visited, files opened, and image and video files 
viewed. The forensic analysis of networks focuses more on 
Special Feature608
• Homeland security uses digital forensics for civilian 
and military intelligence gathering. 
• Businesses and other private sector organizations use 
digital forensics to combat information security attacks.
Each of these areas uses the same core tools and skills in 
digital forensics.
Dept. of Defense
Dept. of Homeland Security
Law Enforcement
Digital 
Forensics 
Private Sector
Figure 2 The domain of digital forensics is multidisciplinary, 
spanning the needs of the military and homeland security, law 
enforcement, and the private sector.
the  activity that occurs on a network, which includes the 
analysis of server contents, server and router log files, net-
work traffic, and information obtained from Internet access 
providers. Investigations involving digital forensics usually 
are thorough, and it can be difficult for a criminal to hide 
or permanently remove information pertaining to his or her 
crime once it is stored on a digital device. For this reason, 
digital forensics investigations can be helpful in  convicting 
an individual of a crime.
Digital forensics is a rapidly growing field because of the 
increased use of computers, digital devices, and the Internet 
in criminal activity. As digital devices become smaller, lighter, 
less expensive, and easier to use, they appear at many crime 
scenes that police investigate. Digital forensics integrates 
aspects of criminal justice, computer science, and computer 
and network investigative techniques. In fact, many high 
schools and colleges realize the importance of digital forensics 
and offer additional courses in the field.
Cybercrimes, which are online or Internet-based illegal 
acts, continue to increase in both the number of incidents and 
the amount of money stolen, largely because cybercriminals 
perceive these crimes to be less risky and more lucrative than 
street crimes such as burglary or theft. The average bank rob-
ber, for example, nets only a few thousand dollars, and most 
are caught and incarcerated. Conversely, cybercrimes such as 
credit card theft, identity theft, and financial scams tend to net 
larger sums of money, and the perpetrators are more difficult 
to catch and convict. The problem is compounded further 
by the fact that access to corporate network resources makes 
insider jobs by employees easier. 
In addition to cybercrime, investigators also use digital 
forensics to combat terrorism. Terrorists around the world use 
computers and digital devices. Thus, digital forensics analysis 
is an important antiterrorism tool for both criminal prosecu-
tion and intelligence gathering. 
As more people and organizations store information 
 digitally and computers are increasingly integrated into more 
aspects of our society, we all face increased exposure and 
 vulnerability.
Digital Forensics Examiners
As mentioned in Chapter 11, a digital forensics examiner 
must have knowledge of the law, technical experience with 
many types of hardware and software products, superior 
communication skills, familiarity with corporate structures 
and policies, a willingness to learn and update skills, and a 
knack for problem solving. Digital forensics covers several 
overlapping areas (Figure 2). 
• Law enforcement uses digital forensics as an evidence 
gathering and criminal investigation tool.
A digital forensics examiner must have knowledge of 
the law regardless of whether the investigation is for law 
enforcement or civilian purposes. Additional complex-
ity in the law exists because computer crime statutes and 
users’ privacy expectations vary widely from state to state 
and nation to nation. Because the jurisdictional boundar-
ies of the Internet are blurred, an individual in one country 
can commit crimes almost anywhere in the world without 
 leaving his or her keyboard. 
Although most digital forensics examiners today engage in 
law enforcement investigations, the field involves more than 
simply obtaining evidence against a criminal. Information 
security professionals employ digital forensics as well. The 
traditional information security manager proactively pro-
tects an organization’s information technology assets, such 
as computers and digital devices, peripherals, and storage 
media. Security intrusions and other events that jeopardize 
assets are inevitable, however. When an event compromises 
an asset, a digital forensics examiner often leads the incident 
response team to uncover how an event occurred, who was 
behind it, and how to prevent a recurrence. Third-party 
  Digital Forensics 609
Step 1  Gather the Materials to Analyze
The first step in the process is to gather the materials to 
 analyze. A search warrant will guide law enforcement officials 
in the seizure of materials. Even with clear guidelines, law 
enforcement officials must consider many items for collec-
tion and examination. During this process, law enforcement 
personnel gather computer media, computers, mobile devices, 
peripherals, network hardware, and computer software.
Computer Media Media is available in a variety of forms 
(Figure 3). This includes hard disks, external hard disks, 
and optical discs. Also included are physically small, high-
capacity memory devices such as USB flash drives (includ-
ing versions of such devices disguised in a watch, pen, or 
Swiss Army knife, the last of which is shown in Figure 1 
on page 607) and memory cards such as Secure Digital 
(SD) cards, CompactFlash cards, and xD Picture Cards.
Computers and Peripherals Every component of the 
computer needs to be considered for examination, and 
examiners generally confiscate any desktop and notebook 
computers; mobile devices such as smart phones, PDAs, 
and digital cameras; and peripherals such as keyboards and 
firms use digital forensics techniques for policy auditing 
and compliance enforcement for issues ranging from 
an organization’s acceptable use policy (AUP) to regulations 
such as Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) and the Health Insurance 
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). (For information 
about these and other related laws, see Figure 11-36 on 
page 589.)
Digital forensics also is part of the toolkit of today’s 
computer scientist. Many information security managers 
purposely place a vulnerable computer, called a honeypot, 
on their networks in the hopes that they can analyze the 
attacks on those computers. Carefully examining the way in 
which a honeypot is attacked can provide significant insight 
into new forms of attack, which then can be translated into 
new defensive tools and strategies.
A digital forensics examiner requires a working knowledge 
of a wide range of topics related to computers, digital devices, 
and networks. The most essential type of knowledge relates 
to how computers and digital devices store files, as well as the 
various file systems. The following sections illustrate some of 
the tasks digital forensics examiners use to search for clues in 
an investigation.
Digital Forensics in Action
The complexity of the digital forensics process can vary, 
depending on the circumstances that initially caused the 
investigation. The digital forensics examiner may be part of 
an investigative team, with the analysis of digital evidence 
comprising just one part of the entire investigation. The 
examiner looks for information pertinent to the incident or 
event, which a search warrant, time, and/or other circum-
stances may limit. The following two scenarios illustrate 
how digital forensics is used to collect and analyze evidence 
for two cybercrimes.
Scenario 1: Identity Theft
Investigators suspect that Jonathan Nash is  stealing 
identities and then opening credit card accounts 
to make fraudulent purchases online. At one point, 
Jonathan suspected that he was being investigated 
for this crime and attempted to delete all incrimi-
nating files on his computer. Before Jonathan can be 
charged with the crime, investigators will use digital 
forensics to prove that he is responsible for steal-
ing the identities and making purchases using credit 
cards that belong to others.
Digital forensics examiners will perform several steps, 
discussed in the following pages, to collect evidence that 
can be used to convict Jonathan of this crime.
S
P
E
C
IA
L
 F
E
A
T
U
R
E
hard disk
external 
hard disk
USB 
fl ash drives
memory 
card
optical disc
Figure 3 Digital forensics examiners analyze the data stored 
on various types of media.
Special Feature610
mouse devices (Figure 4). For example, examiners  cannot 
assume that the keyboard in the forensics lab will be 
 compatible with the computer being seized.
GPS Receivers Forensic examiners analyze an  increasing 
number of GPS receivers each day. Examiners  typically 
gather information such as the destinations that are pro-
grammed into the receiver, the locations where the receiver 
has been, and the route traveled. Some GPS  receivers built 
into an automobile also record data about the  vehicle’s 
 performance, which also can help in an investigation.
Network Hardware Homes with broadband Internet 
connections increasingly have networks and, therefore, 
multiple computers, a router, and a wireless access point. 
Wireless networks allow criminals to hide a networked 
computer easily. For example, a notebook computer or 
mobile device using a home’s wireless network can be as 
far as 100 yards from the wireless access point, and thus be 
far outside of the immediate structure. Furthermore, the 
suspect may be stealing a neighbor’s wireless network while 
engaging in criminal activity.
Computer Software Digital forensics examiners 
 generally will not run software directly from the suspect 
hard disk because it might add, change, or remove data 
on the hard disk that is important for the investigation. 
Instead, they copy the data to another storage medium 
and use software at the forensics lab to access the data. 
In cases where the examiner does not have access to 
desktop computer
notebook 
computer
router
rack-mounted server
PDA
GPS receiver
wireless router
answering 
machine
digital camera
smart phone
Figure 4 Common digital hardware devices examined by a digital forensics examiner.
 specialized, custom, or old software on the suspect’s 
 computer, the examiner may have to install software found 
at the suspect’s site on a computer in the forensics lab. 
For this reason, examiners should seize program discs 
and manuals for any software with which they are 
unfamiliar. Any papers and books near the suspect’s 
computer also will give the examiner a clue as to the 
sophistication of the user and the possible types of 
programs on the computer.
Scenario Specifics
In the case of Jonathan Nash, law  enforcement officials obtained 
a search warrant to enter Jonathan’s house and confiscate specific 
items. Officials locate an office with a computer and peripheral 
device that writes data on magnetic stripes. Law enforcement 
officials also locate  various storage media, which might contain 
personal information or credit card information.
Step 2  Transport the Materials
Once the materials are gathered, law enforcement officials 
or digital forensics examiners transport them safely to a 
forensics lab where digital forensics examiners will examine 
the media for information related to the crime.
Scenario Specifics
Law enforcement officials carefully package the computer and 
digital devices they have obtained from Jonathan’s office so that no 
damage will occur during transport.
  Digital Forensics 611
S
P
E
C
IA
L
 F
E
A
T
U
R
E
Step 3  Preserve the Media
The next step in the investigation is preserving the media. 
Where possible, examiners should not perform digital foren-
sics analysis on the original media, because of the potential 
of accidentally changing the original evidence. Thus, the 
examiners typically make a copy of all media, ensuring that 
they do not alter the original data and information in any 
way and that the copy will be authenticated as identical to 
the original. This process is known as creating an image, or 
imaging.
In the extraordinary circumstances when the  examiner 
must analyze the original media, such as a hard disk, they 
often use a write-protection device. A write-protection 
device prevents the examiner or the computer from 
inadvertently writing data and information on the media 
(Figure 5). Write-protection devices can cost from several 
hundred to several thousand dollars, depending on the 
types of media to which it can connect.
In some cases, examiners may create 
an image of a hard disk at the crime 
scene rather than transporting entire 
computers to the forensics lab. This 
is the  preferable approach when the 
disk to be imaged is on a company’s 
critical server and/or where seiz-
ing the computer might cause 
undue economic hardship to the 
owner. Devices such as Intelligent 
Computer Solutions’ Road 
MASSter-3 fit in a small carrying 
case and are designed to image 
hard disks in the field (Figure 6).
Notebook computer hard disks 
represent a particular challenge 
for forensic analysis because many 
have proprietary or specialty inter-
faces. Additional hardware is avail-
able specifically for imaging drives 
for various models of Dell, Acer, 
HP, Lenovo, NEC, Toshiba, 
Figure 5 Write-
protection devices 
prevent examiners from 
inadvertently altering 
digital evidence.
Figure 6 Shown here are details of the keyboard and working area of Intelligent 
Computer Solutions’ Road MASSter-3, a portable digital forensics laboratory.
and other brands of notebook computers. Other specialized 
hardware allows for the imaging of smart phones, PDAs, 
and other mobile devices.
Scenario Specifics
The digital forensics examiner does not want to damage or change 
the original data on Jonathan’s hard disk, so he creates an image 
of the hard disk. During the imaging process, a write-protection 
device ensures that nothing inadvertently is written to the original 
hard disk.
Step 4  Extract Evidence
The next step in the investigation requires the digital 
 forensics examiner to extract the evidence from the media. 
Based on the guidelines of the investigation, the examiner 
determines the type of data and information on the com-
puter that is pertinent to the case. In a case of suspected 
child exploitation, photos and videos are important. Chat 
room and e-mail logs are useful in cyberstalking cases 
because they might contain incriminating conversations 
involving the suspect. Some cybercriminals attempt to 
delete some or all files on their hard disk in an attempt to 
hide their elicit or illegal behavior. Examiners analyzing the 
media, however, usually are able to recover deleted files by 
Special Feature612
Step 5  Analyze Evidence
The next step, analyzing the evidence and/or determining the 
root cause of the event, is the most time-consuming aspect 
of the process. The data and information that an  examiner 
retrieves from the computer either can be incriminating 
(indicating guilt) or exculpatory (indicating innocence). 
Additionally, the examiner looks at the entire capacity of the 
medium because data and information can be hidden any-
where, including locations on the medium that appear empty. 
Figure 8 summarizes the common items examined during a 
digital forensics investigation.
using software specially designed for this purpose (Figure 7). 
Examiners might encounter encrypted data on some media; 
if so, they must use special software to break the encryption 
so that they can access it.
Scenario Specifics
In this case, Jonathan attempted to delete the incriminating files 
but was not aware of tools that would permanently erase them. 
The digital forensics  examiner is able to locate remnants of the 
files on the hard disk and is able to restore them nearly to their 
original form. Although the files have not been restored fully, 
the digital forensics examiner is able to restore enough data to 
retrieve potentially incriminating evidence.
suspect 
manipulates fi les
directory listing 
of USB flash drive
...and confirm 
that they no 
longer are there
digital forensics examiner 
retrieves deleted fi les
(b) In an attempt to destroy evidence, the suspect deletes all the 
fi les from the USB fl ash drive using the Windows command del *.*.
(a) The display shown 
is from the Windows 
command prompt 
instruction dir 
performed on a USB 
fl ash drive. The USB 
fl ash drive contains 
18 fi les and its volume 
name is TEST_USB.
(c) Programs, such as WinHex (left) and EnCase (above), 
are used to review the fi le names and contents of the fi les 
deleted from the USB fl ash drive by the suspect.
delete all the 
files on the USB 
flash drive...
Figure 7 The top 
portion of this figure 
shows the suspect (a) 
listing the files involved 
in criminal activity and 
(b) later deleting the files 
in an attempt to cover 
up the illegal activity. 
The lower portion of 
the figure shows (c) the 
digital forensics examiner 
retrieving the deleted files 
using special programs.
  Digital Forensics 613
S
P
E
C
IA
L
 F
E
A
T
U
R
E
Digital Forensics Tools As previously mentioned, 
 examiners use digital forensics tools to perform an analysis 
to ensure that no information is modified on the target 
media and that the examination is thorough. When a com-
puter starts, hundreds of registry, log, and/or data files may 
change. Examiners never should use a suspect’s disk to start 
a computer. Additionally, many operating systems, such as 
Windows, UNIX, and Linux, maintain a number of time 
stamps associated with every file, including the creation, last 
access, and last modified dates. Using ordinary utility pro-
grams to examine the contents of files usually will alter at 
least the last access date. Specialized analysis tools maintain 
the integrity of the original data so that the examiner can be 
sure that the results of the analysis are legally and techni-
cally valid and that nothing harms the original evidence.
A wide variety of digital forensics tools is available, each 
with its own use, strengths, and weaknesses. Several compa-
nies make digital forensics hardware, primarily for purposes 
of creating disk images. Digital Intelligence, for example, 
provides several forensics hardware devices, including the 
following:
• Forensic Recovery of Digital Evidence (FRED) is a 
stand-alone forensics workstation that can acquire data 
from all types of hard disk media, including EIDE, ATA, 
SATA, SAS, and SCSI hard disks (Figure 9a). This unit 
Data and Information to Examine
 1. Visited Web sites
 2. Downloaded files
 3. Dates when files were last accessed and modified
 4. Attempts to conceal, destroy, or fabricate evidence
 5. Deleted or overwritten files
 6. Data from RAM
 7. Use of cryptography or steganography
 8. File directory structure
 9. Image, movie, and sound files
 10. Keyword search hits
 11. Contents of system files, such as the print spool, swap files, 
and event logs
 12. Installed programs
 13. E-mail messages, chat logs, instant messaging logs
 14. Registry entries
 15. Contents of the Recycle Bin and unallocated space
 16. Antivirus, personal firewall, adware, and spyware detection 
software, as well as the presence of viruses, Trojan horses, 
rootkits, and spyware
 17. Encrypted and password-protected files
Figure 8 Common items examined during a digital forensics 
investigation.
Figure 9 Three digital forensics devices. 
(a) Forensic Recovery of 
 Digital Evidence (FRED) 
 forensics workstation
(b) Forensic Duplicator hard disk
replication and examination
hardware
(c) FireFly hard disk 
examination hardware
The primary digital forensics analysis tool is software. 
The most widely-used specialty forensics programs today 
are Guidance Software’s EnCase and AccessData’s Forensic 
Toolkit, also known as FTK, which assist in gathering and 
includes fi xed hard disks for the workstation’s operating 
system and analysis tools along with a number of bays 
so that forensic examiners can insert and remove other 
drives. For imaging situations, the examiner copies the 
contents of the suspect disk to a blank disk; the exam-
iner then performs analysis on the newly copied disk.
• The Forensic Duplicator replication hardware allows 
the examiner to connect IDE and SATA hard disks 
and can replicate the contents of one disk to another 
(Figure 9b). The examiner also can copy the contents of 
one disk to a fi le.
• FireFly is a device that plugs directly into an EIDE, IDE, 
SAS, or SATA hard disk and attaches to the  forensics 
computer via a FireWire connection (Figure 9c). 
Special Feature614
Analyzing Mobile Devices Forensic examination 
 increasingly requires analysis of mobile devices such as 
smart phones, PDAs, digital cameras, and portable media 
players. The amount of personal information on smart 
phones and PDAs, for example, includes contact lists, call 
history, text messages, photos and videos, e-mail messages, 
calendars, and documents. In some ways, analysis of mobile 
devices is more problematic than analysis of desktop and 
notebook computers, because mobile devices use a wide 
variety of connectors, operating environments, file struc-
tures, data formats, features, user interfaces, and operat-
ing modes. Mobile devices also can contain a variety of 
expansion cards including flash memory mobile media and 
Subscriber Identity Module (SIM) cards. 
Examiners also can use mobile devices to pinpoint a per-
son’s or device’s whereabouts and routes traveled. GPS is 
becoming more prevalent in mobile devices. Systems like 
OnStar use GPS technology to determine a vehicle’s 
 precise location. 
Analyzing Chat Room Logs Analysis of chat room logs is 
another important aspect of network analysis. The log shown 
in Figure 1 on page 607 is a conversation between BettyF, 
billy89, and other members of the Internet Relay Chat 
(IRC) Strong&40 channel. Analysis of logs such as these 
can uncover evidence of cyberstalking, criminal  conspiracy, 
harassment, or other topics of interest to the examiner.
Analyzing Browser History Logs Occasionally, it is 
necessary to trace a user’s Web browsing path. Manual 
forensic analysis, which involves searching through cookies, 
the browser’s cache, and browser history data, is difficult. 
Several programs are available to analyze a browser's his-
tory, although most new browsers include an incognito 
mode that prevents the browser from storing Web pages 
and addresses in the history. Some programs can locate and 
reconstruct file fragments from the Recycle Bin folder on 
the Windows desktop.
Scenario Specifics
The digital forensics examiner is attempting to locate evidence on 
Jonathan’s hard disk that will help convict him of identity theft. In 
this case, the examiner has found documents and spreadsheets con-
taining credit card numbers, saved Web pages showing receipts for 
items purchased, and browser history logs indicating that Jonathan 
regularly visited Web sites that sell stolen credit card numbers.
Step 6  Document Results 
The final step in the investigation is to document the 
results of a digital forensics examination thoroughly, par-
ticularly when performing the examination for legal pur-
poses. It is important to document everything, including the 
computer configuration and BIOS settings, the steps taken 
by the digital forensics examiner, and any pertinent evidence. 
All computer equipment, media, peripherals, or other items 
seized must be logged, and examiners should take photos 
of external and internal connections, when possible. The 
examiner carefully logs the handling of the evidence to 
demonstrate that no tampering occurred. Sample digital 
forensics evidence worksheets are shown in Figure 12. 
Figure 12a shows an evidence worksheet used when analyz-
ing a computer. Figure 12b contains evidence worksheets 
used when analyzing a hard disk.
Scenario Specifics
The evidence on Jonathan Nash’s hard disk and other media 
determine whether he is guilty of identity theft; however, the 
 precision in collecting and analyzing the evidence is critical if it 
is to be admissible in a court case.
Digital Forensics Software Tasks
 1. Create disk images.
 2. Recover passwords and other important information.
 3. Perform file access, modification, and creation time analysis.
 4. Create file catalogs.
 5. View system and program logs.
 6. Determine the activity of users and/or programs on a 
computer.
 7. Recover deleted files and examine unallocated file space.
 8. Obtain network information such as IP addresses and host 
names, network routes, and Web site information.
 9. Log forensics examiner activity and aid in documentation and 
report writing.
Figure 11 Common tasks performed by digital forensics 
software.
analyzing data (Figure 10). No single program can perform 
all aspects of a digital forensics analysis. These programs 
provide a broad range of forensics functions (Figure 11).
Figure 10 Popular digital forensics software. 
  Digital Forensics 615
S
P
E
C
IA
L
 F
E
A
T
U
R
E
Figure 12a (computer evidence worksheet)
Scenario 2: Spam Attacks
Someone is sending an unusually large number of 
 unsolicited e-mail messages to employees of a well-
known insurance company. The company’s spam filter 
is not able to remove each message, and employees 
are spending too much time removing unwanted 
e-mail messages. As a result, employees sometimes 
inadvertently remove legitimate e-mail messages. The 
increased e-mail messages are decreasing network 
performance and causing the company to lose money. 
It is important to locate and stop those responsible 
for sending the unsolicited e-mail messages.
The origin of the attacks initially is unknown, because the 
e-mail messages appear to come from many different e-mail 
addresses, although the content of each message is similar. 
Digital forensics examiners must rely on information pro-
vided by the attacked company. The previous scenario listed 
six steps describing how to locate, analyze, and document 
the evidence. This scenario is somewhat more complex 
because it is not known who is responsible for the attacks. 
In this scenario, a digital forensics examiner might use the 
following techniques to locate the attacker and/or the com-
puter network facilitating the attacks. Once the examiner 
finds the attacker, he or she might use the six steps in the 
previous scenario to link the attacker to the crime.
Analyzing Network Traffic The ability to analyze network 
traffic is an essential skill for a digital forensics examiner. 
E-mail headers are particularly important, as they provide 
many clues as to the origin and authenticity of e-mail mes-
sages. E-mail headers, which do not display in the body of 
the e-mail message, usually include the standard To:, From:, 
and Subject: lines. E-mail headers contain more information, 
however, than what appears at the top of an e-mail  message. 
For example, they also can reveal the name and version of the 
e-mail program that created an e-mail message, the operat-
ing system used to create the e-mail message, the name and 
version of the mail server, internal IP addresses, and the mail 
server path taken by a message.
Figure 12 Computer Evidence and 
Hard Disk Evidence Work sheets (from 
Forensic Examination of Digital Evidence: 
A Guide for Law Enforcement, National 
Institute of Justice).
Hard Disk Evidence Worksheet
:rebmuN tibihxE:rebmuN esaC
:rebmuN lortnoC:rebmuN yrotarobaL
Hard Disk #1 Label Information   [Not Available ] Hard Disk #2 Label Information   [Not Available ]
:rerutcafunaM:rerutcafunaM
:ledoM:ledoM
:rebmuN laireS:rebmuN laireS
:srednilyC:yticapaC:srednilyC:yticapaC
:srotceS:sdaeH:srotceS:sdaeH
.veR rellortnoC.veR rellortnoC
IDE  50 Pin SCSI IDE  50 Pin SCSI   
68 Pin SCSI   80 Pin SCSI   Other   68 Pin SCSI   80 Pin SCSI   Other   
Jumper: Master   Slave   Jumper: Master   Slave   
Cable Select   Undetermined   Cable Select   Undetermined   
Hard Disk #1 Parameter Information
DOS FDisk PTable  PartInfo Linux FDisk SafeBack EnCase  Other:
Capacity: Cylinders: Heads: Sectors:
:yticapaC Disk dettamroF:srotceS elbasserddA ABL
Volume Label:
Partitions
Name: Bootable? Start: End: Type:
Hard Disk #2 Parameter Information
DOS FDisk PTable  PartInfo Linux FDisk SafeBack EnCase  Other:
Capacity: Cylinders: Heads: Sectors:
  :srotceS elbasserddA ABL
Volume Label:
Partitions
Name: Bootable? Start: End: Type:
  Hard Disk Evidence Worksheet
Formatted Disk Capacity:
Figure 12b (hard disk evidence worksheet)
FORENSIC EXAMINATION OF DIGITAL EVIDENCE: A GUIDE FOR LAW ENFORCEMENT
Attach appropriate worksheet for backup method used.
Tape Type: DAT 24 Dat 40 DLT * Other *: Number Used:
*Requires Lab Director Approval
Analysis Platform Information
Operating Systems Used: DOS Windows Mac *nix Other:
Version:
Analysis Sof ware Base: I-Look EnCase DOS Utilities *nix Utilities Other:*
Version:
Restored Work Copy/Image Validated: Yes No  
List of utilities used other than base
Utility Version Purpose
Analysis Milestones
Milestone Remarks Initials
Run Anti-Virus Scan
Full File List with Meta Data
Identify Users/Logons/ISP Accounts, etc.
Browse File System
Keyword/String Search
Web/E-mail Header Recovery
Recover & Examine Free/Slack Space
Examine Swap
Unerase/Recover Deleted Files
Execute Programs as Needed
Examine/Recover Mail/Chat
Crack Passwords
Image Archive Information
Archive Method: Direct to Tape NTBackup Tar Other :* Compressed?
2 fo 2 egaPHard Disk Evidence Worksheet
Figure 13b  (geographic map display of the route between two hosts)
Tracking Packet Routes Examiners also must have 
 knowledge of how the Internet works. Figure 13a shows 
the results from VisualRoute, listing the intermediate packet 
routes between a local host computer and a Web server 
(www.fujifilm.co.jp). VisualRoute is a utility program that 
lists the IP address and location of all routers with which it 
communicates along the path between the two computers. 
VisualRoute also can show a geographic map of the path 
(Figure 13b).
Analyzing Internet Access Provider Logs During a 
 digital forensics investigation, the examiner might request 
logs from an Internet access provider. The Internet access 
provider will deliver the logs, but they will be in the raw 
format in which they are saved.
While the SMTP protocol forwards e-mail messages 
across the Internet, other protocols download e-mail 
 messages by e-mail programs. One such protocol is the Post 
Office Protocol version 3 (POP3). Figure 1 on page 607 
shows a set of three records from a POP3 server log showing 
a user logging on to check and download e-mail messages. All 
records show a date (February 12) and time stamp on a host 
named watson running the POP3 service (ipop3d) and access 
by a user on the host with IP address 192.168.187.35.
Analyzing a Packet Trace Packet sniffers are an  important 
software tool in understanding network  traffic. A packet 
sniffer monitors all of the traffic seen on the network port 
of a computer and retains a copy for later analysis. One 
of the most commonly used packet sniffers is tcpdump, 
a program for the UNIX and Linux operating systems. 
WinDump is the Windows  version of the program.
Scenario Specifics
Digital forensics examiners were able to analyze the company’s logs, 
as well as e-mail headers from the unwanted e-mail messages. The 
e-mail headers led officials to an Internet access provider in Europe. 
Upon requesting logs from the European Internet access provider, 
officials find that the IP address used to send the e-mail messages 
was assigned to an individual who ultimately was not aware of 
the crime. His computer, however, was being used as a zombie; 
that is, a computer controlled by an outsider without the owner’s 
knowledge. The individual was able to help resolve the problem by 
 locating and removing the malicious software from his computer.
Learning More about Digital Forensics
Every action a user takes on a computer or digital device 
leaves a trail. Deleting files really does not erase information; 
instead, it tells the computer that it can write new data to the 
space. Evidence of computer activity is stored in many places 
on the hard disk, some obvious and some obscure. Information 
about network access potentially is logged on many computers 
throughout the local network and global Internet. Evidence of 
your activities on computers and digital devices is everywhere. 
Using popular search engines such as Google, Yahoo!, Bing, 
and others, you will find links to hundreds of digital foren-
sics sites. For a list of sources for information about digital 
forensics, visit scsite.com/dc2011/ch11/digitalforensics.
Special Feature616
Figure 13a (route between two hosts)
Figure 13 Tracing nodes between a local host computer and 
a Web server using Visualware’s VisualRoute.

