A Survey of Game Theory as Applied to Network Security ∗
Sankardas Roy, Charles Ellis, Sajjan Shiva, Dipankar Dasgupta, Vivek Shandilya, Qishi Wu
Department of Computer Science
University of Memphis
Memphis, TN, USA
{sroy5, ceellis, sshiva, ddasgupt, vmshndly, qishiwu}@memphis.edu
Abstract
Network security is a complex and challenging problem.
The area of network defense mechanism design is receiving
immense attention from the research community for more
than two decades. However, the network security problem
is far from completely solved. Researchers have been ex-
ploring the applicability of game theoretic approaches to
address the network security issues and some of these ap-
proaches look promising. This paper surveys the existing
game theoretic solutions which are designed to enhance
network security and presents a taxonomy for classifying
the proposed solutions. This taxonomy should provide the
reader with a better understanding of game theoretic solu-
tions to a variety of cyber security problems.
1 Introduction
Recent incidents in cyberspace [38, 13, 35] prove that
network attacks can cause huge amounts of loss to govern-
ments, private enterprises, and the general public in terms
of money, data confidentiality, and reputation. The research
community has been paying attention to the network secu-
rity problem for more than two decades. However, the prob-
lem is far from being completely solved. We frequently
see a race between the security specialists and the attack-
ers in the following sense: one day an intelligent solution
is proposed to fix a network vulnerability, and the next day
the attackers come up with a smarter way to circumvent the
proposed countermeasure. The most important factor which
makes this problem difficult is that the local network, which
needs to be secured, is typically connected to the Internet
and major parts of the Internet are beyond the control of
network administrators. However, the Internet has become
an integral component of running the daily business of gov-
ernment, financial institutions, and the general public. As
∗This work is supported by the Office of Naval Research (ONR) under
grant N00014-09-1-0752.
a result, there is a pressing need to design countermeasures
for network attacks.
Traditionally, network security solutions employ either
protective devices such as firewalls or reactive devices such
as Intrusion Detection Systems (IDSs) and both of them are
used in conjunction. The intrusion detection algorithms are
either based on identifying an attack signature or detecting
the anomalous behavior of the system. Once an attack is
detected the employed IDS notifies the network administra-
tor who then takes an action to stop or mitigate the attack.
However, currently IDSs are not very sophisticated and they
rely on ad-hoc schemes and experimental work. The current
IDS technology may prove sufficient for defending against
casual attackers using well known techniques, but there is
still a need to design tools to defend against sophisticated
and well organized adversaries.
The weakness of the traditional network security solu-
tions is that they lack a quantitative decision framework.
To this end, a few groups of researchers have started ad-
vocating the utilization of game theoretic approaches. As
game theory deals with problems where multiple players
with contradictory objectives compete with each other, it
can provide us with a mathematical framework for analysis
and modeling network security problems. As an example,
a network administrator and an attacker can be viewed as
two competing players participating in a game. In addition,
game theory has the capability of examining hundreds of
thousands of possible scenarios before taking the best ac-
tion; hence, it can sophisticate the decision process of the
network administrator to a large extent. As a result, several
game theoretic approaches have recently been proposed to
address network security issues.
This paper surveys the existing game theoretic solu-
tions which are designed to enhance network security and
presents a taxonomy for classifying them. Highlighting the
basic game type used in the defense mechanisms, while ab-
stracting detailed differences, this taxonomy provides the
reader with a global view of the problem and solution space.
This paper does not advocate any specific defense game,
1
rather the main purpose is to provide the reader with the
current solution possibilities.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2
provides an overview of game theory. Section 3 explains
how network security problems can be modeled as a game.
Section 4 classifies the current state of research and pro-
poses a taxonomy. Finally, Section 5 and 6 highlight the dif-
ferences between this report and other surveys in the field,
and provide a summary.
2 An overview of game theory
This section identifies the premise of game theory to aid
the understanding of the games referred later (in Section 4).
For a detailed introduction to game theory refer A Course
in Game Theory [32]. Game theory describes multi-person
decision scenarios as games where each player chooses ac-
tions which result in the best possible rewards for self, while
anticipating the rational actions from other players.
A player is the basic entity of a game who makes deci-
sions and then performs actions. A game is a precise de-
scription of the strategic interaction that includes the con-
straints of, and payoffs for, actions that the players can
take, but says nothing about what actions they actually take.
A solution concept is a systematic description of how the
game will be played by employing the best possible strate-
gies and what the outcomes might be.
The consequence function associates a consequence with
each action the decision makers take. A preference rela-
tion is a complete relation on the set of consequences which
model the preference of each player in the game. A strategy
for a player is a complete plan of actions in all possible situ-
ations throughout the game. If the strategy specifies to take
a unique action in a situation then it is called a pure strat-
egy. If the plan specifies a probability distribution for all
possible actions in a situation then the strategy is referred to
as a mixed strategy.
A Nash equilibrium is a solution concept that describes
a steady state condition of the game; no player would prefer
to change his strategy as that would lower his payoffs given
that all other players are adhering to the prescribed strat-
egy. This solution concept only specifies the steady state
but does not specify how that steady state is reached in the
game. The Nash equilibrium is the most famous equilib-
rium, even though there are many other solution concepts
used occasionally. This information will be used to define
games that have relevant features for representing network
security problems.
2.1 Definitions
Game
A description of the strategic interaction between op-
posing, or co-operating, interests where the constraints
and payoff for actions are taken into consideration.
Player
A basic entity in a game that is tasked with making
choices for actions. A player can represent a person,
machine, or group of persons within a game.
Action
An action constitutes a move in the given game.
Payoff
The positive or negative reward to a player for a given
action within the game.
Strategy
Plan of action within the game that a given player can
take during game play.
Perfect Information Game
A game in which each player is aware of the moves
of all other players that have already taken place. Ex-
amples of perfect information games are: chess, tic-
tac-toe, and go. A game where at least one player is
not aware of the moves of at least one other player
that have taken place is called an imperfect informa-
tion game.
Complete Information Game
This is a game in which every player knows both the
strategies and payoffs of all players in the game, but
not necessarily the actions. This term is often confused
with that of perfect information games but is distinct
in the fact that it does not take into account the actions
each player have already taken. Incomplete informa-
tion games are those in which at least one player is
unaware of the possible strategies and payoffs for at
least one of the other players.
Bayesian Game
A game in which information about the strategies and
payoff for other players is incomplete and a player as-
signs a ‘type’ to other players at the onset of the game.
Such games are labeled Bayesian games due to the use
of Bayesian analysis in predicting the outcome.
Static/Strategic Game
A one-shot game in which each player chooses his plan
of action and all players’ decisions are made simulta-
neously. This means when choosing a plan of action
each player is not informed of the plan of action cho-
sen by any other player. In the rest of this paper, this
class of game is referred to as ‘static game’.
Dynamic/Extensive Game
A game with more than one stages in each of which the
2
players can consider their action [32]. It can be con-
sidered as a sequential structure of the decision making
problems encountered by the players in a static game.
The sequences of the game can be either finite, or in-
finite. In the rest of this paper, this class of game is
referred to as ‘dynamic game’.
Stochastic Game
A game that involves probabilistic transitions through
several states of the system. The game progresses as
a sequence of states. The game begins with a start
state; the players choose actions and receives a payoff
that depend on the current state of the game, and then
the game transitions into a new state with a probability
based upon players’ actions and the current state.
3 Information Warfare as a Game
Global networks continue to undergo dramatic changes
resulting in ever-increasing network size, interconnectivity,
and accessibility, and a consequent increase in its vulner-
ability. Several recent Federal policy documents have em-
phasized the importance of cyber security to the welfare of
modern society [8, 12]. The President’s National Strategy
to Secure Cyber Space [8] describes the priorities for re-
sponse, reduction of threats and vulnerabilities, awareness
and training, and national security and international coop-
eration. Cyber Security: A Crisis of Prioritization [12] de-
scribes the need for certain technologies for cyber security.
Security should be an integral part of advanced hardware
and software from the beginning, as described by Sun Mi-
crosystems, Cisco Systems, and Microsoft at the 2006 RSA
Conference.
Next-generation information infrastructure must ro-
bustly provide end-to-end connectivity among computers,
mobile devices, wireless sensors, instruments, etc. Cyber-
security is an essential component of information and
telecommunications, which impacts all of the other critical
US infrastructures [14]. However, traditional cyber-security
methods involve a never-ending cycle of detection and re-
sponse to new vulnerabilities and threats. It is recognized
that this patches-on-patches approach is a short fix and at-
tests to the failure of the present cyber-security paradigm,
and points to the need for a new and bold approach. The
US-CERT [38] web site has currently more than 20,000 vul-
nerabilities (increasing by 50 to 60 per month), implying a
world-wide cost more than 1 trillion dollar. The open web
application security project also lists top ten vulnerabilities
of the year for web-based applications. “Build Security In”
(BSI) [33] is a project of the Strategic Initiatives Branch
of the National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) of the US
Department of Homeland Security is for use by software de-
velopers, who want information and practical guidance on
producing secure and reliable software. NSA has an effort
on high-assurance computing platforms. The Trusted Com-
puting Group [15] has an ongoing effort. Microsoft has an
effort on next-generation secure computing [26].
In future warfare, cyberspace will play a major role
where no one is guaranteed to have information domi-
nance in terms of intelligence and accessibility. As a re-
sult, a game-theoretic approach of collaboration (carrot) and
compelling (counter-) moves (stick) need to be played ef-
ficiently. This notion is not unlike the mutually assured
destruction (MAD) of nuclear warfare. The question then
becomes: How do we construct such a game theoretic ap-
proach in cyberspace?
In general, a game-theoretic approach works with at least
two players. A player’s success in making choices depends
on the choices of others. In game theory, players are pit-
ted against each other taking turns sequentially to maximize
their gain in an attempt to achieve their ultimate goal [1]. In
the field of cyber security, game theory has been used to
capture the nature of cyber conflict. The attacker’s deci-
sion strategies are closely related to those by the defender
and vice versa. Cyber-security then is modeled by at least
two intelligent agents interacting in an attempt to maximize
their intended objectives.
Different techniques available in game theory can be uti-
lized to perform tactical analysis of the options of cyber
threat produced either by a single attacker or by an orga-
nized group. A key concept of game theory is the ability
to examine the huge number of possible threat scenarios in
the cyber system [16, 17]. Game theory can also provide
methods for suggesting several probable actions along with
the predicted outcome to control future threats. Comput-
ers can analyze all of the combinations and permutations to
find exceptions in general rules, in contrast to humans who
are very prone to overlooking possibilities. This approach
allows identification of the what-if scenarios, which the hu-
man analyst may not have considered.
4 Taxonomy: Classification of current re-
search
Figure 1. Classification of games
Figure 1 illustrates the basic classification of game the-
3
Static Games
Complete and Imperfect Information Incomplete and Imperfect Information
Bayesian Formulation Non-Bayesian Formulation[9]  - Carin
[19] - Jormakka
[23]-Liu
[24]-Liu
Figure 2. Classification of Static Games: Each rectangular leaf node lists the research works which
fall under the corresponding category. Each research work is represented by the reference number
and the first author name.
ory. The existing game-theoretic research as applied to
network security falls under non-cooperative games. As
such, this paper does not further expand upon ‘cooperative
games’. Figure 2 illustrates the classification of static games
and lists the existing research works (related to network se-
curity) falling under each class. Figure 3 does the same for
dynamic games.
Section 4.1 discusses existing works involving static
games while Section 4.2 deals with existing works involv-
ing dynamic games. Section 4.3 discusses a few other works
which do not directly fall under these classes. Finally, Sec-
tion 4.4 presents some directions for future research.
4.1 Static games
Since a static game is a one-shot game, by definition all
static games are of imperfect information. According to the
completeness of information, static games can be classified
into two sub-classes as listed below. We briefly discuss the
existing research works which fall under each sub-class of
static games.
4.1.1 Complete imperfect information
Jormokka et al. [19] introduced a few examples of static
games with complete information where each example rep-
resents an information warfare scenario. For each scenario
the authors found the best strategy of the players in a quan-
titative form. In particular, they investigated if more than
one Nash equilibria exist and if so, then which one is most
likely to appear as the outcome given the players’ strategies.
These examples show that depending on the scenario the
players could get the benefit of a bold strategy or a mixed
strategy.
Carin et al. [9] presented a computational approach to
quantitative risk assessment for investment efficient strate-
gies in cyber security. The focus of this work was how to
protect the critical intellectual property in private and pub-
lic sectors assuming the possibility of reverse engineering
attacks. The authors proposed an attack/protect economic
model cast in a game theoretic context.
4.1.2 Incomplete imperfect information
Liu et al. [23] presented a methodology to model the inter-
actions between a DDoS attacker and the network admin-
istrator. This approach observed that the ability to model
and infer attacker intent, objectives, and strategies (AIOS)
is important as it can lead to effective risk assessment and
harm prediction. An incentive-based game-theoretic model
to infer AIOS was discussed in this work. A few bandwidth
parameters were used as the metric to measure the impact of
the attack and the countermeasure, which in turn measures
the attacker’s, and defender’s, incentive. The work also ob-
served that the best game model to choose depends on the
degree of accuracy of the employed IDS and the degree of
correlation among the attack steps. The work reported sim-
ulation results involving game plays following the Bayesian
model while the simulation experiment was performed on
ns-2. The topology considered in the simulation experiment
consists of 64 source hosts connected to one victim machine
via 4 levels of routers. Each router is capable of employing
4
the pushback mechanism as part of the defense strategy. A
set of Nash equilibrium strategies were computed via the
simulation.
Liu et al. [24] focused on the intrusion detection problem
in mobile ad-hoc networks. Their two-player game model is
based on a Bayesian formulation and they analyzed the ex-
istence of Nash equilibria in static scenario. The defender
updates his prior beliefs about the opponent based on new
observations. This work investigated the Bayesian Nash
Equilibria (BNE) in the static model. The authors also pre-
sented some results from the experiments performed on the
ns-2 simulator.
4.2 Dynamic games
A dynamic game can be either of complete or incomplete
information. Moreover, a dynamic game may involve per-
fect or imperfect information. So, there are four sub-classes
of dynamic games as listed below. For each sub-class of dy-
namic games, we briefly discuss the existing research works
which fall under the corresponding sub-class.
4.2.1 Complete perfect information
Lye et al. [25] proposed a game model for the security of a
computer network. In this work, an enterprise network was
envisioned as a graph of 4 nodes (web server, file server,
work station and external world) along with the traffic state
for all the links. It is a two-player (administrator, attacker),
stochastic, general-sum game and the authors focused on 3
attack scenarios namely, defaced website, denial-of-service,
and stealing confidential data. The game was described
from the point of view of both players. A formal model
defined the game as a 7-tuple— the set of network states,
the action set for each player, the state transition function,
the reward function and a discount factor. In particular, this
work considered a stochastic game involving 18 network
states and 3 actions for each player at each state. The state
transition probabilities and the reward matrices are assigned
using the domain knowledge. With different initial condi-
tions a set of Nash Equilibria were calculated using a non-
linear program in Matlab.
Xiaolin et al. [39] proposed a Markov game theory based
model for risk assessment of network information system
considering the security status of both present and future.
They identified that threats acting on vulnerability can in-
duce risk and the risk will be larger and larger by threat
spreading. On the other hand, the risk will be smaller and
smaller by the system administrator’s repairing the vulner-
ability. Thus, they established a game of threats and vul-
nerabilities. Essentially, the experiment involves a game of
complete and perfect information with two players. Au-
thors formulated a function to capture the damage and used
it to assess the risk. Using the damage function the system
administrator would select the repair strategy which mini-
mizes the maximum damage. To evaluate their model they
constructed a risk assessment platform with four subsys-
tems which are Malicious code Detection Subsystem, Vul-
nerability Detection Subsystem, Asset Detection Subsystem
and Risk Assessment Subsystem. They used Trojan.Mybot-
6307 as a threat, and three assets to define states. Their
results are similar or better than the traditional assessment
model like Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) because they effec-
tively incorporated the potential risk also. They came up
with a repair table of vulnerability states and threat states.
They claimed that the model also leads to the best system
repair scheme.
In Nguyen et al.’s [31] model, an attacker and the net-
work administrator participate in a two-player zero-sum
stochastic game. This work assumed that the network con-
sists of a set of interdependent nodes whose security assets
and vulnerabilities are correlated. It utilized the concept
of linear influence networks [28] and modeled the interde-
pendency among nodes by two weighted directed graphs,
one signifying the relationship of security assets and the
other denoting vulnerability correlation among the nodes.
This research presented one numerical example considering
a small network of three nodes to explain how to compute
the optimal strategies of the players.
4.2.2 Complete imperfect information
Alpcan et al. [3] modeled the interaction between mali-
cious attackers to a system and the IDS using a stochastic
(Markov) game. They captured the operation of the IDS
sensor system using a finite-state Markov chain, and con-
sidered three different information structures: (a) the play-
ers have full information about the sensor system charac-
teristics and the opponents, (b) the attacker has no informa-
tion about the sensor system characteristics, and (c) each
player has only information about his own costs, past ac-
tions, and past states. A few illustrative examples and nu-
merical analysis were presented for these three cases. Tools
such as value iterations to solve Markov decision processes
(MDP) [5], minimax-Q [22], and naive Q-learning [5] were
used to find the best strategies of the players.
Nguyen et al. [30] viewed the network security problem
as a sequence of nonzero-sum games played by an attacker
and a defender. This game model, called ‘fictitious play
(FP)’, conservatively considers that the players cannot make
perfect observations of each other’s previous actions. This
work studied the impact of the error probabilities associated
with the sensor system on the Nash equilibrium strategies
of the players considering two scenarios— (a) each player
is aware of these error probabilities, and (b) neither player
knows these error probabilities. Both classical and stochas-
5
Dynamic Games
[25] - Lye
[39] - Xiaolin
[31] - Nguyen
[3]  - Alpcan
[30] - Nguyen 
[11] - Chen
[34] - Patcha
[4]  - Alpcan
[6]  - Bloem
[2]  - Alpcan
[40] - You
Complete and Perfect Information Complete and Imperfect Information Incomplete and Perfect Information Incomplete and Imperfect Information
Figure 3. Classification of Dynamic Games: Each rectangular leaf node lists the research works
which fall under the corresponding category. Each research work is represented by the reference
number and the first author name.
tic FP games are investigated via simulation.
4.2.3 Incomplete perfect information
Chen [11] in his doctoral dissertation used game theoretic
model to design the response for the importance-scanning
Internet worm attack. The main idea is that defenders can
choose how to deploy an application, that is the group dis-
tribution, when it is introduced to Internet to minimize the
worm propagation speed. The attacker can choose the op-
timal group scanning distribution to maximize the infec-
tion speed. Thus a game would be played between the at-
tacker and the defender. The attacker should choose so as to
maximize the minimum speed of worm propagation, while
defender wants to minimize the maximum speed of worm
propagation. By framing the problem this way it turns out
to be a zero sum game and a min-max problem. The opti-
mal solution for this problem is that defender should deploy
the application uniformly in the entire IP-address space or
in each enterprise network, so that the best strategy that the
attacker exploits is equivalent to random scanning strategy.
This work gave a game theoretical framework to design the
locations of vulnerable and high value hosts over a network.
Patcha et al. [34] proposed a game theoretic approach to
model intrusion detection in mobile ad-hoc networks. The
authors viewed intrusion detection as a game played be-
tween the attacker node and the IDS hosted on the target
node. The objective of the attacker is to send a malicious
message with the intention of attacking the target node. The
modeled game is a basic signaling game which falls under
the domain of multi-stage dynamic non-cooperative game.
Alpcan et al. [4] investigated the problem of Nash Equi-
librium Design for quite a general class of games from an
optimization and control theoretic perspective. The work
is theoretical and the analysis is general though aimed at
information networks. They restricted their treatment to a
class of games where players do not manipulate the game
by deceiving the system designer and where utility func-
tions accurately reflect user preferences. They further dis-
cussed the games with incomplete information with two ob-
jective functions: Quality of service (QoS)-based and utility
maximization. They concluded that though the tragedy of
commons or price of anarchy is unavoidable in pure games,
it is circumvented altogether when additional mechanism
such as “pricing” are included. They explored the pricing
dynamics in different conditions. They inferred that “loss
of efficiency” is not an inherent feature of a broad class of
games with built-in pricing systems, but merely a miscon-
ception that often stems from arbitrary choice of game pa-
rameters. Finally, they give a brief overview of Nash Equi-
librium dynamic control. They focused on how long does
the game approach Nash equilibrium when many players
are trying to solve it in a distributed way. They suggested
a feedback control system approach with pricing as a con-
trol input to make the system robust and to control the sys-
tem’s progress and investigated system’s controllability in
general.
Bloem et al. [6] modeled intrusion response as a resource
allocation problem based on game theory. A cost is associ-
ated with attacks and responses. This problem, including
imperfections in the sensor outputs, was first modeled as
a continuous game. The strategies are discretized both in
time and intensity of actions, which eventually leads to a
discretized model. The reaction functions uniquely mini-
mize the strictly convex cost functions. After discretiza-
tion, this becomes a constrained integer optimization prob-
lem. To solve this they introduced their dynamic algorithm,
Automatic or Administrator Response algorithm (AOAR).
They classified attacks into those resembling previous at-
tacks and those that do not, and many such intuitive classes
with Kohonen self-organizing maps, a neural net, and the
response cost is minimized. The simulations captured varia-
tion in vulnerability, value and cost of actions. Their results
showed system performs improves after using AOAR.
Though majority of Liu et al.’s [23] approaches fall un-
der static games with incomplete and imperfect information
6
(Section 4.1.2), one of their approaches falls under this cat-
egory.
4.2.4 Incomplete imperfect information
Alpcan et al. [2] modeled the interaction of an attacker and
the network administrator as a repeated game with ‘finite
steps’ or ‘infinite steps’. This work assumed that the sen-
sor system which is deployed to detect the attacks is imper-
fect and considered the sensor system as a third ‘fictitious’
player similar to the ‘nature’ player in standard game the-
ory. It found the Nash equilibrium in a repeated game via
simulation considering a simple scenario with three specific
attacks. The Nash equilibrium strategies were computed as-
suming simple cost functions for the players.
You et al. [40] described how to model the network secu-
rity scenario considering the interaction between the hacker
and the defender as a two player, zero sum game. It gave
a taxonomy of relevant game theory and network security
terms and suggested a correlation between them. They
pointed out at the utility of Nash and Bayesian Equilibria in
representing the concepts to predict behavior and analyzed
the interaction between the attacker and the defender. They
gave a list of game theory terms that are relevant in the net-
work security scenario and explained them. They explained
how min max theorem for this game is formulated. They
concluded by suggesting that to solve this problem linear
algorithms would be appropriate.
The research reported in [3], [30] and [34] which are de-
scribed under other classes of games also contain additional
approaches that fall under this class of game.
4.3 Other work
Bursztein et al. [7] presented a model for evaluating the
plausibility of successful attacks on a given network with
interdependent files and services. This work provided a
logic model that accounts for the time needed to attack,
crash, or patch network systems. Rather than providing a
game theoretic model, the work used the given time and
topology constraints to determine if an attack, or defense,
would be successful. The example presented described a
high-availability web server configuration with interdepen-
dent elements and considered the strategic actions of the
attacker as well as the defender.
Sun et al. [37] analyzed information security problem
in the mobile electronic commerce chain. They claimed
that the application of game theory in information safety
is based on the hypothesis of player’s perfect rationality,
while in reality, the main body of information security only
has the bounded rationality, which is just the assumption
of Evolutionary Game theory. They introduced the penalty
parameter in the problem if an organization in the mobile
electronic commerce chain does not invest in information
security. They calculated replicator dynamics of this game.
They analyzed Evolutionary Stable strategy to get the re-
sults which formulate that the pay off to the organizations
for investing is higher than not investing. This is an applica-
tion of evolutionary game theory to the investment strategy
in the network security to obtain the best security pay off.
Sun et al. [36] used game theory to make the analysis and
put forward strategy suggestions for defender organization
to invest in information security. It is concerned about man-
agement and not the technology of the information security.
They formulated the problem of two organizations invest-
ing in the security, with parameters such as for investment,
security risk and disasters. They presented a pay off matrix.
They did the Nash Equilibrium analysis for both pure and
mixed strategy and showed them to be consistent. To make
the investing a rational option they introduced a penalty pa-
rameter associated with not investing. They concluded by
presenting an argument for encouraging organizations the
investment in information security.
4.4 Discussion: scope of future research
Many of the current game-theoretic security approaches
are based on either static game models [23, 24] or games
with perfect information [25, 39, 4, 6] or games with com-
plete information [31]. However, in reality a network ad-
ministrator often faces a dynamic game with incomplete
and imperfect information against the attacker. Some of
the current models involving dynamic game with incom-
plete and imperfect information are specific to wireless net-
works [34] while a few others [2, 40] do not consider a re-
alistic attack scenario.
In particular, some of the limitations of the present re-
search are: (a) Current stochastic game models [25] only
consider perfect information and assume that the defender
is always able to detect attacks; (b) Current stochastic game
models [25] assume that the state transition probabilities are
fixed before the game starts and these probabilities can be
computed from the domain knowledge and past statistics;
(c) Current game models assume that the players’ actions
are synchronous, which is not always realistic; (d) Most
models are not scalable with the size and complexity of the
system under consideration.
5 Related work
This section briefly discusses the existing body of other
research related to the survey topic of this paper, and men-
tions how the existing work differs from this paper. It also
discusses a few research works which focus on the taxon-
omy of network attacks and cyber incidents. It is to be noted
7
that good understanding of the attack taxonomy is a prereq-
uisite to design a countermeasure.
Hamilton et al. [17] outlined the areas of game theory
which are relevant to information warfare. The paper ana-
lyzed a few scenarios suggesting several potential courses
of actions (COA) with predicted outcomes and what-if sce-
narios. Alpha-beta, alpha-beta star, and beta pruning with
min-max search are suggested approaches. Hill climbing al-
gorithm was suggested for predicting the opponent moves.
In the domain of checkers, a linear programming technique
using pattern recognition was cited as finding the optimal
weights in a follow up pass after hill climbing. Automatic
tuning of evaluation functions by the chess program, Deep-
Blue is highlighted. They concluded with speculating about
great possibilities in applying game theory to information
warfare. Hamilton et al.’s work focusses on a motivating
example to illustrate the use of game theory in network se-
curity problems while our paper provides a taxonomy of the
existing game-theoretic solutions.
Hamilton et al. [16] identified the following seven chal-
lenges in applying game theory to the domain of informa-
tion warfare: (i) There is a limited database of relevant
games played by real players, (ii) Both the attacker and the
defender can launch multiple moves simultaneously, (iii)
Players can take as long as they want to make moves, (iv)
The defender may not be able to correctly able to identify
the end goal of the opponent, (v) At each step the flow
of the game may change so that the known legal moves,
both in number and kind, may change for each player, (vi)
The defender may find it hard to keep track of any possible
change in the opponents resources and also his end goals,
(vii) It is hard to define precisely the timing for move and
state updates. The authors expected that these challenges
could be addressed with some non-trivial breakthroughs in
the research. Our paper investigates how the existing game-
theoretic solutions meet some of the above challenges.
Kjaerland [21] introduced existing body of research
work related to computer crime profiling and proposed a
taxonomy of cyber-intrusions, which provides insight into
cyber-criminals and victims. In this research, Kjaerland
focused on reported cyber intrusions reported from CERT.
These attacks were analyzed using facet theory and multi-
dimensional scaling (MDS) with Method of Operation, Tar-
get, Source, and Impact. Each facet contains a number of
elements, each is mutually exclusive and elements exhaus-
tively describe the facet. Kjaerland concluded the paper
with comparing the incidents of commercial versus govern-
ment incidents.
Hansman and Hunt [18] proposed a taxonomy consist-
ing of four unique dimensions that provide a holistic classi-
fication that covers network and computer attacks, provid-
ing assistance in improving computer and network security
as well as consistency in language with attack description.
The first dimension is attack vector, which is used to cat-
egorize the attack into an attack class. The second dimen-
sion allows for the classification of attack targets, which can
be classified to specific targets (e.g., OS:Linux:RedHat6.0).
The third dimension consists of the vulnerability classifica-
tion and the attack uses (e.g., CVE/CERT). The fourth and
final dimension highlight the potential payload or effects
involved (e.g., File Deletion). Within each dimension vari-
ous levels of information are provided to successfully clas-
sify and supply attack details. Hansman and Hunt provided
examples to conclude the proposed taxonomy is general to
categorize attacks and mentioned the need of future work to
improve classifying blended attacks. There are several re-
search works,e.g. [20], [29], which study network attacks.
Chakrabarti et al. [10] focused on the Internet and its in-
frastructure as being the basis for highlighting attacks and
security. Where majority of research focused on securing
the data being transferred, this research discussed attacks on
the infrastructure which can lead to considerable destruction
due to different Internet infrastructure components having
various trust relationships with one another. Chakrabarti et
al. categorized possible Internet infrastructure attacks, iden-
tified attacks within each category, solutions within each
category, and presented guidelines for less researched areas.
In their taxonomy of attacks they provided four categories
on Internet infrastructure attacks (DNS hacking, Route ta-
ble poisoning, Packet mistreatment, and Denial of Service).
They used the categories to develop a comprehensive un-
derstanding of the security threats.
Mirkovic and Reihner [27] presented a taxonomy of
Distributed Denial of Services (DDoS) attack and defense
mechanisms in aim to classify attacks and defense strate-
gies. This work highlighted attack commonalities and im-
portant features of attack strategies. These strategies are
vital in dictating the design of countermeasures. With fo-
cus on DDoS attacks, Mirkovic and Reihner created a tax-
onomy to examine the exploitation, the characteristics, and
the victim impact of the attack. The taxonomy of DDoS at-
tacks was categorized by Degree of Automation, Exploited
Weakness, Source Address Validity, Attack Rate Dynamics,
Possibility of Characterization, Persistent Agent Set, Vic-
tim Type, and Impact on Victim. Highlighting challenges
defending against DDoS attacks, Mirkovic and Reihner de-
veloped a taxonomy of DDoS defenses consisting of Ac-
tivity Level, Cooperation Degree, and Deployment Loca-
tion. Mirkovic and Reihner concluded with the proposed
taxonomies to provide communication of threats and related
countermeasures aiming to foster cooperation between re-
searchers for discussing solutions.
8
6 Summary
Hackers activities have significantly increased in cyber
space, and have been causing damage by exploiting weak-
nesses in information infrastructure. Considerable efforts
are continuously being made by the research community
for the last two decades to secure networks and associated
devices. Recently, researchers have been exploring the ap-
plicability of game theoretic approaches to address cyber
security problems and have proposed a handful of com-
peting solutions. Game theory offers promising perspec-
tives, insights, and models to address the ever changing se-
curity threats in cyber space. This survey highlights im-
portant game theoretic approaches and their applications to
network security and outlines possible directions for future
research. It is to be noted that classes in the taxonomy could
be divided into more detailed levels. It is obvious that new
classes may need to be introduced in the taxonomy after
new defense mechanisms are proposed in the future.
References
[1] A. Alazzawe, A. Nawaz, and M. M. Bayarak-
tar. Game theory and intrusion detection systems.
http://theory.stanford.edu/ĩliano/courses/06S-GMU-
ISA767/project/papers/alazzawe-mehmet-nawaz.pdf, 2006.
[2] T. Alpcan and T. Baser. A game theoretic analysis of intru-
sion detection in access control systems. Proc. of the 43rd
IEEE Conference on Decision and Control, 2004.
[3] T. Alpcan and T. Baser. An intrusion detection game with
limited observations. Proc. of the 12th Int. Symp. on Dy-
namic Games and Applications, 2006.
[4] T. Alpcan and L. Pavel. Nash equilibrium design and op-
timization. International Conference on Game Theory for
Networks, GameNets, 2009.
[5] D. Bertsekas. Dynamic programming and optimal control.
2nd ed. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, vol. 2., 2001.
[6] M. Bloem, T. Alpcan, and T. Basar. Intrusion response as a
resource allocation problem. IEEE Conference on Descision
and Control, 2006.
[7] E. Bursztein and J. Goubalt-Larrecq. A logical framework
for evaluating network resilience against faults and attacks.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science; Vol. 4846, 2007.
[8] G. W. Bush. National strategy to secure cyberspace, office
of the president. 2003.
[9] L. Carin, G. Cybenko, and J. Hughes. Quantitative evalua-
tion of risk for investment efficient strategies in cybersecu-
rity: The queries methodology. IEEE Computer, 2008.
[10] A. Chakrabarti and G. Manimaran. Internet infrastructure
security: A taxonomy. IEEE Network, 16:13, November
2002.
[11] Z. Chen. Modeling and defending against internet worm at-
tacks. PhD Dissertation at Georgia Institute Of Technology,
2007.
[12] President’s Information Technology Advisory Committee,
Cyber Security: A crisis of prioritization, 2005.
[13] Security focus, http://www.securityfocus.com/archive, secu-
rity focus bugtraq vulnerability notification database, 2009.
[14] The National Strategy for Homeland Security,
http://www.dhs.gov/interweb/assetlibrary/nat-strat-hls.pdf,
2002.
[15] The Trusted Computing Group, http://
www.trustedcomputinggroup.org.
[16] S. N. Hamilton, W. L. Miller, A. Ott, and O. S. Saydjari.
Challenges in applying game theory to the domain of infor-
mation warfare. Proceedings of the 4th Information surviv-
ability workshop (ISW-2001/2002), 2002.
[17] S. N. Hamilton, W. L. Miller, A. Ott, and O. S. Saydjari.
The role of game theory in information warfare. Proceed-
ings of the 4 th information survivability workshop (ISW-
2001/2002), 2002.
[18] S. Hansman and R. Hunt. A taxonomy of network and com-
puter attacks. Computers and Security, 24:31–43, February
2005.
[19] J. Jormakka and J. V. E. Molsa. Modelling information war-
fare as a game. Journal of Information Warfare; Vol. 4(2),
2005.
[20] D. Kienzle and M. Elder. Recent worms: A survey and
trends. Proceedings of the 2003 ACM workshop on rapid
malcode, 2003.
[21] M. Kjaerland. A taxonomy and comparison of computer se-
curity incidents from the commercial and government sec-
tors. Computers and Security, 25:522–538, October 2005.
[22] M. L. Littman. Markov games as a framework for multi-
agent reinforcement learning. Proc. of the 11th International
Conference on Machine Learning, pages 157–163, 1994.
[23] P. Liu, W. Zang, and M. Yu. Incentive-based modeling and
inference of attacker intent, objectives, and strategies. ACM
Transactions on Information and System Security (TISSEC),
2005.
[24] Y. Liu, C. Comaniciu, and H. Man. A bayesian game ap-
proach for intrusion detection in wireless ad hoc networks.
ACM International Conference Proceeding Series; Vol. 199,
2006.
[25] K. Lye and J. Wing. Game strategies in network security.
Proceedings of the Foundations of Computer Security, 2002.
[26] Microsoft. Next-generation secure computing base.
www.microsoft.com/resources/ngscb/default.mspx.
[27] J. Mirkovic and P. Reiher. A taxonomy of ddos attack and
ddos defense mechanisms. Computer Communication Re-
view 34, no. 2, 2004.
[28] R. A. Miura-Ko, B. Yolken, N. Bambos, and J. Mitchell.
Security investment games of interdependent organizations.
Proceedings of the 46th Allerton Conference, 2008.
[29] D. Moore, V. Paxson, S. Savage, C. Shannon, S. Staniford,
and N. Weaver. Inside the slammer worm. IEEE Security
and Privacy no.4, 2003.
[30] K. C. Nguyen, T. Alpcan, and T. Basar. Security games with
incomplete information. Proc. of IEEE Intl. Conf. on Com-
munications (ICC), 2009.
[31] K. C. Nguyen, T. Alpcan, and T. Basar. Stochastic games
for security in networks with interdependent nodes. Proc. of
Intl. Conf. on Game Theory for Networks (GameNets), 2009.
[32] M. J. Obsborne and A. Rubinstein. A course in game theory.
MIT Press, 1994.
9
[33] U.S. Department of Homeland Security,
https://buildsecurityin.us-cert.gov/daisy/bsi/home.html.
[34] A. Patcha and J. Park. A game theoretic approach to model-
ing intrusion detection in mobile ad hoc networks. Proceed-
ings of the 2004 IEEE workshop on Information Assurance
and Security, 2004.
[35] Packet storm vulnerability database, http:// packetstormse-
curity.org/, 2009.
[36] W. Sun, X. Kong, D. He, and X. You. Information secu-
rity investment game with penalty parameter. The 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Innovative Computing Information
and Control, 2008.
[37] W. Sun, X. Kong, D. He, and X. You. Information security
problem research based on game theory. International Sym-
posium on Publication Electronic Commerce and Security,
2008.
[38] US-CERT. http://www.us-cert.gov. United States Computer
Emergency Readiness Team, 2009.
[39] C. Xiaolin, T. Xiaobin, Z. Yong, and X. Hongsheng. A
markov game theory-based risk assessment model for net-
work information systems. International conference on
computer science and software engineering, 2008.
[40] X. You and Z. Shiyong. A kind of network security behav-
ior model based on game theory. Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Com-
puting, Applications and Technologies, 2003.
10

