ar
X
iv
:c
s/
00
11
03
3v
1 
 [
cs
.L
G
] 
 2
2 
N
ov
 2
00
0
Web Mining Research: A Survey
Raymond Kosala
Department of Computer Science
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200A, B-3001 Heverlee, Belgium
Raymond@cs.kuleuven.ac.be
Hendrik Blockeel
Department of Computer Science
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200A, B-3001 Heverlee, Belgium
Hendrik.Blockeel@cs.kuleuven.ac.be
ABSTRACT
With the huge amount of information available online, the
World Wide Web is a fertile area for data mining research.
The Web mining research is at the cross road of research
from several research communities, such as database, infor-
mation retrieval, and within AI, especially the sub-areas of
machine learning and natural language processing. How-
ever, there is a lot of confusions when comparing research
efforts from different point of views. In this paper, we sur-
vey the research in the area of Web mining, point out some
confusions regarded the usage of the term Web mining and
suggest three Web mining categories. Then we situate some
of the research with respect to these three categories. We
also explore the connection between the Web mining cate-
gories and the related agent paradigm. For the survey, we
focus on representation issues, on the process, on the learn-
ing algorithm, and on the application of the recent works
as the criteria. We conclude the paper with some research
issues.
Keywords
Web, data mining, information retrieval, information extrac-
tion
1. INTRODUCTION
The World Wide Web (Web) is a popular and interactive
medium to disseminate information today. The Web is huge,
diverse, and dynamic and thus raises the scalability, multi-
media data, and temporal issues respectively. Due to those
situations, we are currently drowning in information and
facing information overload [84]. Information users could
encounter, among others, the following problems when in-
teracting with the Web:
a. Finding relevant information: People either browse or
use the search service when they want to find specific in-
formation on the Web. When a user uses search service he
or she usually inputs a simple keyword query and the query
response is the list of pages ranked based on their similarity
to the query. However today’s search tools have the follow-
ing problems [23]. The first problem is low precision, which
is due to the irrelevance of many of the search results. This
results in a difficulty finding the relevant information. The
second problem is low recall, which is due to the inability
to index all the information available on the Web. This re-
sults in a difficulty finding the unindexed information that
is relevant. See [80] for some other search engine problems.
b. Creating new knowledge out of the information available
on the Web: Actually this problem could be regarded as a
sub-problem of the problem above. While the problem above
is usually a query-triggered process (retrieval oriented), this
problem is a data-triggered process that presumes that we
already have a collection of Web data and we want to ex-
tract potentially useful knowledge out of it (data mining
oriented). Recent research [34; 83; 29] focuses on utilizing
the Web as a knowledge base for decision making.
c. Personalization of the information: This problem is often
associated with the type and presentation of information,
since it is likely that people differ in the contents and pre-
sentations they prefer while interacting with the Web.
On the other hand, the information providers could en-
counter these problems, among others, when trying to achieve
their goals on the Web:
d. Learning about consumers or individual users: This is
a problem that specifically deals with the problem c above,
which is about knowing what the customers do and want.
Inside this problem, there are sub-problems such as mass
customizing the information to the intended consumers or
even to personalize it to individual user, problems related to
effective Web site design and management, problems related
to marketing, etc.
Web mining techniques could be used to solve the informa-
tion overload problems above directly or indirectly. How-
ever, we do not claim that Web mining techniques are the
only tools to solve those problems. Other techniques and
works from different research areas, such as database (DB),
information retrieval (IR), natural language processing (NLP),
and the Web document community, could also be used. By
the direct approach we mean that the application of the Web
mining techniques directly addresses the above problems.
For example, a Newsgroup agent that classifies whether the
news is relevant to the user. By the indirect approach we
mean that the Web mining techniques are used as a part
of a bigger application that addresses the above problems.
For example, Web mining techniques could be used to create
index terms for the Web search services.
The Web mining research is a converging research area from
several research communities, such as database, IR, and AI
research communities especially from machine learning and
NLP. This paper is an attempt to put the research done in
a more structured way from the machine learning point of
view. However, the methods of the research that we survey
do not necessarily use well-known machine learning algo-
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 1
rithms. Since this is a huge, interdisciplinary, and very dy-
namic research area, there are undoubtedly some omissions
in our coverage.
This paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we give
an overview of Web mining, describe some confusions in the
usage of the term Web mining, provide a classification, and
relate this classification to the agent paradigm. In section 3,
4 and 5 we describe some research that represent the range
of the research in their respective categories. In section 6 we
discuss some related work and finally we conclude in section
7.
2. WEB MINING
2.1 Overview
Web mining is the use of data mining techniques to automat-
ically discover and extract information from Web documents
and services [40]. This area of research is so huge today
partly due to the interests of various research communities,
the tremendous growth of information sources available on
the Web and the recent interest in e-commerce. This phe-
nomenon partly creates confusion when we ask what con-
stitutes Web mining and when comparing research in this
area. Similar to Etzioni [40], we suggest decomposing Web
mining into these subtasks, namely:
1. Resource finding: the task of retrieving intended Web
documents.
2. Information selection and pre-processing: automati-
cally selecting and pre-processing specific information
from retrieved Web resources.
3. Generalization: automatically discovers general pat-
terns at individual Web sites as well as across multiple
sites.
4. Analysis: validation and/or interpretation of the mined
patterns.
By resource finding we mean the process of retrieving the
data that is either online or offline from the text sources
available on the Web such as electronic newsletters, elec-
tronic newswire, newsgroups, the text contents of HTML
documents obtained by removing HTML tags, and also the
manual selection of Web resources. We also include text
sources that originally were not accessible from the Web
but are accessible now, such as online texts made for re-
search purposes only, text databases, etc. The information
selection and pre-processing step is any kind of transfor-
mation processes of the original data retrieved in the IR
process. These transformations could be either a kind of
pre-processing that are mentioned above such as removing
stop words, stemming, etc. or a pre-processing aimed at
obtaining the desired representation such as finding phrases
in the training corpus, transforming the representation to
relational or first order logic form, etc. In step 3 above, ma-
chine learning or data mining techniques are typically used
for the generalization. We should also note that humans
play an important role in the information or knowledge dis-
covery process on the Web since the Web is an interactive
medium. This is especially important for validation and/or
interpretation in step 4. Thus, interactive query-triggered
knowledge discovery is as important as the more automatic
data-triggered knowledge discovery. However, we exclude
the knowledge discovery done manually by humans. As we
will see later in section 3, the process 1 - 3 - 4 is also used.
Thus, Web mining refers to the overall process of discovering
potentially useful and previously unknown information or
knowledge from the Web data. It implicitly covers the stan-
dard process of knowledge discovery in databases (KDD)
[42]. We could simply view Web mining as an extension
of KDD that is applied on the Web data. From the KDD
point of view, the information and knowledge terms are in-
terchangeable [43]. There is a close relationship between
data mining, machine learning and advanced data analysis
[89]. However, throughout the paper, we discuss the Web
mining research where machine learning techniques are used.
Although mining is an intriguing word to use, it is not a good
metaphor to describe the overall knowledge discovery pro-
cess [43] and what people really do in the field [61]. Web
mining is often associated with IR or IE. However, web min-
ing or information discovery on the Web is not the same as
IR or IE.
2.1.1 Web Mining and Information Retrieval
Some have claimed that resource or document discovery (IR)
on the Web is an instance of Web (content) mining and oth-
ers associate Web mining with intelligent IR. Actually IR
is the automatic retrieval of all relevant documents while at
the same time retrieving as few of the non-relevant as pos-
sible [119]. IR has the primary goals of indexing text and
searching for useful documents in a collection and nowadays
research in IR includes modeling, document classification
and categorization, user interfaces, data visualization, fil-
tering, etc. [10]. The task that can be considered to be an
instance of Web mining is Web document classification or
categorization, which could be used for indexing. Viewed in
this respect, Web mining is part of the (Web) IR process.
However, we should note that not all of the indexing tasks
use data mining techniques.
2.1.2 Web Mining and Information Extraction
IE has the goal of transforming a collection of documents,
usually with the help of an IR system, into information that
is more readily digested and analyzed [33]. IE aims to ex-
tract relevant facts from the documents while IR aims to
select relevant documents [99]. While IE is interested in the
structure or representation of a document, IR views the text
in a document just as a bag of unordered words [123]. Thus,
in general IE works at a finer granularity level than IR does
on the documents. However, the differences between the two
become blurred if the interest of IR is in extraction [100],
and when used in the context of vague forms of information
in which a full text IR system can provide some IE features
[123].
Building IE systems manually is not feasible and scalable
for such a dynamic and diverse medium such as Web con-
tents [93]. Due to this nature of the Web, most IE systems
focus on specific Web sites to extract. Others use machine
learning or data mining techniques to learn the extraction
patterns or rules for Web documents semi-automatically or
automatically [76]. Within this view, Web mining is part
of the (Web) IE process. Other views regarding the rela-
tionship between (Web) IE and Web mining also exist. The
results of the IE process could be in the form of a struc-
tured database or could be a compression or summary of
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 2
the original text or documents. One could view for the for-
mer that IE is a kind of pre-processing stage in the Web
mining process, which is the step after the IR process and
before the data mining techniques are being performed. In
a similar view, IE can also be used to improve the indexing
process, which is part of the IR process. Conversely, one
could also argue for the latter that IE is an instance of text
or Web mining since the summary or the compressed form of
a document is a new form of information that does not exist
before. However, we advocate the view that Web mining is
used to improve Web IE (Web mining is part of IE).
There are basically two types of IE: IE from unstructured
texts and IE from semi-structured data [92]. There are con-
siderable differences between the IE systems that are used
for unstructured documents with those that are used for
semi-structured or even structured documents. IE tasks
from unstructured natural language texts (classical or tra-
ditional IE tasks) typically use a rather basic to a slightly
deeper linguistic pre-processing before performing data min-
ing. Classical or traditional IE research, with roots on the
NLP community, has been studied for quite a long time
[33; 123]. We could say that Advanced Research Projects
Agency (ARPA) helped creating the field (classical IE) be-
cause the evaluations of IE cannot be separated from the
ARPA sponsored Message Understanding Conferences (MUCs)
and the TIPSTER IE project [123; 7]. MUCs and TIPSTER
are competitive environments that seek to improve IE and
IR technologies [33; 22]. Classical IE usually relies on lin-
guistic pre-processing such as syntactic analysis, semantic
analysis, and discourse analysis [111; 92; 76]. Indeed, clas-
sical IE could be called a core language technology [123].
With the increasing popularity of the Web, there is a need
for structural IE systems that extract information from semi-
structured documents. Structural IE research is different
from the classical one as it usually utilizes the meta-information
(e.g. HTML tags [111], simple syntactics [76], or delim-
iters [92] that are available inside the semi-structured data.
Structural IE approaches that do not use linguistic con-
straints are termed wrapper induction [92]. Some of the
structural IE systems are built manually by knowledge en-
gineering approach, for examples see [26; 9; 59]. However,
more and more structural IE systems for the Web are built
(semi-) automatically using machine learning techniques or
other algorithms as building the systems manually is no
longer appropriate [76]. Some examples are [77; 51; 66; 93;
58; 111]. These systems are usually built by using machine
learning or data mining techniques, which learn extraction
rules from the annotated corpora. For more explanations
and the categories of IE we point interested readers to the
following survey papers. For classical IE and the issues of
IE for unstructured texts we refer to [33; 22; 7; 111] and for
structural IE we refer to [111; 92].
2.1.3 Web Mining and Machine Learning Applied on
the Web
Web mining is not the same as learning from the Web or
machine learning techniques applied on the Web. On the
one hand, there are some applications of machine learning
applied on the Web that are not instances of Web mining.
An example of this is a machine learning technique that is
used to spider the Web efficiently for a specific topic [104;
86] that emphasize on planning the best path that is going
to be traversed next. On the other hand, there are some
other methods used for Web mining besides machine learn-
ing methods. Some examples are some proprietary algo-
rithms that are used for mining the hubs and authorities
[24], DataGuides [55; 56] and Web schema discovery [120;
96]. However, there is a close relationship between the two
research areas. Machine learning techniques support and
help Web mining as they could be applied to the processes
in Web mining. For example recent research [90] shows that
applying machine learning techniques could improve the text
classification process compared to the traditional IR tech-
niques. In short, Web mining intersects with the application
of machine learning on the Web.
2.2 Web Mining Categories
In this section we give the overview of each category. More
detailed explanations are given in the respective sections.
Similar to Madria, et al. [83] and Borges and Levene [15],
we categorize Web mining into three areas of interest based
on which part of the Web to mine: Web content mining,
Web structure mining, and Web usage mining. Web con-
tent mining describes the discovery of useful information
from the Web contents/data/documents. However, what
consist of the Web contents could encompass a very broad
range of data. Previously the Internet consists of different
types of services and data sources such as Gopher, FTP
and Usenet. Now most of those data are either ported to
or accessible from the Web. It is mentioned in [65] that in
the last several years the growth in the amount of govern-
ment information has been tremendous. We also know the
existence of Digital Libraries that are also accessible from
the Web. We also see that many companies are transform-
ing their businesses and services electronically. As a con-
sequence many of the company databases that previously
resided in the legacy systems are being ported to or made
accessible from the Web. Thus the employees, partners, or
even customers could access some of the company database
directly from Web based interfaces. Another consequence of
this transformation is the existence of Web applications so
that the users could access the applications through Web in-
terfaces. Many applications and systems are being migrated
to the Web and many types of applications are emerging in
the Web environment. Of course some of the Web content
data are hidden data, which cannot be indexed. These data
are either generated dynamically as a result of queries and
reside in the DBMSs or are private. In short, the Web al-
ready contains many kinds and types of data.
Basically, the Web content consists of several types of data
such as textual, image, audio, video, metadata as well as
hyperlinks. Recent research on mining multi types of data
is termed multimedia data mining [128]. Thus we could con-
sider multimedia data mining as an instance of Web content
mining. However this line of research still receives less at-
tention than the research on the text or hypertext contents
[128; 89]. The Web content data consist of unstructured
data such as free texts, semi-structured data such as HTML
documents, and a more structured data such as data in the
tables or database generated HTML pages. However, much
of the Web content data is unstructured text data [40; 20; 4;
23]. The research around applying data mining techniques
to unstructured text is termed knowledge discovery in texts
(KDT) [44], or text data mining [61], or text mining [115].
Hence we could consider text mining as an instance of Web
content mining. We discuss text mining further in the next
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 3
section. We could differentiate the research done in Web
content mining from two different points of view: IR and
DB [30] views. The goal of Web content mining from the IR
view is mainly to assist or to improve the information find-
ing or filtering the information to the users usually based
on either inferred or solicited user profiles, while the goal
of Web content mining from the DB view mainly tries to
model the data on the Web and to integrate them so that
more sophisticated queries other than the keywords based
search could be performed. These viewpoints are further
discussed in the next section.
Web structure mining [24] tries to discover the model un-
derlying the link structures of the Web. The model is based
on the topology of the hyperlinks with or without the de-
scription of the links. This model can be used to categorize
Web pages and is useful to generate information such as
the similarity and relationship between different Web sites.
Web structure mining could be used to discover authority
sites for the subjects (authorities) and overview sites for the
subjects that point to many authorities (hubs).
Web usage mining [30] tries to make sense of the data gen-
erated by the Web surfer’s sessions or behaviors. While the
Web content and structure mining utilize the real or pri-
mary data on the Web, Web usage mining mines the sec-
ondary data derived from the interactions of the users while
interacting with the Web. The Web usage data includes the
data from Web server access logs, proxy server logs, browser
logs, user profiles, registration data, user sessions or trans-
actions, cookies, user queries, bookmark data, mouse clicks
and scrolls, and any other data as the results of interac-
tions. Table 1 gives an overview of the above Web mining
categories (the explanations are given in the subsequent sec-
tions).
However we should emphasize that the distinctions between
the above categories are not clear-cut. Web content mining
might utilize text and links and even the profiles that are
either inferred or inputted by the users. User profiles are
mostly used for the user modeling applications or personal
assistants. The same is true for Web structure mining that
could use the information about the links in addition to the
link structures. Moreover we could infer the traversed links
from the documents that were requested during the user
session from the logs generated by the server. We could also
characterize the categories above from the point of view of
the scope of most of the work done in the respective areas:
local scope spans an individual Web site while global scope
spans the entire Web. The scope of the Web content mining
from the IR view and Web structure mining is global while
the scope of the Web content mining from the DB view and
Web usage mining is local. However this characterization is
not clear-cut either.
In practice, the three Web mining tasks above could be
used in isolation or combined in an application, especially
in Web content and structure mining since the Web docu-
ments might also contain links. For example, Chakrabarti
et al. [24] uses as Web content the terms in a document’s
link neighborhood and as Web structure the links from its
neighbors, to classify Web pages. Joachims et al. [67] use
Web content and usage to build a software tour agent for
assisting users browsing a Web site.
2.3 Web Mining and the Agent Paradigm
Web mining is often viewed from or implemented within
Table 2: The association between the categories of Web min-
ing and the agent paradigm
Content-based filters ↔ Content mining
Reputation-based filters ↔ Structure (and content) mining
Collaborative or social-based
filters
↔ Usage mining
Event-based filters ↔ Usage mining
Hybrid filters ↔ Combination of the categories
an agent paradigm. Thus, Web mining has a close rela-
tionship with software agents or intelligent agents. Indeed
some of these agents perform data mining tasks to achieve
their goals. According to Green, et al. [57] there are three
sub-categories of software agents: user interface agents, dis-
tributed agents, and mobile agents. The sub-categories of
software agents that are relevant for data mining tasks are
user interface agents and distributed agents. User interface
agents try to maximize the productivity of current users in-
teraction with the system by adapting behavior. The issue
of personalization abounds here. User interface agents that
can be classified into the Web mining agent category are in-
formation retrieval agents, information filtering agents, and
personal assistant agents. Distributed agents technology is
concerned with problem solving by a group of agents and
relevant agents in this category are distributed agents for
knowledge discovery or data mining (for example see [70]).
There are two frequently used approaches for developing in-
telligent agents that help users find and retrieve relevant in-
formation from the Web [11], namely content-based and col-
laborative approaches. In the content-based approach, the
system searches for items that match based on an analysis of
the content using the user preferences. In the collaborative
approach, the system tries to find users with similar inter-
ests to give recommendations to. The system does this by
analyzing the user profiles and sessions or transactions. It
assumes that if some users rate an item high, then the other
users with similar interests would rate this item high also.
So this approach mainly uses the usage data (user ratings).
Viewed in this light we could categorize the content-based
methods as Web content mining and categorize the collabo-
rative approaches as Web usage mining. However, collabo-
rative approaches might also be used or combined with the
Web content.
A similar view related to the Web mining categories above
also exists in the software agent community. Delgado [38]
classifies the user interface agents by the underlying infor-
mation filtering technology into content-based filters, rep-
utation based filters, collaborative or social-based filters,
event-based filters, and hybrid filters. In event based fil-
tering, the system tracks and follows the events that are
inferred from the surfing habits of people in the Web. Some
examples of those events are saving a URL into a bookmark
folder, mouse clicks and scrolls, link traverse behavior, etc.
We could make an association between these agent-based
categories with the Web mining categories above. Table 2
shows the association.
3. WEB CONTENT MINING
In this section we list some of the research in the respective
categories in separate tables. We should note that the lists
are by no means complete. The explanations on the meth-
ods surveyed are beyond the scope of this paper. Interested
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 4
Table 1: Web mining categories
Web Mining
Web Content Mining Web Structure Mining Web Usage Mining
IR View DB View
View of Data - Unstructured - Semi structured - Links structure - Interactivity
- Semi structured - Web site as DB
Main Data - Text documents - Hypertext documents - Links structure - Server logs
- Hypertext documents - Browser logs
Representation - Bag of words, n-grams - Edge-labeled graph (OEM) - Graph - Relational table
- Terms, phrases - Relational - Graph
- Concepts or ontology
- Relational
Method - TFIDF and variants - Proprietary algorithms - Proprietary algorithms - Machine Learning
- Machine learning - ILP - Statistical
- Statistical (including NLP) - (Modified) association rules - (Modified) association rules
Application
Categories
- Categorization - Finding frequent sub-
structures
- Categorization - Site construction, adapta-
tion, and management
- Clustering - Web site schema discovery - Clustering - Marketing
- Finding extraction rules - User modeling
- Finding patterns in text
- User modeling
readers can consult the book by Mitchell [88] and the re-
spective papers for the explanation of the methods. We just
intend to give a taste on the variety of some representations,
processes, methods, and applications that have been used.
3.1 Information Retrieval View
3.1.1 Information Retrieval View for Unstructured Doc-
uments
Table 3 summarizes some of the research done for unstruc-
tured documents. What we mean by the unstructured docu-
ments is free texts such as news stories. Most of the research
in table 3 uses bag of words to represent unstructured docu-
ments. The bag of words or vector representation [106] takes
single words found in the training corpus as features. This
representation ignores the sequence in which the words occur
and is based on the statistic about single words in isolation.
The features could be Boolean (a word either occurs or does
not occur in a document), or frequency based (frequency of
the word in a document). Variations of the feature selection
include removing the case, punctuation, infrequent words,
and stop words. The features could be reduced further by
applying some other feature selection techniques, such as in-
formation gain, mutual information, cross entropy, or odds
ratio (see [91] for the details). Other preprocessing includes
Latent Semantic Indexing (LSI) [36] that seeks to trans-
form the original document vectors to a lower dimensional
space by analyzing the correlational structure of terms in
the document collection such that similar documents that
do not share terms are placed in the same topic, and stem-
ming which reduces words to their morphological roots. For
example the words “informing”, “information”, “informer”,
and “informed” would be stemmed to their common root
“inform” and only the latter word is used as the feature
instead of the former four. While those pre-processing vari-
ations are useful for reducing feature set size, the generality
of their effectiveness over different domains for text catego-
rization tasks are doubted [105].
Other feature representations are also possible such as using
information about word positions in the document [27; 3;
50], using n-grams representation (word sequences of length
up to n) [64; 70] (for example “the morphological roots” is a
tri-gram), using phrases [39; 50; 107; 125] such as “the quick
brown fox that run away”, using document concept cate-
gories [44], using terms [45] such as “annual interest rate”
or “Wall Street”, using hypernyms (linguistic term for the
“is a” relationship - a dog is an animal, thus “animal” is a
hypernym of “dog”) [107], or using named entities [124] such
as people’s names, dates, email addresses, locations, organi-
zations, or URLs. The relational representation ([27; 68] in
table 3) that we mean here is actually first order logic, a lan-
guage that is more expressive than propositional logic (for
instance see [88]). For example in the bag of words represen-
tation features are the frequencies of specific words; using
a relational representation one might use relationships be-
tween different words and their positions, e.g. “word X is to
the left of word Y in the same sentence”. Although different
types of representations have been used, there is currently
no study that shows clear advantages of some representa-
tions over several domains for text categorization tasks [90].
Indeed, Scott and Matwin [107] compare different represen-
tations (bag of words, phrase based, and hypernym) but
found no significant differences in the performance of differ-
ent representations.
As we can see from table 3, the commonly used process is 1
- 2 - 3 - 4, while some others do not use any or only use a
minimal pre-processing step (process 1 - 3 - 4). The name
and explanation of the four steps are described in section
2.1 above. The use of text compression techniques [124] is
rather new for the text classification task. The applications
range from text classification or categorization, event de-
tection and tracking, finding extraction patterns or rules,
to finding some interesting patterns in the text documents.
Event detection and tracking problems are sub-topics of a
broader initiative called topic detection and tracking (TDT),
which is a new line of research related to research in infor-
mation retrieval and filtering [6]. TDT is an initiative to
investigate the state of the art in finding and following new
events in a stream of news stories broadcast [5].
Recently the usage of the term text mining has been a sub-
ject to controversy. There are at least two controversies that
we are aware of: one is regarding the usage of the term “min-
ing” itself [61] and the other one is regarding the meaning
of the word “knowledge” in knowledge discovery from text
(KDT) [74]. As far as we know, the term text mining or
KDT was first proposed by Feldman and Dagan in [44].
They suggest to structure the text documents by means
of information extraction, text categorization, or applying
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 5
Table 3: An IR view on Web content mining for unstructured documents
Author Document Representa-
tion
Process Method Application
Ahonen, et al. [3] Bag of words and word
positions
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Episode rules - Finding keywords and
keyphrases
- Discovering grammatical rules
and collocations
Billsus and Pazzani [13] Bag of words 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - TFIDF Text classification
- Näıve Bayes
Cohen [27] Relational 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - Propositional rule based sys-
tem
Text classification
Inductive Logic Programming
Dumais, et al. [39] - Bag of words 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - TFIDF Text categorization
- Phrases - Decision trees
- Naive Bayes
- Bayes nets
- Support Vector Machines
Feldman and Dagan [44] Concept categories 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Relative entropy Finding patterns between con-
cept distributions in textual
data
Feldman, et al. [45] Terms 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Association rules Finding patterns across terms
in textual data
Frank, et al. [50] Phrases and their posi-
tions
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Naive Bayes Extracting keyphrases from
text documents
Freitag and McCallum
[52]
Bag of words 1 - 3 - 4 Hidden Markov Models Learning extraction models
Hofmann [62] Bag of words 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Unsupervised statistical
method
Hierarchical clustering
Honkela, et al. [64] Bag of words with n-
grams
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Self-Organizing Maps Text and document clustering
Junker, et al. [68] Relational 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Inductive Logic Programming - Text categorization
- Learning extraction rules
Kargupta, et al. [70] Bag of words with n-
grams
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - Unsupervised hierarchical
clustering
Text classification and hierar-
chical clustering
- Decision trees
- Statistical analysis
Nahm and Mooney [94] Bag of words 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Decision trees Predicting (words) relationship
Nigam, et al. [97] Bag of words 1 - 3 - 4 Maximum entropy Text classification
Scott and Matwin [107] - Bag of words 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Rule based system Text classification
- Phrases
- Hypernyms and syn-
onyms
Soderland [111] Sentences, and clauses 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Rule learning Learning extraction rules
Weiss, et al. [121] Bag of words 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Boosted decision trees Text categorization
Wiener, et al. [122] Bag of words 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - Neural Networks Text categorization
- Logistic Regression
Witten, et al. [124] Named entity 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Text compression Named entity classifier
Yang, et al. [125] Bag of words and
phrases
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - Clustering algorithms Event detection and tracking
- k-Nearest Neighbor
- Decision tree
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 6
NLP techniques as pre-processing step before performing
any kind of KDTs. The reason is mining on the unprepared
documents does not provide effectively exploitable results
[102; 45]. Currently the term text mining has been used
to describe different applications such as text categorization
[63; 115; 121], text clustering [115; 103], IE [3], empirical
computational linguistic tasks [61], exploratory data analy-
sis [61], finding patterns in text databases [44; 45], finding
sequential patterns in texts [81; 3; 4], and association dis-
covery [115; 94]. So although some of the papers surveyed
mention their application as text mining, we use less con-
troversial names for the applications.
3.1.2 Information Retrieval View for Semi-Structured
Documents
We can see from table 4 that the process used in the works
surveyed above is 1 - 2 - 3 - 4. We can also see that the
works surveyed in table 4 use richer representations com-
pared to the works surveyed in table 3. This is due to
the additional structural (HTML and hyperlink) informa-
tion in the hypertext documents. Actually all of the works
surveyed utilize the HTML structures inside the documents
and some utilize the hyperlink structure between the doc-
uments for document representation. The methods that
are used are common data mining methods. The applica-
tions ranged from hypertext classification or categorization
and clustering, learning relations between Web documents,
learning extraction patterns or rules, and finding patterns
in semi-structured data.
3.2 Database View
As mentioned in [49], the database techniques on the Web
are related to the problems of managing and querying the
information on the Web. [49] mentions that there are three
classes of tasks related to those problems: modeling and
querying the Web, information extraction and integration,
and Web site construction and restructuring. Although the
first two tasks are related to Web content mining applica-
tions, not all the works there are inside the scope of Web
content mining. This is due to the absence of the machine
learning or data mining techniques in the process. Basically
the DB view tries to infer the structure of the Web site or to
transform a Web site to become a database so that better
information management and querying on the Web become
possible. As mentioned previously, the DB view of Web con-
tent mining mainly tries to model the data on the Web and
to integrate them so that more sophisticated queries other
than the keywords based search could be performed. These
could be achieved by finding the schema of Web documents,
building a Web warehouse or a Web knowledge base or a
virtual database. The research done in this area mainly
deals with semi-structured data. Semi-structured data from
database view often refers to data that has some structure
but no rigid schema [1; 18].
From table 5, we can see that the DB view uses representa-
tions that differ from the IR view that we see in table 3 and
table 4. The DB view mainly uses Object Exchange Model
(OEM) [2] that represents semi-structured data by a labeled
graph. The data in the OEM is viewed as a graph, with ob-
jects as the vertices and labels on the edges. Each object
is identified by an object identifier (oid) and a value that
is either atomic, such as integer, string, gif, html, etc. or
complex in the form of a set of object references, denoted as
a set of (label, oid) pairs. All of the processes that are sur-
veyed above are 1 - 2 - 3 - 4. However, the process used here
typically starts from manually selected Web sites for doing
Web content mining instead of searching the whole Internet
for the specific resources. This is partly due to the appli-
cations of the DB view that are quite different from those
of the IR view (which mostly are classification tasks). The
process 1 and 2 is typically done by site-specific wrappers
or parsers for hypertext documents.
Most of the applications that are surveyed above are the
task of schema extraction or discovery [69; 116] or build-
ing DataGuides [55; 95; 56]. Roughly speaking, a schema or
DataGuide is a kind of structural summary of semi-structured
data. For practical applications and computational reason,
this summary is often approximated [1; 56]. Some applica-
tions do not deal with the task of finding the global schema
but deal with the task of finding frequent substructures (sub-
schema) in semi-structured data. Another application deals
with the task of creating multi-layered database (MLDB)
[127] in which each layer is obtained by generalizations on
lower layers and use a special purpose query language for
Web mining to extract some knowledge from the MLDB of
Web documents. This is an example of the query perspec-
tive of data mining. There has been some work on query
languages for semi-structured data [2; 19] and for the Web
[8; 78; 87; 47]. However, we only see the works by Zäıane,
et al. [127] and Singh, et al. [109] that are inside the scope
of Web content mining.
Due to the different representations used in the DB view,
most of the methods used for data mining are also differ-
ent except the ILP methods that could operate on rela-
tional or graphical data. These differences are partly due
to the inappropriateness of many existing data mining tech-
niques, which operate on flat data, to operate on relational
or graphical data. [58; 95; 127] use proprietary algorithms
for schema discovery and for the construction of MLDB, [69]
uses a modified version of association rules, and [116] uses
an upgraded first order logic version of association rules [37].
3.3 About Mining Multimedia Data
We should note that we have not actually discussed the issue
of mining multimedia data on the Web. Although multime-
dia data has been the major focus for many researchers [72;
114] and many techniques for multimedia IR and extrac-
tion have been proposed (for example see [60]), multimedia
data mining is still in its infancy [128]. Uthurusamy [117],
Shapiro et al. [101], and Mitchell [89] assert that working
towards a unifying framework for representation, problem
solving, and learning from multimedia data is indeed a chal-
lenge. Fayyad et al. [41] describes mining the images of sky
objects taken from satellite. Smyth, et al. [110] describes
mining images to identify small volcanoes on Venus. More
recent works are [128] in the application of Web data ware-
housing and [65] in the application of a medical IR system
for mining the multimedia data on the Web. For a definition
and a short survey on multimedia data mining, we refer to
[128].
4. WEB STRUCTURE MINING
If in the database view of Web content mining we are inter-
ested in the structure within Web documents (intra-document
structure), in Web structure mining we are interested in
the structure of the hyperlinks within the Web itself (inter-
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 7
Table 4: An IR view on Web content mining for semi-structured documents
Author Document Representa-
tion
Process Method Application
Craven, et al. [34] Relational and ontol-
ogy
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - Modified Naive Bayes - Hypertext classification
- Inductive Logic Programming - Learning Web page relation
- Learning extraction rules
Crimmins, et al. [35] Phrase, URLs, and
meta information
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Unsupervised and supervised
classification algorithms
- Hierarchical and graphical
classification
- Clustering
Fürnkranz [53] Bag of words and hy-
perlinks information
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Rule learning Hypertext classification
Joachims, et al. [67] Bag of words and hy-
perlinks information
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - TFIDF Hypertext prediction
- Reinforcement learning
Muslea, et al. [93] Bag of words, tags,
and word positions
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Rule learning Learning extraction rules
Shavlik and Eliassi-Rad
[108]
Localized bag of
words, and relational.
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Neural networks with reinforce-
ment learning
Hypertext (homepage) classifi-
cation
Singh, et al. [109] Concepts and Named
entity
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 - Modified association rule Finding patterns in semi-
structured texts
- Classification algorithm
Soderland [111] Sentences, phrases,
and named entity
1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Rule learning Learning extraction rules
Table 5: Web content mining from a database view
Author Document Representa-
tion
Process Method Application
Goldman and Widom
[56]
OEM 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Proprietary algorithms Finding DataGuide in semi-
structured data
Grumbach and Mecca
[58]
Strings and relational 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Proprietary algorithms Finding schema in semi-
structured data
Nestorov, et al. [95] OEM 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Proprietary algorithms Finding type hierarchy in semi-
structured data
Toivonen [116] OEM 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Upgraded association rules Finding useful sub-structure in
semi-structured data
Wang and Liu [69] OEM 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Modified association rules Finding frequent sub-
structures in semi-structured
data
Zaiane and Han [127] Relational 1 - 2 - 3 - 4 Attribute-oriented induction Multilevel databases
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 8
document structure). This line of research is inspired by the
study of social networks and citation analysis [71; 23]. With
social network analysis we could discover specific types of
pages (such as hubs, authorities, etc.) based on the incoming
and outgoing links. Web structure mining utilizes the hyper-
links structure of the Web to apply social network analysis
to model the underlying links structure of the Web itself.
Research done by Kautz et al. [71] utilizes the network
analysis of people to model the network of AI researchers.
They use the name entity data found in close proximity in
any public Web pages such as the hyperlinks from home
pages, co-authorship and citation of papers, exchange of in-
formation between individuals found in net-news archives,
and organization charts. In our framework, their research
could be classified as a combination of Web structure and
content mining.
Some algorithms have been proposed to model the Web
topology such as HITS [73], PageRank [16] and improve-
ments of HITS by adding content information to the links
structure [24] and by using outlier filtering [12]. These mod-
els are mainly applied as a method to calculate the quality
rank or relevancy of each Web page. Some examples are
the Clever system [24] and Google [16]. Some other appli-
cations of the models include Web pages categorization [25]
and discovering micro communities on the Web [75].
More applications of Web structure mining in the context of
Web warehouse are discussed by Madria, et al. [83]. These
include measuring the completeness of the Web sites by mea-
suring the frequency of local links that reside in the same
server, measuring the replication of Web documents across
the Web warehouse that helps in identifying the mirrored
sites for example, and discovering the nature of the hierar-
chy of hyperlinks in the Web sites of a particular domain to
study how the flow of information affects the design of the
Web sites.
5. WEB USAGE MINING
Web usage mining focuses on techniques that could predict
user behavior while the user interacts with the Web. As
mentioned before, the mined data in this category are the
secondary data on the Web as the result of interactions.
These data could range very widely but generally we could
classify them into the usage data that reside in the Web
clients, proxy servers and servers [113]. The Web usage
mining process could be classified into two commonly used
approaches [15]. The first approach maps the usage data of
the Web server into relational tables before an adapted data
mining technique is performed. The second approach uses
the log data directly by utilizing special pre-processing tech-
niques. As is true for typical data mining applications, the
issues of data quality and pre-processing are also very im-
portant here. The typical problem is distinguishing among
unique users, server sessions, episodes, etc. in the presence
of caching and proxy servers [85; 113]. For the details and
comparison of some pre-processing methods for Web usage
data we refer to [31].
In general, typical data mining methods (see for example
in [113]) could be used to mine the usage data after the
data have been pre-processed to the desired form. However,
modifications of the typical data mining methods are also
used such as composite association rules [14], an extension
of a traditional sequence discovery algorithm (MIDAS [17]),
and hypertext probabilistic grammars [15]. The Web usage
data could also be represented with graphs [17; 98]. Of-
ten the Web usage mining uses some background or domain
knowledge such as navigation templates, Web content, site
topology, concept hierarchies, and syntactic constraints [17;
112].
The applications of Web usage mining could be classified
into two main categories: learning a user profile or user mod-
eling in adaptive interfaces (personalized) (for examples see
[79]) and learning user navigation patterns (impersonalized)
(for examples see [112]). Web users would be interested in,
among others, techniques that could learn their informa-
tion needs and preferences, which is user modeling possibly
combined with Web content mining. On the other hand,
information providers would be interested in, among oth-
ers, techniques that could improve the effectiveness of the
information on their Web sites by adapting the Web site
design or by biasing the user’s behavior towards satisfying
the goals of the site. In other words, they are interested in
learning user navigation patterns. Then the learned knowl-
edge could be used for applications such as personalization
(at a Web site level), system improvement, site modifica-
tion, business intelligence, and usage characterization (see
[113] for the detail). It is not in our intention to give a com-
plete survey of Web usage mining research here. Interested
readers could consult the overview papers by Srivastava, et
al. [113], Spiliopoulou [112], and Masand and Spiliopoulou
[85], and Robert Cooley’s Ph.D. thesis [32] for mining user
patterns and the overview paper by Langley [79] for mining
user profiles.
6. RELATED WORKS
As far as we know, it was Etzioni [40] who first coined the
term Web mining. Etzioni starts by making a hypothesis
that the information on the Web is sufficiently structured
and outlines the subtasks of Web mining. His paper de-
scribes the Web mining processes. There have been some
works around the survey of data mining on the Web. The
first paper that we know that noticed the confusion in the
Web mining research is [30]. It gives a Web mining taxon-
omy but restricted to Web content and Web usage mining,
and gives a survey on Web usage mining. It divides the
Web content mining into the agent based approach and the
database approach. We use a similar division but divide it
into the IR approach instead of the agent approach. Later,
in [113] they classify Web mining into three categories that
are similar to our categories. Compared to their paper, our
paper points out three confusions on the usage of the term
Web mining, identifies additional user-centered Web mining
processes, and provides new perspectives for the Web mining
categories. We use the Web mining categories suggested in
[83] and [15]. [15] proposes a new model for mining Web log
data, while [83] discusses the research issues of Web mining
in the context of Web warehouse project.
Carbonell et al. [20] give an overview of the workshop on
learning from text and the Web that is related to Web con-
tent (from the IR view) and usage mining. They also give an
outline of the research directions in that area. Mladenic [90]
surveys the research on text learning and related intelligent
agents. She compares two frequently used approaches for de-
veloping intelligent agents, namely collaborative and content
based. In our categories, these would be Web content (from
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 9
the IR view) and usage mining. She also surveys research on
machine learning applied to text data, which is broader than
but similar to our discussion in section 3.1.1 about the IR
view of Web content mining from unstructured documents.
Carbonell et al. [21] review the emerging research collabora-
tions between the IR and machine learning communities in
a special issue of the Machine Learning journal. They also
indicate some fertile research areas for both communities.
Garofalakis et al. [54] review some data mining techniques
and the algorithms for Web mining that specifically take
into account the hyperlink information. Chakrabarti [23]
provides a survey of data mining for hypertext. His paper
mainly surveys the statistical techniques for Web content
across the continuum of supervised, semi-supervised and un-
supervised learning, and social network analysis techniques
for Web structure mining. Levy and Weld [82] wrote a sur-
vey in the special issue of Artificial Intelligence on intelligent
Internet systems that we think describes a broader domain
than Web mining. Vaithyanathan [118] gives an overview of
the papers in the special issue of Artificial Intelligence Re-
view on data mining on the Internet. He mentions similar
categories of Web mining as ours, except the database view
of Web content mining. Some other related work that we
found recently in special issues of some magazines are the
following. Yang and Pedersen edited a special issue on intel-
ligent information retrieval [126]. Filman and Pant edited a
special issue on searching the Internet [48].
7. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we survey the research in the area of Web min-
ing. We point out some confusions regarded the usage of the
term Web mining. We also suggest three Web mining cat-
egories and then situate some of the research with respect
to these categories. We also explore the connection between
Web mining categories and the related agent paradigm. For
the survey, we focus on representation issues, on the process,
and on the learning algorithm, and the application of the re-
cent works as the criteria. The Web presents new challenges
to the traditional data mining algorithms that work on flat
data. We have seen that some of the traditional data mining
algorithms have been extended or new algorithms have been
used to work on the Web data.
An interesting direction of Web content mining is the recent
interest in information integration [26; 46], which could be
in the form of a Web knowledge base [20; 29] or Web ware-
house [83], or in the form of a mediator (see [46] for exam-
ples). At least this is the area where database and other
research communities such as IR, AI, and machine learning
met recently. Information integration was mainly concerned
with integrating various databases but has changed its focus
with the increasing popularity of the Web [46]. The same is
also true for the research in IE, which could be thought as
a mediator or wrapper in the information integration area.
Information integration also raises some other research ques-
tions such as scaling up the number of Web sites that could
be integrated, wrapper maintenance, building and maintain-
ing a global schema, etc. [28] (see also [76] for other issues).
Topic detection and tracking (TDT) is also a promising re-
search area for IR and machine learning communities that
raises, among others, temporal issue in the data. It would
be interesting if the learning algorithm could model this as-
pect accurately. Some other promising research issues in
the area of Web content mining are discussed in [20]. Fi-
nally, another interesting fact is that graph structures oc-
cur almost everywhere in Web mining research. There are
many opportunities for (existing or new) machine learning
algorithms that could work with this representation or that
could take advantage of the available structures on the Web.
8. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Johannes Fürnkranz, Dunja Mladenic, Nico Ja-
cobs, and Maurice Bruynooghe for reading the draft and
the useful comments. We also thank Luc Dehaspe for the
interesting discussions. Raymond Kosala is supported by
the GOA Project LP+ of the Katholieke Universiteit Leu-
ven. Hendrik Blockeel is a post-doctoral fellow of the Fund
for Scientific Research of Flanders.
9. REFERENCES
[1] S. Abiteboul. Querying semi-structured data. In Pro-
ceedings of Database Theory - ICDT ’97, 6th Inter-
national Conference, volume 1186 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 1–18. Springer, 1997.
[2] S. Abiteboul, D. Quass, J. McHugh, J. Widom, and
J. L. Wiener. The lorel query language for semistruc-
tured data. Int. J. on Digital Libraries, 1(1):68–88,
1997.
[3] H. Ahonen, O. Heinonen, M. Klemettinen, and
A. Verkamo. Applying data mining techniques for de-
scriptive phrase extraction in digital document col-
lections. In Advances in Digital Libraries (ADL’98),
1998.
[4] H. Ahonen, O. Heinonen, M. Klemettinen, and
A. Verkamo. Finding co-occurring text phrases by
combining sequence and frequent set discovery. In Pro-
ceedings of 16th International Joint Conference on Ar-
tificial Intelligence IJCAI-99 Workshop on Text Min-
ing: Foundations, Techniques and Applications, pages
1–9, 1999.
[5] J. Allan, J. Carbonell, G. Doddington, J. Yamron, and
Y. Yang. Topic detection and tracking pilot study:
Final report. In Proceedings of the DARPA Broad-
cast News Transcription and Understanding Work-
shop, 1998.
[6] J. Allan, R. Papka, and V. Lavrenko. On-line new
event detection and tracking. In Proceedings of the
21st annual international ACM SIGIR conference on
Research and development in information retrieval,
pages 37–45, 1998.
[7] D. E. Appelt and D. Israel. Introduction to informa-
tion extraction technology. In Proceedings of 16th In-
ternational Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
IJCAI-99, Tutorial, 1999.
[8] G. O. Arocena and A. O. Mendelzon. Weboql: Re-
structuring documents, databases, and webs. Theory
and Practice of Object Systems, 5(3):127–141, 1999.
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 10
[9] P. Atzeni and G. Mecca. Cut & paste. In Proceedings of
the Sixteenth ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Sym-
posium on Principles of Database Systems, pages 144–
153. ACM Press, 1997.
[10] R. Baeza-Yates and e. Berthier Ribeiro-Neto. Mod-
ern Information Retrieval. Addison-Wesley Longman
Publishing Company, 1999.
[11] M. Balabanovic and Y. Shoham. Fab: Content-
based, collaborative recommendation. Communica-
tions of the ACM, 40(3):66–70, 1997.
[12] K. Bharat and M. R. Henzinger. Improved algorithms
for topic distillation in a hyperlinked environment. In
Proceedings of the 21st annual international ACM SI-
GIR conference on Research and development in in-
formation retrieval, pages 104–111, 1998.
[13] D. Billsus and M. Pazzani. A hybrid user model for
news story classification. In Proceedings of the Seventh
International Conference on User Modeling (UM ’99),
1999.
[14] J. Borges and M. Levene. Mining association rules in
hypertext databases. In Proceedings of the Fourth In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD-98), 1998.
[15] J. Borges and M. Levene. Data mining of user nav-
igation patterns. In Proceedings of the WEBKDD’99
Workshop on Web Usage Analysis and User Profiling,
pages 31–36, 1999.
[16] S. Brin and L. Page. The anatomy of a large-scale
hypertextual Web search engine. In Seventh Interna-
tional World Wide Web Conference, 1998.
[17] A. Büchner, M. Baumgarten, S. Anand, M. Mulvenna,
and J. Hughes. Navigation pattern discovery from in-
ternet data. In Proceedings of the WEBKDD’99 Work-
shop on Web Usage Analysis and User Profiling, 1999.
[18] P. Buneman. Semistructured data. In Proceedings of
the Sixteenth ACM SIGACT-SIGMOD-SIGART Sym-
posium on Principles of Database Systems, pages 117–
121. ACM Press, 1997.
[19] P. Buneman, S. B. Davidson, G. G. Hillebrand, and
D. Suciu. A query language and optimization tech-
niques for unstructured data. In Proceedings of the
1996 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on
Management of Data, pages 505–516. ACM Press,
1996.
[20] J. Carbonell, M. Craven, S. Fienberg, T. Mitchell, and
Y. Yang. Report on the conald workshop on learning
from text and the web. In CONALD Workshop on
Learning from Text and the Web, 1998.
[21] J. Carbonell, Y. Yang, and W. Cohen. Special issue
of machine learning on information retrieval introduc-
tion. Machine Learning, 39:99–101, 2000.
[22] C. Cardie. Empirical methods in information extrac-
tion. AI Magazine, 18(4):65–79, 1997.
[23] S. Chakrabarti. Data mining for hypertext: A tutorial
survey. ACM SIGKDD Explorations, 1(2):1–11, 2000.
[24] S. Chakrabarti, B. Dom, D. Gibson, J. Klein-
berg, S. Kumar, P. Raghavan, S. Rajagopalan, and
A. Tomkins. Mining the link structure of the world
wide web. IEEE Computer, 32(8):60–67, 1999.
[25] S. Chakrabarti, B. Dom, and P. Indyk. Enhanced hy-
pertext categorization using hyperlinks. In SIGMOD
1998, Proceedings ACM SIGMOD International Con-
ference on Management of Data, pages 307–318. ACM
Press, 1998.
[26] S. Chawathe, H. Garcia-Molina, J. Hammer, K. Ire-
land, Y. Papakonstantinou, J. Ullman, and J. Widom.
The tsimmis project: Integration of heterogeneous in-
formation sources. In Proceedings of the 10th Meeting
of the Information Processing Society of Japan, pages
7–18, 1994.
[27] W. W. Cohen. Learning to classify english text with ilp
methods. In Advances in Inductive Logic Programming
(Ed. L. De Raedt). IOS Press, 1995.
[28] W. W. Cohen. Some practical observations on integra-
tion of web information. In ACM SIGMOD Workshop
on The Web and Databases (WebDB’99), pages 55–60,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, 1999.
[29] W. W. Cohen. What can we learn from the web?
In Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning (ICML’99), pages 515–521,
1999.
[30] R. Cooley, B. Mobasher, and J. Srivastava. Web min-
ing: Information and pattern discovery on the world
wide web. In Proceedings of the 9th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence
(ICTAI’97), 1997.
[31] R. Cooley, B. Mobasher, and J. Srivastava. Data
preparation for mining world wide web browsing
patterns. Knowledge and Information Systems, 1(1),
1999.
[32] R. W. Cooley. Web Usage Mining: Discovery and Ap-
plication of Interesting Patterns from Web data. PhD
thesis, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Min-
nesota, May 2000.
[33] J. Cowie and W. Lehnert. Information extraction.
Communications of the ACM, 39(1):80–91, 1996.
[34] M. Craven, D. DiPasquo, D. Freitag, A. McCallum,
T. Mitchell, K. Nigam, and S. Slattery. Learning to
extract symbolic knowledge from the world wide web.
In Proceedings of the Fifteenth National Conference
on Artificial Intellligence (AAAI98), pages 509–516,
1998.
[35] F. Crimmins, A. Smeaton, T. Dkaki, and J. Mothe.
Tétrafusion: Information discovery on the internet.
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 14(4):55–62, 1999.
[36] S. Deerwester, S. Dumais, G. Furnas, T. Landauer,
and R. Harshman. Indexing by latent semantic anal-
ysis. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 41(6):391–407, 1990.
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 11
[37] L. Dehaspe and L. de Raedt. Mining association rules
in multiple relations. In Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Workshop on Inductive Logic Programming, vol-
ume 1297 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
125–132, Prague, Czech Republic, 1997. Springer.
[38] J. A. Delgado. Agent-Based Information Filtering and
Recommender System On the Internet. PhD thesis,
Dept. of Intelligence & Computer Science, Nagoya In-
stitute of Technology, March 2000.
[39] S. Dumais, J. Platt, D. Heckerman, and M. Sa-
hami. Inductive learning algorithms and representa-
tions for text categorization. In Proceedings of the 1998
ACM 7th international conference on Information and
knowledge management, pages 148–155, Washington
United States, 1998.
[40] O. Etzioni. The world wide web: Quagmire or gold
mine. Communications of the ACM, 39(11):65–68,
1996.
[41] U. Fayyad, S. Djorgovski, and N. Weir. Automating
the analysis and cataloging of sky surveys. In Advances
in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pages 471–
493. AAAI Press, 1996.
[42] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth. From
data mining to knowledge discovery: An overview. In
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 1–34. AAAI Press, 1996.
[43] U. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, and P. Smyth.
Knowledge discovery and data mining: toward a uni-
fying framework. In Proceeding of The Second Int.
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Min-
ing, pages 82–88, 1996.
[44] R. Feldman and I. Dagan. Knowledge discovery in tex-
tual databases (kdt). In Proceedings of the First In-
ternational Conference on Knowledge Discovery and
Data Mining (KDD-95), pages 112–117, Montreal,
Canada, 1995.
[45] R. Feldman, M. Fresko, Y. Kinar, Y. Lindell, O. Liph-
stat, M. Rajman, Y. Schler, and O. Zamir. Text min-
ing at the term level. In Principles of Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, Second European Sympo-
sium, PKDD ’98, volume 1510 of Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 56–64. Springer, 1998.
[46] D. Fensel, C. Knoblock, N. Kushmerick, and M.-C.
Rousset. Workshop on intelligent information integra-
tion (iii’99). AI Magazine, 21(1):91–94, 2000.
[47] M. F. Fernandez, D. Florescu, A. Y. Levy, and D. Su-
ciu. A query language for a web-site management sys-
tem. SIGMOD Record, 26(3):4–11, 1997.
[48] R. E. Filman and S. Pant. Searching the internet -
guest editors’ introduction. IEEE Internet Computing,
2(4):21–23, 1998.
[49] D. Florescu, A. Y. Levy, and A. O. Mendelzon.
Database techniques for the world-wide web: A sur-
vey. SIGMOD Record, 27(3):59–74, 1998.
[50] E. Frank, G. W. Paynter, I. H. Witten, C. Gutwin,
and C. G. Nevill-Manning. Domain-specific keyphrase
extraction. In Proceedings of 16th International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence IJCAI-99, pages
668–673, 1999.
[51] D. Freitag. Information extraction from html: Appli-
cation of a general learning approach. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth Conference on Artificial Intelligence
AAAI-98, pages 517–523, 1998.
[52] D. Freitag and A. McCallum. Information extraction
with hmms and shrinkage. In Proceedings of the AAAI-
99 Workshop on Machine Learning for Information
Extraction, 1999.
[53] J. Fürnkranz. Exploiting structural information for
text classification on the www. In Advances in Intel-
ligent Data Analysis, Third International Symposium,
IDA-99, pages 487–498, 1999.
[54] M. N. Garofalakis, R. Rastogi, S. Seshadri, and
K. Shim. Data mining and the web: Past, present and
future. In Workshop on Web Information and Data
Management, 1999, pages 43–47, 1999.
[55] R. Goldman and J. Widom. Dataguides: Enabling
query formulation and optimization in semistructured
databases. In VLDB’97, Proceedings of 23rd Interna-
tional Conference on Very Large Data Bases, pages
436–445. Morgan Kaufmann, 1997.
[56] R. Goldman and J. Widom. Approximate dataguides.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Query Processing
for Semistructured Data and Non-Standard Data For-
mats, 1999.
[57] S. Green, L. Hurst, B. Nangle, P. Cunningham,
F. Somers, and R. Evans. Software agents: A review.
Technical Report TCD-CS-1997-06, Technical Report
of Trinity College, University of Dublin, 1997.
[58] S. Grumbach and G. Mecca. In search of the lost
schema. In Database Theory - ICDT ’99, 7th Inter-
national Conference, pages 314–331, 1999.
[59] J. Hammer, H. Garcia-Molina, J. Cho, A. Crespo,
and R. Aranha. Extracting semistructured informa-
tion from the web. In Proceedings of the Workshop
on Management of Semistructured Data, pages 18–25,
1997.
[60] A. Hauptmann. Integrating and using large databases
of text, image, video and audio. IEEE Intelligent Sys-
tems, 14(5):34–35, 1999.
[61] M. A. Hearst. Untangling text data mining. In Pro-
ceedings of ACL’99: the 37th Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 1999.
[62] T. Hofmann. The cluster-abstraction model: Unsuper-
vised learning of topic hierarchies from text data. In
Proceedings of 16th International Joint Conference on
Artificial Intelligence IJCAI-99, pages 682–687, 1999.
[63] S. J. Hong and S. M. Weiss. Advances in predictive
model generation for data mining. Technical Report
Report RC-21570, IBM Research Report, 1999.
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 12
[64] T. Honkela, S. Kaski, K. Lagus, and T. Kohonen.
Websom - self-organizing maps of document collec-
tions. In Proc. of Workshop on Self-Organizing Maps
(WSOM’97), pages 310–315, 1997.
[65] A. Houston, H. Chen, S. M. Hubbard, B. R. Schatz,
T. D. Ng, R. R. Sewell, and K. M. Tolle. Medical data
mining on the internet: Research on a cancer informa-
tion system. Artificial Intelligence Review, 13:437–446,
1999.
[66] C.-N. Hsu and M.-T. Dung. Generating finite-state
transducers for semi-structured data extraction from
the web. Information Systems, 23(8):521–538, 1998.
[67] T. Joachims, D. Freitag, and T. Mitchell. Webwatcher:
A tour guide for the world wide web. In Proceedings
of the International Joint Conference on Artificial In-
telligence IJCAI-97, pages 770–777, 1997.
[68] M. Junker, M. Sintek, and M. Rinck. Learning for text
categorization and information extraction with ilp. In
Proceedings of the Workshop on Learning Language in
Logic, 1999.
[69] H. L. K. Wang. Discovering association of struc-
ture from semistructured objects. To appear in IEEE
Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering,
1999.
[70] H. Kargupta, I. Hamzaoglu, and B. Stafford. Dis-
tributed data mining using an agent based architec-
ture. In Proceedings of Knowledge Discovery And Data
Mining, pages 211–214. AAAI Press, 1997.
[71] H. Kautz, B. Selman, and M. Shah. The hidden web.
AI magazine, 18(2):27–36, 1997.
[72] S. Khoshafian and A. B. Baker. Multimedia and Imag-
ing Databases. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1996.
[73] J. M. Kleinberg. Authoritative sources in a hyper-
linked environment. In Proc. of ACM-SIAM Sympo-
sium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 668–677, 1998.
[74] Y. Kodratoff. About knowledge discovery in texts:
A definition and an example. In Proc. of Advanced
Course on Artificial Intelligence (ACAI-99) on Ma-
chine Learning and Applications (Invited talk), 1999.
[75] S. R. Kumar, P. Raghavan, S. Rajagopalan, and
A. Tomkins. Trawling the web for emerging cyber-
communities. In Proceedings of the Eighth World Wide
Web Conference (WWW8), 1999.
[76] N. Kushmerick. Gleaning the web. IEEE Intelligent
Systems, 14(2):20–22, 1999.
[77] N. Kushmerick, D. Weld, and R. Doorenbos. Wrapper
induction for information extraction. In Proceedings of
the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence IJCAI-97, pages 729–737, 1997.
[78] L. Lakshmanan, F. Sadri, and I. Subramanian. A
declarative language for querying and restructuring
the web. In Proceedings of 6th. International Work-
shop on Research Issues in Data Engineering, RIDE
’96, pages 12–21, 1996.
[79] P. Langley. User modeling in adaptive interfaces. In
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference
on User Modeling, pages 357–370, 1999.
[80] S. Lawrence and C. L. Giles. Accessibility of informa-
tion on the web. Nature, 400:107–109, 1999.
[81] B. Lent, R. Agrawal, and R. Srikant. Discovering
trends in text databases. In Proc. 3 rd Int Conf. On
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 1997),
pages 227–230, 1997.
[82] A. Y. Levy and D. S. Weld. Intelligent internet sys-
tems. Artificial Intelligence, 118(1-2), 2000.
[83] S. K. Madria, S. S. Bhowmick, W. K. Ng, and E.-P.
Lim. Research issues in web data mining. In Proceed-
ings of Data Warehousing and Knowledge Discovery,
First International Conference, DaWaK ’99, pages
303–312, 1999.
[84] P. Maes. Agents that reduce work and information
overload. Communications of the ACM, 37(7):30–40,
1994.
[85] B. Masand and M. Spiliopoulou. Webkdd-99: Work-
shop on web usage analysis and user profiling. ACM
SIGKDD Explorations, 1(2), 2000.
[86] A. McCallum, K. Nigam, J. Rennie, and K. Seymore.
A machine learning approach to building domain-
specific search engines. In Proceedings of the Inter-
national Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
IJCAI-99, pages 662–667, 1999.
[87] A. O. Mendelzon, G. A. Mihaila, and T. Milo. Query-
ing the world wide web. In Proceedings of the Fourth
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed
Information Systems, pages 80–91, 1996.
[88] T. Mitchell. Machine Learning. McGraw Hill, 1997.
[89] T. M. Mitchell. Machine learning and data mining.
Communications of the ACM, 42(11):30–36, 1999.
[90] D. Mladenic. Text-learning and related intelligent
agents. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 14(4):44–54, 1999.
[91] D. Mladenic and M. Grobelnik. Feature selection for
unbalanced class distribution and naive bayes. In Pro-
ceedings of the 16th International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning ICML-99, pages 258–267, 1999.
[92] I. Muslea. Extraction patterns for information extrac-
tion tasks: A survey. In AAAI-99 Workshop on Ma-
chine Learning for Information Extraction, 1999.
[93] I. Muslea, S. Minton, and C. Knoblock. Wrapper
induction for semistructured, web-based information
sources. In Proceedings of the Conference on Auto-
matic Learning and Discovery CONALD-98, 1998.
[94] U. Y. Nahm and R. J. Mooney. A mutually beneficial
integration of data mining and information extraction.
In Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Conference
on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-00), 2000.
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 13
[95] S. Nestorov, S. Abiteboul, and R. Motwani. Infering
structure in semistructured data. SIGMOD Record,
26(4), 1997.
[96] S. Nestorov, S. Abiteboul, and R. Motwani. Extracting
schema from semistructured data. In L. M. Haas and
A. Tiwary, editors, SIGMOD 1998, Proceedings ACM
SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, pages 295–306. ACM Press, 1998.
[97] K. Nigam, J. Lafferty, and A. McCallum. Using max-
imum entropy for text classification. In Proceedings of
the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intel-
ligence IJCAI-99 Workshop on Machine Learning for
Information Filtering, pages 61–67, 1999.
[98] G. Paliouras, C. Papatheodorou, V. Karkaletsis,
P. Tzitziras, and C. D. Spyropoulos. Large-scale min-
ing of usage data on web sites. In AAAI 2000 Spring
Symposium on Adaptive User Interfaces, 2000.
[99] M. T. Pazienza, editor. Information Extraction: A
multidisciplinary Approach to an Emerging Infor-
mation Technology, volume 1299 of Lecture Notes
in Computer Science. International Summer School,
SCIE-97, Frascati (Rome), Springer, 1997.
[100] M. T. Pazienza, editor. Information Extraction, Fras-
cati (Rome), 1999. International Summer School,
SCIE-99 , Frascati (Rome).
[101] G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, R. Braachman, T. Khabaza,
W. Kloesgen, and E. Simoudis. An overview of issues
in developing industrial data mining and knowledge
discovery applications. In Proceeding of the Second Int.
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD-96), pages 89–95, 1996.
[102] M. Rajman and R. Besançon. Text mining - knowledge
extraction from unstructured textual data. In Proc. of
6th Conference of International Federation of Classi-
fication Societies (IFCS-98), pages 473–480, 1998.
[103] A. Rauber and D. Merkl. Automatic labeling of self-
organizing maps: Making a treasure-map reveal its
secrets. In Proc of the Pacific Asia Conf on Knowledge
Discovery and Data Mining (PAKDD’99), 1999.
[104] J. Rennie and A. McCallum. Using reinforcement
learning to spider the web efficiently. In Proceedings of
the 16th International Conference on Machine Learn-
ing ICML-99, 1999.
[105] E. Riloff. Little words can make a big difference for
text classification. In SIGIR’95, Proceedings of the
18th Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference on
Research and Development in Information Retrieval,
pages 130–136. ACM Press, 1995.
[106] G. Salton and M. McGill. Introduction to Modern In-
formation Retrieval. McGraw Hill, 1983.
[107] S. Scott and S. Matwin. Feature engineering for text
classification. In Proceedings of the 16th International
Conference on Machine Learning ICML-99, 1999.
[108] J. W. Shavlik and T. Eliassi-Rad. Intelligent agents
for web-based tasks: An advice-taking approach.
In Working Notes of the AAAI/ICML-98 Workshop
on Learning for Text Categorization, pages 588–589,
1999.
[109] L. Singh, B. Chen, R. Haight, P. Scheuermann, and
K. Aoki. A robust system architecture for mining
semi-structured data. In Proceeding of The Fourth Int.
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD-98), pages 329–333, 1998.
[110] P. Smyth, U. M. Fayyad, M. C. Burl, and P. Perona.
Modeling subjective uncertainty in image annotation.
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 517–539, 1996.
[111] S. Soderland. Learning information extraction rules
for semi-structured and free text. Machine Learning,
34(1-3):233–272, 1999.
[112] M. Spiliopoulou. Data mining for the web. In Princi-
ples of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Sec-
ond European Symposium, PKDD ’99, pages 588–589,
1999.
[113] J. Srivastava, R. Cooley, M. Deshpande, and P.-N.
Tan. Web usage mining: Discovery and applications of
usage patterns from web data. SIGKDD Explorations,
1(2), 2000.
[114] V. S. Subrahmanian. Principles of Multimedia
Database Systems. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
1998.
[115] A.-H. Tan. Text mining: The state of the art and the
challenges. In Proc of the Pacific Asia Conf on Knowl-
edge Discovery and Data Mining PAKDD’99 workshop
on Knowledge Discovery from Advanced Databases,
pages 65–70, 1999.
[116] H. Toivonen. On knowledge discovery in graph-
structured data. In Workshop on Knowledge Discovery
from Advanced Databases (KDAD’99), pages 26–31,
1999.
[117] R. Uthurusamy. From data mining to knowledge dis-
covery: Current challenges and future directions. In
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining,
pages 561–569, 1996.
[118] S. Vaithyanathan. Introduction: Data mining on the
internet. Artificial Intelligence Review, 13(5/6):343–
344, 1999.
[119] C. J. van Rijsbergen. Information Retrieval. Butter-
worths, 1979.
[120] K. Wang and H. Liu. Schema discovery for semistruc-
tured data. In Proceedings of the Third International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining
(KDD-97), pages 271–274, 1997.
[121] S. M. Weiss, C. Apté, F. Damerau, D. E. Johnson,
F. J. Oles, T. Goetz, and T. Hampp. Maximizing
text-mining performance. IEEE Intelligent Systems,
14(4):63–69, 1999.
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 14
[122] W. Wiener, J. Pedersen, and A. Weigend. A neural
network approach to topic spotting. In Proceedings of
the 4th Symposium on Document Analysis and Infor-
mation Retrieval (SDAIR 95), pages 317–332, 1995.
[123] Y. Wilks. Information Extraction as a core language
technology, volume 1299 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, chapter In M-T. Pazienza (ed.), Information
Extraction, pages 1–9. Springer, 1997.
[124] I. H. Witten, Z. Bray, M. Mahoui, and W. J. Tea-
han. Text mining: A new frontier for lossless compres-
sion. In Data Compression Conference, pages 198–207,
1999.
[125] Y. Yang, J. Carbonell, R. Brown, T. Pierce, B. T.
Archibald, and X. Liu. Learning approaches for detect-
ing and tracking news events. IEEE Intelligent Sys-
tems, 14(4):32–43, 1999.
[126] Y. Yang and J. Pedersen. Guest editors’ introduction:
Intelligent information retrieval. IEEE Intelligent Sys-
tems, 14(4):30–31, 1999.
[127] O. Zaiane and J. Han. Webml: Querying the world-
wide web for resources and knowledge. In Proc. ACM
CIKM’98 Workshop on Web Information and Data
Management (WIDM’98), pages 9–12, 1998.
[128] O. R. Zaiane, J. Han, Z.-N. Li, S. H. Chee, and J. Chi-
ang. Multimediaminer: a system prototype for mul-
timedia data mining. In Proc. ACM SIGMOD Intl.
Conf. on Management of Data, pages 581–583, 1998.
SIGKDD Explorations. Copyright c©2000 ACM SIGKDD, July 2000. Volume 2, Issue 1 - page 15

