Principles of 
Geographical 
Information 
Systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Peter A. Burrough 
 
AND 
 
Rachael A. McDonnell 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1998 
 
Data Models and Axioms 
 
 
 TWO
Data Models and Axioms:
Formal Abstractions 
of Reality
When someone views an environment they simplify the inherent
complexity of it by abstracting key features to create a 'model' of the
area. This cognitive exercise is influenced by the cultural norms of
the observer and the purpose of the study. This chapter examines
the various model development stages that take place in the
process of producing geographical data that may be used by others
in a graphical or digital form. It is important to examine these
theoretical ideas as all the data we use in a GIS will have been
schematized using these geographical data models. 
The two extremes in approach perceive space either as being
occupied by a series of entities which are described by their
properties and mapped using a co- ordinate system, or as a
continuous field of variation with no distinct boundaries. Formalized
geographical data models are used to characterize these
conceptual ideas so that they may be broken down into units which
may be recorded and mapped. The principal approaches use either
a series of points, lines, and polygons, or tessellated units to
describe the various features in a landscape. The adoption of a
particular model influences the type of data that may be used to
describe the phenomena and the spatial analysis that may be
undertaken. The fundamental procedures and axioms for handling
and modifying spatial data are explained. Practical examples of the
choice and use of various data models in frequently encountered
applications are given. 
 
 
 
 
 
Imagine that you are talking on the telephone to 
someone and they ask you to describe the view 
from your window. How would you depict the 
variations you see? It is likely that you would 
break down the landscape 
into units such as a building, road, field, 
valley, or hill and use geographical referencing in 
terms of 'beside', 'to the left of', or 'in front of' to 
describe the features. You have in fact developed 
a conceptual model of the  
 
 17
Data Models and Axioms 
 
Figure 2.1. All aspects of dealing with geographical information involve interactions with people 
 
 
 
BOX 2.1. SPATIAL DATA MODELS AND DATA STRUCTURES  
 
Spatial data models and data structures 
 
The creation of analogue and digital spatial data sets involves seven levels of 
model development and abstraction (cf. Peuquet 1984a, Rhind and Green 1988, 
Worboys 1995) :  
(a) A view of reality (conceptual model)  
(b) Human conceptualization leading to an analogue abstraction (analogue 
model)  
(c) A formalization of the analogue abstraction without any conventions or 
restrictions on implementation (spatia data model)  
(d) A representation of the data model that reflects how the data are recorded 
in the computer (database model)  
(e) A file structure, which is the particular representation of the data structure 
in the computer memory (physical computational model).  
(f) Accepted axioms and rules for handling the data (data manipulation model) 
(g) Accepted rules and procedures for displaying and presenting spatial data 
to people (graphical model)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 18
Data Models and Axioms 
landscape. Your interpretation of the features you 
have observed and the ones you have decided to 
ignore will be influenced by your experience, your 
cultural background, and that of the person to 
whom you are describing the scene.  
When information needs to be exchanged over a 
larger domain it becomes necessary to formalize 
the models used to describe an area to ensure that 
data are interpreted without ambiguity and 
communicated effectively. This chapter will 
describe the main data models used for describing 
geographical phenomena (see Couclelis 1992, 
Frank et al. 1992; Frank and Campari 1993; 
Egenhofer and Herring 1995; and Burrough and 
Frank 1996 for more detailed discussion). It gives 
an essential background to the following chapters 
of this book, because we do not store real  
 
world phenomena in the computer but only 
representations based on these formalized 
models. The major steps involved in proceeding 
from human observation of the world, either 
directly or with the assistance of tools like aerial 
photographs, remotely sensed images, or 
statistically located samples, to an analogue or 
digital representation are outlined in Box 2.1 and 
illustrated in Figure 2.1. The most important first 
step is that people observe the world and 
perceive phenomena that are fixed or change in 
space and time. Their perception will influence 
all subsequent analysis; success or failure with 
GIS does not depend in the first instance on 
technology but more on the appropriateness or 
otherwise of the conceptual models of space and 
spatial interactions. 
 
Conceptual models of real world geographical" phenomena  
 
Geographical phenomena require two descriptors 
to represent the real world; what is present, and 
where it is. For the former, phenomenological 
concepts such as 'town', 'river', 'floodplain', 
'ecotope', 'soil association' are used as fundamental 
building blocks for analysing and synthesizing 
complex information. These phenomena are 
recognized and described in terms of well-
established 'objects' or 'entities', which are de- 
fined in standard texts (cf. Goudie et al. 1988, 
Johnston et al. 1988, Lapedes 1976, Lapidus 1987, 
Scott 1980, Stevens 1988, Whitten and Brooks 
1972, Whittow 1984). However, these dictionaries 
fail to point out that there are many ways to 
describe these phenomena, and different terms can 
be used for different levels of resolution. Many of 
these perceived geographical phenomena 
described by people as explicit entities (such as 
'hill', 'town', or 'lake') do not have an exact form 
and their extent may change with time (e.g. see 
Burrough and Frank 1996).  
At the same time, the type of building block 
used to describe a phenomena at one scale of 
resolution is likely to be quite different from that 
at another. For example, a road imaged from a 
satellite-based sensor might be modelled as a line, 
but the plan of a building site would have to be 
modelled using an areal repres-  
entation to show its various structures. 
Phenomena are also very often grouped or 
divided into units at other levels of resolution 
('scales') according to hierarchically defined 
taxonomies; for example the hierarchy of 
administration units of country-province-town-
district, or of most soil, plant, or animal 
classification systems. 
The referencing in space of the phenomena 
may be defined in terms of a geometrically exact 
or a relative location. The former uses local or 
world coordinate systems defined using a 
standard system of spheroids, projections, and 
coordinates which give an approximation of the 
form of the earth (a spheroid) onto a flat surface. 
The coordinate system may be purely local, 
measured in tens of metres, or it may be a 
national grid or an internationally accepted 
projection that uses geometrical coordinates of 
latitude and longitude. Alternatively some maps 
provide geographical referencing in a relative, 
rather than an absolute spatial geometry as 
illustrated by aboriginal rock paintings and the 
plan of the London Underground. With these 
maps the locations are defined in reference to 
other features within the space, and neighbour- 
hoodness and direction between entities is shown 
rather than actual metric distances.  
 
 
 19
Data Models and Axioms 
Conceptual models of space: entities or fields  
Is the geographic world a jig-saw puzzle of 
polygons. or a dub-sandwich of data layers? 
(Coudelis 1992)  
From these conceptual ideas of geographical 
phenomena it is possible to formalize the 
representation of space and spatial properties. 
When considering any space-a room, a landscape, 
or a continent -we may adopt several 
fundamentally different ways to describe what is 
going on in that subset of the earth's surface. The 
two extremes are (a) to perceive the space as being 
occupied by entities which are described by their 
attributes or properties, and whose position can be 
mapped using a geometric coordinate system, or 
(b) to imagine that the variation of an attribute of 
interest varies over the space as some continuous 
mathematical function or field. 
Entities. The most common view is that space 
is peopled with 'objects' (entities). Defining and 
recognizing the entity (is it a house, a cable, a 
forest, a river, a mountain?) is the first step; listing 
its attributes, defining its boundaries and its 
location is the second. In this book we use the 
word entity for those things that most people 
would call an 'object' because the term 'object 
orientation' has acquired a very special meaning in 
database technology and programming (see 
Chapter 3). In this jargon, 'object-orientation' is 
used to refer to a way of structuring data in the 
computer or in a computer program and does not 
necessarily mean that a physical entity is being 
referred to. 
Continuous fields. In the continuous field 
approach, the simplest conceptual model 
represents geographical space in terms of 
continuous Cartesian coordinates in two or three 
dimensions (or four if time is included). The 
attribute is usually assumed to vary smoothly and 
continuously over that space. The attribute (e.g. air 
pressure, temperature, elevation above sea level, 
clay content of the soil) and its spatial variation is 
considered first; only when there are remarkable 
clusters of like attribute values in geographical 
space or time, as with hurricanes or mountain 
peaks, or 'significant events' will these zones be 
recognized as 'things' (e.g. Hurricane Caesar, the 
Matterhorn, the Gulf Stream, or the clay layer rich 
in the element  
Indium that is thought to date the asteroid impact 
that caused the demise of the dinosaurs). 
 
Objects in a vector GIS may be counted, 
moved about, stacked, rotated, colored, 
labeled, cut, split, sliced, stuck together, 
viewed from different angles, shaded, inflated, 
shrunk, stored and retrieved, and in general, 
handled like a variety of everyday solid 
objects that bear no particular relationship to 
geography. (Couclelis 1992)  
 
Opting for an entity model or a continuous 
field approach can be difficult when the entities 
can also be seen as sets of extreme attribute 
values clustered in geographical space. Should 
one recognize Switzerland, for example, as a 
land of individual mountain entities (Mont 
Blanc, Eiger, Matterhorn, etc.) or as a land in 
which the attribute 'elevation' demonstrates 
extreme variation? In practice, a pragmatic 
solution based on the aims of the user of the 
database must be made. The choice of 
conceptual model determines how information 
can later be derived. Opting for an entity 
approach to mountain peaks will provide an 
excellent basis for a system that records who 
climbed the mountain and when, but it will not 
provide information for computing the slopes of 
its sides. Choosing a continuous representation 
allows the calculation of slopes as the first 
derivative of the surface, but does not give 
names for those parts of the surface where the 
first derivative is zero and the curvature is in 
every direction downwards i.e. the peaks. 
 
...the phenomenon of interest is blithely 
bisected by the image frame. ..for the mindless 
mechanical eye everything in the world is just 
another array of pixels. (Couclelis 1992) 
 
As a gross oversimplification, the choice of 
an entity or a field approach also depends on the 
scientific  
 
 20
Data Models and Axioms 
 
Figure 2.2. Examples of the different kinds of geographical data collected for different purposes 
by persons from different disciplines 
 
 
 
or technical discipline of the observer. Disciplines 
that focus on the understanding of spatial 
processes in the natural environment may be more 
likely to use  
 
the continuous field approach while those who 
work entirely in an administrative context will 
view an area as a series of distinct units (Figure 
2.2).  
 
 
 
Geographical data models and geographical data primitives 
 
 
Geographical data models are the formalized 
equivalents of the conceptual models used by 
people to perceive geographical phenomena (in 
this book we use the term 'data type' for the kind 
of number used to quantify the attributes-see 
below). They formalize how space is discretized 
into parts for analysis and communication and 
assume that phenomena can be uniquely 
identified, that attributes can be measured or 
specified and that geographical coordinates can be 
registered. As data may be collected in a variety of 
ways,  
 
information on the method or the level of 
resolution of observation or measurement may 
also be an important part of the data model.  
Most anthropogenic phenomena (houses, land 
parcels, administrative units, roads, cables, 
pipelines, agricultural fields in Western 
agriculture) can be handled best using the entity 
approach. The simplest and most frequently used 
data model of reality is a basic spatial entity 
which is further specified by attributes and 
geographical location. This can be further  
 
 
 21
Data Models and Axioms 
 
 
Figure 2.3. The fundamental geographical primitives of points, lines, and polygons 
 
 
subdivided according to one of the three basic 
geographical data primitives, namely a 'point', a 
'line', or an 'area' (which is most usually known as 
a 'polygon' in GIS) which are shown in Figure 2.3. 
These are the fundamental units of the vector data 
model and its various forms are summarized in 
Table 2.1 and illustrated in Figure 2.4a,c. 
Alternative means of representing entities using 
tessellations of regular-shaped polygons are to use 
sets of pixels (see below).  
With continuous field data, although the 
variation of attributes such as elevation, air 
pressure, temperature, or clay content of the soil is 
assumed to be continuous in 2D or 3D space (and 
also in time), the variation is generally too 
complex to be captured by a simple mathematical 
function such as a polynomial equation. In some 
situations simple regression equations (trend 
surfaces) may be used to represent large-scale 
variations in terms of simple, differentiable 
numerical functions (see Chapter 5) but generally 
it is necessary to divide geographical space into 
discrete spatial units as given in Table 2.1 and 
shown in Figure 2.4b,d. The resulting tessellation 
is taken as a reasonable approximation of reality at 
the level of resolution under consideration and it is 
assumed that the operations such as 
differentiability which can be  
applied to continuous mathematical functions 
also apply to these discretized approximations. 
Both the entity and tessellation models 
assume that the phenomena can be specified 
exactly in terms of both their attributes and 
spatial position. In practice there will be some 
situations where these data models are 
acceptable representations of reality, but there 
will be many others where uncertainties force us 
to choose pragmatically the one or the other 
approach (the effects of uncertainty and error in 
spatial analysis are dealt with in Chapters 9 and 
10). 
VECTOR DATA MODELS OF ENTITIES  
The vector data model represents space as a 
series of discrete entity-defined point line or 
polygon units which are geographically 
referenced by Cartesian coordinates as shown in 
Figure 2.3. 
 
Simple points, lines, and polygons: Simple 
point, line, and polygon entities are essentially 
static representations of phenomena in terms of 
XY coordinates. They are supposed to be 
unchanging, and do not contain any information 
about temporal or spatial variability. A point 
entity implies that the geographical 
 
 
 22
Data Models and Axioms 
 
Tabble 2.1   Discrete data models for spatial data 
Vector representation of exact entities Tessellations of continuous fields 
Non-topological structures (loose points and lines 
“spaghetti”) 
Simple topology with linked lines – e.g. a  
drainage net or utility infrastrutures 
Complex topology with linked lines and nest 
structures – e.g linked polygons 
Complex topology of object orientation with 
internal structures and relations. 
Regular triangular, square, or hexagonal 
grid (square pixels = raster) 
Irregular tesselation: Thiessen polygons 
Triangular irregular nets (TIN) 
Finite elements 
Nested regular cells/quadtrees irregular 
nesting 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.4. The encoding of exact objects (entities) and continuous fields in different data 
models. (a) top left: vector representation of crisp polygons; (b) top right-raster model of 
continuous fields; (c) bottom left-vector representation of linked lines; (d) bottom right- 
Delaunay triangulation of a continuous field  
 
 
 
 23
Data Models and Axioms 
extents of the object are limited to a location that can 
be specified by one set of XY coordinates at the level 
of resolution of the abstraction. A town could be 
represented by a point entity at a continental level of 
resolution but as a polygon entity at a regional level. 
Increasing the level of resolution reveals internal 
structure in the phenomenon (in the case of a town, 
sub-districts, suburbs, streets, houses, lamp-posts, 
traffic signs) which may be important for some people 
and not for others.  
A line entity implies that the geographical extents 
of the object may be adequately represented by sets of 
XY coordinate pairs that define a connected path 
through space, but one that has no true width unless 
specified in terms of an attached attribute. A road at 
national level is adequately represented by a line; at 
street level it becomes an area of paving and the line 
representation is unrealistic. A telephone cable, on the 
other hand, can be represented as a line at most 
practical levels of resolution used in GIS.  
The simplest definition of the polygon implies that 
it is a homogeneous representation of a 2D space. 
Clearly this also depends on the level of resolution. 
The polygon can be represented in terms of the XY 
coordinates of its boundary, or in terms of the set of 
XY coordinates that are enclosed by such a boundary. 
Polygons may contain holes, they have direct 
neighbours, and different polygons with the same 
characteristics can occur at different locations (Figure 
2.3).  
If the boundary can be clearly identified it can be 
specified in terms of a linked list of a limited number 
of XY coordinates (see Burrough and Frank 1996); the 
size of the set of included XY coordinates depends on 
the level of spatial resolution that is used. Very often it 
is assumed that the level of resolution is given by the 
number of decimals to which the coordinates or the 
boundary are specified, which means that encoding 
using boundaries is more efficient than listing all 
coordinates that are inside the boundary envelope.  
 
Complex points, lines, polygons, and objects with 
functionality: More complex definitions of points, 
lines, and polygons can be used to capture the internal 
structure of an entity; these definitions may be 
functional or descriptive. A town includes streets, 
houses, and parks, each of which have different 
functions and which may respond differently to queries 
or operations at the town level. Topological links 
(Figure 2.4a,c) can be used to indicate how lines are 
linked into polygons or linked networks, respectively. 
In recent years more highly structured ways of encap-  
sulating entity data have been possible through the 
object-oriented approach. This is the technical name 
for database and programming tools that provide 
nested hierarchies and functional relations between 
related groups of entities that together form a single 
unit at a higher aggregation level. Object orientation 
is described more fully in the context of data 
structures in Chapter 3.  
TESSELLATIONS OF CONTINUOUS FIELDS 
Continuous surfaces can be discretized into sets of 
single basic units, such as square, triangular, or 
hexagonal cells, or into irregular triangles or 
polygons (the Thiessen/Dirichlet/Voronoi procedure-
see Chapter 5) which are tessellated to form 
geographical representations. The use of irregular 
triangles, long used in land surveying, is based on the 
principle of triangulation whereby the continuous 
surface of the land is approximated by a mesh of 
triangles whose apices or nodes are given by 
measured 'spot heights' at carefully located 
trigonometric points. A major advantage of this 
approach is that the density of the mesh can be easily 
adjusted to the degree with which the surface varies-
areas with little variation can be represented 
adequately by few triangles while areas with large 
variation require more. This supports a variable 
resolution in the data. The triangular surface can also 
easily accommodate variations in form as seen in 3D 
representations of landform, or other surfaces such as 
aeroplane wings or car bodies. These data models are 
essentially static representations of the hypsometric 
surface, which is supposed to be unchanging over 
time.  
Triangular meshes are also used to represent 
continuous variation in the dynamic modelling of 
groundwater flows, surface water movement, wind 
fields, and so on. In this form they provide a structure 
called finite elements; the differences in attribute 
values between adjacent triangular cells that result 
from the flow of water or dissolved materials are 
modelled using the differential calculus (Gee et al. 
1990). The triangular irregular network or TIN is a 
data structure (see Chapter 3) used to model 
continuous surfaces in terms of a simplified 
polygonal vector schema (Figure 2.4d).  
The most-used alternative to triangulation is the 
regular tessellation or regular grid. The 2D geometric 
surface is divided into square cells (known as pixels) 
whose size is determined by the resolution that is 
required to represent the variation of an attribute for a 
given purpose. The grid cell representation of space 
is 
 
 
 24
Data Models and Axioms 
known as the Raster data model (Figure 2.4b ). When 
the grid cells are used to represent the variation of a 
continuously varying attribute each cell will have a 
different value of the attribute; the variations between 
cells will be assumed to be mathematically continuous 
so that differential calculus may be used to compute 
local averages, rates of change, and so on. Each grid 
cell may be thought of as a separate entity that differs 
from vector polygons only in terms of its regular form 
and implicit rather than explicit delineation (Tobler 
1995). 
Although the regular grid is most often used to 
represent static phenomena, it can easily be adapted to 
deal with dynamic change. Changes over time may be 
recorded in separate layers of grid cells, one for each 
time step, so that the change from the static to the 
dynamic data model requires only that the basic 
structure is repeated for each time step. Time, like 
space, is assumed to be discretized in this model. 
Regular tessellations may also be nested to provide 
more spatial detail through the use of linear and 
regional quadtrees and other nested structures (see 
Chapter 3). 
Lateral changes over space may also be handled 
easily by the regular grid because of its approximation 
to a continuous, differentiable mathematical surface. 
The flow of materials through space may be computed 
using finite difference modelling because the constant 
geometry of the cells means that first and second order 
derivatives can be easily calculated by simple 
subtraction and addition.  
Three-dimensional equivalents of pixels are termed 
voxels - these are the basic units of spatial variation in 
a 3D space. In 2D and 3D space some applications use 
rectangular or parallelepiped tessellations but these can 
be seen as aberrant forms of the regular square 
discretization. All the operations possible in the 2D 
regular grids can be applied to data on a 3D grid.  
 
PIXELS AND VOXELS AS 'ENTITIES'  
The basic units of discretization in the regular 
tessellation of continuous space may also be used to 
provide a geometrical reference for the simple data 
units of points, lines, and areas. A vector 'point' can be 
represented by a single cell; a vector 'line' by a set of 
contiguous cells one cell wide having the same 
attribute value; a vector polygon by a set of contiguous 
cells having the same attribute value. Vector 
representation is often preferred because regular grid 
cells may lose spatial details, though this is becoming 
less of a problem with increased power of computers 
and memories.  
This equivalence between the vector and raster 
models of space frequently causes confusion about 
the nature of the phenomena being represented. For 
examples, continuous fields can also be represented 
by isolines or contours, which are sets of XY 
coordinates linking sites of equal attribute value. 
Contours are useful ways of representing attribute 
values on paper maps and computer screens but they 
are less efficient for handling continuous spatial 
variation in numerical models of spatial interactions. 
Contour envelopes may be treated as simple polygons 
or as closed lines in terms of the entity approach, but 
they are merely artefacts of representation, not 
outlines of real world 'objects'.  
The overlap between the two approaches is 
greatest when we have to deal with phenomena such 
as soil mapping units, or land use or land cover units. 
The classic approach of conventional mapping is to 
define classes of soil, land use, land cover, etc. and 
then to identify areas of land (entities) that 
correspond to these classes. These areas can be 
represented by vector boundaries enclosing polygons 
or by sets of contiguous raster cells having the same 
value. Such a representation is known as a choropleth 
map, because it contains zones of equal value. It may 
also be known as a chorochromatic map because each 
zone is displayed using a single colour or shading.  
An alternative approach to representing artificial 
entities such as land use or soil classes is to postulate 
that land use or soil are continuous variables, not 
entities, but the geographical surface is made up of 
zones where the attributes have the same value (the 
polygons) and zones where the attribute values 
change abruptly (boundaries). This approach stems 
from the need to extract entities and homogeneous 
zones from grid-based data such as remotely sensed 
images. Note that though the variation of these kinds 
of attributes may be thought of as being continuous in 
space (because every cell has a value for soil or land 
use, including classes for 'no soil' or 'waste land') the 
surface is not continuous in terms of the differential 
calculus. This means that mathematical operations 
like the calculation of slopes should not be applied to 
data that cannot be approximated by a continuous 
mathematical function.  
In both 2D and 3D we can think of pixels (voxels) or 
polygons as units that can be treated as a series of 
open systems with regular or irregular form. The state 
of each cell (the local system) is determined by the 
value of its attributes; attribute values can be changed 
by operations that refer only to the cell in question or 
that use information from other cells that in one way 
or another are part of the cell's surroundings. The  
 
 
 25
Data Models and Axioms 
 
Figure 2.5. Steps in the process from observation of real word phenomena to the creation of standardized data models  
 
 
difference between this approach for cells and the 
approach for polygons is not great (Tobler 1995); 
only the variable geometry of the vector 
representation of entities means that computing 
neighbourhood  
interactions is much more complex than with 
regular cell structures.  
Figure 2.5 summarizes the data modelling stages 
followed so far.  
 
 
 
 
The display of geographical primitives using vector and raster approaches  
 
 
People are used to seeing spatial information 
represented both by lines or dotted shading (for 
example see the paintings of Seurat or use a lens 
to see the dots that make up a photograph in the 
newspaper). If we look at the conventional way of 
communicating geographical data, paper maps, 
these use both vector and continuous field data 
models in characterizing an area. The real world is 
portrayed either in terms of a series of  
entities represented by coloured or stylized point, 
line, or area symbols, or as a continuous 
variation in the values of an attribute over space, 
such as the portrayal of the elevation by the 
hypsometric curve or as contours.  
In the computer these essentially linear or dotted 
approaches are formalized into the vector and 
raster methods of representation. Figure 2.6 
presents the main ways in which the simple 
geographical data  
 
 26
Data Models and Axioms 
 
Figure 2.6. The different ways of graphically displaying data encapsulated by (a) left – vector entity models, and (b) right – 
raster models. 
 
 
 
models can be visualized in the vector or raster 
domain. The figure also summarizes and makes  
explicit the influence of cartographic semiology in 
the vector representation.  
 
 
 
 
Data Types  
 
In everyday speech we distinguish qualitative 
or nominal attributes from quantitative data or 
numbers, and recognize that different kinds of 
operations suit different kinds of data. The 
same is true when describing geographical 
phenomena using a formalized data model and 
the information may be written down ( and 
stored in the computer) using various data 
types (Table 2.2).  
The attributes of entities may be expressed by 
Boolean, nominal, ordinal, integer, or real data 
types. Real data types include decimals; integer 
and real are collectively known as scalar data. 
Geographical coordinates are sometimes 
expressed as integers but mostly as real data types, 
and topological linkages use integers. 
Differentiable continuous surfaces require real 
data types though integers are sometimes used as 
 
 
 
 27
Data Models and Axioms 
 
Table 2.2   Data types 
Data type Allowed values Allowed operations 
Boolean 
Nominal 
Ordinal 
Integer 
Real 
 
Topological 
0 or 1 
Any names 
Numbers from 0 to ∞ 
Whole numbers from - ∞ to + ∞ 
Real numbers (with decimals)  
from - ∞ to + ∞ 
Whole numbers 
Logical and indicator operations: Truth versus Falsehood 
Logical operations, classification and identification 
Logical and ranking operations, comparisons of magnitude 
Logical operations, integer arithmetic 
All logical and numerical operations 
 
Indicate links between entities 
 
 
 
an approximation (one cannot take the 
derivative of a nominal attribute). Non-
differentiable continuous surfaces and their 
discretized forms (grid cells or pixels) can take 
the same range of data types as entities. 
Logical operations can be carried out with 
all data types, but arithmetical operations are  
 
limited to real and integer data types. 
Consequently the kind of data analysis is governed 
by the data types used in the data model. The 
limits of accuracy of arithmetical operations is 
limited by the length of the computer word used to 
record the numbers (see Chapter 8).  
 
 
 
 
 
Axioms and procedures for handling data in information systems  
 
 
Having explored the problems of defining data 
models as representations of phenomena in the 
real world and the ways they can be 
constructed from geographical primitives as 
simple or complex entities or discretized 
continuous surfaces we can now specify the 
logical ground rules and axioms (sensu 
'generally accepted propositions or principles 
sanctioned by experience': Collins English 
Dictionary, 3rd edn., 1994) that govern the way 
these data models may be treated. Though 
some of the following may seem self-evident, 
the following statements (adapted from 
Robinove 1986) provide a formal basis for 
spatial data handling and look forward to the 
material presented in Chapters 7 and 8.  
1. It is necessary to identify some kind of 
discretization such as entities (individuals) that 
carry the data. In GIS the primitive entities are  
 
points, lines, polygons, and pixels (grid elements). 
Complex entities having a defined internal 
structure can be built from sets of points, lines, 
and polygons. 
2. All fundamental entities are defined in terms 
of their geographical location (spatial 
coordinates or geometry), their attributes 
(properties) and relationships (topology). These 
relationships may be purely geometrical (with 
respect to spatial relations or neighbours), or 
hierarchical (with respect to attributes) or both.  
3. Individuals (entities) are distinguishable 
from one another by their attributes, by their 
location, or by their internal or external 
relationships. In the simple, static view, 
individuals or 'objects' are usually assumed to be 
internally homogeneous unless they are a 
representation of a mathematical surface or unless 
they are complex objects built out of the 
primitives.  
 
 28
Data Models and Axioms 
In most cases GIS usually only distinguish 
objects that are internally homogeneous and 
that are delineated by crisp boundaries. A more 
complex GIS allows intelligence about 
inexactness in objects in which either the 
attributes, the relationships, or the location and 
delineation are subject to uncertainty or error.  
4. Both entities and attributes can be 
classified into useful categories.  
5. The propositional calculus (Boolean 
algebra) can be used to perform logical 
operations on an entity, its attributes, its 
relations, and the groups to which it belongs. 
6. In GIS the propositional calculus is 
extended to take account of:  
distance 
direction  
connectivity (topology) 
adjacency proximity  
superposition  
group membership  
ownership of other entities  
Intelligent GIS extend the propositional 
calculus to take account of non-exact data (see 
Chapter 11).  
7. New entities (or sets of entities) can be 
created by geometrical union or intersection of 
existing entities (line intersection, polygon 
overlay)-see Chapter 6.  
8. New complex entities or objects can be 
created from the basic point, line, area or pixel 
entities.  
9. New attributes can be derived from existing 
attributes by means of logical and/or 
mathematical procedures or models.  
New attribute U = f(A, B, C, ...) 
The mathematical operations include all kinds 
of arithmetic (addition, subtraction, 
multiplication, division, trigonometry, 
differentiation and integration, etc.) depending on 
data type-see Table 2.2.  
New attributes can also be derived from 
existing topological relations and from geometric 
properties (e.g. linked to, or size, shape, area, 
perimeter) or by interpolation.  
10. Entities having certain defined sets of 
attributes may be kept in separate subdata sets 
called data planes or overlays.  
11. Data at the same XYZt coordinate can be 
linked to all data planes (the principle of the 
common basis of location).  
12. Data linked to any single XYZt coordinate 
may refer only to an individual at that coordinate, 
or to the whole of an individual in or on which 
that point is located.  
13. New attribute values at any XYZt location 
can be derived from a function of the 
surroundings (e.g. computation of slope, aspect, 
connectivity).  
 
Data modelling and spatial analysis  
 
As should be clear there are direct links 
between these fundamental axioms, the data 
model, and the data type used to represent a 
geographical phenomenon, and the kinds of 
analysis that can be carried out with it. The 
following different situations help to illustrate 
this:  
1. If the location and form of the entity is 
unchanging and needs to be known accurately, 
but the attributes can change to reflect 
differences in its state caused by inputs of new 
data or output from a numerical model, then the 
vector representation of the entity model is 
appropriate. This is the most common situation 
in conventional GIS.  
2. If the attributes are fixed, but the entity 
may change form or shape but not position, as 
in the drying up of a lake, then a vector model 
requires a redefinition of the boundary every time 
the area of the lake changes. A raster model of a 
continuous field, however, would treat the 
variation of the water surface as a response 
surface to a driving process so that the extents of 
the lake could be followed continuously.  
3. If the attributes can vary and the entity can 
change position but not form, or its separate parts 
are linked together, the behaviour can be well 
described by an object-oriented model which can 
pass information from one level of the model to 
another.  
4. If no clear entities can be discerned, then it 
is often preferable to treat the phenomenon as a 
discretized, continuous field.  
 
 29
Data Models and Axioms 
Examples of the use of data models  
 
 
 
Collectors and users of geographical data need to 
make decisions on the choice of data model every 
day. The following examples illustrate the 
importance of an understanding of these ideas.  
CADASTRE 
The main aim of the cadastre or land registry is to 
provide a record of the division and ownership of 
land. The important issues are the location, area, 
and extent of the land in question and its attributes 
(such as the name and address of the owner), the 
address of the parcel in question, and information 
about transactions and legal matters. In this case the 
exact entity (vector) model works well, using 
nominal, integer, and real data types to record the 
attributes and real data types for the coordinates. In 
many countries land registry is highly organized, 
parcel boundaries are surveyed with high accuracy 
to reduce the chance of disputes so the assumption 
of a data model in which the parcel is bound by 
infinitely thin lines is a good approximation to what 
the land registry is trying to achieve. The 
coordinates of these boundaries are located 
accurately with respect to a national or local 
reference and the attributes of the entity in the 
database are simply the properties associated with 
the parcel. An essential aspect of the polygon 
representation is that boundaries may be shared by 
adjacent parcels. This saves double representation 
in the database (see Chapter 3) and links the 
boundaries into a topologically sound polygon net 
which can handle both adjacency and inclusions. 
UTILITY NETWORKS 
Utility network is the generic term for the 
collections of pipes and wires that link the houses 
of consumers to the supplies of water, gas, 
electricity, telephone, cable television to national or 
regional suppliers and also to the waste water 
disposal systems of drains and sewers. In many 
countries these networks are hidden below ground 
though in some, electricity, telephone, and 
television cables may be suspended from poles 
along the streets. Three aspects of these networks 
are important when recording these phenomena, 
namely (a) the attributes of a given net (what it 
carries, what kind of wire or pipe, additional 
information on materials used, age, name of 
contractor who installed it, and so on); (b) the 
location of the net (so that persons  
 
digging in the street will not damage it and so it can 
be found quickly when needing repair), and (c) 
information on how different parts of the net are 
connected together. Clearly all these requirements can 
be incorporated in a data model of topologically 
connected lines (entities) that are described by 
attributes (Figure 2.2). Data types may include all 
forms. 
LAND COVER DATABASES 
National and international governments are interested 
in the division of the landscape according to classes of 
land cover-urban areas, arable crops, grassland, forest, 
waterbodies, coasts, mountains, etc. Creating a data 
model for such an application requires several steps. 
First, it is necessary to define exactly what is meant 
by the classes. Second, one needs to decide how to 
recognize them, and third, one must choose a survey 
methodology (such as a point sample survey or a 
remote sensing scanner in a satellite) to collect 
surrogate data which are then interpreted to produce 
the result desired.  
The simplest data model assumes that the classes 
are crisp and mutually exclusive and that there is a 
direct relation between the class and its location on 
the ground. If this is acceptable then one can use the 
simple polygon primitives as a model for each 
occurrence of each class. The result is the well-known 
choropleth, or more correctly, chorochromatic map. 
The issues involved in building the database are then 
defining the classes, identifying and mapping the 
boundaries, and attaching the attributes to each class 
in a manner that is equivalent to the polygon net 
model for cadastral mapping. The data types used will 
range from nominal (for recording names of classes) 
to scalar (for computing and recording areas). 
Consider now what might happen if there are 
disagreements about how to classify land cover. 
Different people or organizations might have different 
reasons for allocating land to different classes; even if 
the same number of classes are used and the central 
concepts of the classes are similar. Table 2.3 presents 
some examples of how different the results can be. 
Clearly, any analyses based on data from the different 
sources would give considerably different results, 
with serious implications for interpretation.  
Now consider the effects of the method of survey 
on the results. If we collect land cover data by sam-  
 
 
 
 
 30
Data Models and Axioms 
Table 2.3. Examples of vartation in estimation of land cover in Europe - km2*1000 
Land use 
classification 
FAO-Agrostat Pan-European 
Questionnarire by 
Eurostat 
10 minutes Pan-
European Pan Use 
Database 
Land Use Statistical 
Database 
Land Use Vector 
Database 
Permanent crops 
Germany 
France 
Netherlands 
UK 
 
Forest 
Germany 
France 
Netherlands 
UK 
 
4.42 
12.11 
0.29 
0.51 
 
 
103.84 
147.84 
3.00 
23.64 
 
- 
- 
- 
- 
 
 
103.84 
148.10 
3.30 
24.00 
 
1.80 
12.07 
0.22 
0.52 
 
 
98.56 
140.675 
1.48 
18.96 
 
2.30 
12.18 
0.34 
0.59 
 
 
- 
145.81 
3.00 
14.29 
 
5.36 
31.45 
1.07 
6.54 
 
 
100.46 
79.63 
0.78 
10.03 
Source:  RIVM  1994 
 
 
 
pling, i.e. by visiting a set of data points on the 
ground and recording what is there we will have to 
interpolate from these 'ground truth' data to all sites 
where no observations have been made. The 
allocation of an unsampled site to a given class is 
then a function of the quality and density of the data 
and the power of the technique used for 
interpolation. Note that if we decide to interpolate 
to crisply delineated areas of land we still use the 
choropleth model based on the geographical 
primitive area/polygon. If we interpolate to a 
discretized surface such as a regular grid then the 
land cover map consists of sets of pixels with 
attributes indicating the land cover class to which 
they belong.  
If we use remotely sensed data to identify land 
cover we automatically work with a gridded 
discretization of continuous space because that is 
how the satellite scanner works. The resolution of 
our spatial information is limited by the spatial 
resolution of the scanner, which for digital 
orthophotos may be very fine indeed (Plate I). 
Unlike the case with sampling, we do have 
complete cover of the area (excluding problems 
with cloud cover on the image and so on) so the 
information present in each pixel is of equal quality, 
which is not the case with interpolation. The major 
problem with identifying land cover with remotely 
sensed data is to convert the measurements of 
reflected radiation for each pixel into a prediction 
that a given land cover class dominates that cell. 
Obviously the success of the quality of the data 
depends on the quality of the classification process. 
This example shows that two different, but 
complementary data models can be used for land 
cover mapping. The representation of these models as 
vectors or rasters depends partly on how the data have 
been collected and partly on the way they will be 
used.  
SOIL MAPS  
Most published soil maps use the entity data model 
based on the vector polygon as the geographical 
primitive. Polygons are defined in terms of their soil 
class, which by implication is homogeneous over the 
unit. Boundaries are represented as infinitely thin lines 
implying abrupt changes of soil over very short 
distances. Note that inclusion of polygons in polygons 
is an important aspect of soil and geological maps.  
This data model is practical, because it means that 
simply by locating a site on a map and determining 
the mapping unit one can retrieve information on the 
soil properties by consulting the survey report. 
However, the paradigm is scientifically inadequate 
because it ignores spatial variation in both soil 
forming processes and in the resulting soils (see Plates 
4.4, 4.6). The model is conceptually identical to that 
used in other polygon-based spatial information, such 
as parcel-based land use or land ownership data, and it 
has provided the role model for the development of 
soil information systems and GIS in the late 1970s 
and 1980s (Burrough 1991b). Data types used to 
record attribute data will include nominal, integer, and 
real.  
 
 
 
 31
Data Models and Axioms 
A critical aspect of delineating soil classes in 
geographical space concerns the interpretation of 
boundaries on the ground. Important soil 
differences may be indicated by abrupt, clearly 
observable physiographic features such as changes 
in lithology, drainage, or breaks of slope, which we 
can call 'primary boundaries'. However, the drawn 
soil boundaries may also merely reflect interpreted 
differences in soil classification in the data space. 
These we term 'secondary boundaries'.  
As far as the user is concerned, printed (and 
digitized) soil maps do not distinguish between 
'real' primary boundaries that have a physiographic 
basis, and 'interpreted' secondary boundaries. 
Consequently, as both types of boundary are 
represented as supposedly infinitely thin lines, the 
mapping procedures lead inevitably to a 'double 
crisp' conceptual model of soil variation, both with 
respect to the classification in attribute space and 
the geographical delineation of mapping units. 
According to this Boolean model any site can 
belong to a only single soil unit: both in attribute 
space and geographical space the membership of a 
site in soil class i is either 0 (not a member or 
outside the area) or 1 (is a member or is inside).  
A major problem with soil, vegetation, and other 
similar natural phenomena, is that they vary 
spatially at all scales from millimetres to whole 
continents. Although soil scientists have long 
recognized this, soil cartographers still use the 
choropleth model for mapping soil at different 
levels of resolution. This generates a serious logical 
fallacy because at one level it assumes within-unit 
homogeneity, while at another spatially coherent 
differences in soil have been recognized. In 
addition, whereas with land cover we might expect 
the boundaries of land cover classes to be 
reasonably sharp and discrete because their location 
is often dictated by differences in human use of 
landscape, real soil boundaries can be sharp, 
gradual, or diffuse.  
An alternative to the discrete polygon data 
model for soil is to assume that soil properties vary 
gradually over the landscape. The soil is sampled at 
a series of locations and attributes are determined 
for these samples. The simplest data model is then 
the geographical point (to represent the locations) 
with the values of the associated attributes. From 
this simple data model new data models of 
continuous spatial variation may be created by 
interpolation.  
The data models for describing soil as a continu- 
ous variable are, in principle, very similar to those 
used for the hypsometric surface of land elevation. 
Sets of discrete contour lines can be used to link  
zones of equal attribute values, or attribute values may 
be interpolated to cells or locations on a regular grid, 
which leads to the raster model of space. As with soil 
and many other attributes of the physical, chemical, 
and biological landscape, these cannot be seen directly 
but must be collected at sets of sample points 
according to some approved sampling scheme. Both 
the area (or volume) of the samples (known 
technically as the support) and their density in space 
relative to the spatial variation of the attribute 
concerned are important for the quality of the 
resulting interpolations. The details of interpolation 
and the differences in results obtained using different 
methods are explained in Chapters 5 and 6. 
 
HYDROLOGY 
Hydrological applications require the modelling of the 
transport of water and materials over space and time, 
which can require changes to be signalled in 
attributes, and in location and form of critical patterns 
(e.g. water bodies). Not only may water levels in 
rivers, reservoirs, and lakes change but the geometry 
and location of water bodies can vary as well. A 
change in water level in a lake causes the location of 
the boundary between water and land to change. A 
flood may result in the opening up of new channels 
and the abandonment of old ones, thereby changing 
both topology and location.  
The simple entity vector data model of points, lines, 
and areas is not very well suited to dealing with 
hydrological phenomena because changes in geometry 
mean changing the coordinate and topological data in 
polygon networks, which can involve considerable 
computation. Better is to use a data model based on 
ideas of 'object orientation' in which primitive entities 
are linked together in functional groups (McDonnell 
1996). The internal structure of the data model 
permits action on one component of the group to be 
passed automatically to other parts; consequently the 
data model contains not only geographical location, 
geometry, topology, and attributes but also 
information on how all these react to change. 
Transport of material can also be easily captured 
by data models of continuous variation. The use of the 
variable resolution triangular or square finite element 
net is common in hydrological models but not in 
commercial GIS (e.g. McDonald and Harbaugh 1988). 
Transport of material over a surface can also be dealt 
with using the raster data model of continuous 
variation to which the surface topology has been 
added or derived by computation (see Chapter 8).  
 
 32
Data Models and Axioms 
Summary: entities or fields? 
 
Figure 2.5 summarizes the steps that need to be 
taken when going from a perception of reality to a 
set of data models that can be used in a 
computerized information system. In some 
applications the decision to opt for an entity-based 
approach or a field-based approach may be clear-
cut. In others it may be a matter of opinion 
depending on the aims of the user. 
Interconversion between an entity-based vector 
or raster representation and a continuous 
representation is technically possible if the original 
phenomena have been clearly identified. Raster-
Vector conversion is covered in Chapter 4. No 
amount of technology, however, can make up for 
differences in interpretation that are made before 
the phenomena are recorded. If scientist X 
perceives the landscape as being made up of sets of 
crisp entities represented by polygons, his view of 
the world is functionally different from scientist Y, 
who prefers to think in terms of continuous 
variation. Both approaches may be distortions of a 
complex reality which cannot be described 
completely by either model. 
Figure 2.2 illustrates how the preferred choice of 
entities or continuous fields may vary between 
applications and within disciplines. Generally 
speaking, those disciplines concerned with the 
inventory and recording of static aspects of the 
landscape opt for the entity approach; disciplines 
dealing with the studies of pattern and process 
requiring dynamic data models opt for continuous, 
differentiable fields. 
In most GIS all locational data and attribute 
values are deemed to be exact. Everything is 
supposed to be known, there is no room for 
uncertainty. Very often this comes not because we 
are unable to cope with statistical uncertainty, but 
rather because it costs too much to collect or 
process the data needed to give us the information 
about the error bands that should be associated with 
each attribute for each data unit. But, in principle 
there is no reason why information on quality 
cannot be added to the data. 
In essence, the intellectual level of the simple 
crisp entity models of spatial phenomena is little 
different from that of children's plastic building 
blocks. These toys obey the basic axioms of 
information systems, including that which says that 
it is possible to create a wide variety (possibly an 
infinite variety?) of derived objects by combining 
various blocks in different ways. Logically this is 
no different from combining sets of  
points, lines, and areas from a GIS to make a new 
map. Given enough bricks one can build houses, 
recreate landscapes, or even construct life-sized 
models of animals like giraffes and elephants.  
And this is the point. The giraffe built out of 
plastic blocks can be the size, the colour, and the 
shape of a real giraffe, but the model does not, and 
cannot have the functions of a giraffe. It cannot walk, 
eat, sleep, procreate, or breathe because the basic units 
of which it is built (the blocks or database elements) 
are not capable of supporting these functions. While 
this is a trivial example, the same point can be made 
for many database units that are used to supply 
geographical data to drive analytical or process 
oriented models. No amount of data processing can 
provide true functionality unless the basic units of the 
data models have been properly selected.  
NINE FACTORS TO CONSIDER WHEN 
EMBARKING ON SPATIAL ANALYSIS WITH A GIS  
The following nine, not necessarily independent, 
questions concerning spatial data are of fundamental 
importance when choosing data models, and database 
approaches for any given application:  
1. Is the real world situation/phenomena under study 
simple or complex?  
2. Are the kinds of entities used to describe the 
situation/phenomena detailed or generalized?  
3. Is the data type used to record attributes Boolean, 
nominal, ordinal, integer, real, or topological?  
4. Do the entities in the database represent objects 
that can be described exactly, or are these objects 
complex and possibly somewhat vague? Are their 
properties exact, deterministic, or stochastic?  
5. Do the database entities represent discrete 
physical things or continuous fields?  
6. Are the attributes of database entities obtained by 
complete enumeration or by sampling?  
7. Will the database be used for descriptive, 
administrative, or analytical purposes?  
8. Will the users require logical, empirical, or 
process-based models to derive new information 
from the database and hence make inferences 
about the real world?  
9. Is the process under consideration static or 
dynamic?  
 
 
 
 33
Data Models and Axioms 
Questions  
 
1. Develop simple data models for use in the following applications:  
A road transport information system  
The location of fast food restaurants  
The incidence of landslides in mountainous terrain  
The dispersion of pollutants in groundwater  
An emergency unit (police, fire, ambulance)  
A tourist information system  
The monitoring of vegetation change in upland areas  
The monitoring of movement of airborne pollutants, such as the 137CS deposited by rain from the 
Chernobyl accident in 1986.  
 
Consider the sources of data, the kinds of phenomena being represented, the data models, the data types, 
and the main requirements of the users. 
 
 
Suggestions for further reading  
COUCLELIS, H. (1992). People manipulate objects (but cultivate fields): beyond the raster-vector debate in GIS. In A. U. Frank, I. 
Campari, and u. Formentini ( eds. ), Theories and Methods of Spatio- Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Space. Springer Verlag, 
Berlin, pp. 65-77.  
GAHEGAN, M. ( 1996) .Specifying the transformations within and between geographic data models. Transactions in GIS, 1: 137-52.  
GATRELL, A. C. (1991). Concepts of Space and Geographical Data. In D. J. Maguire, M. F. Goodchild, and D. W. Rhind (eds.), 
Geographical Information Systems: Principles and Applications, vol. ii, Longman Scientific and Technical, Harlow, pp.119-34.  
HARVEY, D. (1969). Explanation in Geography. Edward Arnold, London.  
 
 
 
 
 34

