STETS Language & Communication Review, Vol. 2, No. 2, 2003
BOOK REVIEW
Language and the Internet
by David Crystal
(2001  ●  272 pages  ●  ISBN 0521802121 hardback  ●  $38.50  ●  Cambridge University Press)
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................
Reviewed by David Deterding, National Institute of Education
Copyright © 2004 Singapore Tertiary English Teachers Society (STETS)
.......................................................................................................................................................................................................
This book about the language used on the Internet
analyses four basic domains: e-mail, chatgroups, virtual
worlds, and the Web. Each of these is, of course, quite
distinct, but they all share the property of being new and
evolving, and this provides an opportunity not just to
describe the linguistic features of these new forms of
communication but also to gain an insight into how
innovation can take place to accommodate the demands
and improvisations of constantly changing modes of
human interaction. In addition, the new media,
especially texts on the Web, raise important issues of
ownership and authenticity, both of which are discussed
in some detail.
There are many areas of interest in the innovative
ways language is used on the Internet, not just in the
familiar development of abbreviations such as btw (“by
the way”), imho (“in my humble opinion”) and  cul8r
(“see you later”), but also in the manner in which
extensive shifts in existing usage can be observed. For
example, one might naively believe that chatgroups just
represent a form of on-line conversation, with the same
rules of turn-taking and courtesy applying, but Crystal
shows that very different conventions are adopted, partly
to prevent the potential chaos that might otherwise ensue
with the interspersed contributions of many participants,
some of which may exhibit substantial time-lags. One
such convention is that deviation from a topic is often
strongly discouraged, so there are special ways to force
participants back to the original topic (by using an ob-
prefix), while in contrast, regular topic shift in an ordinary
conversation is standard behaviour, with anyone at liberty
to say “That reminds me …” and then set off on a
completely new track (p. 147).
This book is timely. It is interesting to note that in
Crystal (1995), an extraordinarily wide-ranging overview
of so many aspects of the history, structure and use of
English, there is no mention of the Internet and the
language of e-mail is covered in just one page, so this
new book provides a valuable insight into domains that
were almost completely overlooked because they were
either non-existent or in their infancy just a few years
ago. However, although the book is both timely and
exceptionally carefully researched, the dynamic nature
of the media means that much of the material may
already be out of date, a point that Crystal himself
acknowledges (p. 224). Furthermore, as he is not quite
young enough to participate actively in most chat-rooms
and virtual gaming worlds, he relies for his analysis of
these domains almost entirely on other sources published
during the 90’s, so much of the material may be even
further out of date than the publication date suggests.
Nevertheless, the investigation is always thorough and
interesting, and as some of the modes of communication
he discusses may be passing fads in any case, it does not
really matter if his analysis represents a snapshot of the
state-of-play during the late 90’s rather than current
practice, for they provide fascinating insights into how
language can be adapted amazingly quickly to
accommodate the demands and opportunities of a fast-
changing world.
One widespread concern nowadays is whether the
spread of the Internet is increasing the domination of
English throughout the world, to the detriment of so
many other languages. Crystal offers an optimistic
outlook in this respect, emphasizing that although
initially nearly all Internet materials were in English,
nowadays the volume of material in other languages is
steadily increasing, both in absolute terms and also in
percentage, and he believes that the Internet can actually
provide resources to help save minority languages, by
enabling widely separated people to communicate with
each other, and also by providing easily-accessible written
texts and recordings. It is undoubtedly true that about
half the world’s languages are under immediate threat
of extinction, but this was the case before the arrival of
computers, and the Internet might actually provide
facilities that can help to save some of them.
One other recurring question about Internet
language is whether its toleration and encouragement of
abbreviations is leading to the degradation of language
usage, especially with SMS-style contractions creeping
into the writing of students and creating real problems
for teachers whose job it is to develop expertise in more
formal styles of language. Crystal once again takes a very
positive, optimistic view on this issue, regarding such
innovation as evidence of our linguistic creativity.
Language has always changed, and if it is adapting at an
ever-increasing pace now, this is just evidence of how
wonderfully imaginative we humans can be. So, instead
of persisting in futile attempts to stamp out such
innovative usage, maybe we, as teachers, need to devote
our energy to raising awareness among our students
about different styles of writing and the adoption of
appropriate usage according to the situation. In
documenting the complex language use found on the
Internet, this book may help many of us to appreciate
the sophistication of linguistic practices outside the
domains we are familiar with, and by fostering such
knowledge, it may give us the means to deal with these
issues more effectively.
This book chronicles the emergence of new styles of
communication that are often characterised by innovative
and colourful ways of presenting material, and it is
therefore somewhat ironic that the book itself should
Copyright © 2004 Singapore Tertiary English Teachers Society (STETS)
28  |  David Deterding
itself rely entirely on plain text, with no screen shots of
web pages or images of the environments that occur in
virtual worlds. Indeed, this is a little surprising, as so
many other books by the same author (e.g. Crystal 1995,
1996) are full of illustrations, cartoons, and imaginatively
presented text. However, the reliance of this book on a
traditional style of presentation does not actually interfere
with the clarity of the material, for the text is always lively,
informative, and well-researched, and in many ways it is
reassuring that even in the modern world, it is not
necessary for a book to be packed with colourful pictures
for it to convey its message attractively. In some ways,
therefore, the success of this book in using a traditional
style to discuss modern developments in communication
reinforces the contention that a variety of styles of writing
can continue to coexist quite comfortably.
References
Crystal, David (1995) The Cambridge encyclopedia of the English language.
Cambridge; Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, David (1996) Rediscover grammar. Harlow: Longman.

