Operational Research Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve, and extend access to
Journal of the Operational Research Society.
www.jstor.org
®
J. Of!/ Res. Soc .• Vo l. 30, pp. 1025 to 1028 
Pc r~a nwn Press Ltd 1979. Pr inted in G reat Bri tain 
Opcr;lt i<> Jl<ll l~ese; J rch So cie ty Ltd 
Book Selection 
Edited by JoHN HouGH 
M. S. BAZARAA and C. M. SHETTY : Nonlinear Programming- Theory and 
Algorithms 1025 
A. A. B. PRITSKER and C. D. PEGDEN: Introduction to Simulation and SLAM 1026 
R. ScHECHTER (Editor): Proceedings of the Second Lawrence Symposium on 
Systems and Decision Sciences _ 1026 
Y. M. EL-FATTAH and C. FouLARD: Learning Systems : DeCision, Simulation 
and Control 1027 
IANN BARRON and RAY CuRNow : The Future with Microelectronics 1027 
Nonlinear Programming-Theory and Algorithms 
M. S. BAZARAA and C. M. SHETTY 
Wiley, New York, U.S.A., 1979. 560 pp. £15.00 
There has been such a remarkable upsurge in development in every aspect of engineering, 
science, and technology during the last two decades or so, that is has become increasingly 
difficult to rely on one book only for information on any subject matter. That is why I 
believe that a more appropriate title for this book should have been ALL YOU 
WANTED TO KNOW ABOUT NLP ALGORITHMS BUT WERE AFRAID TO 
START (because of the vast amount of avialable material scattered throughout the 
literature). The book is a self-contained exposition of just about all you would ever want 
to know about NLP algorithms at this point in time. Although its treatment of the basic 
theory of NLP is not quite as exhaustive and systematic as that of the algorithms, it is, 
without any doubt, the best thing that has happened (to sell NLP) since A. V. FIAcco 
and G . P. McCORMICK (with their Lanchester award winning book on NLP: SUMT by 
the same publisher, 1968?). 
The organisation of the book is as follows. After an introductory chapter, which 
embodies a formal statement of the NLP problem, basic definitions, and some illustrative 
examples taken from various aspects of engineering, science, and technology, the 
remainder of the two chapters deal with the rudiments of convex sets and convex 
functions respectively. The next section contains three chapters devoted to the treatment 
of the Fritz John and the Kuhn- Tucker optimality conditions, constraint qualifications, 
and the Lagrangian duality and saddle point optimality conditions respectively. The first 
four chapters of the last section present a systematic treatment of the concept of an 
algorithm, unconstrained optimization, penalty and barrier functions, and the methods of 
feasible directions. This is lastly followed by a chapter on the linearity complementary, 
quadratic, separable, and fractional programming problems. 
Thanks must go to the authors for citing W. Karush for his pioneering effort on what 
H. W. Kuhn and A. W. Tucker enjoy as a blatant credit. Maybe the K-T conditions 
should be renamed Karush- Kuhn- Tucker (KKT) conditions? Why not Karush- John-
Kuhn- Tucker (KJKT) conditions? some might ask. Whatever the case, the important 
question is "how well is the subject matter presented?" The answer, in one word, is 
EXCELLENT!, even if linear fractional programming and especially second order opti-
mality conditions are not given sufficient attention. 
Important routines available for use on mainframe computers are not discussed 
and therefore the practitioner may not find the book to be as useful as the engineer, 
teacher, and student. 
GODWIN c. OVUWORIE 
1025 

