 
 
 
 
Stress Analysis and Optimization of Crankshafts  
Subject to Dynamic Loading 
 
Farzin H. Montazersadgh and Ali Fatemi 
Graduate Research Assistant and Professor, Respectively 
 
A Final Project Report Submitted to the 
 
Forging Industry Educational Research Foundation (FIERF) 
and 
American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI) 
 
                                       
                              
 
 
 
 
 
The University of Toledo 
 
 
August 2007 
 
 ii
FORWARD 
 
 
The overall objective of this study was to evaluate and compare the fatigue 
performance of two competing manufacturing technologies for automotive crankshafts, 
namely forged steel and ductile cast iron.  In addition, weight and cost reduction 
opportunities for optimization of the forged steel crankshaft were also investigated.  The 
detailed results are presented in two reports.  The first report deals with the fatigue 
performance and comparison of forged steel and ductile cast iron crankshafts.  This 
second report deals with analyses of weight and cost reduction for optimization of the 
forged steel crankshaft. 
 
 
 iii
ABSTRACT 
Stress Analysis and Optimization of Crankshafts  
Subject to Dynamic Loading 
 
The main objective of this study was to investigate weight and cost reduction 
opportunities for a forged steel crankshaft. The need of load history in the FEM analysis 
necessitates performing a detailed dynamic load analysis. Therefore, this study consists 
of three major sections: (1) dynamic load analysis, (2) FEM and stress analysis, (3) 
optimization for weight and cost reduction. 
In this study a dynamic simulation was conducted on two crankshafts, cast iron 
and forged steel, from similar single cylinder four stroke engines. Finite element analysis 
was performed to obtain the variation of stress magnitude at critical locations. The 
pressure-volume diagram was used to calculate the load boundary condition in dynamic 
simulation model, and other simulation inputs were taken from the engine specification 
chart. The dynamic analysis was done analytically and was verified by simulations in 
ADAMS which resulted in the load spectrum applied to crankpin bearing. This load was 
then applied to the FE model in ABAQUS, and boundary conditions were applied 
according to the engine mounting conditions. The analysis was done for different engine 
speeds and as a result, critical engine speed and critical region on the crankshafts were 
obtained. Stress variation over the engine cycle and the effect of torsional load in the 
analysis were investigated. Results from FE analysis were verified by strain gages 
attached to several locations on the forged steel crankshaft.  
 
 iv
Results achieved from aforementioned analysis were used in optimization of the 
forged steel crankshaft. Geometry, material, and manufacturing processes were optimized 
considering different constraints, manufacturing feasibility, and cost. The optimization 
process included geometry changes compatible with the current engine, fillet rolling, and 
the use of microalloyed steel, resulting in 18% weight reduction, increased fatigue 
strength and reduced cost of the crankshaft, without changing connecting rod and/or 
engine block. A 26% weight reduction is also possible considering changes in the main 
bearings and the engine block. 
 
 v
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
Financial support for this research project was provided by the Forging Industry 
Educational Research Foundation (FIERF) and the American Iron and Steel Institute 
(AISI).  We would like to thank Karen Lewis (Executive Director of FIERF), David 
Anderson (Director of Bar and Rod Products at AISI), Michael Wicklund (President of 
FIERF) for providing technical support and information, and George Mochnal from the 
Forging Industry Association. 
 
 
 
 vi
Table of Contents 
Forward ii 
Abstract iii 
Acknowledgments iv 
Table of Contents vi 
List of Tables ix 
List of Figures xi 
Nomenclature xxii 
1 Introduction 1 
1.1 Background 1 
1.1.1 Function of Crankshafts in IC Engines 2 
1.1.2 Service Loads and Failures Experienced by Crankshafts 2 
1.2 Motivation and Objectives of the Study 3 
2 Literature Review 8 
2.1 Materials and Manufacturing Processes 9 
2.1.1 Forging Process and the Influencing Parameters 9 
2.1.2 Casting Process and the Influencing Parameters 13 
2.1.3 Comparison of Forging and Casting Processes 15 
2.2 Operating Conditions and Failure of Crankshafts 17 
2.3 Dynamic Load Determination and Analysis 19 
2.4 Finite Element Modeling 22 
2.5 Optimization of Crankshafts with Geometry, Material, Manufacturing, 
and Cost Considerations 27 
3 Dynamic Load Analysis of the Crankshaft 53 
3.1 Analytical Vector Approach 54 
3.2 Verification of Analytical Approach 55 
 
 vii
3.3 Dynamic Analysis for the Actual Crankshaft 57 
3.4 FEA with Dynamic Loads 60 
4 Stress Analysis and FEA 74 
4.1 Finite Element Modeling 75 
4.1.1 Generation of the Geometry of Crankshafts 75 
4.1.2 Mesh Generation 78 
4.1.2.1 Dynamic FEA 78 
4.1.2.2 Test Assembly FEA 79 
4.1.3 Loading and Boundary Conditions 80 
4.1.3.1 Dynamic FEA 80 
4.1.3.2 Test Assembly FEA 82 
4.2 Finite Element Analysis Results and Discussion 82 
4.2.1 Finding the Critical Location 83 
4.2.2 Finding Critical Engine Speed 85 
4.2.3 Effect of Torsional Load 86 
4.2.4 Validation of FEA Results with Experimental Results 87 
4.2.5 Fatigue Life Calculations 88 
5 Geometry, Material, and Cost Optimization 112 
5.1 Component Specifications and Manufacturing Process 113 
5.2 Optimization Problem Definition 117 
5.2.1 Objective Function 119 
5.2.2 Constraints 119 
5.2.3 Design Variables 120 
5.3 Optimization Analysis Results and Discussion 121 
5.3.1 Stage I – No Change in the Engine Block and the Connecting Rod 
Dimensions 121 
5.3.1.1 Optimization Using Geometry Variables 122 
5.3.1.2 Modification to Manufacturing Process 133 
5.3.1.3 Modification Using Alternatives Materials 134 
5.3.1.4 Final Optimized Crankshaft from Stage I 135 
5.3.2 Stage II - Limited Changes to Connecting Rod and Bearings/Engine 
Block 136 
 
 viii
5.4 Cost Analysis 139 
6 Summary and Conclusions 171 
References 174 
Appendix A 178 
Appendix B 184 
 
 
 ix
List of Tables 
Table 3.1 Details of slider crank mechanism used in ADAMS software. 63 
Table 3.2 Configuration of the engine to which the crankshaft belongs. 63 
Table 4.1 Material properties for cast iron and forged steel (Williams et al. 2007). 90 
Table 4.2 Stress components in MPa at locations labeled in Figure 4.18 on the 
forged steel crankshaft, resulting from unit load of 1 kN. 90 
Table 4.3 Stress components in MPa at locations labeled in Figure 4.19 on the cast 
iron crankshaft, resulting from unit load of 1 kN. 91 
Table 4.4 Comparison of stress results from FEA and strain gages located at 
positions shown in Figure 4.30. 92 
Table 5.1 Chemical composition of AISI 1045 by percent weight (Williams and 
Fatemi, 2006). 141 
Table 5.2 Cost breakdown for a forged steel crankshaft weighing 32.6 lbs by factor 
in the study by (Nallicheri, 1991). 141 
Table 5.3 Cost breakdown for forged steel crankshaft weighing 32.6 lbs by process 
in the study by (Nallicheri, 1991). 142 
Table 5.4 Possible combination of optimization cases*. 142 
Table 5.5 Fatigue experiment results on specimens from competitor crankshaft 
materials (Pichard et al., 1993). 143 
Table 5.6 Typical mechanical and fatigue properties of Ti-added controlled-cooled 
35MV7 steel (Pichard et al., 1993) and AISI 1045 steel (Williams and 
Fatemi, 2007). 143 
Table 5.7 Manufacturing assumptions for a forged steel crankshaft weighing 32.6 
lbs (Nallicheri, 1991). 143 
Table 5.8 Manufacturing assumptions for a microalloyed steel forging crankshaft 
weighing 32.6 lbs (Nallicheri, 1991). 144 
 
 x
Table 5.9 Break of cost by factor for a crankshaft weighing 32.6 lbs, fully 
machined part cost (Nallicheri, 1991). 144 
 
 xi
List of Figures 
Figure 1.1 Typical crankshaft with main journals that support the crankshaft in 
the engine block. Rod journals are offset from the crankshaft 
centerline (Halderman and Mitchell, 2001). 6 
Figure 1.2 Exploded view of a single cylinder engine showing the crankshaft 
mounting in the engine (http://www.deere.com/, 2005). 6 
Figure 1.3 P-V diagram at constant delivery ratio. Curve 5 is for 900 rev/min, 
curve 6 for 1200 rev/min, curve 7 for 1500 rev/min, and curve 8 for 
1800 rev/min (Ferguson, 1986). 7 
Figure 1.4 Side view of the engine block at the time of combustion 
(http://www.wikipedia.org/, 2007). 7 
Figure 2.1 Crankshaft workpiece and lower forging die for a four cylinder 
crankshaft (Shamasundar et al. 2003). 36 
Figure 2.2 Four cylinder forged crankshaft (Shamasundar et al. 2003). 36 
Figure 2.3 Incomplete four cylinder forged crankshaft (Shamasundar et al. 
2003). 36 
Figure 2.4 a) Detail of a journal of a crankshaft, and b) Detail of journal of 
another crankshaft  in the study by (Silvia, 2003). 37 
Figure 2.5 A V-6 sample failed with a 2 Hz resonance shift with a 9.5 mm crack 
(Spiteri et al., 2005). 37 
Figure 2.6 Photograph of test piece 3R after fracture at fillet A. Fatigue crack 
extending 2.2 cm along the edge fillet (Baxter, 1993). 38 
Figure 2.7 V-8 crankshaft critical sections (Jenson, 1970). 38 
Figure 2.8 Strain gage bridge placement on crankshaft critical sections (Jenson, 
1970). 39 
Figure 2.9 Typical trace of crankshaft loads (Jensen, 1970). 39 
Figure 2.10 Finite element mesh for a crankshaft-flywheel assembly (Mourelatos, 
1995). 40 
 
 xii
Figure 2.11 A single throw model of crankshaft for finite element analysis 
(Uchida and Hara, 1984). 40 
Figure 2.12 A finite element crankshaft model (Henry et al., 1992). 41 
Figure 2.13 Stress prediction of crankshaft using a neural network structure 
(Shiomi and Watanabe, 1995). 41 
Figure 2.14 Flow-chart for transient stress analysis of crankshaft (Payer et al., 
1995). 42 
Figure 2.15 Solid element model of a crankshaft (Payer et al., 1995). 43 
Figure 2.16 Mass model of a crankshaft (Payer et al., 1995). 43 
Figure 2.17 Complete geometry of a single throw of a crankshaft (initial model), 
(Borges et al., 2002). 44 
Figure 2.18 Geometrically restricted, symmetrical model (final model) of a 
crankshaft section, with loading (1), restraints (2), and symmetry 
plane (3), in the study of (Borges et al., 2002). 44 
Figure 2.19 A two dimensional finite element model of a portion of crankshaft 
section, with a primary roller and a secondary roller in the study by 
(Chien et al., 2004). 45 
Figure 2.20 A magnified finite element mesh of the crankshaft section near the 
fillet and a portion of the primary roller in the study by (Chien et al., 
2004). 45 
Figure 2.21 (a) Initial crank web design, and (b) Modified crank web design in the 
study by (Henry et al., 1992). 46 
Figure 2.22 Simplified flow chart of PET geometry optimization by (Mikulec et 
al., 1998). 46 
Figure 2.23  Effect of controlled shot peening on the fillet area of a 6 cylinder 
diesel engine crankshaft made of AISI 4340H Forged steel (Burell, 
1985). 47 
Figure 2.24 S-N diagram of deep rolled ductile cast iron crankshaft with different 
rolling forces (Kamimura, 1985). 47 
 
 xiii
Figure 2.25 S-N curve rig test results with various surface treatments from the 
study by (Park et al., 2001). 48 
Figure 2.26 A crankshaft section used in the resonant bending fatigue test in the 
study by (Chien et al., 2004). 48 
Figure 2.27 Radial distributions of the hoop stress, radial stress and shear stress of 
the crankshaft at θ = 52.35° based on two-dimensional plane strain 
model (a) under bending, (b) roller down, (c) roller released and (d) 
summation of (a) and (c). (Chien et al., 2004). 49 
Figure 2.28 Vertical cross-sectional view of an apparatus for forming a shaped 
metallic article, the view showing the hollow blank pipe which starts 
being formed into a crankshaft (Ando et al., 1992). 50 
Figure 2.29 Fragmentary longitudinal cross-sectional views showing the manner 
in which a pipe is successively squeezed into a hollow blank pipe and 
forged into a crankshaft according to a TR forging process (Ando et 
al., 1992). 51 
Figure 2.30 Finished piece costs; alternative processes as a function of annual 
production volume (Nallicheri et al., 1991). 52 
Figure 3.1 Slider-crank mechanism. 64 
Figure 3.2 Crankshaft, connecting rod, and piston assembly model in 
ADAMS/View software. 64 
Figure 3.3 Angular velocity of link BC for the slider-crank mechanism. A 
comparison of the results obtained by MATLAB programming and 
ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm crank speed. 65 
Figure 3.4 Angular acceleration of link BC for slider-crank mechanism. A 
comparison of the results obtained by MATLAB programming and 
ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm crank speed. 65 
Figure 3.5 Forces at joint B defined in the global/non-rotating coordinate system, 
for the slider-crank mechanism. A comparison of results obtained by 
MATLAB programming and ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm 
crank speed. 66 
Figure 3.6 Forces at joint B defined in the local/rotating coordinate system, for 
the slider-crank mechanism. A comparison of results obtained by 
 
 xiv
MATLAB programming and ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm 
crank speed. 66 
Figure 3.7 Pressure versus volume of the engine used to calculate the pressure 
versus crankshaft angle diagram (Taylor, 1985). 67 
Figure 3.8 Pressure versus crankshaft angle used to calculate the forces at the 
surface of the piston. 67 
Figure 3.9 Variation of linear velocity of the piston assembly over one complete 
engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 68 
Figure 3.10 Variation of linear acceleration of the piston assembly over one 
complete engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 68 
Figure 3.11 Variation of angular velocity of the connecting rod over one complete 
engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 69 
Figure 3.12 Variation of angular acceleration of the connecting rod over one 
complete engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 69 
Figure 3.13 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the 
crank end of the connecting rod defined in the global/non-rotating 
coordinate system at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 70 
Figure 3.14 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the 
crank end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating 
coordinate system at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 70 
Figure 3.15 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the 
crank end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating 
coordinate system at crankshaft speed of 2000 rpm. 71 
Figure 3.16 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the 
crank end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating 
coordinate system at crankshaft speed of 2800 rpm. 71 
Figure 3.17 Comparison of maximum, minimum, mean, and range of load 
between bending and torsional load at different engine speeds. 72 
Figure 3.18 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the 
crank end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating 
 
 xv
coordinate system at crankshaft speed of 2000 rpm, with labels on 
critical locations on each graph. 72 
Figure 3.19 Crankshaft geometry and bending (Fx), torsional (Fy), and 
longitudinal (Fz) force directions. 73 
Figure 4.1 Generated geometry of the cast iron crankshaft. 93 
Figure 4.2 Picture of the actual cast iron crankshaft from which the digitized 
model was generated. 93 
Figure 4.3 Generated geometry of the forged steel crankshaft. 94 
Figure 4.4 Picture of the actual forged steel crankshaft from which the digitized 
model was generated. 94 
Figure 4.5 Drawing of the forged steel crankshaft with measured dimensions 
noted. 95 
Figure 4.6 Drawing of the cast iron crankshaft with measured dimensions noted. 96 
Figure 4.7 von Mises stress at locations 1 through 6 for forged steel crankshaft. 
Note that the convergence is achieved at all locations with 119,337 
elements. This corresponds to a global element size of 5.08 mm and a 
local mesh size of 0.762 mm. 97 
Figure 4.8 Element size at different locations on the forged steel crankshaft 
geometry. Note that the global mesh size is 5.08 mm. (a) back view 
(b) front view. 98 
Figure 4.9 Element size at different locations on the cast iron crankshaft 
geometry. Note that the global mesh size is 5.08 mm. (a) back view 
(b) front view. 99 
Figure 4.10 Meshed geometry of the forged steel crankshaft with 122,441 
elements 100 
Figure 4.11 Meshed geometry of the cast iron crankshaft with 128,366 elements. 100 
Figure 4.12 Element size at different locations on the forged steel crankshaft 
geometry for test assembly FEA. Note that the global mesh size is 
5.08 mm. 101 
 
 xvi
Figure 4.13 Forged steel crankshaft in the engine block (taken from the engine 
manual). 101 
Figure 4.14 Boundary conditions of dynamic model of the forged steel crankshaft 
with the load applied on the upper part of the connecting rod bearing. 102 
Figure 4.15 Boundary conditions of dynamic model of the cast iron crankshaft 
with the load applied on the upper part of the connecting rod bearing. 102 
Figure 4.16 Schematic of test assembly fixture for the forged steel crankshaft. 103 
Figure 4.17 Boundary conditions of test assembly model of the forged steel 
crankshaft with the load applied as a concentrated force. 103 
Figure 4.18 Locations on the forged steel crankshaft where the stress variation 
was traced over one complete cycle of the engine. 104 
Figure 4.19 Locations on the cast iron crankshaft where the stress variation was 
traced over one complete cycle of the engine. 104 
Figure 4.20 von Mises stress history (considering sign of principal stress) at 
different locations on the forged steel crankshaft at the engine speed 
of 2000 rpm. 105 
Figure 4.21 von Mises stress history (considering sign of principal stress) at 
different locations on the cast iron crankshaft at the engine speed of 
2000 rpm. 105 
Figure 4.22 Comparison of maximum, minimum, mean, and range of stress at the 
engine speed of 2000 rpm at different locations on the forged steel 
crankshaft. 106 
Figure 4.23 Comparison of maximum, minimum, mean, and range of stress at the 
engine speed of 2000 rpm at different locations on the cast iron 
crankshaft. 106 
Figure 4.24 Variations of minimum stress, maximum stress, mean stress, and 
stress range at location 2 on the forged steel crankshaft as a function 
of engine speed. 107 
Figure 4.25 Variations of minimum stress, maximum stress, mean stress, and 
stress range at location 2 on the cast iron crankshaft as a function of 
engine speed. 107 
 
 xvii
Figure 4.26 Effect of torsion on von Mises stress at location 2 at the engine speed 
of 2000 rpm for the forged steel crankshaft. 108 
Figure 4.27 Effect of torsion on von Mises stress at location 2 at the engine speed 
of 2000 rpm for the cast iron crankshaft. 108 
Figure 4.28 Effect of considering torsion in stresses at location 7 at different 
engine speeds for the forged steel crankshaft. 109 
Figure 4.29 Effect of considering torsion in stresses at location 7 at different 
engine speeds for the cast iron crankshaft. 109 
Figure 4.30 Locations on the crankshaft where strain gages were mounted. 110 
Figure 4.31 Rainflow count of the von Mises stress with consideration of sign at 
location 2 at engine speed of 2000 rpm for the forged steel crankshaft. 110 
Figure 4.32 Rainflow count of the von Mises stress with consideration of sign at 
location 2 at engine speed of 2000 rpm for the cast iron crankshaft. 111 
Figure 5.1 Crankshaft optimization stages followed in this study 145 
Figure 5.2 General flow chart of forged steel crankshaft optimization procedure. 146 
Figure 5.3 Manufacturing process flowchart for the forged steel crankshaft. 147 
Figure 5.4 Stress distribution under critical loading condition at the crank angle 
of 355 degrees. 148 
Figure 5.5 Location of the treaded hole at the back of the crankshaft. 148 
Figure 5.6 Case 1: Original hole depth and increased hole depth. Dimensions are 
in mm. 149 
Figure 5.7 Stress results for the critical location. The horizontal line at 1 stands 
for the original crankshaft with 73 MPa for mean stress, 188 MPa for 
stress range, and 3.72 kg for weigh. Case 1: Increasing the depth of 
the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the 
hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, 
Case 3: Redesigning the geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: 
Rectangular material removal from the center of the crank web 
symmetric to the central axis, Case 5: Half circle material removal 
from the center of the crank web symmetric to the central axis, Case 
 
 xviii
6: Reducing the thickness of the web, and Case 7: Modification to the 
crank web design. 149 
Figure 5.8 Locations on the forged crankshaft where displacements were traced 
over one complete engine cycle. 150 
Figure 5.9 Displacements in (a) Longitudinal direction, U3, (b) Radial direction, 
resultant of U1 and U2 ( 22 U2U1 + ), at different locations on the 
crankshaft shown in Figure 5.8. Case 1: Increasing the depth of the 
drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the hole 
diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, Case 
3: Redesigning the geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: Rectangular 
material removal from the center of the crank web symmetric to the 
central axis, Case 5: Half circle material removal from the center of 
the crank web symmetric to the central axis, Case 6: Reducing the 
thickness of the web, and Case 7: Modification to the crank web 
design. 151 
Figure 5.10 Case 2: Original crankpin hole diameter and increased diameter with 
modification to the counter weights for dynamic balance. Including 
increased fillet radii. All dimensions are in mm. 152 
Figure 5.11 Case 3: Redesigned crankpin geometry and modification to counter 
weights for dynamic balance. 152 
Figure 5.12 Cross section view of the original and optimized crankshaft in Case 3. 153 
Figure 5.13 Case 4: Rectangular material removal from the crank web symmetric 
to the central axis of the crankshaft. 153 
Figure 5.14 Case 5: Semi-circular material removal from the crank web 
symmetric to the central axis of the crankshaft. 154 
Figure 5.15 Case 6: Web thickness reduction and material added to the counter 
weights for dynamic balance of the crankshaft. 154 
Figure 5.16 Case 7: Modification to crank web geometry. 155 
Figure 5.17 Dimensions of eccentricity of the crankpin hole. 155 
 
 xix
Figure 5.18 Effect of eccentricity on bending moment (M) coefficient in stress 
I
lM
e
×
=σ . 156 
Figure 5.19 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, and 4. 156 
Figure 5.20 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, and 6. 157 
Figure 5.21 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, and 7 157 
Figure 5.22 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6. 158 
Figure 5.23 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, and 6. 158 
Figure 5.24 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, and 7. 159 
Figure 5.25 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7. 159 
Figure 5.26 (a) Stress range results for different combination options at different 
locations on the crankshaft. (b) Comparison of stress range results 
with the original crankshaft at different locations. The horizontal line 
at 1 stands for the original crankshaft. Case 1: Increasing the depth of 
the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the 
hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, 
Case 3: Redesigning the geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: 
Rectangular material removal from the center of the crank web 
symmetric to the central axis, Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the 
web, Case 7: Modification to the crank web design, Case 2*: 
Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole further, and Case 
6*: Reducing the thickness of the web further. 160 
Figure 5.27 Stress results for the critical location and weights. The horizontal line 
at 1 stands for the original crankshaft with 73 MPa for mean stress, 
188 MPa for stress range, and 3.72 kg for weigh. Case 1: Increasing 
the depth of the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: 
Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing 
the fillet radius, Case 3: Redesigning the geometry of the crankpin, 
Case 4: Rectangular material removal from the center of the crank 
web symmetric to the central axis, Case 6: Reducing the thickness of 
the web, Case 7: Modification to the crank web design, Case 2*: 
Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole further, and Case 
6*: Reducing the thickness of the web further. 161 
 
 xx
Figure 5.28 Displacements in (a) Longitudinal direction, U3, (b) Radial direction, 
resultant of U1 and U2 ( 22 U2U1 + ), at different locations on the 
optimized crankshaft in directions shown in Figure 5.8. Case 1: 
Increasing the depth of the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, 
Case 2: Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole and 
increasing the fillet radius, Case 3: Redesigning the geometry of the 
crankpin, Case 4: Rectangular material removal from the center of the 
crank web symmetric to the central axis, Case 6: Reducing the 
thickness of the web, Case 7: Modification to the crank web design, 
Case 2*: Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole further, 
and Case 6*: Reducing the thickness of the web further. 162 
Figure 5.30 Dimensions of the final optimized geometry, which is a combination 
of Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7. Case 1: Increasing the depth of the drilled hole 
at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the hole diameter of 
the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, Case 6: Reducing 
the thickness of the web, and Case 7: Modification to the crank web 
design. All dimensions shown are in mm. 163 
Figure 5.31 Geometry optimization flowchart. 164 
Figure 5.32 Optimized crankshaft from Stage II of the optimization process. 165 
Figure 5.33 Dimensions of the optimized geometry from Stage II, which is a 
combination of Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7 including changes from Stage II 
as compared with Stage I and original crankshaft. Case 1: Increasing 
the depth of the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: 
Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing 
the fillet radius, Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the web, and Case 
7: Modification to the crank web design. All dimensions shown are in 
mm. 166 
Figure 5.34 Stress range at different locations in the original and optimized 
crankshaft from Stage II. 167 
Figure 5.35 Displacements in (a) Longitudinal direction, U3, and (b) Radial 
direction, resultant of U1 and U2 ( 22 U2U1 + ), at different 
locations on the optimized crankshaft from Stage II in directions 
shown in Figure 5.8. 168 
Figure 5.36 Finished piece costs – alternative processes as a function of annual 
production volume for 32.6 lbs automotive crankshafts (Nallicheri et 
al., 1991). 169 
 
 xxi
Figure 5.37 Modified manufacturing process for the forged steel crankshaft. 170 
 
 xxii
Nomenclature 
 
ap, apx Linear acceleration of piston, Linear acceleration of piston in X direction 
arx, ary X, Y components of linear acceleration of C.G. of connecting rod 
d Oil bore diameter located in the crankpin bearing  
D, Rp Diameter, radius of piston 
e Oil bore eccentricity distance from crankpin bearing center 
F Force magnitude applied on the crankpin bearing 
Fax, Fay X, Y components of reaction forces on the crankpin defined in non-
rotating coordinate system 
Fpx Reaction force at the piston pin end of connecting rod in the X direction 
Fx, Fy X, Y components of the load applied on the crankpin bearing described in 
a coordinate system, XY, attached to crankshaft 
I Moment of inertia of a cross section 
Ixx, Iyy, Izz Moment of Inertia about X, Y, and Z axis located at the C.G. of 
connecting rod 
Ixy, Iyz, Ixz Moment of Inertia about XY, YZ, and XZ planes located at the C.G. of 
connecting rod 
l Location of bending neutral axis of a cross section 
L1 Crank radius 
L2 Connecting rod length 
Lg Distance of the C.G. of connecting rod from crankpin end center 
mp, mr Mass of piston assembly, connecting rod 
P0 Normal pressure on the contact surface between connecting rod bearing 
and crankpin bearing 
 
 xxiii
Pc Pressure in the cylinder applied on the top of the piston 
r Crankpin bearing radius 
rg Location of C.G. of connecting rod 
rgx, rgy X, Y components of location of C.G. of connecting rod 
rpx, rpy X, Y components of piston pin location 
rp Location of piston pin with respect to the central axis of the crankshaft 
t Crankpin bearing length 
Vg Linear velocity of C.G. of connecting rod 
Vgx, Vgy X, Y components of linear velocity of C.G. of connecting rod 
Vpx Linear velocity of piston in the X direction 
1α , 2α  Angular acceleration of crankshaft, connecting rod 
β  Connecting rod angle 
ϕ  Angle on the crankpin bearing measured from a line connecting crankpin 
center to central axis of crankshaft 
θ  Crank angle 
cσ  Critical bending stress with symmetric cross section (cylinder with a 
concentric hole) 
eσ  Critical bending stress with non symmetric cross section (cylinder with an 
eccentric hole) 
Misesvon σ  Equivalent von Mises stress 
zzyyxx σσσ  , ,  x, y, and z components of normal stresses 
xzyzxy σσσ  , ,  xy, yz, and xz components of shear stresses 
1ω , 2ω  Angular velocity of crankshaft, connecting rod 
1 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Background 
Crankshaft is a large component with a complex geometry in the engine, which 
converts the reciprocating displacement of the piston to a rotary motion with a four link 
mechanism. Since the crankshaft experiences a large number of load cycles during its 
service life, fatigue performance and durability of this component has to be considered in 
the design process. Design developments have always been an important issue in the 
crankshaft production industry, in order to manufacture a less expensive component with 
the minimum weight possible and proper fatigue strength and other functional 
requirements. These improvements result in lighter and smaller engines with better fuel 
efficiency and higher power output.  
This study was conducted on a single cylinder four stroke cycle engine. Two 
different crankshafts from similar engines were studied in this research. The finite 
element analysis was performed in four static steps for each crankshaft. Stresses from 
these analyses were used for superposition with regards to dynamic load applied to the 
crankshaft. Further analysis was performed on the forged steel crankshaft in order to 
optimize the weight and manufacturing cost. Figure 1.1 shows a typical picture of a 
crankshaft and the nomenclature used to define its different parts. 
 
 
2
1.1.1 Function of Crankshafts in IC Engines 
The crankshaft, connecting rod, and piston constitute a four bar slider-crank 
mechanism, which converts the sliding motion of the piston (slider in the mechanism) to 
a rotary motion. Since the rotation output is more practical and applicable for input to 
other devices, the concept design of an engine is that the output would be rotation. In 
addition, the linear displacement of an engine is not smooth, as the displacement is 
caused by the combustion of gas in the combustion chamber. Therefore, the displacement 
has sudden shocks and using this input for another device may cause damage to it. The 
concept of using crankshaft is to change these sudden displacements to a smooth rotary 
output, which is the input to many devices such as generators, pumps, and compressors. It 
should also be mentioned that the use of a flywheel helps in smoothing the shocks. Figure 
1.2 shows the mounting of a crankshaft in an engine and Figure 1.3 shows the P-V 
diagram during an engine cycle for a four stroke cycle engine, where Vd is the volume 
swept by the piston and Vbdc is the volume of the cylinder when the piston is at the 
bottom dead centre (BDC).  
1.1.2 Service Loads and Failures Experienced by Crankshafts 
Crankshaft experiences large forces from gas combustion. This force is applied to 
the top of the piston and since the connecting rod connects the piston to the crankshaft, 
the force will be transmitted to the crankshaft. The magnitude of the force depends on 
many factors which consists of crank radius, connecting rod dimensions, weight of the 
connecting rod, piston, piston rings, and pin. Combustion and inertia forces acting on the 
 
 
3
crankshaft cause two types of loading on the crankshaft structure; torsional load and 
bending load.  
There are many sources of failure in the engine. They could be categorized as 
operating sources, mechanical sources, and repairing sources (Silva 2003). One of the 
most common crankshaft failures is fatigue at the fillet areas due to bending load caused 
by the combustion. Even with a soft case as journal bearing contact surface, in a 
crankshaft free of internal flaws one would still expect a bending or torsional fatigue 
crack to initiate at the pin surface, radius, or at the surface of an oil hole.  
Due to the crankshaft geometry and engine mechanism, the crankshaft fillet 
experiences a large stress range during its service life. Figure 1.4 shows a crankshaft in 
the engine block from side view. In this figure it can be seen that at the moment of 
combustion the load from the piston is transmitted to the crankpin, causing a large 
bending moment on the entire geometry of the crankshaft. At the root of the fillet areas 
stress concentrations exist and these high stress range locations are the points where 
cyclic loads could cause fatigue crack initiation, leading to fracture.  
1.2 Motivation and Objectives of the Study 
This study was motivated by a need for a comparative study of forged steel and 
ductile cast iron crankshafts, which are the most commonly used manufacturing 
processes for an automotive crankshaft. In addition, it was desired to develop an 
optimized geometry, material, and manufacturing procedure which will reduce the weight 
of the forged steel component for fuel efficiency and reduce the manufacturing cost due 
to high volume production of this component.  
 
 
4
This research was performed on crankshafts from single cylinder engines. 
However, since the basis of analysis are the same for multi-cylinder engines, the 
procedures used could be modified and implemented for crankshafts from other types of 
engines. Other studies on crankshafts from multi-cylinder engines are typically 
performed on a portion of the crankshaft consisting of two journal bearings and one 
crankpin bearing, which is similar to that a single cylinder engine. The only major 
difference in engines with different number of cylinders is the dynamic analysis of the 
loads applied to the component.  
This study is a part of a project dealing with fatigue performance comparison and 
optimization of forged steel and ductile cast iron crankshafts. A comprehensive literature 
review about crankshaft durability, comparison of competing manufacturing processes 
and cost analysis was performed by Zoroufi and Fatemi (2005). Fatigue and durability 
assessment of the crankshafts used in this study were investigated by Williams and 
Fatemi (2007). They conducted experimental monotonic and cyclic tests on both 
materials using specimens taken from as forged and as cast crankshafts. Their 
investigation also included component fatigue tests and fatigue life predictions.  
This study is concerned with identifying the critical location of fatigue failure 
caused by engine loads and calculating the operating stress range at this location 
(Montazersadgh and Fatemi, 2007). In addition, considering component geometry and 
according to the applied loads during service life of the crankshaft, it was desired to 
optimize the weight and manufacturing cost of the forged steel crankshaft, while 
maintaining or improving its fatigue performance (Williams et al., 2007).  
 
 
5
Chapter 2 discusses forging and casting manufacturing processes of crankshaft 
production. In this chapter, these two competing manufacturing processes are explained 
and compared. This chapter also presents a literature survey performed on previous 
studies. Chapter 3 discusses dynamic load analysis of the crankshaft, which consists of 
load-history applied to the crankshaft bearings during its service life. Stress analysis and 
FEA, according to dynamic loading of the crankshaft, is investigated and presented in 
Chapter 4. This is followed by the optimization study of the forged steel crankshaft in 
Chapter 5. The optimization process started with geometry optimization and was 
completed by considering modifications to the manufacturing process and using 
alternative materials.  
 
 
6
 
Figure 1.1 Typical crankshaft with main journals that support the crankshaft in the 
engine block. Rod journals are offset from the crankshaft centerline 
(Halderman and Mitchell, 2001). 
 
 
Figure 1.2 Exploded view of a single cylinder engine showing the crankshaft 
mounting in the engine (http://www.deere.com/, 2005). 
 
 
7
 
Figure 1.3 P-V diagram at constant delivery ratio. Curve 5 is for 900 rev/min, curve 6 
for 1200 rev/min, curve 7 for 1500 rev/min, and curve 8 for 1800 rev/min 
(Ferguson, 1986). 
 
 
Figure 1.4 Side view of the engine block at the time of combustion 
(http://www.wikipedia.org/, 2007). 
 
 
Crankshaft side view 
8 
2 Literature Review 
An extensive literature review on crankshafts was performed by Zoroufi and 
Fatemi (2005). Their study presents a literature survey focused on fatigue performance 
evaluation and comparisons of forged steel and ductile cast iron crankshafts. In their 
study, crankshaft specifications, operation conditions, and various failure sources are 
discussed. Their survey included a review of the effect of influential parameters such as 
residual stress on fatigue behavior and methods of inducing compressive residual stress in 
crankshafts. The common crankshaft material and manufacturing process technologies in 
use were compared with regards to their durability performance. This was followed by a 
discussion of durability assessment procedures used for crankshafts, as well as bench 
testing and experimental techniques. In their literature review, geometry optimization of 
crankshafts, cost analysis and potential cost saving opportunities are also briefly 
discussed. 
In this chapter, material and manufacturing processes of crankshafts are discussed 
and a brief literature review related to this topic is presented. Since this study is mostly 
about dynamic load analysis, finite element modeling, and optimization, research articles 
concerning these issues are also summarized and discussed in this chapter. 
 
 
9
2.1 Materials and Manufacturing Processes 
The major crankshaft material competitors currently used in industry are forged 
steel, and cast iron. Comparison of the performance of these materials with respect to 
static, cyclic, and impact loading are of great interest to the automotive industry. A 
comprehensive comparison of manufacturing processes with respect to mechanical 
properties, manufacturing aspects, and finished cost for crankshafts has been conducted 
by Zoroufi and Fatemi (2005). 
This Section discusses forging and casting processes as the two competing 
manufacturing processes in crankshaft production industry. Influencing parameters in 
both processes are detailed. Finally, the forged steel and the cast iron products are 
compared in terms of material properties and manufacturing processes.  
2.1.1 Forging Process and the Influencing Parameters 
Forging is the term for shaping metal by plastic deformation. Cold forging is done 
at low temperatures, while conventional hot forging is done at high temperatures, which 
makes metal easier to shape. Cold forgings are various forging processes conducted at 
near ambient temperatures, such as bending, cold drawing, cold heading, coining, and 
extrusion to produce metal components to close tolerances and net shape 
(http://www.jobshop.com/, 2007). Warm forging is a modification of the cold forging 
process where the workpiece is heated to a temperature significantly below the typical 
hot forging temperature, ranging from 500º C to 750º C (http://www.forging.org/, 2007). 
Compared with cold forging, warm forging has the potential advantages of reduced 
tooling loads, reduced press loads, increased steel ductility, elimination of need to anneal 
 
 
10
prior to forging, and favorable as-forged properties that can eliminate heat treatment 
(http://www.qcforge.net/, 2007). The use of the lower temperatures in cold and warm 
forging processes provides the advantages of reducing and even substantially eliminating 
the harmful scale or oxide growth on the component as well as enabling the component to 
be produced to a high dimensional accuracy (Koike and Matsui, 2001). Despite these 
advantages, cold and warm forging processes have the limitations of close tolerance and 
net shape of the final component with the workpiece. Hot forging is the plastic 
deformation of metal at a temperature and strain rate such that recrystallization occurs 
simultaneously with deformation, thus avoiding strain hardening 
(http://www.jobshop.com/, 2007). Since crankshafts have complex geometries, warm and 
cold forging of the component is not possible. Therefore, crankshafts are manufactured 
using the hot forging process.  
In impression (or closed die) hot forging two or more dies are moved toward each 
other to form a metal billet, at a suitable temperature, in a shape determined by the die 
impressions. These processes are capable of producing components of high quality at 
moderate cost. Forgings offer a high strength to weight ratio, toughness, and resistance to 
impact and fatigue, which are important factors in crankshaft performance.  
In closed die forging, a material must satisfy two basic requirements: (a) The 
material strength (or flow stress) must be low so that die pressures can be kept within the 
capabilities of practical die materials and constructions, and (b) The capability of the 
material to deform without failure (forgeability) must be sufficient to allow the desired 
amount of deformation. 
 
 
11
By convention, impression and closed die forging are considered to be hot 
working operations. In most practical hot forging operations, the temperature of the 
work-piece material is higher than that of the dies. The metal flow and die filling are 
largely determined by (a) the forging material’s resistance to flow and ability to flow, i.e. 
its flow stress and forgeability, (b) the friction and cooling effects at the material 
interface and (c) the complexity of the forging shape. A multi-cylinder crankshaft is 
considered to have a complex geometry, which necessitates proper workpiece and die 
design according to material forgeability and friction to have the desired geometry (Altan 
et al., 1983).  
Lubrication 
In hot forging, in addition to lubrication effects, the effects of die chilling or heat 
transfer from the host material to the colder dies must be considered. Therefore, values of 
the friction factor, or coefficient of friction, obtained under certain forging conditions 
may not be applicable under other conditions. For example, for a given lubricant, friction 
data obtained in hydraulic press forging cannot be useful in mechanical press or hammer 
forging, even if the die and billet temperatures are comparable (Altan et al., 1983). 
Shape complexity in forging  
The main objective of forging process design is to ensure adequate flow of the 
metal in the dies so that the desired finish part geometry can be obtained without any 
external or internal defects. Metal flow is greatly influenced by part or die geometry. 
Often, several operations are needed to achieve gradual flow of the metal from an 
initially simple shape (cylinder or round cornered square billet) into the more complex 
shape of the final forging (Altan et al., 1983).  
 
 
12
Schematic initial workpiece and lower forging die for a four cylinder crankshaft is 
shown in Figure 2.1. The as-forged crankshaft with flashes is shown in Figure 2.2. As 
could be seen, the geometry complexity requires extensive analysis on the forging piece 
and die, in order to have proper material flow to fill all cavities in the die. Improper 
workpiece design will result in a deficient geometry as shown in Figure 2.3 
(Shamasundar et al., 2003). 
Heat treatment 
All hot forged parts receive a certain amount of heat treatment in the process of 
being forged and, thereafter, may be used without additional heat treatment. For 
maximum usefulness, however, many forgings are heat treated one or more times before 
being put into service. For instance, bearing sections and fillet areas on crankshafts are 
heat treated in order to improve fatigue and wear properties of the material at these 
certain locations.  
Usually forgings are heat treated before and after their machining. The purpose of 
the initial treatment is to secure uniform structure of the metal and contribute to ease of 
machining of the forged part. The final treatment makes it possible to use the finished 
forgings for the service intended. For example, forged tools must be hard and tough, 
consequently, they must receive final hardening and tempering treatments 
(http://www.sme.org/, 2007). Today, microalloy steels are widely used for manufacturing 
forged steel crankshafts. The microalloyed steel can effectively eliminate the need for 
additional heat-treating, reducing the cost of forgings by 5% to 10% to the final cost 
(http://www.steel.org/, 2007). 
 
 
13
Straightening and coining 
When the flash is trimmed from the drop forging, the shape may become 
distorted, which is common in forged crankshafts because of geometry section changes 
and non-uniform cooling during forging process. Correction of this condition may be 
necessary. Correction to a certain degree may be accomplished by hammering the 
distorted forging in a special re-striking die. The correction is made while the forging 
cools. Other re-striking operations, called coining, are conducted on powerful and 
accurate presses after the forgings have cooled to room temperature. The forgings are 
brought to the correct size and shape in these presses, and final machining operations 
ordinarily performed are either entirely or partially eliminated 
(http://www.engineersedge.com/, 2007).  
Microalloy steels provide more consistent mechanical properties, improved 
steelmaking and metal forming processes such as rolling, and reduced surface flaws with 
less distortion than heat-treated forged steel. This reduces the need for straightening in 
the forging process and increases the machinability of the forged steel 
(http://www.steel.org/, 2007). 
2.1.2 Casting Process and the Influencing Parameters 
Casting is a manufacturing process by which a molten material such as metal or 
plastic is introduced into a mold, allowed to solidify within the mold, and then ejected or 
broken out to make a fabricated part. Casting is used for making parts of complex shape, 
such as crankshafts, that would be difficult or uneconomical to make by other methods 
(such as machining from solid material). 
 
 
14
Sand-mold casting is adaptable to a very wide range of alloys, shapes, sizes, and 
production quantities. Hollow shapes can be produced in these castings through the use of 
cores. Sand-mold casting is by far the most common casting process used in the industry; 
some estimates are that as many as 90% of industrial castings use the sand-mold casting 
process (http://www.makinamuhendisi.com/, 2007).  
Green sand 
Green sand refers to the fact that water is added to activate the clay binder. Green 
sand-mold casting involves mixing sand with a suitable clay binder (usually a bentonite 
clay) and other additives, and packing the sand mixture tightly around a pattern that is 
constructed from the part design, but the pattern is not an exact replica of the part since 
various dimensional allowances must be made to accommodate certain physical effects. 
For most metals and most sizes and shapes of casting, green sand molding is the most 
economical of all the molding processes.  
The moisture present in green sand produces steam when contacted by hot metal. 
Inability of the steam and other gases to escape causes problems with some casting 
designs, and blowhole damage results. The dimensional accuracy of green sand casting is 
limited. Even with small castings, it is seldom that dimensions can be held closer than 
±0.5 millimeter (http://www.makinamuhendisi.com/, 2007).  
Dry sand molds 
Dry sand molding is a sand casting process using a mold made of greensand 
which is dried in an oven to remove the moisture and increase its strength. The absence 
of moisture eliminates the formation of water vapor and reduces the type of casting 
defects that are due to gas formation. The cost of heat, the time required for drying the 
 
 
15
mold, and the difficulty of handling heavy molds without damage make the process 
expensive compared to green sand molding, and it is used mostly when steam formation 
from the moisture present would be a serious problem (http://www.castsolutions.com/, 
2007).   
Skin drying  
Most of the benefits of dry sand molds can be obtained by skin drying molds to 
depths from a fraction of an inch to an inch. With the mold open, the inside surfaces are 
subjected to heat from torches, radiant lamps, hot dry air, or electric heating elements to 
form a dry insulting skin around the mold cavity. Skin-dried molds can be stored only for 
short periods of time before pouring, since the water in the main body of the mold will 
redistribute itself and re-moisturize the inside skin (http://www.castsolutions.com/, 2007).   
2.1.3 Comparison of Forging and Casting Processes 
To some extend, forging and casting are competitive, even where different 
materials are involved with each process. As a general rule, the tooling investment is 
higher for forging than for casting. Thus, the use of forging tends to be restricted to 
applications in which the higher material properties of steel compare to cast iron or the 
higher properties of wrought steel compared to cast steel can be made use of in the 
design. Because forgings compete best in high strength applications, most producers take 
particular care in raw material selection and inspection. In many cases, either forging or 
castings may have adequate properties, and one process has no universal economic 
advantage over the other.  
Some characteristics of castings as compared to forgings are as follows: 
 
 
16
• Castings cannot obtain the strengthening effects of hot and cold working. Forging 
surpasses casting in predictable strength properties, producing assured superior 
strength consistently. 
• A casting has neither grain flow nor directional strength and the process cannot 
prevent formation of certain metallurgical defects. Pre-working forge stock produces 
a grain flow oriented in directions requiring maximum strength. Dendritic structures, 
alloy segregations and like imperfections are refined in forging.  
• Casting defects occur in a variety of forms. Because hot working refines grain pattern 
and imparts high strength, ductility and resistance properties, forged products are 
more reliable. And they are manufactured without the added costs for tighter process 
controls and inspection that are required for casting.  
• Castings require close control of melting and cooling processes because alloy 
segregation may occur. This results in non-uniform heat-treatment response that can 
affect straightness of finished parts. Forgings respond more predictably to heat 
treatment and offer better dimensional stability. 
• Some castings, such as special performance castings, require expensive materials and 
process controls, and longer lead times. Open-die and ring rolling are examples of 
forging processes that adapt to various production run lengths and enable shortened 
lead times. 
In spite of the aforementioned advantages of forgings over castings, castings may 
be an economical alternative, depending on part functionality requirements, production 
volume, and other considerations. 
 
 
17
2.2 Operating Conditions and Failure of Crankshafts 
Crankshaft is one of the largest components in the internal combustion engine that 
has a complex geometry consisting of cylinders as bearings and plates as the crank webs. 
Geometry section changes in the crankshaft cause stress concentration at fillet areas 
where bearings are connected to the crank webs. In addition, this component experiences 
both torsional and bending load during its service life. Therefore, fillet areas are locations 
that experience the most critical stresses during the service life of the crankshaft. As a 
result, these locations are main sections of fatigue failure of the component. The size of a 
crankshaft depends on the number of cylinders and horsepower output of the engine. The 
size of the crankshaft could range from 3.2 kg for a single cylinder engine with the output 
power of 12 hp, to 300 tons for a fourteen cylinder diesel engine with the output power of 
108,920 hp. 
In an internal combustion engine, two load sources apply force on the crankshaft. 
The load applied by combustion in the combustion chamber to the piston is transmitted to 
the crankpin bearing by a four bar slider-crank mechanism. This is the main source of 
loading in the engine. The other load source is due to dynamic nature of the mechanism. 
Since the engine operates at high speeds, the centrifugal forces are present at different 
rotating components such as connecting rods. These load sources apply both torsional 
and bending load on the crankshaft.  
Silva (2003) classifies the cause of journal bearing failure or damage (jagged 
journals) to three possible sources; “(a) operating sources such as oil absence on carter, 
defective lubrication of journals, high operating oil temperature, improper use of the 
engine (over-revving); (b) mechanical sources such as misalignments of the crankshaft on 
 
 
18
the assembling, improper journal bearings (wrong size), no control on the clearance size 
between journals and bearings, crankshaft vibration; (c) repairing sources such as 
misalignments of the journals (due to improper grinding), misalignments of the 
crankshaft (due to improper alignment of the crankshaft), high stress concentrations (due 
to improper grinding at the radius on both sides of the journals), high surface roughness 
(due to improper grinding, origination of wearing), improper welding or nitruration, 
straightening operation, defective grinding.” Details of cracks on the journal bearing 
surfaces studied by Silva are shown in Figure 2.4. 
Another common failure in the crankshafts is mechanical crack nucleation at the 
fillet radius of journal bearings. Different criteria are used in identifying the crack in the 
fillet area. Spiteri et al. (2005) studied the relationship of different failure modes such as 
surface cracks, stiffness change, and two-piece failures on different crankshafts. The 
crankshafts in their study consisted of rolled, ductile, and cast iron crankshafts. Using the 
resonant bending test in their study they showed that an accelerating resonant shift is a 
valid failure criterion and the results have good agreement with two piece failure. In 
addition, the fatigue strength obtained from the two-piece failure criterion is significantly 
higher than the fatigue strength derived from the surface crack failure criterion. The four-
bubble failure criterion cracks or those found in post process Magnaglow inspection did 
not propagate and result in failure. These cracks formed and remained on the fillet 
surface. Figure 2.5 shows a V6 sample failed with a 2 Hz resonance shift with a 9.5 mm 
track in Spiteri et al. studies. 
Another crack detection method was introduced by Baxter (1993). He studied 
crack detection using a modified version of the gel electrode technique. In this technique 
 
 
19
the critical location of the crankshaft was covered by a thin (~0.5 µm) polymer film. 
After the fatigue test, the surface was inspected with a gel electrode probe. Applying a 
voltage between the electrode as cathode and the crankshaft as anode, induced a current 
to flow to any fatigue sites in the contact area. Information was displayed qualitatively as 
a direct image of the fatigue sites and quantitatively as the spatial distribution of charge 
flow to the surface. This technique could identify both the primary fatigue cracks and a 
distribution of secondary sites of less severe fatigue damage. The most useful aspect of 
this study is that the ELPO film can be applied before or after the fatigue test, and in both 
cases, the gel electrode technique is successful at detecting fatigue damage. Figure 2.6 
shows the photograph of the test piece after fracture at the fillet location. As can be seen, 
a fatigue crack of length 2.2 cm exists along the edge of the fillet, which the markings 
from this technique clearly identify.  
2.3 Dynamic Load Determination and Analysis 
Jenson (1970) performed an experimental study to determine the load applied to a 
V8 crankshaft. The load determination in this study started with the selection of the 
crankshaft sections to be investigated. The critical sections are shown on the V8 
crankshaft in Figure 2.7. In order to measure the bending and torsion loads applied to 
each section of the crankshaft, bending and torsion strain gage bridges were mounted in 
pairs. Figure 2.8 shows the details of strain gage bridges mounted on section No. 4 in 
Figure 2.7. After mounting the strain gages, the crankshaft was carefully assembled in the 
engine and then the engine was completely assembled and installed on a dynamometer 
stand. The loads at several speed increments were recorded to capture peak bending and 
 
 
20
torsion loads, which in general do not occur at the same crankshaft angle, as shown in 
Figure 2.9.  
Henry et al. (1992) implemented the dynamic load in their FEM model with 
consideration of internal centrifugal, external bearing, and torsional dynamic loads. In 
their study, internal loads were calculated by assuming constant FEM mass forces. 
Therefore, for any engine speed, the resulting displacements were calculated only once. 
Considering the classical gas and inertia forces acting on the crankpin bearings result in 
external bearing loads. A statistically determinate method or an indeterminate one was 
used to calculate the journal bearings reactions considering the clearances and engine 
block compliance. And finally a classical mass-spring model with harmonic response was 
created in order to calculate the dynamic twisting moments. The result was the crank 
internal moment at each throw and throughout the cycle. Only one tosional displacement 
calculation was performed per throw, and the displacements at each cycle step were 
scalar multiples of these results.  
An analytical investigation on bending vibrations was done for a V6 engine by 
Mourelatos (1995). He used a crankshaft system model (CRANKSYM) to analytically 
verify a vibration problem related to the flywheel for the mentioned crankshaft. As 
described in their study, CRANKSYM could perform an analysis considering the 
crankshaft structural dynamics, main bearing hydrodynamics and engine block flexibility. 
The program considers the gyroscopic effect of the flywheel, loads applied on the belt, 
crankshaft bent and block misboring, and the anisotropy of the block flexibility as seen 
from a rotating crankshaft. This program could also calculate the dynamic stress history 
on the crankshaft during the whole engine cycle. The CRANKSYM requires a finite 
 
 
21
element mesh of the whole crankshaft assembly. The output of CRANKSYM includes 
the natural frequencies of the crankshaft-flywheel system, the bearing loads with respect 
to an engine fixed coordinate system, and the axial displacement of a point on the outer 
perimeter of the flywheel. In this program the crankshaft structural analysis predicts the 
crankshaft dynamic response based on the finite element method. Figure 2.10 shows the 
finite element mesh for the crankshaft-flywheel assembly used in the CRANKSYM 
program.  
The classical model of crankshaft vibration was used in Payer et al. (1995) studies 
to determine the time dependent displacement-vector x of the crankshaft for the 
calculation of its transient stress behavior. The following equation was used in their 
studies: 
[ ] [ ] [ ] )(   tFxCxDxM =++ &&&        (2.1) 
where [M], [D] and [C] are time dependent nonlinear mass matrix, damping matrix and 
stiffness matrix, respectively, and the displacement vector as x , velocity vector as x& , and 
acceleration vector as x&& , and the time dependent force vectors as F(t). In this equation, 
by knowing the displacements, velocities, and accelerations at time t, the Newmark-Beta-
method could be used to calculate the solution for the time t + dt. The excitation forces 
acting at the crank pins are calculated from superposition of the time dependent gas 
forces and the time dependent rotating mass forces of the pistons and connecting rods 
considering the combustion order in the engine. This calculation results in the time 
dependent deformation behavior of the crankshaft and the time dependent stress and 
deformation behavior of the main bearing walls.  
 
 
22
Prakash et al. (1998) used the advantages of both the classical method and finite 
element technique in their studies to design crankshafts. They used the classical method 
in order to calculate the initial and the approximate results. Based on this method a 
program was developed, TVAL, which quickly gave the natural frequencies, critical 
modes, displacements and stresses. In order to obtain more accurate results and to 
evaluate the results from the program, they created the finite element model of the 
crankshaft. Time varying radial and tangential forces acting on the crankpin were derived 
from the cylinder pressures. The displacements and stresses were calculated using the 
superposition method. They used an engine load duty cycle corresponding to automotive 
applications for generating load histories for accelerated fatigue testing.  
2.4 Finite Element Modeling 
Since the crankshaft has a complex geometry for analysis, finite element models 
have been considered to give an accurate and reasonable solution whenever laboratory 
testing is not available.  
Uchida and Hara (1984) used a single throw FEM model shown in Figure 2.11 in 
the extrapolation of the experimental equation in their study. In their study the web 
thickness of a 60° V-6 crankshaft was reduced while maintaining its fatigue performance 
and durability under turbo-charged gas pressure. In the study of the 60° V-6 engine 
crankshaft dimensions, the stress evaluation of the crankpin fillet part was extremely 
critical since, to reduce the crank’s total length, it was necessary to reduce the thickness 
of the web between main journal and crankpin as much as possible while maintaining its 
 
 
23
strength. FEM was used to estimate the stress concentration factor at thicknesses where 
confirmed calculation was not available.  
A crankshaft durability assessment program based on three dimensional 
mechanical analyses was developed by RENAULT and was used by Henry et al. (1992) 
to predict the durability and calculate the fatigue performance of crankshafts. In the 
program, the stress calculations involved initial 3D FEM analysis with a coarse mesh for 
the whole crankshaft geometry as shown in Figure 2.12 and were followed by a local 
BEM fillet zoom technique for the fillet areas in order to accurately calculate the stress 
concentration factors. In their durability assessment program, they had chosen a 3D 
numerical approach. The coarse mesh is used in the whole crankshaft model to avoid cut 
plane boundary condition approximations. The resulting displacements were then applied 
to a local small sized BEM fillet model. The resulting BEM fillet stress state was biaxial 
on the surface, unlike corresponding FEM results. This two-stage FEM/BEM stress 
calculation method was compared to several other numerical calculations and several 
crankshaft geometries in their study, which showed increased precision, resulting in 
improved initial design of a crankshaft. 
A theoretical study followed by experimental results was conducted by Guagliano 
et al. (1993) to calculate the stress concentration factor in a diesel engine crankshaft. 
They conducted experimental tests by mounting strain gages at high stress concentration 
areas (crank fillet). A three dimensional model of the crankshaft was generated and 
numerical calculation was performed according to linear-elastic properties of the material 
and different loading conditions. Good agreement between experimental results and 
numerical results indicated the accuracy of stress concentration factor calculation. In 
 
 
24
addition, a bi-dimensional model of the crankshaft was constructed numerically and 
experimentally, in order to quickly evaluate the stress concentration factor. Considering 
similar boundary conditions and loading situation for both three dimensional and bi-
dimensional models, resulted in identical stress concentration factors. They concluded 
that a bi-dimensional model could simply and efficiently determine the stress 
concentration factor. 
An artificial neural network was developed by Shiomi and Watanabe (1995) in 
order to calculate the stress concentration factor at the crankpin fillet area from 
dimensional characteristics of the crankshaft. An artificial neural network was used to 
calculate the stress concentration factor based on mathematical approximations from a 
database which contained geometry properties of the crankshaft as well as stress 
concentration factors. In order to construct the database, finite element model of 
crankshafts with different geometries were created. Stress concentration factors were 
obtained from these models and results were inserted in the database. The finite element 
model results in accurate values for stress concentration factor and eliminates inevitable 
measurement errors due to experiments. A large number of mathematical functions had to 
be solved in order to create the approximation function, but after having the final 
equation, the stress concentration could be easily calculated for a given crankshaft 
geometry. The structure of the network applied to crankshaft geometry is shown in Figure 
2.13.  
A nonlinear transient stress analysis for the rotating crankshaft of a 6-cylinder 
inline engine was presented by Payer et al. (1995). A method was shown in their study 
which enabled the nonlinear transient analysis to be both highly sophisticated and 
 
 
25
efficient for determining the fatigue behavior of crankshafts. They used a finite element 
program which uses two major steps to calculate the transient stress behavior of a rotating 
crankshaft, the structure of which is shown in Figure 2.14. The software automatically 
generates a solid element model of the crankshaft considering both flywheel and 
vibrational damper, see Figure 2.15. In order to create a beam mass model, shown in 
Figure 2.16, the strain energy method was used. Stiffness calculated with the solid 
element model of a crank throw was used to generate the beam mass model. This model 
was used for the calculation of the transient deformations of the crankshaft.  
Prakash et al. (1998) modeled a complete crankshaft using the solid elements of 
ANSYS software. In order to verify the integrity of the FE model natural frequencies of 
the model was compared with those obtained from practical measurements. They 
evaluated the stress amplitudes using mode superposition method. As a prerequisite, 
reduced modal analysis was required for carrying out the mode superposition analysis. 
They selected the master degrees of freedom to exactly calculate the fist few torsional 
natural frequencies. This method decouples the equations of motion and reduces 
computational effort required.  
An analysis of the stress distribution inside a crankshaft crank was studied by 
Borges et al. (2002). The stress analysis was done to evaluate the overall structural 
efficiency of the crank, concerned with the homogeneity and magnitude of stresses as 
well as the amount and localization of stress concentration points. Due to memory 
limitations in the computers available, the crank model had to be simplified by mostly 
restricting it according to symmetry planes. In order to evaluate results from the finite 
element analysis a 3D photoelasticity test was conducted. The area of major interest was 
 
 
26
that closest to crankpin bearing, usually critical to bending loads. An initial model was 
established as shown in Figure 2.17. Initial tentative meshing was performed over this 3D 
geometry, with several degrees of overall refinement and of local refinement. Due to 
limitations in computer memories, solving this initial model was not possible. According 
to experimental information from a photoelastic model, the theoretical model could be 
geometrically simplified by restricting symmetry planes. This results in the geometrically 
restricted symmetrical model shown in Figure 2.17. For the final model, Figure 2.18 
shows (1) the applied load, (2) displacement restrictions which are the cutting planes for 
crank isolation, and (3) the symmetry plane.  
Chien et al. (2005) studied the influence of the residual stress induced by the fillet 
rolling process on the fatigue process of a ductile cast iron crankshaft. The stress 
concentration near the fillet area of the crankshaft section was investigated by a 2D 
elastic finite element analysis in the ABAQUS software. Then, an elastic-plastic 2D plane 
strain FEA was conducted to obtain the residual stress distributions near the fillet due to 
the rolling process. The portion of the crankshaft section and the rollers were modeled by 
eight-node plane strain quadrilateral continuum elements with a reduced integration 
scheme, shown in Figure 2.19. A relatively fine mesh near the fillet was generated in 
order to accurately capture the characteristics of the stress field in this stress 
concentration area. A magnified finite element mesh of the crankshaft section near the 
fillet and a portion of the primary roller are shown in Figure 2.20.  
 
 
27
2.5 Optimization of Crankshafts with Geometry, Material, 
Manufacturing, and Cost Considerations 
Crankshaft is among large volume production components in the internal 
combustion engine industry. Weight and cost reduction of this component will result in 
high cost savings. Weight reduction of a crankshaft will also increase the fuel efficiency 
of the engine. 
Geometry optimization 
Development of the DCI crankshaft for the Nissan 60° V-6 engine was studied by 
Uchida and Hara (1984). It was aimed to reduce the web thickness while maintaining the 
performance of the crankshaft used before. This resulted in shortening the engine length. 
They used the finite element method to perform structural analyses. The analyses was 
necessary to set the absolute minimum dimensions for the cylinder pitch as well as each 
of the parts. The objective of their study was to reduce available length for various engine 
installation types, reduction of friction for better fuel economy, and good stiffness for 
lower noise.  
Henry et al. (1992) used the durability assessment tool developed by RENAULT 
to optimize the crank web design of a turbocharged diesel engine crankshaft. The 
geometry of the web design was changed according to reasonable geometries in order to 
reduce the maximum stress. This constraint allowed changes in the web width and pin 
side web profile. The initial and modified webs are shown in Figures 2.21 (a) and (b). An 
increase of 11% for the fatigue safety factor for fillet P2 and 19% for fillet P1 (see Figure 
2.12) resulted from the crank web modifications. In the fatigue improvement, two 
mechanisms contribute to the stress reduction, the first is the geometric reinforcement of 
 
 
28
the webs, and the second is the decrease in maximum main bearing reaction on the fifth 
journal due to the influenced change in crank balancing.  
Powertrain Engineering Tool (PET), developed at Ford Powertrain and Vehicle 
Research Laboratory by Mikulec et al. (1998) is a powertrain computer program that 
allows rapid development of preliminary powertrain component geometry based on the 
engine performance and friction. PET program uses its integrated design rules and a non-
linear SQP-based (Sequential Quadratic Programming) geometry optimizer to calculate 
the powertrain component geometries. The simplified flow diagram of the PET 
component optimization scheme associated with the SQP is illustrated in Figure 2.22. 
They presented some initial designs and the optimized geometries given by the program 
in their study.  
Inducing residual stress by shot peening  
Shot peening is a carefully controlled process of blasting a large number of 
hardened spherical or nearly spherical particles (shot) against the softer surface of a part. 
Each impingement of a shot makes a small indentation in the surface of the part, thereby 
inducing compressive residual stresses, which are usually intended to resist fatigue 
fracture or stress-corrosion cracking.  
Burrell (1985) studied the effect of controlled shot peening on the fatigue 
properties of different automotive components, including crankshafts. Six different 
crankshafts from different engines were investigated. The critically stressed location of 
each crankshaft was the journal bearing fillet. The high stress point was the bottom side 
of the fillet when the journal is in the top dead center position during the firing cycle. 
Each fatigue test was performed on single journal bearing of crankshafts. A high 
 
 
29
frequency bending load was applied for the fatigue test and the load was monitored 
during the test by strain gages mounted in the fillets. The following results were obtained 
for the crankshafts mentioned: 
• 25% increase in fatigue strength for a 6 cylinder diesel engine forged steel (AISI 
15B55) crankshaft 
• 40% increase in fatigue strength for a 6 cylinder diesel engine forged steel (AISI 
4340H) crankshaft 
• 31% increase in fatigue strength for a 6 cylinder diesel engine forged steel (AISI 
1046) crankshaft 
• 12.5% increase in fatigue strength for a 6 cylinder diesel engine nodular cast iron 
crankshaft 
• 48% increase in fatigue strength for a 2 cylinder 4 cycle gasoline engine cast 
malleable iron (ARMASTEEL 88-M) crankshaft 
• 17.2% increase in fatigue strength for a 16 cylinder diesel engine forged steel 
(C1046) crankshaft 
The above data indicate that the fatigue strength of either forged steel or cast iron 
crankshafts increases as a result of shot controlled peening process, compared with the 
same unpeened component. Figure 2.23 shows the effect of controlled shot peening on a 
6 cylinder diesel engine forged steel crankshaft. 
Inducing residual stress by fillet rolling  
Since fatigue fracture initiated near the fillets is one of the primary failure 
mechanisms of automotive crankshafts, fillet rolling process has been used to improve 
the fatigue lives of crankshafts for many years (Love et al., 1954). The fillet rolling 
 
 
30
process induces compressive residual stresses near the fillet surface. The compressive 
residual stresses lower the fatigue driving stresses near the fillet surface due to operating 
loads and consequently increase the fatigue lives of crankshafts.  
Kamimura (1985) performed a study on the effect of fillet rolling on fatigue 
strength of ductile cast iron crankshaft. He conducted bench tests of crankshaft pin 
samples and fatigue tests on test pieces in order to study the fatigue strengths of fillet 
rolled crankshafts and specimens. His study also showed that optimum deep rolling 
method could increase the bending fatigue strength by 83% over conventional ductile 
iron crankshafts not fillet rolled. Test results of his study are presented in Figure 2.24, 
which shows an S-N diagram for each of the non-deep rolled fillets and for eight different 
rolling forces.  
Park et al. (2001) showed that without any dimensional modification, fatigue life 
of crankshaft could be improved significantly by applying various surface treatments. 
Fillet rolling and nitriding were the surface treatment processes that were studied in their 
research. Figure 2.25 shows relative S-N curve rig test results with various treatments; 
nitriding, fillet rolling (500 and 900 kgf), and crankshaft section bare samples. From the 
figure, it is seen that the standard bare sample has a fatigue limit of 10 kN. Fillet rolled 
specimens with 500 kgf load exhibit 14 kN fatigue limit, whereas with 900 kgf load more 
than 18 kN fatigue limit is obtained.  
Above experimental data clearly indicate that fillet rolling can dramatically 
increase the fatigue performance of crankshafts. The fillet rolled at 900 kfg force shows 
more than 80% increase in fatigue limit, while the fillet rolled at 500 kgf force exhibits 
relatively lower improvement of 40% in fatigue limit. Therefore, higher rolling force 
 
 
31
results in better fatigue strength as a result of inducing higher compressive stress on the 
fillet surface. However, there is a certain limit for applying residual stress and additional 
load above that level results in excess plastic deformation. Thus, it is important to decide 
the optimum level of rolling force, which was experimentally found to be 700~900 kgf 
rolling force for crankshaft section specimens in Park et al. study.  
An extensive study was performed by Chien et al. (2004) about fatigue analysis of 
ductile cast iron (SAE J434C D5506) crankshaft sections under bending with 
consideration of the residual stresses induced by the fillet rolling process. They used a 
two-dimensional elastic finite element model to investigate the stress concentration near 
the fillet of the crankshaft section under bending without consideration of residual stress. 
A two-dimensional elastic-plastic FEA was created in order to study the plastic zone 
development and the residual stress distribution near the crankshaft fillet induced by the 
fillet rolling process. After the rolling process, a bending moment was applied to the 
crankshaft section. The fatigue failure of the crankshaft near the fillet area under bending 
moment was investigated considering the effect of the residual stress induced by the fillet 
rolling process based on a linear elastic fracture mechanics approach. Finally, the results 
of the fillet rolling FEA simulation were verified by the fillet surface profiles measured 
by the shadowgraphs taken before and after the fillet rolling process. The fatigue life of 
the component was studied using the resonant bending fatigue test on crankshaft sections, 
as shown in Figure 2.26. Figure 2.27 shows the radial distributions of the hoop stress, 
radial stress and shear stress of the investigated crankshaft at the critical angle (θ = 
52.35°) on the fillet, based on the two dimensional plane strain model.   
 
 
32
Nitriding the fillet area for improving fatigue limit 
Nitriding is a surface hardening process that is applied only to certain type of 
steels. This process creates a finish that is the hardest surface attainable using heat 
treatment processes. The process consists of maintaining a work-piece in a 500 degree 
Celsius ammonia atmosphere for up to 100 hours. Under these conditions atomic nitrogen 
combines with surface iron to form iron nitride. The nitrogen slowly diffuses away from 
the surface, as long as the proper temperature is maintained. Therefore, the resulting case 
thickness depends on length of heat treatment. 
Park et al. (2001) studied fatigue behavior of crankshafts investigating effect of 
nitriding surface finish on the fillet area of the crankshafts. From Figure 2.25 it can be 
seen that the standard bare crankshaft section had a fatigue limit of 10 kN and the lower 
hardness crankshaft section exhibited a fatigue limit of 9 kN. In the case of nitriding these 
crankshaft sections, the lower hardness crankshafts had a fatigue limit of 16 kN and the 
standard bare crankshaft sections fatigue limit increased to 18 kN, which is about 60% 
improvement. Therefore, it was suggested that the best combination of crankshaft 
materials is to apply proper surface modification to inexpensive steels with lower 
hardness to compromise both the cost and quality. In this study, the optimum level of 
nitriding depth was suggested to be at least 400 µm. 
TR1 method in forging crankshafts 
TR forging method is an advanced forging process to shape metallic components 
such as a crankshaft from a commercially available hollow pipe. The hollow pipe, which 
has a predetermined wall thickness, is squeezed into a hollow blank pipe having a 
predetermined shape and wall thickness. A region of the hollow blank pipe is then heated, 
                                                 
1 Initials of Prof. Tadeusz Rut, the author of the TR method of forging crankshafts. 
 
 
33
and the heated region is upset and bent into a crankshaft, for example. The hollow blank 
pipe is upset and bent by dies positioned one on each side of the gripped portion of the 
blank and moving toward each other, and also by punches. After the crankshaft is forged, 
one of the punches is released from the crankshaft before the dies are separated therefrom 
(Ando et al., 1992). 
The TR forging method has the following advantages when manufacturing 
crankshafts: 
• material saving 
• reduced labor cost 
• high quality forging (e.g. proper grain flow)  
• possibility of forging bigger crankshafts on relatively smaller forging presses 
Figure 2.28 shows vertical cross-sectional view of a forging machine and the 
hollow blank pipe which starts being formed into a crankshaft. Figure 2.29 shows cross-
sectional views of the TR forging sequences where a pipe is successively squeezed into a 
hollow blank pipe and forged into a crankshaft.  
Material and cost optimization 
An extensive study was performed by Nallicheri et al. (1991) on material 
alternatives for the automotive crankshaft based on manufacturing economics. They 
considered steel forging, nodular cast iron, micro-alloy forging, and austempered ductile 
iron casting as manufacturing options to evaluate the cost effectiveness of using these 
alternatives for crankshafts. Technical cost modeling method was used in their study to 
estimate the manufacturing costs of various material alternatives. They concluded that the 
production volume of the crankshaft and the requirements of the engine are predominant 
 
 
34
factors in cost effective production route for this application. The cast iron crankshaft 
offered the most cost effective manufacturing process, but the properties offered by this 
production method have to be sufficient for the engine design. If the design requires 
better mechanical properties, then other alternatives must be considered. The selection of 
the best alternative depends upon the production volume in a year. At production volume 
above 200,000 parts/year, microalloyed steel forgings offered the most cost effective high 
performance crankshaft. They attributed this to the die and machining tool lives, which 
are improved for the microalloyed steel forging, but at lower than 200,000 parts/year 
production volume the cost savings obtained do not compensate for higher raw material 
cost of the microalloyed forged steel. ADI crankshafts were cost effective at low 
production runs (below 180,000 parts/year). Sensitivity with respect to volume 
production was evaluated as shown in Figure 2.30. Based on their assumptions, raw 
material was about 30% of the final cost, whereas, machining cost was 47% for the 
forged steel crankshaft. The raw material cost of the microalloyed steel forging 
crankshaft was 38%, which is higher than that of forged steel, but the machining 
percentage cost was 43% which reduced the cost of the final component. In addition, the 
heat treatment process was eliminated for the microalloyed steel crankshaft, which was 
3.5% of the final cost of the forged steel, resulting in further final cost reduction. 
A study was performed to examine the cost reduction opportunities to offset the 
penalties associated with forged steel, with raw material and machinability being the 
primary factors evaluated by Hoffmann and Turonek (1992). Materials evaluated in their 
study included medium carbon steel SAE 1050 (CS), and medium carbon alloy steel SAE 
4140 (AS); these same grades at a sulfur level of 0.10%, (CS-HS and AS-HS); and two 
 
 
35
micro-alloy grades (MA1 and MA2). The material selection was based on fatigue 
strength requirements and potential cost benefits. The micro-alloy grades evaluated 
offered cost reduction opportunities over the original design materials. The micro-alloy 
grade could reduce the finished cost by 11% to 19% compared to a quenched and 
tempered alloy steel (SAE 4140), and by 7% to 11% compared to a quenched and 
tempered carbon steel (SAE 1050). In addition, the micro-alloy grades met or exceeded 
the fatigue strength of the original materials for the applications studied, and had better 
machinability characteristics.  
 
 
 
36
 
Figure 2.1 Crankshaft workpiece and lower forging die for a four cylinder crankshaft 
(Shamasundar et al. 2003). 
 
 
Figure 2.2 Four cylinder forged crankshaft (Shamasundar et al. 2003). 
 
 
Figure 2.3 Incomplete four cylinder forged crankshaft (Shamasundar et al. 2003). 
 
 
37
 
 
Figure 2.4 a) Detail of a journal of a crankshaft, and b) Detail of journal of another 
crankshaft  in the study by (Silvia, 2003). 
 
Figure 2.5 A V-6 sample failed with a 2 Hz resonance shift with a 9.5 mm crack 
(Spiteri et al., 2005). 
 
 
 
38
 
Figure 2.6 Photograph of test piece 3R after fracture at fillet A. Fatigue crack 
extending 2.2 cm along the edge fillet (Baxter, 1993). 
 
 
Figure 2.7 V-8 crankshaft critical sections (Jenson, 1970). 
 
 
 
39
 
Figure 2.8 Strain gage bridge placement on crankshaft critical sections (Jenson, 
1970). 
 
 
Figure 2.9 Typical trace of crankshaft loads (Jensen, 1970). 
 
 
40
 
 
Figure 2.10 Finite element mesh for a crankshaft-flywheel assembly (Mourelatos, 
1995). 
 
 
Figure 2.11 A single throw model of crankshaft for finite element analysis (Uchida 
and Hara, 1984). 
 
 
 
41
 
Figure 2.12 A finite element crankshaft model (Henry et al., 1992). 
 
 
Figure 2.13 Stress prediction of crankshaft using a neural network structure (Shiomi 
and Watanabe, 1995). 
 
 
 
42
 
Figure 2.14 Flow-chart for transient stress analysis of crankshaft (Payer et al., 1995). 
 
 
 
43
 
Figure 2.15 Solid element model of a crankshaft (Payer et al., 1995). 
 
 
Figure 2.16 Mass model of a crankshaft (Payer et al., 1995). 
 
 
 
44
 
Figure 2.17 Complete geometry of a single throw of a crankshaft (initial model), 
(Borges et al., 2002). 
 
 
Figure 2.18 Geometrically restricted, symmetrical model (final model) of a crankshaft 
section, with loading (1), restraints (2), and symmetry plane (3), in the 
study of (Borges et al., 2002). 
 
 
45
 
Figure 2.19 A two dimensional finite element model of a portion of crankshaft section, 
with a primary roller and a secondary roller in the study by (Chien et al., 
2004). 
 
 
Figure 2.20 A magnified finite element mesh of the crankshaft section near the fillet 
and a portion of the primary roller in the study by (Chien et al., 2004). 
 
 
46
 
   (a)             (b) 
Figure 2.21 (a) Initial crank web design, and (b) Modified crank web design in the 
study by (Henry et al., 1992). 
 
 
 
Figure 2.22 Simplified flow chart of PET geometry optimization by (Mikulec et al., 
1998). 
 
 
47
 
 
Figure 2.23  Effect of controlled shot peening on the fillet area of a 6 cylinder diesel 
engine crankshaft made of AISI 4340H Forged steel (Burell, 1985). 
 
 
Figure 2.24 S-N diagram of deep rolled ductile cast iron crankshaft with different 
rolling forces (Kamimura, 1985). 
 
 
 
48
 
Figure 2.25 S-N curve rig test results with various surface treatments from the study 
by (Park et al., 2001). 
 
 
Figure 2.26 A crankshaft section used in the resonant bending fatigue test in the study 
by (Chien et al., 2004). 
 
 
49
 
 
Figure 2.27 Radial distributions of the hoop stress, radial stress and shear stress of the 
crankshaft at θ = 52.35° based on two-dimensional plane strain model (a) 
under bending, (b) roller down, (c) roller released and (d) summation of 
(a) and (c). (Chien et al., 2004). 
 
 
 
50
 
Figure 2.28 Vertical cross-sectional view of an apparatus for forming a shaped 
metallic article, the view showing the hollow blank pipe which starts being 
formed into a crankshaft (Ando et al., 1992). 
 
 
 
51
 
Figure 2.29 Fragmentary longitudinal cross-sectional views showing the manner in 
which a pipe is successively squeezed into a hollow blank pipe and forged 
into a crankshaft according to a TR forging process (Ando et al., 1992). 
 
 
 
52
 
Figure 2.30 Finished piece costs; alternative processes as a function of annual 
production volume (Nallicheri et al., 1991). 
 
 
53 
3 Dynamic Load Analysis of the Crankshaft 
The crankshaft experiences a complex loading due to the motion of the 
connecting rod, which transforms two sources of loading to the crankshaft. The main 
objective of this study was the optimization of the forged steel crankshaft which requires 
accurate magnitude of the loading on this component that consists of bending and torsion. 
The significance of torsion during a cycle and its maximum compared to the total 
magnitude of loading should be investigated to see if it is essential to consider torsion 
during loading or not. In addition, there was a need for obtaining the stress variation 
during a loading cycle and this requires FEA over the entire engine cycle.  
The main objective of this chapter is to determine the magnitude and direction of 
the loads that act on the bearing between connecting rod and crankshaft, which was then 
used in the FEA over an entire cycle. An analytical approach was used on the basis of a 
single degree of freedom slider crank mechanism. MATLAB programming was used to 
solve the resulting equations.  
The analytical approach was solved for a general slider crank mechanism which 
results in equations that could be used for any crank radius, connecting rod geometry, 
connecting rod mass, connecting rod inertia, engine speed, engine acceleration, piston 
diameter, piston and pin mass, pressure inside cylinder diagram, and any other variables 
of the engine. This analytical approach also helped to verify that the inputs in the 
ADAMS View software were correct. However, since changing variables in the 
 
 
54
analytical approach using MATLAB programming code was more convenient, the results 
of ADAMS View software were used as verification of the analytical solutions. 
In summary, this chapter explains the analytical approach steps and the equations 
that could be used in MATLAB to obtain angular velocity and acceleration of connecting 
rod, linear velocity and acceleration of piston assembly, and the most important forces 
between different joints in the mechanism. It is shown that the results from the analytical 
approach were verified by a simple model in ADAMS. How the output from the 
analytical approach is used in FEA is also discussed. It should be pointed out that in this 
analysis it was assumed that the crankshaft rotates at a constant angular velocity, which 
means the angular acceleration was not included in the analysis. However, in a 
comparison of forces with or without considering acceleration, the difference was found 
to be less than 1%. 
3.1 Analytical Vector Approach 
The analytical approach is discussed in detail in this section. The slider-crank 
mechanism with a single degree of freedom considered for solving the equations of 
motion is as shown in Figure 3.1. The following procedure was performed to obtain 
different dynamic properties of moving components. 
The angle θ shown in Figure 3.1 represents the crankshaft angle, which is used as 
the generalized degree of freedom in the mechanism; therefore every other dynamic 
property in this mechanism would be a function of this angle. Calculation of other 
dynamic properties of the mechanism such as angular velocity, angular acceleration, and 
forces at pin joints are shown in Appendix A. 
 
 
55
The equations where used in MATLAB and provided the values of angular 
velocity and angular acceleration of the connecting rod, linear acceleration of center of 
gravity of the connecting rod, and forces at the connecting rod-piston bearing and 
connecting rod-crankshaft bearing. The advantage of using MATLAB programming is 
that any changes in the input could be made very easily and solution quickly obtained, 
whereas using commercial programs such as ADAMS requires much more time editing 
the input data. This advantage comes into consideration when optimization is to be 
performed on a component, since during optimization mass and/or some dimensions 
change and making these changes in the commercial software is time consuming. The 
complete MATLAB program used in this analysis is given in Appendix B.  
3.2 Verification of Analytical Approach 
The analytical approach used in this study was verified by 3D dynamic simulation 
of the crankshaft, connecting rod, and piston assembly. The analysis was based on 
simulation of the simple slider-crank mechanism which is shown in Figure 3.1. As can be 
seen in the figure, link AB is the crankshaft radius, link BC is the connecting rod length, 
and the slider is the piston assembly. For the purpose of this simulation crankshaft and 
connecting rod were digitized and the generated geometries were used to obtain the 
accurate location of the center of gravity of the connecting rod and the magnitude of its 
inertia. Since the only concerning factor in the piston assembly that would affect the 
dynamic of the mechanism is the mass, there was no need to generate the piston assembly 
geometry. Material density of 2840 kg/m3 (2.84E-6 kg/mm3) was used for the connecting 
rod, which is the density of the aluminum alloy used in the component. The crankshaft 
 
 
56
AB rotational speed was taken to be the maximum operating speed of the engine, which 
is 3600 rev/min. It is shown in next Sections that the engine speed effect within the 
operating engine speed of 2000 rpm to 3600 rpm, is less than 15% on the force range 
applied to the crankshaft. This results in about 10% change in the stress range of the 
critically stressed location, which is discussed in the next Chapter. The 3D model of 
slider crank mechanism used in ADAMS is shown in Figure 3.2. 
Details of slider crank mechanism used in ADAMS are tabulated in Table 3.1. 
These details and any other information required were input in the MATLAB program. 
The loading on the piston which is the slider in the slider crank mechanism was taken to 
be zero in this part of the analysis since the purpose of this analysis was just compare the 
results from MATLAB programming and ADAMS software. 
Although the simulation was performed in a 3D space, the mechanism is a simple 
2D linkage; therefore forces are expected to be in the plane of crankshaft motion. 
Therefore, forces in the longitudinal direction of the crankshaft would be zero in this 
case. Since the joints at different locations of this mechanism are pin joints, there would 
be no moment resistance.  
The results of the analytical approach for the slider crank mechanism using the 
MATLAB program are plotted in Figures 3.3 through 3.6. The results from ADAMS 
software are also included in these figures for comparison. Figure 3.3 shows the variation 
of angular velocity of link BC over one complete cycle of the engine, which is 720 
degrees or two cycles of crank rotation. The two curves coincide perfectly indicating 
agreement of the results from MATLAB programming with results from ADAMS 
software. Similarly, Figure 3.4 shows the variation of angular acceleration over an entire 
 
 
57
cycle, Figure 3.5 shows the variation of forces at joint B defined in the global/non-
rotating coordinate system at the engine speed of 2800 rev/min, which is the mean 
operating speed of the engine, and Figure 3.6 shows the same forces at joint B projected 
in the local/rotating coordinate system. As could be seen in the figures, it can be 
concluded that the results from MATLAB programming are accurate and reliable.  
3.3 Dynamic Analysis for the Actual Crankshaft 
The engine configuration from which the crankshaft was taken is shown in Table 
3.2. The pressure versus crank angle of this specific engine was not available, so the 
pressure versus volume (thermodynamic engine cycle) diagram of a similar engine was 
considered. This diagram was scaled between the minimum and maximum of pressure 
and volume of the engine. The four link mechanism was then solved by MATLAB 
programming to obtain the volume of the cylinder as a function of the crank angle.  
Figure 3.7 shows the scaled graph of pressure versus volume for this specific 
engine, and Figure 3.8 shows pressure versus crankshaft angle, which was used as the 
applied force on the piston during the dynamic analysis. It should be noted that the 
pressure versus volume of the cylinder graph changes as a function of engine speed, but 
the changes are not significant and the maximum pressure which is the critical loading 
situation does not change. Therefore, the same diagram was used for different engine 
speeds in this study. The results of the MATLAB programming are linear velocity and 
acceleration of the piston assembly, angular velocity and angular acceleration of the 
connecting rod, linear acceleration of center of gravity of the connecting rod, and forces 
 
 
58
that are being applied to the bearing between the crankshaft and the connecting rod. The 
program was run for different engine speeds in the operating engine speed range. 
Results from the MATLAB programming at the engine speed of 3600 rpm are 
plotted in Figures 3.9 though 3.14. Figures 3.9 and 3.10 show the variation of linear 
velocity and linear acceleration of the piston assembly over 720 degrees, respectively. 
Figures 3.11 and 3.12 show the angular velocity and angular acceleration of the 
connecting rod during a cycle. Note that variations of velocity and acceleration in both 
piston assembly and connecting rod from 0° to 360° are identical to their variation from 
360° to 720°.  
Figure 3.13 shows the variation of the force at the journal bearing between 
crankshaft and connecting rod defined in the global/non-rotating coordinate system. 
Figure 3.14 shows the variation of the same force defined in the local/rotating coordinate 
system. Fx in Figure 3.14 is the force that causes bending during service life and Fy is the 
force that causes torsion on the crankshaft. As can be seen in this figure, the maximum 
loading happens at the angle of 355° where the combustion takes place. The only 
difference between these figures is their reference coordinate system, therefore the 
magnitude, which is not dependent on the coordinate system chosen, is the same in both 
plots.  
As the dynamic loading on the component is a function of engine speed, the same 
analysis was performed for different engine speeds which were in the range of operating 
speed for this engine (i.e. 2000 rpm which is the minimum engine speed and 2800 rpm). 
The variation of forces defined in the local coordinate system at 2000 rpm and 2800 rpm 
engine speeds are shown in Figures 3.15 and 3.16, respectively. Figure 3.17 compares the 
 
 
59
magnitude of maximum torsinal load and bending load at different engine speeds. Note 
from this figures that as the engine speed increases the maximum bending load decreases. 
The reason for this situation could be explained as follows. As mentioned previously, 
there are two load sources in the engine; combustion and inertia. It was pointed out that 
the maximum pressure in the cylinder does not change as the engine speed changes, 
therefore the load applied to the crankshaft at the moment of maximum pressure due to 
combustion does not change. This is a bending load since it passes thought the center of 
the crank radius. On the other hand, the load caused by inertia varies as a function of 
engine speed. As the engine speed increases this force increases too. The load produced 
by combustion is greater than the load caused by inertia and is in the opposite direction, 
which means the sum of these two forces results in the bending force at the time of 
combustion. So as the engine speed increases the magnitude of the inertia force increases 
and this amount is deducted from the greater force which is caused by combustion, 
resulting in a decrease in total load magnitude. However, factors such as wear and 
lubrication are important at higher engine speeds. Further discussion of these issues is 
avoided since they are not of concern in this study and fatigue failure is the main focus. 
In this specific engine with its dynamic loading, it is shown in the next chapter 
that torsional load has no effect on the range of von Mises stress at the critical location. 
The main reason for torsional load not having much effect on the stress range is that the 
maximums of bending and torsional loading happen at different times during the engine 
cycle. In addition, when the main peak of the bending takes place the magnitude of 
torsional load is zero.  
 
 
60
The dynamic analysis of this single cylinder crankshaft is very similar to an 
automotive crankshaft which consists of several cylinders. The only difference is the 
number of applied loads to the mechanism which could be projected to the rotating plane 
of the crankshaft. In a multi-cylinder crankshaft the effect of combustion of other 
cylinders on one cylinder results in high torsional load which must be included in the 
analysis. Since the studied crankshaft belonged to a single cylinder engine, there would 
be no such effect. Therefore, the analysis could be performed without considering 
torsional load. The noise and vibration analysis of single cylinder and multi-cylinder 
crankshafts are similar. The longitudinal and radial displacements of a single throw, 
which consists of two main bearings, two crank webs, and a crankpin, under service load 
is measured in order to define the noise and vibration level of the crankshaft. Therefore, 
the analysis followed in this study could be implemented in the analysis of a single throw 
of a multi-cylinder crankshaft as well (http://www.steel.org/, 2007).  
3.4 FEA with Dynamic Loads 
There are two different approaches for applying the loads on the crankshaft to 
obtain the stress time history. One method is to run the FE model many times during the 
engine cycle or at selected times over 720° by applying the magnitude of the load with its 
direction in a way that the loading could define the stress-time history of the component. 
Another approach to obtain stresses at different locations at different times during a cycle 
is by superposition of the basic loading conditions. This involves applying a unit load in 
the basic conditions and then scaling the stresses from each unit load according to the 
dynamic loading. Then similar stress components are added together. In this study both 
 
 
61
approaches were used for the engine speed of 3600 rpm to verify that results from both 
approaches are the same. After verification of results, the superposition approach was 
used by developing a code in Excel spread sheet to perform the necessary calculation and 
obtain the results for the stresses at different crankshaft angles. 
Justification for selecting some locations over 720° was according to peaks and 
valleys of load variation. Three different graphs were used for selecting proper points to 
cover the entire cycle; bending, torsion, and total load magnitude. Figure 3.18 shows the 
variation of these loads versus crank angle. Selected points are labeled in this figure and 
the reason of selecting each point is indicated as follows: 
a. Beginning of the cycle 
b. A peak of the bending load 
c. Valley of the bending load 
d. Bending load of zero 
e. Peak of torsional load 
f. Peaks of bending load and total load magnitude 
g. A valley of torsional load 
h. Bending load of zero 
i. A valley of total load magnitude 
j. A valley of bending load 
k. Selected to have smooth connectivity between the points before and after 
l. A valley of total load magnitude and a peak of bending load 
 
 
62
The same locations could be identified in the load history diagram of the 
crankshaft at other engine speeds. However, only engine speed of 2000 rev/min was 
selected for verification of results. 
FE analysis was performed on these 12 points over 720 degrees, and the results 
where compared with the results from the superposition. The comparison showed errors 
less than 3% on each stress component, which verified the use of superposition in all 
other cases. 
As the dynamic loading condition was analyzed, only two main loading 
conditions were applied to the surface of the crankpin bearing. These two loads are 
perpendicular to each other and their directions are shown in Figure 3.19 as Fx and Fy. 
Since the contact surface between connecting rod and crankpin bearing does not carry 
tension, Fx and Fy can also act in the opposite direction to those shown in Figure 3.19. 
Any loading condition during the service life of the crankshaft can be obtained by scaling 
and combining the magnitude and direction of these two loads. 
 
 
63
Table 3.1 Details of slider crank mechanism used in ADAMS software. 
 
 Crank AB Connecting rod BC Slider C 
Calculated Mass (kg) 3.7191 283.35E-3 417.63E-3 
    
Ixx (kg-mm2) - 608.5844 - 
Iyy (kg-mm2) - 80.3227 - 
Izz (kg-mm2) - 662.5235 - 
Ixy (kg-mm2) - 8.0467 - 
Ixz (kg-mm2) - 0 - 
Iyz (kg-mm2) - 0 - 
    
Length (mm) 36.985 120.78 - 
 
Table 3.2 Configuration of the engine to which the crankshaft belongs. 
 
Crankshaft radius 37 mm 
Piston diameter 89 mm 
Mass of the connecting rod 0.283 kg 
Mass of the piston assembly 0.417 kg 
Connecting rod length 120.78 mm 
Izz of connecting rod about the center of gravity 0.663×10-3 kg-m2 
Distance of C.G. of connecting rod from crank end center 28.6 mm 
Maximum gas pressure 35 Bar 
 
 
 
64
 
Figure 3.1 Slider-crank mechanism. 
 
 
Figure 3.2 Crankshaft, connecting rod, and piston assembly model in ADAMS/View 
software. 
 
 
65
 
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
0 90 180 270 360
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
A
ng
ul
ar
 V
el
oc
ity
 (D
eg
/s
)
Ang Vel - MATLAB
Ang Vel - ADAMS
 
Figure 3.3 Angular velocity of link BC for the slider-crank mechanism. A 
comparison of the results obtained by MATLAB programming and 
ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm crank speed. 
 
-2000000
-1500000
-1000000
-500000
0
500000
1000000
1500000
2000000
0 90 180 270 360
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
A
ng
ul
ar
 A
cc
el
er
at
io
n 
(D
eg
/s
^2
)
Ang Accl - MATLAB
Ang Accl - ADAMS
 
Figure 3.4 Angular acceleration of link BC for slider-crank mechanism. A 
comparison of the results obtained by MATLAB programming and 
ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm crank speed. 
 
 
66
-3000
-2500
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
2000
0 90 180 270 360
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Fo
rc
e 
(N
) Fx-MATLAB
Fy-MATLAB
Fx-ADAMS
Fy-ADAMS
 
Figure 3.5 Forces at joint B defined in the global/non-rotating coordinate system, for 
the slider-crank mechanism. A comparison of results obtained by 
MATLAB programming and ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm crank 
speed. 
 
-3000
-2500
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
500
1000
1500
0 90 180 270 360
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Fo
rc
e 
(N
) Fx-MATLAB
Fy-MATLAB
Fx-ADAMS
Fy-ADAMS
 
Figure 3.6 Forces at joint B defined in the local/rotating coordinate system, for the 
slider-crank mechanism. A comparison of results obtained by MATLAB 
programming and ADAMS/View software at 2800 rpm crank speed. 
 
 
67
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
Volume (cm^3)
Pr
es
su
re
 (b
ar
)
 
Figure 3.7 Pressure versus volume of the engine used to calculate the pressure versus 
crankshaft angle diagram (Taylor, 1985). 
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Pr
es
su
re
 (b
ar
)
 
Figure 3.8 Pressure versus crankshaft angle used to calculate the forces at the surface 
of the piston. 
 
 
 
68
-20
-15
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Pi
st
on
 L
in
ea
r V
el
oc
ity
 (m
/s
)
 
Figure 3.9 Variation of linear velocity of the piston assembly over one complete 
engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 
 
-8000
-6000
-4000
-2000
0
2000
4000
6000
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Pi
st
on
 L
in
ea
r A
cc
el
er
at
io
n 
(m
/s
^2
)
 
Figure 3.10 Variation of linear acceleration of the piston assembly over one complete 
engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 
 
 
 
69
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
C
on
ne
ct
in
g 
R
od
 A
ng
ul
ar
 V
el
oc
ity
 (r
ad
/s
)
 
Figure 3.11 Variation of angular velocity of the connecting rod over one complete 
engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 
 
-60000
-40000
-20000
0
20000
40000
60000
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
C
on
ne
ct
in
g 
R
od
 A
ng
ul
ar
 A
cc
el
er
at
io
n 
(r
ad
/s
^2
)
 
Figure 3.12 Variation of angular acceleration of the connecting rod over one complete 
engine cycle at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 
 
 
 
70
-5000
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Fo
rc
e 
(N
)
Fx'
Fy'
Magnitude
 
Figure 3.13 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the crank 
end of the connecting rod defined in the global/non-rotating coordinate 
system at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 
 
-10000
-5000
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Fo
rc
e 
(N
)
Fx
Fy
Magnitude
 
Figure 3.14 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the crank 
end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating coordinate system 
at crankshaft speed of 3600 rpm. 
 
Fx 
Fy 
Fz 
Fx 
Fy 
Fz 
 
 
71
-5000
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Fo
rc
e 
(N
)
Fx
Fy
Magnitude
 
Figure 3.15 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the crank 
end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating coordinate system 
at crankshaft speed of 2000 rpm. 
 
-10000
-5000
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Fo
rc
e 
(N
)
Fx
Fy
Magnitude
 
Figure 3.16 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the crank 
end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating coordinate system 
at crankshaft speed of 2800 rpm. 
Fx 
Fy 
Fz 
Fx 
Fy 
Fz 
 
 
72
 
0
5
10
15
20
25
2000 2800 3600
Engine Speed (RPM)
Fo
rc
e 
M
ag
ni
tu
de
 (k
N
)
Max Bending Max Torsion Range of Bending Range of Torsion
 
Figure 3.17 Comparison of maximum, minimum, mean, and range of load between 
bending and torsional load at different engine speeds. 
 
 
-5000
0
5000
10000
15000
20000
25000
0 90 180 270 360 450 540 630 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
Fo
rc
e 
(N
)
Fx
Fy
Magnitude
 
Figure 3.18 Variation of the force components over one complete cycle at the crank 
end of the connecting rod defined in the local/rotating coordinate system 
at crankshaft speed of 2000 rpm, with labels on critical locations on each 
graph. 
e
b 
c d
h
g
a 
j 
i k l
Fx 
Fy 
Fz 
f
 
 
73
 
 
Figure 3.19 Crankshaft geometry and bending (Fx), torsional (Fy), and longitudinal (Fz) 
force directions. 
 
 
 
Fy
Fx
Fz
74 
4 Stress Analysis and FEA 
This chapter discusses geometry generation used for finite element analysis, 
describes the accuracy of the model and explains the simplifications that were made to 
obtain an efficient FE model. Mesh generation and its convergence are discussed. Using 
proper boundary conditions and type of loading are important since they strongly affect 
the results of the finite element analysis. Identifying appropriate boundary conditions and 
loading situation are also discussed. Finite element models of two components were 
analyzed; the cast iron crankshaft and the forged steel crankshaft. Since these two 
crankshafts are from similar engines, the same boundary conditions and loading were 
used for both. This facilitates proper comparison of this component made from two 
different manufacturing processes. The results of finite element analysis from these two 
crankshafts are discussed in this chapter. Above mentioned FE models were used for 
dynamic analysis considering the boundary conditions according to the mounting of the 
crankshafts in the engine.  
In order to evaluate the FEA results, a component test was conducted with strain 
gages. FEA boundary conditions were changed according to the test setup. Strain gages 
were mounted on the forged steel crankshaft and results from FE analysis and 
experimental data were compared in order to show the accuracy of the FE model. 
 
 
75
Finally, results from dynamic FE analysis, which consist of stress history at 
different locations, were used as the input to the optimization process discussed in 
Chapter 5.  
4.1 Finite Element Modeling 
Finite element modeling of any solid component consists of geometry generation, 
applying material properties, meshing the component, defining the boundary constraints, 
and applying the proper load type. These steps will lead to the stresses and displacements 
in the component. In this study, similar analysis procedures were performed for both 
forged steel and cast iron crankshafts. 
4.1.1 Generation of the Geometry of Crankshafts 
The dimensions of the crankshafts were measured using a clipper and a CMM 
(coordinate measuring machine) with the accuracy of 0.025 mm (0.001 in) and 0.0025 
mm (0.0001 in), respectively. Having accurate dimensions of both crankshafts solid 
models were generated using I-DEAS Master Modeler.  
The solid model generated for the cast crankshaft is shown in Figure 4.1 and a 
picture of the cast crankshaft from which the geometry was generated is shown in Figure 
4.2. As can be seen in the picture of the cast crankshaft the gear on the rear side of the 
main bearing is not included in the digitized model, instead the plane next to it is 
extruded to cover the section which the gear covers. This simplification is reasonable 
since the gear is press fit at this location and the gear tooth does not have any effect on 
stresses at fillet areas where high stress gradient exists. It should be mentioned that 
 
 
76
simplification on the gear will not affect the stiffness of the model because the boundary 
condition used on this side of the crankshaft is a sliding edge and moving its location 
along the main bearing shaft will not change the stress results. In addition, the significant 
effect of bending load was observed to be in the cross section of the crankpin bearing and 
crank web. Therefore, simplifications on the main bearings will not affect stresses at 
critical areas. Another simplification done on the cast iron crankshaft was neglecting the 
cap at the end of oil way on the bearing of the connecting rod. This cap is pressed in its 
place to seal the drilled hole to prevent oil to flow out. The absence of this cap does not 
affect stresses at any location; therefore the cap was not included in the model. The last 
simplification done on the cast iron crankshaft was neglecting the slight slope on the 
crank web from outside toward centerline of main bearings. The slope is a result of 
manufacturing process. The molds in casting are such that the molded part could easily 
slip out the molds; as a result, walls that are perpendicular to the mold movement must 
have a positive slope. Since the change in the web thickness was small, by averaging 
thickness over the entire crank web, the crank web was modeled with uniform thickness. 
This simplification is acceptable since stresses at this location are very low and the 
thickness does not change the results at the fillet areas, which are critical locations.  
Figure 4.3 shows the solid model of the forged steel crankshaft, and Figure 4.4 
shows a picture from the same view of the received crankshaft. As can be seen the 
threaded front shaft is not threaded in the model, since this part is out of loading and 
boundary conditions and has no effect on stresses at different locations. Another 
simplification made to forged steel crankshaft model was in the crank web slope, similar 
to the cast iron crankshaft. In the manufacturing process of forging there is a need of the 
 
 
77
same slight slope as in casting process on the component in order to ease removing the 
forged component from the forging die. The web slope in the forged component is less 
than the web slope in the cast iron crankshaft. Again, an average value was used as the 
uniform thickness on the crank web in this model.  
Drilled holes on the counter weights in order to balance the crankshafts and inside 
threads on holes at the back of the crankshafts were not included in the models since their 
presence makes the geometry complicated but they do not affect stresses at critical 
locations. 
The cast iron crankshaft weight as measured on a weighing scale was 3.58 kg, and 
the weight of the forged steel crankshaft was 3.80 kg. The difference between the 
generated models and the actual crankshafts were about 7% and 2%, for the cast iron and 
forged steel crankshafts, respectively. The reason for 7% difference in the cast crankshaft 
is not including the gear tooth in the solid model, which if considered, the difference will 
reduce to only 3%. Material properties used in both models are tabulated in Table 4.1. 
Another important characteristic for this component is the dynamic balance of the 
geometry; this property could be verified by the location of center of gravity. Examining 
the location of center of gravity of both digitized models showed a very close distance 
from the main bearings center line. By adding the drilled holes on the counter weight of 
the actual crankshafts, the center of gravity will coincide with the main bearing center 
line, indicating the component would be in proper dynamic balance.  
This weight comparison between the actual crankshafts and corresponding models 
and dynamic balance are indications of accuracy of the generated models. Figures 4.5 and 
 
 
78
4.6 show detailed drawings of the forged steel and cast iron crankshafts, respectively, 
based on the measured dimensions. 
4.1.2 Mesh Generation 
FEA analysis was performed on both crankshafts for the dynamic load analysis, 
as well as for the test setup. Since boundary conditions of dynamic FEA and test setup 
FEA are different, separate FE models were needed. In this section, meshing of both 
dynamic FEA and test setup FEA are presented for the forged steel and cast iron 
crankshafts. 
4.1.2.1 Dynamic FEA 
Quadratic tetrahedral elements were used to mesh the crankshaft finite element 
geometry. Tetrahedral elements are the only option for meshing the imported complex 
geometries to the ABAQUS software. Using linear tetrahedral elements will result in a 
rigid model with less accuracy, whereas using quadratic tetrahedral elements will 
increase the accuracy and lessen the rigidity of the geometry. In order to mesh the 
geometry with this element type, the free meshing feature of ABAQUS software was 
used. In this feature, the global mesh size could be defined, while for critical locations 
free local meshing could be used to increase the number of elements for accurate stresses 
at locations with high stress gradients. 
Convergence of stress at different locations was considered as the criterion for 
mesh size and number of elements selection. Figure 4.7 shows von Mises stress 
magnitude at six locations on fillet areas versus number of elements in the forged steel 
 
 
79
crankshaft geometry for a load of 20.3 kN applied in the Fx direction shown in Figure 
3.19. As could be seen from Figure 4.7, with the increase of element numbers, especially 
in the fillet areas, the stresses converge. Satisfactory results were obtained using 119,337 
elements for the forged steel crankshaft and 121,138 elements for the cast iron 
crankshaft, corresponding to a global mesh size of 5.08 mm and a local mesh size of 
0.762 mm in each model. This local mesh size results in having 5 elements in the radius 
of the fillet areas for both crankshafts. 
In order to have more efficient models, different element sizes where used for the 
final models which increased the number of elements to 122,441 and 128,366 for the 
forged steel and the cast iron crankshafts, respectively. The selection of different sizes for 
elements was made to obtain a uniform growth of element size as the element size 
changed through the geometry. Figure 4.8 shows element sizes used at different locations 
for the forged steel crankshaft and Figure 4.9 shows the element sizes used for the cast 
iron crankshaft. Figures 4.10 and 4.11 show the meshed geometry for forged and cast 
components, respectively, which were meshed using the mentioned mesh size growth. 
4.1.2.2 Test Assembly FEA 
FEA was also conducted for the bench test assembly of the forged steel 
crankshaft. According to the fixture of the component test assembly a separate model was 
created. The only difference in the mesh is the size of mesh at the part where the 
crankshaft is gripped in the fixture. Figure 4.12 shows the local mesh size used in the test 
assembly FEA. The reason for using a fine mesh on the boundary of the gripped location 
is to measure stress around the oil hole which act as a stress concentration. Considering 
the above mentioned considerations, the crankshaft model resulted in 137,779 elements. 
 
 
80
4.1.3 Loading and Boundary Conditions 
4.1.3.1 Dynamic FEA 
The engine manual of the forged steel crankshaft was used to determine the 
proper boundary conditions at bearing locations. Figure 4.13 was taken from the engine 
manual of the forged steel crankshaft and shows different components at a cut view of the 
engine. It can be seen that the crankshaft is constraint with a ball bearing (number 9 on 
Figure 4.13) from one side and with a journal bearing on the other side. The ball bearing 
is press fit to the crankshaft and does not allow the crankshaft to have any motion other 
than rotation about its main central axis. Since only 180 degrees of the bearing surfaces 
facing the load direction constraint the motion of the crankshaft, this constraint was 
defined as a fixed semicircular surface as wide as the ball bearing width on the 
crankshaft. The other side of the crankshaft is on a journal bearing. Therefore, this side 
was modeled as a semicircular edge facing the load at the bottom of the fillet radius fixed 
in a plane perpendicular to the central axis and free to move along central axis direction. 
Figures 4.14 and 4.15 show these defined boundary conditions in the FE model of forged 
steel and cast iron crankshafts, respectively. Boundary conditions rotate with the 
direction of the load applied such that the inner face of the fixed semicircular surface and 
sliding ring face the direction of the load. For example, if the load is applied downward in 
Figure 4.14 (opposite direction of axis 2) the inner curve of both boundary conditions 
will face upward in the same figure (positive direction of axis 2).  
Definition of a fixed edge is based on the degrees of freedom in a journal bearing, 
which allows the crankshaft to have displacement along its central axis. Also, the section 
 
 
81
that is located on the journal bearing can have limited rotation in the direction 
perpendicular to the plane which central axis and load vector lay in (i.e. Fx in Figure 
3.19). 
The distribution of load over the connecting rod bearing is uniform pressure on 
120° of contact area, shown in Figures 4.14 and 4.15. This load distribution is based on 
experimental results from Webster et al. (1983). The explanation of load distribution in 
the Webster et al. study is for connecting rods, but since the crankshaft is in interaction 
with the connecting rod, the same loading distribution will be transmitted to the 
crankshaft. For pressure P0 on the contact surface, the total resultant load is given by:  
( ) 3       
3
3
00 trPdtrCosPF ∫
−
==
π
π
ϕϕ       (4.1) 
where r is the crankpin radius and t is the crankpin length. As a result, the pressure 
constant is given by: 
3  0 tr
FP =          (4.2) 
Force F, which is the magnitude of the total force applied to the crankshaft, can 
be obtained from dynamics analysis at different angles. According to the geometry of the 
forged steel crankshaft a unit load of 1 kN will result in the pressure of 1.142 MPa, as 
follows: 
 MPa 142.1
337.2748.18
1000
0 =××
=P  
The same boundary conditions and loading were used for the cast iron crankshaft. 
Since some of the dimensions are different in the two crankshafts, the applied pressure 
resulting from a unit load of 1 kN is calculated to be 1.018 MPa, 
 
 
82
 MPa 018.1
335.3451.16
1000
0 =××
=P  
4.1.3.2 Test Assembly FEA 
Figure 4.16 shows a schematic drawing of the fixture of test assembly. As can be 
seen one crankshaft end is gripped in the fixed column and the other end is gripped in a 
44 cm arm to apply bending load. According to this assembly one side of the crankshaft 
which is in the column will be constrained in all degrees of freedom in the FE model. A 
load is then applied to the other side. Since the material behavior is fully elastic, stresses 
for any load magnitude could be obtained by scaling each stress component resulting 
from a unit load. These boundary conditions applied to the FE model of the test assembly 
are shown in Figure 4.17. 
4.2 Finite Element Analysis Results and Discussion 
In Section 3.4 it was pointed out that the analysis conducted was based on 
superposition of four basic loadings in the FE analysis. The unit load applied on the 
connecting rod bearing was a pressure of magnitude 1.142 MPa and 1.018 MPa for 
forged steel and cast iron crankshafts, respectively. Note that the resultant load F was 1 
kN and because of differences in dimensions of the two crankshafts, the pressure is 
somewhat different. 
Section changes in the crankshaft geometry result in stress concentrations at 
intersections where different sections connect together. Although edges of these sections 
are filleted in order to decrease the stress level, these fillet areas are highly stresses 
 
 
83
locations over the geometry of crankshaft. Therefore, stresses were traced over these 
locations. 
Stress results from applying unit load on both crankshafts are tabulated in Table 
4.2 for the forged steel crankshaft and Table 4.3 for the cast iron crankshaft. The stress 
components in Tables 4.2 and 4.3 were used to obtain stresses at different loading 
conditions by scaling these values by the magnitude of the applied load.  
In order to obtain stresses at any location at different crank angles these tabulated 
data were used as explained below: 
At a crank angle for which stress components are aimed to be calculated, load 
components at that crank angle defined in the local rotating coordinate system are taken 
from the dynamic analysis with consideration of their sign. Since the analysis is based on 
linear elastic behavior of the material, stress magnitude has linear relation with load, 
therefore stresses tabulated in Tables 4.2 and 4.3 are scaled according to the proper load 
component. Identical stress components are then added together resulting in stress 
components of the aimed loading situation. Replacing these stress components in the 
following equation gives the von Mises stress. 
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )222222Misesvon 62
1
yzxzxyzzyyzzxxyyxx σσσσσσσσσσ +++−+−+−=   (4.3) 
Following the above mentioned procedure, von Mises stress results for both FE 
models of forged steel and cast iron crankshafts were obtained. 
4.2.1 Finding the Critical Location 
FE analyses were performed on the forged steel crankshaft as well as the cast iron 
crankshaft at different engine speeds. Investigation of the FE models shows that the fillet 
 
 
84
areas experience the highest stresses during service life of the crankshaft. Therefore, six 
points on the fillets were selected and labeled in Figure 4.18 for forged steel crankshaft 
and in Figure 4.19 for cast iron crankshaft.  
Locations 1 and 6 are located on the boundary conditions of three of the loading 
conditions. For the loading condition, where the load direction is toward the center of the 
crankshaft, locations 1 and 6 are located far from boundary conditions (refer to Section 
4.1.3.1 for boundary conditions). This loading condition is the only loading condition 
used at the time of maximum bending load, because at this time the torsional load is zero. 
Therefore, using the stress results and scaling them according to the maximum dynamic 
load at this moment will give the maximum stress at these locations.  
Figures 4.20 and 4.21 show the von Mises stress with sign at these six locations at 
the engine speed of 2000 rpm for the forged steel and cast iron crankshafts, respectively. 
The sign of von Mises stress is determined by the sign of the principal stress that has the 
maximum absolute value. As can be seen from both figures, the maximum von Mises 
stress occurs at location 2, while other locations experience stresses lower than location 
2. Therefore, other five locations were not considered to be critical in the rest of the 
analysis. Since locations 1 and 6 have lower stresses than location 2 at the critical loading 
condition, finding stresses at these locations for the other three boundary conditions was 
unnecessary. According to the obtained results, the maximum von Mises stress value at 
location 2 for the forged steel crankshaft is 186 MPa and 195 MPa for the cast iron 
crankshaft at the engine speed of 2000 rpm. 
Since stress range and mean stress are the main controlling parameters for 
calculating fatigue life of the component, these parameters have to be calculated. Figures 
 
 
85
4.22 and 4.23 show minimum, maximum, mean, and range of stress at selected locations 
on the forged steel and cast iron crankshafts, respectively, at the engine speed of 2000 
rpm. As can be seen from these figures, location 2 has the highest maximum stress as 
well as the maximum value of stress range in both crankshafts. This location also has a 
positive mean stress, which has a detrimental effect on the fatigue life of the component. 
Therefore, location 2 is the critical location on both crankshafts, and any further 
discussion is with regards to this critical location on both crankshafts. 
One of the main objectives of performing the dynamic FE modeling was to 
determine the design loads for optimization of the forged steel crankshaft. The maximum 
load that is applied to the crankshaft during its service life is the load corresponding to 
the peak gas pressure. Figure 3.8 indicated that the maximum gas pressure occurs at 
about 355° crank angle. Figures 4.20 and 4.21 also show that the maximum stress occurs 
at this crank angle. Therefore, this loading condition is the most sever case of loading 
resulting in the maximum magnitude of von Mises stress at location 2.  
4.2.2 Finding Critical Engine Speed 
As discussed in Section 3.3, dynamic load applied on the crankshaft is a function 
of engine speed. Figures 4.24 and 4.25 show comparison plots of von Mises stress at 
location 2 at different engine speeds for forged steel and cast iron crankshafts, 
respectively. As can be seen in these figures, with the increase of engine speed the 
maximum stress and, therefore, the stress range decreases, although not very 
significantly. Therefore, the critical engine speed will be the lowest operating engine 
speed, which is 2000 rpm according to the engine manual. This issue should not be 
 
 
86
misunderstood as the higher the engine runs the longer the service life, since there are 
many other factors to consider in an engine. The most important issue when the engine 
speed increases is wear and lubrication. As these issues were not of concern in this study, 
further discussion is avoided. Engine speeds lower than 2000 rpm are transient, which 
means the engine speeds up in few seconds to its operating speed. Since an electric rotor 
starts the engine, combustion does not occur during the transient speed up and torque 
output is not taken from the engine. Therefore, speed engines lower than 2000 rpm are 
not considered. 
4.2.3 Effect of Torsional Load 
In this specific engine with its dynamic loading, it is shown that torsional load has 
no effect on the range of von Mises stress at the critical location. The main reason of 
torsional load not having any effect on the stress range is that the maxima of bending and 
torsional load happen at different times. In addition, when the peak of the bending load 
occurs the magnitude of torsional load is zero. Therefore, crankshafts are usually tested 
under bending fatigue load, as it was the case for the single cylinder crankshaft 
investigated in this study. 
Stress magnitudes without considering torsion were calculated by substituting the 
value of zero for all Fy load components. Figures 4.26 and 4.27 show the von Mises 
stresses at location 2 at the engine speed of 2000 rpm considering torsion and without 
considering torsion for the forged steel and cast iron crankshafts, respectively. It can be 
seen that the stress-time history remains the same with and without considering torsional 
 
 
87
load for both crankshafts. This is due to the location of the critical point which is not 
influenced by torsion since it is located on the crankpin bearing.  
Other locations such as 1, 6, and 7 in Figures 4.18 and 4.19 experience the 
torsional load. Since locations 1 and 6 are located on the boundary conditions of the FE 
model, stress results at these locations are not reliable. Therefore, location 7 was selected 
as a point which is located far enough from the boundary conditions and also carries the 
effect of torsional load. Figures 4.28 and 4.29 show changes in minimum, maximum, 
mean, and range of von Mises stress at location 7 with considering torsion and without 
considering it at different engine speeds for the forged steel and cast iron crankshafts, 
respectively. The effect of torsion at the engine speed of 2000 rpm is about 16% increase 
in the stress range at this location for the forged steel crankshaft, and 18% increase for 
the cast iron crankshaft. It should be added that the effect of torsion decreases as the 
engine speed increases. Therefore, at higher engine speeds the effect of torsion is less 
than the mentioned percentages.  
4.2.4 Validation of FEA Results with Experimental Results 
Stress results obtained from the FE model of the forged steel crankshaft were 
verified by experimental component test. Strain gages were mounted at four locations in 
the midsection of the crankpin bearing of the forged steel crankshaft. These locations are 
labeled as a, b, c, and d in Figure 4.30. The reason for attaching strain gages at these 
locations is that the size of strain gages was not small enough to place them in the fillet 
areas. In addition, stress gradients in the fillet areas are high, therefore, values measured 
by strain gages at these locations would not be accurate.  
 
 
88
Considering the test assembly boundary conditions in Section 4.1.3.2, the 
crankshaft experiences bending as a cantilever beam. Applying load in the direction of 
axis 2 in Figure 4.17 will result in stresses at locations a and b, and applying load in the 
direction of axis 1 in the same figure will result in stresses at locations c and d. Analytical 
calculations based on pure bending equation, Mc/I, show the magnitude of stresses at 
these four locations to be the same and equal to 72 MPa at these locations, for a 890 N 
load. The values obtained from experiments are tabulated in Table 4.4. FEA results are 
also shown and compared with experimental results in this table. As can be seen, 
differences between FEA and experimental results are less than 6.5% for different 
loading conditions. This is an indication of the accuracy of the FE model used in this 
study.  
A comparison between the analytical calculations, experimental, and FEA results 
shows that for the complex geometry of the crankshaft, analytical approach does not 
result in accurate stresses, as shown in Table 4.4. Therefore, using FE models to calculate 
stresses were necessary.  
4.2.5 Fatigue Life Calculations 
Load variation over an engine cycle results in variation of stress. For proper 
calculations of fatigue damage in the component there is a need for a cycle counting 
method over the stress history. Using the rainflow cycle counting method (Stephens et al., 
2000) on the critical location, stress-history plot (i.e. location 2 in Figure 4.18) shows that 
during an entire cycle only one peak is important and can cause fatigue damage in the 
component. The result of the rainflow count over the stress-time history of location 2 at 
 
 
89
the engine speed of 2000 rpm is shown in Figures 4.31 and 4.32 for the forged steel and 
cast iron crankshafts, respectively. It is shown in these figures that in the stress history of 
the critical location only one cycle of loading is important and the other minor cycles 
have low stress amplitudes. 
As a result of load analysis, the load R ratio, which is the ratio of the minimum 
load to maximum load, applied to both crankshafts during service life is about –0.30 and 
–0.16 for the engine speed of 3600 rpm and 2000 rpm, respectively. Investigation of 
stress R ratio, which is the ratio of minimum von Mises stress to maximum von Mises 
stress, according to the stress-time history at critical location 2 at the engine speed of 
3600 rpm to 2000 rpm shows a variation of – 0.22 to –0.12 for the forged steel 
crankshaft, and –0.25 to –0.13 for the cast iron crankshaft. 
 
 
90
Table 4.1 Material properties for cast iron and forged steel (Williams et al. 2007). 
Material Property Unit Forged Steel Cast Iron 
Modulus of Elasticity GPa 
ksi 
221 
32,053 
178 
25,817 
Poisson’s Ratio - 0.30 0.30 
Mass Density  kg/m3 
lb/in3 
7833 
0.283 
7197 
0.26 
 
Table 4.2 Stress components in MPa at locations labeled in Figure 4.18 on the 
forged steel crankshaft, resulting from unit load of 1 kN. 
Location 
Number 
von 
Mises 
S11 S22 S33 S12 S13 S23 
Load direction: +Fx 
1 3.58E-02 2.37E-03 -7.09E-03 -2.76E-02 -1.07E-03 3.84E-03 1.29E-02 
2 1.27852 4.81E-01 3.60E-01 1.14264 -3.68E-03 -6.22E-03 -6.05E-01 
3 5.99E-01 1.78E-01 3.03E-02 6.46E-01 -2.00E-03 3.53E-04 1.27E-01 
4 2.07E-01 -1.23E-01 -2.51E-02 -2.01E-01 4.75E-03 9.16E-03 -7.90E-02 
5 2.59E-01 -1.96E-01 -1.15E-02 -2.87E-01 -2.95E-03 -1.73E-03 5.07E-02 
6 5.78E-01 1.77E-01 6.48E-02 5.96E-01 -7.19E-03 -1.30E-02 1.79E-01 
7 4.65E-01 -1.59E-01 -1.15E-01 -4.16E-01 -6.78E-03 6.96E-03 2.09E-01 
Load direction: -Fy 
2 8.90E-02 5.09E-03 -1.88E-03 -1.58E-02 1.74E-02 -4.68E-02 6.22E-03 
3 6.51E-01 1.99E-02 1.05E-03 1.69E-04 -7.01E-02 -3.69E-01 -6.38E-04 
4 3.48E-01 9.98E-03 8.37E-03 3.07E-02 7.30E-02 1.86E-01 1.17E-02 
5 3.04E-01 2.41E-02 2.59E-03 5.25E-02 3.34E-02 -1.70E-01 -1.21E-02 
7 6.88E-01 -4.19E-03 -5.50E-03 -2.48E-02 -1.14E-01 3.78E-01 4.49E-03 
Load direction: -Fx 
2 9.34E-01 -4.40E-01 -1.42E-01 -9.42E-01 -5.03E-03 1.90E-03 3.56E-01 
3 8.57E-02 -8.51E-02 8.18E-03 -2.51E-02 -2.35E-03 -8.88E-03 4.59E-03 
4 2.72E-01 6.00E-02 4.54E-02 2.61E-01 3.48E-04 -4.62E-03 1.01E-01 
5 2.59E-01 7.15E-02 8.88E-03 2.76E-01 -9.98E-05 1.06E-02 -5.14E-02 
7 4.68E-01 1.59E-01 1.15E-01 4.18E-01 5.76E-03 -3.26E-03 -2.11E-01 
Load direction: +Fy 
2 9.50E-02 5.98E-03 -3.97E-03 -2.82E-02 -1.88E-02 4.72E-02 1.09E-02 
3 6.46E-01 1.34E-02 -2.19E-03 -1.17E-03 6.99E-02 3.66E-01 -2.60E-03 
4 3.54E-01 1.28E-02 5.32E-03 3.11E-02 -7.36E-02 -1.90E-01 1.13E-02 
5 3.01E-01 2.15E-02 2.54E-04 4.49E-02 -3.34E-02 1.69E-01 -4.82E-03 
7 6.81E-01 6.81E-03 -2.49E-03 -3.51E-03 1.13E-01 -3.75E-01 5.56E-03 
 
 
 
 
91
Table 4.3 Stress components in MPa at locations labeled in Figure 4.19 on the cast 
iron crankshaft, resulting from unit load of 1 kN. 
Location 
Number 
von 
 Mises 
S11 S22 S33 S12 S13 S23 
Load direction: +Fx 
1 3.69E-02 2.44E-03 -7.31E-03 -2.85E-02 -1.10E-03 3.96E-03 1.33E-02 
2 1.39E+00 4.65E-01 2.16E-01 1.39E+00 1.89E-03 7.43E-03 -5.06E-01 
3 6.35E-01 -2.59E-01 -4.93E-01 -2.71E-01 -2.31E-02 -1.44E-02 -3.39E-01 
4 4.45E-01 -2.20E-01 -7.07E-02 -4.44E-01 5.96E-03 1.06E-02 -1.74E-01 
5 1.15E-01 -7.50E-02 2.48E-02 3.49E-02 1.55E-03 -2.17E-04 -2.10E-02 
6 2.70E-01 -2.04E-01 -1.20E-02 -2.99E-01 -3.07E-03 -1.80E-03 5.28E-02 
7 3.60E-01 -2.68E-01 -4.68E-01 -3.13E-01 -1.28E-02 1.01E-02 1.50E-01 
Load direction: -Fy 
2 5.48E-02 3.73E-04 -7.26E-03 -4.57E-02 1.32E-04 -4.32E-03 1.91E-02 
3 1.09827 -9.31E-03 -6.84E-02 -2.92E-02 -5.09E-01 -3.74E-01 -4.12E-02 
4 3.77E-01 1.56E-02 2.74E-03 2.08E-02 7.69E-02 2.03E-01 5.92E-03 
5 2.04E-01 -6.40E-03 -1.41E-02 -1.23E-02 8.06E-02 -8.47E-02 1.10E-02 
7 5.73E-01 -1.77E-02 -9.09E-03 -1.90E-02 -2.33E-01 2.02E-01 2.58E-03 
Load direction: -Fx 
2 1.1218 -4.76E-01 -1.75E-01 -1.1321 -1.04E-03 -8.64E-04 4.24E-01 
3 1.05618 3.47E-01 7.98E-01 4.49E-01 -1.02E-03 -4.41E-03 5.59E-01 
4 6.72E-01 1.81E-01 1.07E-01 6.61E-01 -3.80E-03 -2.86E-03 2.44E-01 
5 1.32E-01 5.47E-02 6.18E-02 8.04E-02 3.26E-03 -4.53E-03 -7.42E-02 
7 3.94E-01 2.91E-01 5.12E-01 3.41E-01 5.77E-03 -3.68E-03 -1.64E-01 
Load direction: +Fy 
2 1.05E-01 -1.98E-02 -1.53E-02 -1.01E-01 -2.44E-03 8.19E-03 3.57E-02 
3 1.06977 -4.04E-02 -5.94E-02 -4.31E-02 4.96E-01 3.64E-01 -4.80E-02 
4 3.80E-01 2.32E-02 4.96E-03 2.55E-02 -7.77E-02 -2.05E-01 9.69E-03 
5 2.24E-01 5.41E-03 -1.18E-03 -5.63E-03 -8.82E-02 9.39E-02 2.62E-03 
7 5.58E-01 2.81E-02 1.64E-02 1.69E-02 2.27E-01 -1.97E-01 -3.53E-03 
 
 
 
92
Table 4.4 Comparison of stress results from FEA and strain gages located at 
positions shown in Figure 4.30. 
Location a Location b 
FEA EXP Analytical FEA EXP Analytical 
Load 
(N) 
  (MPa) (MPa) (Mpa) 
Diff-I*  
% 
Diff-II+ 
% (MPa) (MPa) (Mpa) 
Diff-I*  
% 
Diff-II+ 
% 
-890 -61.6 -59.3 -72 3.80% 21.42% 86.9 81.4 72 6.40% 11.55%
890 61.5 65.5 72 6.50% 9.92% -86.7 -90.3 -72 4.20% 20.27%
Location c Location d 
FEA EXP Analytical FEA EXP Analytical 
Load 
(N) 
  (MPa) (MPa) (Mpa) 
Diff-I*  
% 
Diff-II+ 
% (MPa) (MPa) (Mpa) 
Diff-I*  
% 
Diff-II+ 
% 
-890 -76.4 -71.7 -72 6.10% 0.42% 75.5 71.7 72 5.00% 0.42% 
890 76.3 75.8 72 0.50% 5.01% -75.6 -76.5 -72 1.30% 5.88% 
* Difference between FEA results and experimental results 
+ Difference between analytical results and experimental results 
 
 
93
 
Figure 4.1 Generated geometry of the cast iron crankshaft. 
 
 
Figure 4.2 Picture of the actual cast iron crankshaft from which the digitized model 
was generated. 
 
 
94
 
Figure 4.3 Generated geometry of the forged steel crankshaft. 
 
 
Figure 4.4 Picture of the actual forged steel crankshaft from which the digitized 
model was generated. 
 
 
 
95
 
Figure 4.5 Drawing of the forged steel crankshaft with measured dimensions noted. 
 
 
96
 
Figure 4.6 Drawing of the cast iron crankshaft with measured dimensions noted.  
 
 
97
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
50000 70000 90000 110000 130000 150000 170000 190000 210000
Number of Elements
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
1
2
3
4
5
6
 
Figure 4.7 von Mises stress at locations 1 through 6 for forged steel crankshaft. Note 
that the convergence is achieved at all locations with 119,337 elements. 
This corresponds to a global element size of 5.08 mm and a local mesh 
size of 0.762 mm. 
 
 
 
98
 
(a) 
 
 (b) 
Figure 4.8 Element size at different locations on the forged steel crankshaft 
geometry. Note that the global mesh size is 5.08 mm. (a) back view (b) 
front view. 
 
0.762
3.81
3.81
0.762
3.81
2.54
3.81
1.27
3.81
3.81
3.81
1.27
0.762
3.81
3.81
3.81
2.54
0.762
3.81 
3.81 
 
 
99
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 4.9 Element size at different locations on the cast iron crankshaft geometry. 
Note that the global mesh size is 5.08 mm. (a) back view (b) front view. 
 
0.762
3.81
3.81
3.81
2.54
0.762 3.81
3.81
3.81
0.762
3.81
3.81
3.81
2.54
0.762 3.81 
3.81
 
 
100
 
Figure 4.10 Meshed geometry of the forged steel crankshaft with 122,441 elements 
 
 
Figure 4.11 Meshed geometry of the cast iron crankshaft with 128,366 elements. 
 
 
 
 
101
 
Figure 4.12 Element size at different locations on the forged steel crankshaft geometry 
for test assembly FEA. Note that the global mesh size is 5.08 mm. 
 
 
Figure 4.13 Forged steel crankshaft in the engine block (taken from the engine 
manual). 
 
0.762
3.81
3.81
1.27
3.81 2.54
0.762 2.54
3.81
3.81
 
 
102
 
Figure 4.14 Boundary conditions of dynamic model of the forged steel crankshaft with 
the load applied on the upper part of the connecting rod bearing. 
 
 
Figure 4.15 Boundary conditions of dynamic model of the cast iron crankshaft with 
the load applied on the upper part of the connecting rod bearing. 
 
Fixed surface in all 
degrees of freedom 
over 180° Fixed edge in directions 1 & 2 
over 180° 
Applied load; constant 
pressure over 120°  
Applied load; constant 
pressure over 120°  
Fixed 
surface in 
all degrees 
of freedom 
over 180°
Fixed edge in 
directions 1 & 2 
over 180° 
 
 
103
 
Figure 4.16 Schematic of test assembly fixture for the forged steel crankshaft. 
 
 
Figure 4.17 Boundary conditions of test assembly model of the forged steel crankshaft 
with the load applied as a concentrated force. 
 
Fixed surface in all 
degrees of freedom 
Fixed surface in all 
degrees of freedom 
Applied load; 
concentrated force  
 
 
104
 
Figure 4.18 Locations on the forged steel crankshaft where the stress variation was 
traced over one complete cycle of the engine. 
  
 
Figure 4.19 Locations on the cast iron crankshaft where the stress variation was traced 
over one complete cycle of the engine. 
 
1
5
3
2
4
6
1
5
3 
2
4
6
7
7
 
 
105
-50
0
50
100
150
200
0 180 360 540 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
1
2
3
4
5
6
 
Figure 4.20 von Mises stress history (considering sign of principal stress) at different 
locations on the forged steel crankshaft at the engine speed of 2000 rpm. 
 
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 180 360 540 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
1
2
3
4
5
6
 
Figure 4.21 von Mises stress history (considering sign of principal stress) at different 
locations on the cast iron crankshaft at the engine speed of 2000 rpm. 
 
 
 
 
106
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
1 2 3 4 5 6
Location Number
St
re
ss
 M
ag
ni
tu
de
 (M
Pa
)
Maximum
Minimum
Range
Mean
 
Figure 4.22 Comparison of maximum, minimum, mean, and range of stress at the 
engine speed of 2000 rpm at different locations on the forged steel 
crankshaft. 
 
-150
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
1 2 3 4 5 6
Location Number
St
re
ss
 M
ag
ni
tu
de
 (M
Pa
)
Maximum
Minimum
Range
Mean
 
Figure 4.23 Comparison of maximum, minimum, mean, and range of stress at the 
engine speed of 2000 rpm at different locations on the cast iron crankshaft. 
 
 
 
107
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
Engine Speed (RPM)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
Min 
Max 
Mean 
Range 
 
Figure 4.24 Variations of minimum stress, maximum stress, mean stress, and stress 
range at location 2 on the forged steel crankshaft as a function of engine 
speed. 
 
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000
Engine Speed (RPM)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
Min 
Max 
Mean 
Range 
 
Figure 4.25 Variations of minimum stress, maximum stress, mean stress, and stress 
range at location 2 on the cast iron crankshaft as a function of engine 
speed. 
 
 
108
-50
0
50
100
150
200
0 180 360 540 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
With torsion
Without torsion
 
Figure 4.26 Effect of torsion on von Mises stress at location 2 at the engine speed of 
2000 rpm for the forged steel crankshaft. 
 
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 180 360 540 720
Crankshaft Angle (Deg)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
With torsion
Without torsion
 
Figure 4.27 Effect of torsion on von Mises stress at location 2 at the engine speed of 
2000 rpm for the cast iron crankshaft. 
 
 
109
-80
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
2000 2800 3600
Engine Speed (RPM)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
Min stress with torsion Min stress without torsion
Max stress with torsion Max stress without torsion
Stress range with torsion Stress range without torsion
Mean stress with torsion Mean stress without torsion
 
Figure 4.28 Effect of considering torsion in stresses at location 7 at different engine 
speeds for the forged steel crankshaft. 
 
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
80
2000 2800 3600
Engine Speed (RPM)
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 (M
Pa
)
Min stress with torsion Min stress without torsion
Max stress with torsion Max stress without torsion
Stress range with torsion Stress range without torsion
Mean stress with torsion Mean stress without torsion
 
Figure 4.29 Effect of considering torsion in stresses at location 7 at different engine 
speeds for the cast iron crankshaft. 
 
 
 
110
 
Figure 4.30 Locations on the crankshaft where strain gages were mounted. 
 
1
2
3
5
6
7
9 10 11
-50
0
50
100
150
200
0 2 4 6 8 10 12v
on
 M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 M
ag
ni
tu
de
 (M
Pa
)
 
Figure 4.31 Rainflow count of the von Mises stress with consideration of sign at 
location 2 at engine speed of 2000 rpm for the forged steel crankshaft.  
 
 
A
A
A-A
a 
b 
d c
 
 
111
1
2
3
5
6
7
9 10 11
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
vo
n 
M
is
es
 S
tre
ss
 M
ag
ni
tu
de
 (M
Pa
)
 
Figure 4.32 Rainflow count of the von Mises stress with consideration of sign at 
location 2 at engine speed of 2000 rpm for the cast iron crankshaft. 
 
 
112 
5 Geometry, Material, and Cost Optimization 
This chapter discusses the optimization options, their combination under a set of 
defined constraints and a comparison between the original forged steel crankshaft and the 
final optimized forged steel component. The main objective of this analysis was to 
optimize the weight and manufacturing cost of the forged steel crankshaft, which not only 
reduces the final production cost of the component, but also results in a lighter weight 
crankshaft which will increase the fuel efficiency of the engine.  
Optimization carried out on this component is not the typical mathematical sense 
of optimization, because variables such as manufacturing and material parameters could 
not be organized in a mathematical function according to the set of constraints such that 
the maximum or minimum could be obtained. Instead, each optimization step was judged 
through the sense of engineering knowledge. In this case of optimization process, the 
final optimized geometry has definitely less weight than the original crankshaft but this 
does not mean that the weight could not be reduced further. In other words, this may not 
be the minimum possible weight under the set of constraints defined. As the main 
objective of this analysis, it was attempted to reduce the weight and final cost of the 
component.  
The first step in the optimization process was weight reduction of the component 
considering dynamic loading, which means that the stress range under dynamic loading 
would not exceed the stress range magnitude in the original crankshaft. Possible weight 
 
 
113
reduction options and their combinations were considered. Since the optimization and 
weight reduction was performed in an interactive manner and judged by manufacturing 
feasibility and cost, there is no guarantee that the obtained optimized crankshaft has the 
minimum weight possible. As a result, in this optimization problem, weight reduction by 
geometry optimization and other factors such as manufacturing process and material 
alternatives were considered separately.  
The two main factors which were considered during optimization are stress range 
under dynamic load and bending stiffness. These factors were verified to be in the 
permissible limits. The optimization process was categorized in two stages; Stage I – No 
change in the engine block and the connecting rod, and Stage II – Some minor changes 
on the bearings and connecting rod. The optimization problem solving process is 
summarized in Figure 5.1, where it could be seen that the result from the first stage is 
input to the second stage. The general flow chart of the optimization process is shown in 
Figure 5.2. Objective function, design variables, and constraints are summarized in this 
figure and it is shown that the optimization process consisting of geometry, 
manufacturing process, and material optimization was performed simultaneously.  
5.1 Component Specifications and Manufacturing Process 
In order to carry out optimization process, it is necessary to have knowledge of 
the component dimensions, its service conditions, material of construction, 
manufacturing process, and other parameters that affect its cost. The service loading 
condition of this component was specified in Chapter 3. It was shown that the maximum 
 
 
114
bending load occurs at the lowest operating engine speed. Therefore, this loading 
condition was considered as the primary loading condition for the optimization study. 
The forged steel crankshaft material, AISI 1045, has the chemical composition 
shown in Table 5.1. As can be seen in this table, this high-strength low-alloy steel 
contains 0.45% carbon resulting in a yield strength of 625 MPa and fatigue strength of 
359 MPa at 106 cycles (Williams and Fatemi, 2007). 
The main manufacturing process of the forged crankshaft is hot forging and 
machining and this is shown in a flowchart in Figure 5.3. Each step of this flowchart is 
described below, where the information about the forging and machining processes were 
obtained from the metal forming books and OEM websites. 
1. The row material samples of the AISI 1045 are inspected for chemical composition. 
2. The material is shaped and cut to the rough dimensions of the crankshaft. 
3. The shaped material is heated in the furnace to the temperature of 900ºC to 1100ºC.  
4. The forging process starts with the pre-forming dies, where the material is pressed 
between two forging dies to get a rough shape of the crankshaft. 
5. The forging process continues with the forging of the pre-formed crankshaft to its 
first definite forged shape. 
6. Trimming process cuts the flash which is produced and appears as flat unformed 
metal around the edge of the component. 
7. The exact shape of the forged crankshaft is obtained in the coining process where 
the final blows of the hammer force the stock to completely fill every part of the 
finishing impression. 
 
 
115
8. The final shaped forged crankshaft is now ready for the shot cleaning process. In 
this step the scales remained from forging process are removed. 
9. The machining process starts with the facing and centering of the total length size. 
The facing process is a machining operation that is a form of turning in which the 
tool is fed at right angles to axis of workpiece rotation to produce flat surface. 
Centering refers to aligning the bearings of the component according to the final 
dimensions. 
10. After alignment of all diameters the turning process will give a rough shape of 
cylinder to all cylindrical portions. 
11. CAM turning is the process used to produce cylindrical components, typically on a 
lathe. A cylindrical piece of stock is rotated and a cutting tool is traversed along 2 
axes of motion to produce precise diameters and depths. Turning can be either on 
the outside of the cylinder or on the inside (also known as boring) to produce 
tubular components to various geometries.  
12. In the drilling operation, all inner diameters are drilled in the crankshaft geometry. 
The drilling mainly consists of oil holes. 
13. Threads are cut on the inner surface of the bore at the back of the crankshaft and on 
the outer diameter of the front shaft. 
14. Heat treatment is the next step to obtain the desired mechanical properties for the 
material.  
15. Shot blasting consists of attacking the surface of a material with one of many types 
of shots. Normally this is done to remove scale from the surface.  
 
 
116
16. Straightening process by application of external forces eliminates or reduces the 
curvatures, which can result by deformation during rolling, drawing, extrusion or 
due to non-uniform cooling. Thickness and geometry changes at different sections 
of a crankshaft cause non-uniform cooling during the forging process, which results 
in unwanted curvatures along the forged component.  
17. After the straightening process the crankshaft is ready for grinding and being 
aligned to its final dimensions. Therefore, the grinding begins with the rough 
grinding of all diameters. 
18. Since the crankshaft has eccentric cylinders the diameters have to be grinded using 
CAM. 
19. The final grinding of diameters sets the cylinder diameters to their final acceptable 
tolerance. This is followed by grinding of other sections such as grooves using 
CAM. 
20. The final step in grinding is face grinding, where the dimensions of the crankshaft 
will be finalized. 
21. The last step in the machining process is balancing the crankshaft. In this process 
the crankshaft is mounted on two bearings in a device, and the dynamic balance of 
the component is checked. Mass and location of material removal is specified. 
Drilling holes in the counter weights will balance the crankshaft dynamically. The 
balance of the crankshaft is checked once more on the device. 
22. Final washing of the component and preparation for final inspection. 
23. The final inspection consists of checking diameter of cylinders, radius of crankshaft 
and distance of faces. 
 
 
117
24. The finished forged crankshafts are sent for packing and dispatch. 
As a main objective of the optimization study, the cost break down for each 
manufacturing step is very important. The influence of different parameters on the final 
cost of the component is another way for the cost break down. These parameters are 
shown in Table 5.2. Summarizing the manufacturing process to 12 steps as listed in Table 
5.3 helps in cost estimation of the manufacturing process. In this table, each 
manufacturing step and its share in the total cost is shown. As can be seen for this table, 
about 50% of the final cost is machining process and 31% is material cost (Nallicheri et 
al., 1991). 
5.2 Optimization Problem Definition 
At the beginning of this chapter it was mentioned that the optimization study 
performed on this component was not the typical mathematical optimization process. 
There are different functions and limitations in the mathematical optimization, which are 
all defined as a set of variables. The main objective function is minimizing the weight, 
maximum stress at critical locations, and manufacturing cost. This function is subject to 
inequality constraints, equality constraints, and side constraints having the design 
variables as a tool for any optimization process. The bounded constraint in this 
component is maximum allowable stress of the material. The equality constraint is 
geometry limitations or fixed dimensions. And finally the design variables are upper and 
lower limit for size and geometry, material alternatives, and manufacturing processes.  
Size optimization is an optimization approach, where the parameters do not 
change the overall shape of the component and only the size is modified. Geometrical 
 
 
118
properties parameters such as thickness, diameter, and area are used as design variables 
in size optimization. There are other optimization methods such as Shape Optimization 
and Topological Optimization, which change the appearance of the geometrical domain.  
The optimization approach in this study involved both size and shape 
optimizations. As discussed earlier, the optimization stages were considered not as a 
defined function of variables, but based on judgment using the results of the FEA and 
dynamic service load. The judgment was based on mass reduction, cost reduction, and 
improving fatigue performance using alternative materials and considering manufacturing 
aspects, as well as bending stiffness of the forged steel crankshaft. In Stage I, the design 
variables were thickness of the crank web, geometry of the cranks web, increasing inner 
hole diameters and their depth, and geometry changes on outer part of the crankpin 
bearing. Material alternatives and additional manufacturing operations such as fillet 
rolling were also investigated to reduce weight and cost as final steps of the first stage. 
Design variables for Stage II were considered to be changes in fillet radius, change in 
connecting rod bearing thickness, and bearing diameters. These geometry modifications 
are in addition to geometry modifications from Stage I.  
The process of geometrical optimization in both stages was localized size and 
shape optimization with consideration of manufacturing limitations. Manufacturing 
process and material alternatives were other optimization variables that were considered 
for the optimization study. The algorithm of each optimization attempt is shown in Figure 
5.2. Local geometrical optimization was performed in separate models, possible 
combinations of these optimizations were considered, and new models were created. 
Finite element analysis was performed on each model using the service load history 
 
 
119
calculation from Chapter 3. Since this component is designed for many millions of 
cycles, the stresses generated from dynamic loading of the component are in the elastic 
region. Therefore, linear elastic analysis was considered to be sufficient for the 
optimization analysis. Manufacturing process and material alternatives were studied in a 
trial and error approach, after the geometrical optimization. In the manufacturing process 
optimization, the aim was to eliminate some steps to reduce the cost, while considering 
adding other steps in order to increase the performance of the crankshaft.  
5.2.1 Objective Function 
Objective function is defined as the parameters that are attempted to be optimized. 
In this study the weight, manufacturing cost and fatigue performance of the component 
were the main objectives. Optimization attempt was to reduce the weight and 
manufacturing cost, while improving the fatigue performance and maintaining the 
bending stiffness within permissible limits. 
5.2.2 Constraints 
Since the current crankshaft used in the engine has proper fatigue performance, 
optimization was carried out in such a way that the equivalent local stress amplitude at 
any location of the optimized model did not exceed the equivalent stress amplitude at the 
critical location of the original model. Considering two stages for the optimization 
approach, the following constraints were defined for each stage. 
Stage I – Since the optimized crankshaft was expected to be interchangeable with 
the current one, the following dimensions were not changed: 
 
 
120
• Outer diameters of different cylinders 
• Crank radius 
• Location of main bearings (distance between them) 
• Geometry of main bearings 
• Thickness and geometry of connecting rod bearing 
Stage II – The first three constraints in Stage I remain the same, but the geometry 
of main bearings, and thickness and geometry of the connecting rod bearing could be 
modified.  
It should be added that a main concern in crankshaft design is that the crankshaft 
has to be dynamically balanced, which could be achieved by maintaining the center of 
gravity on the center line and in the midway of both main bearings. This constraint has to 
always be fulfilled in the optimization process by changing the dimensions, and removing 
and/or adding material in the counter weights.  
5.2.3 Design Variables 
Parameters that could be changed during the optimization process are design 
variables. Considering the functions of the crankshaft and its constraints, the following 
design variables were considered in the optimization study: 
Stage I: 
• Thickness of crank web 
• Geometry of crank web 
• Increasing inner hole diameters and depths 
• Geometry changes on the outer part of crankpin bearing  
 
 
121
Stage II: Variables in stage I and 
• Changes in fillet radii 
• Change of connecting rod bearing length 
• Change in the main bearing diameters 
Manufacturing process and material alternatives are other design variables that 
were considered in this study. Since automotive crankshafts are mostly manufactured 
from microalloyed steels, this was considered as the alternative material. Microalloyed 
steels have the main advantage of eliminating the heat treatment step in the 
manufacturing process, which will reduce the cost of the final crankshaft. Other 
manufacturing aspects that are common in manufacturing of crankshafts including 
inducing compressive residual stress at the fillets were investigated to improve the fatigue 
performance of the component. This improvement would allow additional changes in the 
geometry in order to reduce the weight of the final optimized crankshaft.  
5.3 Optimization Analysis Results and Discussion 
In this section, details of each optimization stage is discussed, presenting the 
influence of each optimization potential on maximum stress range, bending stiffness, and 
weight difference with the original crankshaft.  
5.3.1 Stage I – No Change in the Engine Block and the Connecting Rod 
Dimensions 
In this stage of the optimization process, it is tried to reduce the weight and 
manufacturing cost without changing the geometry of the components that are connected 
 
 
122
to the crankshaft. In addition, modification to manufacturing processes was considered to 
improve the fatigue performance and reduce the final cost of the component. Considering 
alternative material to improve the fatigue strength and reduce the cost was another 
concern of this stage. Substituting alternative materials allows manufacturing cost 
reduction by eliminating some manufacturing steps or modifying current production 
process. 
5.3.1.1 Optimization Using Geometry Variables 
Investigating the stress contour of the crankshaft FEA model during an engine 
cycle showed that some locations of the crankshaft experience lower stresses such as; 
counter weights and crank webs. The crankshaft has to be dynamically balanced and 
counter weights have a key role in balancing it. Therefore, although stresses applied to 
these sections are low, they can not be removed, but can only be changed according to 
other modifications made on the component. Since the whole engine rotating and moving 
mechanism, consisting of crankshaft, connecting rod, piston assembly, and flywheel, 
weight and inertia specifications have been considered in the design of the engine, mass 
reduction of one part could affect the response of the system to dynamic loads applied to 
the mechanism. Geometry optimization of the crankshaft results in weight reduction and 
therefore, reduction of the moment of inertia. In order to maintain the original dynamic 
behavior of the mechanism, the moment of inertia of the rotating components has to 
remain unchanged. Therefore, the flywheel moment of inertia has to be increased to 
cover the reduction made in the moment of inertia of the crankshaft, which results in 
weight increase of the flywheel. But since the flywheel radius is larger than the 
 
 
123
crankshaft radius, weight increase of the flywheel is much less than weight reduction of 
the crankshaft. 
Local shape optimization techniques were applied to different locations of the 
crankshaft to lower the weight of the crankshaft. After each optimization step the counter 
weights were balanced in order to have an accurate estimation of the weight reduction. 
Also, after each shape optimization iteration the optimized component was investigated 
for design feasibility and examined to find whether the design was the best feasible 
design possible. In a feasible design, the component stresses fall within the stress limits 
and bending stiffness does not change significantly, while its manufacturability is 
economical.  
According to FE analysis, blue locations shown in Figure 5.4 have low stresses 
during service life and have the potential for material removal and weight reduction. 
Therefore, the following optimization options were considered. It should be added that 
the effect of mean stress in the results was negligible. Therefore, all stress concerns were 
about the stress range. 
Case 1: Increasing the depth of the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft 
Since the dynamic balance is one of the main concerns in the optimization of this 
component as the first step it was tried to remove material symmetric to the central axis, 
which would not disturb the dynamic balance of the crankshaft. At the back of the 
crankshaft, as shown in Figure 5.5, there is a treaded hole. The depth of this bore does not 
affect the function of the crankshaft. Therefore, this hole could be drilled as far as 
possible in the geometry. Figure 5.6 shows the current depth and the increased depth of 
this bore at the back of the crankshaft. As could be seen in this figure, the oil hole 
 
 
124
restricts further drilling. Since this hole is far from the boundary conditions and loadings 
on the crankshaft, stresses do not change at critical locations.  
Figure 5.7 shows stress results for the critical location for different optimization 
cases, where value of one on the vertical axis of the fatigue stands for the original 
crankshaft (73 MPa for mean stress, 188 MPa for stress range, and 3.72 kg for weight). 
The slight change (1%) in stress range for Case 1 is a result of selection of the critical 
node, because each model is meshed separately and the node numbers and position 
slightly change. Therefore, each time a node is selected, a variation could be seen in the 
results.  
Another concern of redesign and optimization process is bending stiffness. 
Bending stiffness of the crankshaft is important in the noise and performance of the 
component in the engine. In order to estimate the stiffness of the original crankshaft and 
compare it with other generated models, three locations with highest displacements were 
selected for stiffness investigation. These locations are shown in Figure 5.8. Chosen 
locations are located on the corners or exactly in the middle of a symmetric geometry. 
Therefore, there is a node located at these points, which always remains at the same 
location in each FE mesh. These nodes were used as selected nodes for checking the 
displacement. Figures 5.9 (a) and (b) show displacements in axial direction, U3, and 
radial direction, 22 U2U1 + , for the three locations on the crankshaft for different 
optimization potentials. As can be seen from this figure, the displacements do not change 
after the hole was drilled further at the back of the crankshaft. Considering this 
optimization process the weight of the crankshaft is reduces by 1%. 
 
 
125
Case 2: Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole 
Another optimization step which does not require any complicated changes in the 
geometry is increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin hole. Increasing the inner 
diameter of this hole will result in decreasing the moment inertia of the cross section. 
Therefore, in order to not increase the stress level at the fillet area, the fillet radius has to 
be increased. Increasing the fillet radius does not affect the connecting rod geometry 
since the current connecting rod has enough clearance. Applying these changes to the 
crankshaft causes the center of mass to move toward the counter weights. In order to 
balance the modified crankshaft, material has to be removed from the counter weight.  
The optimized crankshaft in this step is shown in Figure 5.10. Considering this 
optimization option the stress range reduces by 5%, compared to the original model, as 
can be seen in Figure 5.7. The reason for this reduction is increasing the fillet area, which 
causes a lower stress concentration factor. As could be seen in Figure 5.9 (b) the 
displacement of three locations on the optimized crankshaft does not change more than 
9% in radial direction. Displacement in U3 direction has slight changes of ±1% at 
locations A, B, and C. Weight reduction in this step is about 3%.  
Case 3: Redesigning the geometry of the crankpin 
Any weight reduction made on the crankpin geometry would result in material 
removal from the counter weights for dynamic balance of the crankshaft. Therefore, the 
next option considered for weight reduction was to redesign the crankpin geometry and 
remove material from this section. Material was cut from the outer geometry of the 
crankpin. Figure 5.11 shows the modified crankshaft after this geometry change. In this 
case, the stress range increased by 10%, which is shown in Figure 5.7. The increase of 
 
 
126
stress was a result of higher stress concentration factor, which not only depends on the 
two diameters of the shafts and the fillet radius, but also depends on the thickness of the 
crank web, which was reduced in this case. Figure 5.12 shows a cross section view of the 
original and optimized crankshaft considering this case. It can be seen in this figure that 
the bending stiffness of the optimized cross section of the web has reduced as a result of 
material removal. Figures 5.9 (a) and (b) show the displacement of the critical locations 
on this optimization case. It can be seen that they increase no more than 10% in any 
direction. Weight reduction is 4% as a result of this optimization. 
Case 4: Rectangular material removal from the center of the crank web symmetric 
to the central axis 
Figure 5.13 shows the weight reduction option for this case. Material removal in 
the shape of rectangular was considered since the dynamic balance of the crankshaft 
would not be disturbed and further dynamic redesign of the counter weights were not 
necessary. The rectangle could be cut out from one side to the end of the other side, as far 
as the center of the rectangle remains centered to the central axis of the main bearings. 
The height of the rectangle is limited to the geometry of the crankpin bearing. It can be 
seen in Figure 5.13 that the upper side of the rectangle is restricted to the crankpin 
bearing. The depth of this rectangle was determined as it would not intersect with the oil 
hole drilled in the crank web. In addition, the moment of inertia of the cross section in the 
crank web should not be reduced significantly to avoid excess reduction of bending 
stiffness. This modification on the crank web did not increase the stress range and mean 
stress, but the stiffness of the crankshaft was changed. Displacement of different 
locations increase as a result of this optimization step, where location A in Figure 5.8 has 
 
 
127
the highest displacement difference of 28% with the original crankshaft. Figures 5.9 (a) 
and (b) show the displacement of different locations in different directions. Though 28% 
may seem high, the main location and displacement direction which is important in the 
noise of the crankshaft is at location C and in the radial direction, which is about 8%. 
Weight reduction of about 3% is the result of this optimization step. 
Case 5: Semi-circle material removal from the center of the crank web symmetric to 
the central axis 
This step is a result of improvement of the previous step. Since the rectangular 
section depth is limited to the oil hole from the upper part, the middle section could be 
cut out more. Removing more material from the middle section of the crank web 
symmetric to the central axis resulted in cutting half circle from each part and reducing 
the weight more than 5%, in comparison with the original crankshaft. The optimized 
crankshaft from this optimization step is shown in Figure 5.14. Considering this 
optimization case the stresses slightly reduced with the applied dynamic load. This could 
be seen in Figure 5.7, where the mean stress and stress range are shown. As can be seen 
from Figures 5.9 (a) and (b), similar to the previous optimization case, the displacement 
of point C in radial direction is 8%.  
Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the web 
A high weigh percentage of the crankshaft is in the crank web volume, therefore, 
reducing the weight of this section could result in a more efficient weight reduction of the 
component. Reducing the web thickness is another applied optimization case that was 
performed on the crankshaft web. Figure 5.15 shows this geometry change. As a result of 
this change in the crank web the center of gravity moves toward the crankpin bearing. In 
 
 
128
order to dynamically balance the crankshaft, material has to be added to the counter 
weights. Adding material to the counter weights is possible by increasing their radius. 
This optimization option was restricted to the clearance between the piston and counter 
weights of the crankshaft. Since the current geometry is designed with specified 
clearance between counter weights and the piston, this optimization case could not be 
implemented without additional changes to the piston. In the next section it is shown that 
this case could be used in combination with other optimization cases. This optimization 
step did not change the stresses compared with the original crankshaft as could be seen in 
Figure 5.7. In addition, maximum displacement is about 16% at location A and in the U3 
direction, which is in the same range of other optimization cases considered. 
Displacements at different locations in two directions are shown in Figures 5.9 (a) and 
(b). This optimization case results in the maximum weight reduction of 7%.  
Case 7: Modification of the crank web design  
Redesigning the crank web and removing material is the next optimization case 
that was applied to the crankshaft. Changing the design was with consideration of the 
manufacturing process. The final designed geometry should be feasible for the 
manufacturing process, which requires not having negative slopes. The crank web was 
modified such that no changes in the counter weights would be necessary. The result of 
this redesign is shown in Figure 5.16. Weight reduction is about 5% for this case and 
stresses remain the same as the original crankshaft. These are shown in Figure 5.7. The 
main advantage of this optimization process is that the displacements increase no more 
than 3% in comparison with the original crankshaft. This is a result of not changing the 
 
 
129
crank web section, where bending moment is considered to be high. This could be seen in 
Figures 5.9 (a) and (b). 
Case 8: Eccentric crankpin hole  
This optimization step requires redesign of the outer geometry of the crankpin. By 
moving the centered oil hole toward the upper part of the crankshaft, where stresses are 
lower, the cross section of the hollow tube will have more area in the bottom, which is 
where higher stresses exist. With the increase of area in this section stresses would be 
lower, since the same bending moment is being applied to a wider area. Although stresses 
on the upper side will increase, the critical location still remains at the bottom part of the 
fillet. The following calculations show the effect of moving the oil hole on the nominal 
stress. 
For the centered oil hole: 
( )44
64
dDI −= π         (5.1) 
I
DM
c
2/×
=σ         (5.2) 
Considering the actual dimensions of the crankpin and oil hole of D = 33 mm (1.3 
in) and d = 16.9 mm (0.665 in): 
Mc ××=
−41004.3σ         (5.3) 
where M is in N-mm and cσ will be in MPa. 
For the eccentric hole in the crankpin (based on nomenclature shown in Figure 
5.17): 
( )
22
23 2/2/
dD
eDdDl
−
+−
=        (5.4) 
 
 
130
( ) ( ) ⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎣
⎡
−++−⎥
⎦
⎤
⎢
⎣
⎡
−+= 2
24
2
24
2/
464
2/
464
leDddlDDDI ππππ    (5.5) 
I
lM
e
×
=σ          (5.6) 
where l is the distance to the centroid. 
Substituting for values of D and d, the final nominal stress at the bottom of the 
crankpin would be a function of e. Figure 5.18 shows the variation of stress as a function 
of distance of center of the oil hole with the outer diameter, e. The minimum stress occurs 
at e = 2.032 mm. Considering this figure and the calculations for the nominal stress, it 
can be calculated that the eccentricity reduces the stress for about 2.1% at most. Since 
this percentage of stress reduction is small and this optimization step reduces the weight 
of the crankshaft by less than 1%, this optimization step was not considered further. 
Combination options 
Since each optimization case was studied individually, further analysis is needed 
considering combination of these cases. Table 5.4 shows possible combination options, 
where “X” shows that the two cases in the row and the column could be used together on 
the crankshaft simultaneously and “-” indicates that the two cases can not be combined 
on the crankshaft geometry. Combination options have been considered as a redesigned 
crankshaft in which as many optimization cases as possible could be applied. For 
example, according to Table 5.4, Case 1 could be combined with any other optimization 
case, or Case 6 could be combined with Cases 1, 2, 3, and 7. These combinations were 
considered to develop the optimized crankshaft. Case 5 was not considered for 
combination with other cases because this case results in higher displacements and 
therefore, reduced stiffness for the crankshaft in comparison with other modifications to 
 
 
131
the crank web. Cases 4, 6, and 7 have been developed for the crank web section, which 
are more efficient than Case 5 when combined together. In addition, forging the crank 
web geometry with semi-circular material removal could be difficult due to complexity of 
the geometry for the forging process. The optimized geometries resulting from each 
combination are shown in Figures 5.19 through 5.25. 
FE models of possible combinations were created and FE analysis with dynamic 
load was considered for each combination. Results of stress range for these combination 
models are plotted in Figure 5.26 (a). It can be seen in this figure that the critical location 
(location 2) does not change as a result of geometry optimization. A comparison plot of 
stress ranges with the original stress ranges at the high stress locations of the current 
crankshaft are shown in Figure 5.26 (b), where the horizontal line at 1 stands for the 
original crankshaft. As could be seen in this figure, the first four combination options 
cause the stress range at the critically stressed location to increase. Referring to the 
previous analysis on separate optimization cases, it can be seen from Figure 5.7 that the 
only optimization option resulting in higher stress range than the original model is Case 
3. Since the purpose of optimization is to at least maintain the original performance, this 
case was not considered as a local optimization option. Combinations of Cases 1, 2, and 6 
and Cases 1, 2, and 7 are shown to have lower stress ranges than the original crankshaft. 
These combinations result in 12% and 9% weight reduction, as shown in Figure 5.27, 
respectively.  
Combination of Cases 1, 2, and 6 has the same problem as considering Case 6 on 
its own. The counter weights radius is larger than the original crankshaft, which will 
cause interference between the counterweights and the piston. Combination of Cases 1, 2, 
 
 
132
and 7 results in increased clearance between the counter weights and the piston, which 
means further weight reduction is possible. Replacing the material removal from the 
counter weights in combination 1, 2, and 7 will move the center of gravity toward the 
counter weights. Since reducing web thickness is not symmetric with respect to the 
central axis and results in more material removal from the side of the counter weights, the 
center of gravity will move toward the crankpin. At a certain web thickness reduction, the 
center of gravity will be located on the main axis, which means the crankshaft becomes 
dynamically balanced. The combination of Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7 results in 12% weight 
reduction in comparison with the original crankshaft, which is 3% more than combining 
Cases 1, 2, and 7. The reason for similar weight reduction between this combination and 
combination of Cases 1, 2, and 6 is that in Cases 1, 2, and 6 more material was removed 
from the crank web thickness and material was added to the counter weight to maintain 
the dynamic balance. But in Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7, it was not possible to reduce the crank 
web thickness further, since it was aimed not to add material and increase the counter 
weight radii due to the clearance between the piston and counter weights. As could be 
seen in Figure 5.27 the mean stress on the critical location of Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7 is the 
same as the original crankshaft and stress range is reduced slightly. Displacements of 
locations A, B, and C are not increased more than 15% in this combination of cases. 
Therefore, the stiffness of the optimized crankshaft is within the acceptable limit. 
Displacements at locations A, B, and C on different optimized crankshafts are shown in 
Figures 5.28 (a) and (b). 
 
 
133
5.3.1.2 Modification to Manufacturing Process 
As the next step for the optimization study it is tried to modify the production 
steps in order to reduce the cost or improve the performance of the current crankshaft. 
Further improvement of the performance could result in more geometry changes and 
weight reduction. The optimization in this section was investigated by considering adding 
compressive residual stress to the fillet area of the crankpin. 
Due to lack of experimental information, the magnitude of the residual stress that 
could be induced in the studied crankshaft geometry is not identified. It was shown in the 
studies by Kamimura (1985), Park et al. (2001), and Chien et al. (2004), as discussed in 
the literature review Section 2.5, inducing compressive residual stress increases the 
fatigue strength of the crankshaft. Therefore, adding compressive residual stress on the 
fillet area of the current crankshaft increases its fatigue strength by 40% to 80% based on 
the material properties, crankshaft geometry, and applied rolling force.  
Effect of nitriding as a surface hardening process was discussed in the literature 
review in Section 2.5. Since the nitriding process is time consuming in comparison with 
other heat treatment processes, it was not considered as a modification to manufacturing 
process to increase the performance of the crankshaft. 
The effects of different surface hardening treatments such as quenching and 
tempering, ion-nitriding or fillet rolling on the fatigue properties were investigated in 
Pichard et al. (1993) research. Table 5.5 summarizes these effects. The fatigue bending 
moment for microalloyed 35MV7 steel without surface treatment was 1990 N.m. As 
could be seen in this table, the fatigue strength increases by 87% and 125% by fillet 
 
 
134
rolling forces of 9 kN and 12 kN, respectively. For short nitriding treatments, the fatigue 
limit of microalloyed 35MV7 steel increased by about 135%.  
5.3.1.3 Modification Using Alternatives Materials 
One of the most common alternatives for the forged steel material is microalloyed 
steel. Pichard et al. (1993) performed a study on a microalloyed (MA) steel with titanium 
addition specially adapted for the production of forged crankshafts and which does not 
require any post-forging treatment.  The use of MA steel enables elimination of any 
further heat treatment, resulting in shorter manufacturing process and consequently an 
increase in the forged crankshaft productivity.  The metallurgical choice of this MA steel 
for crankshaft applications was based on the 35MV7 steel grade, with a typical 
composition of 0.35C, 1.8Mn, 0.25Si, 0.12V, and micro-addition of Ti.  Based on the 
results of their research, 35MV7 control-cooled microalloyed steel shows similar tensile 
and rotating bending fatigue behavior as AISI 4142 quenched and tempered steel. In 
addition, the machinability of the microalloyed steel can be improved by about 40% in 
turning and about 160% in drilling (Pichard et al. 1993).  
The effect of using different material with the same surface treatments are 
summarized in Table 5.5. As could be seen in this table, the quenched and tempered 1042 
steel with short nitriding treatment has 56% higher fatigue strength than the quenched 
and tempered alloyed ductile iron with the same nitriding time. The quenched and 
tempered 32CDV13 steel with 7 hour nitriding time has the highest fatigue strength, 
which is about 49% higher than quenched and tempered 1042 steel with shorter nitriding 
time. Cost reduction of 13% is obtained for the final crankshaft by replacing the 
traditional AISI 4142 steel with 35MV7 control-cooled microalloyed steel. This includes 
 
 
135
10% savings on the unfinished piece, 15% saving on mechanical operations and 15% 
saving on ion nitriding treatment (Pichard et al. 1993). 
A comparison between the material properties used in the current crankshaft, AISI 
1045 steel, and microalloyed steel 35MV7 indicates similar yield strengths, 12% higher 
tensile strength, and higher fatigue strength (by 21%) at 106 cycles for the microalloyed 
steel, as summarized in Table 5.6. Further study on the cost of final product is discussed 
in the cost analysis section. 
5.3.1.4 Final Optimized Crankshaft from Stage I 
Considering the manufacturing processes, the geometry of the crankshaft could be 
modified even more to take advantage of the results of improved fatigue strength due to 
fillet rolling and/or use of microalloyed steel. Further modification to the crankpin 
geometry is possible. Increasing the crankpin hole is an option which does not influence 
the manufacturing process and is not an expensive process. Increasing the hole diameter 
from 18.3 mm (0.72 inch) to 25.4 mm (1 inch) and reducing the crank web thickness in 
order to maintain dynamic balance of the crankshaft, will cause the stress range at the 
critical location to increase by 7%, which could be covered by the beneficial effect of the 
compressive residual stress from fillet rolling. This modification is shown as Case 1, 2*, 
6*, and 7 in Figures 5.26 through 5.28. Since the wall thickness in the crankpin area is 
limited, further increasing the hole diameter to larger than 25.4 mm was not possible, 
because sufficient material is needed to restrict plastic deformation in the rolling process 
to result in residual stress. This modification reduces the weight of the original crankshaft 
by 18%. As discussed in Section 5.3.1.1, weight reduction of the crankshaft results in 
reduction of moment of inertia of the component, which is about 21% for the final 
 
 
136
optimized geometry. Therefore, in order to maintain the total moment of inertia of the 
rotating parts mass is added to the flywheel to increase its moment of inertia. Weight 
increase of the flywheel is less than weight reduction of the crankshaft, because the 
flywheel radius is larger than the crankshaft radius. The use of microalloyed steel will 
reduce the final cost by eliminating the heat treatment process and increasing the 
machinability of the crankshaft. In addition, the dynamic balance is maintained during the 
optimization process and the bending stiffness is verified to be in the permissible limits.  
The modified dimensions of the original forged steel crankshaft and the final 
optimized geometry are shown in Figure 5.29. The geometry optimization process is 
summarized in a flowchart shown in Figure 5.30. 
5.3.2 Stage II - Limited Changes to Connecting Rod and Bearings/Engine 
Block 
Stage II of optimization includes geometry optimization with limited changes in 
the diameter of the main bearing, crankpin bearing length, and fillet radius of crankpin 
and main bearings. It is aimed in this stage to obtain a lighter crankshaft that further 
reduces the material and manufacturing costs. 
For this optimization stage, the optimized crankshaft from Stage I was redesigned 
to obtain higher fatigue performance and reduced weight. Reducing the main bearing 
diameters was the first step of geometry optimization in this stage. Since the critical 
location is in the fillet area of the crankpin, reduction in the main bearing diameters does 
not affect the stresses in the critical location, but increases the stresses in the fillet area 
between the main bearings and the crank web attachment. Increased stress ranges in this 
 
 
137
section were admissible, because the stress ranges were lower than the operating critical 
stress range in the existing crankshaft, defined as and equal to 210 MPa at location 2. 
Figure 5.31 shows the redesigned model with modification on the main bearings, and 
Figure 5.32 shows dimensions on the original crankshaft and optimized crankshafts from 
Stages I and II. This modification will result in 10% weight reduction in comparison with 
the optimized crankshaft from the previous step, and 26% reduction in comparison with 
the original component. Stress range results at different locations of this optimized 
crankshaft are shown in Figure 5.33. Stress ranges at locations 1 and 3 increase by 85% 
and 43%, respectively, but the critical location remains location number 2. The increase 
of 10% in stress range at location 2 is easily compensated for by residual stress from fillet 
rolling. This optimization will reduce the stiffness of the component significantly. 
Displacement in the axial direction, U3, is about 47% for location B in Figure 5.8, and 
radial displacement of location C is 46%. These are shown in Figure 5.34. In order to 
implement this optimization, thrust bearings have to be used in the engine to support both 
sides of the crankshaft. Thrust bearings will limit the axial displacement of the crankshaft 
resulting in increase of stiffness and reduction of the longitudinal displacement, which 
may allow additional changes and further weight reduction of the crankshaft, connecting 
rod, and piston assembly. This requires more analysis and modeling. In addition, the cost 
of angular contact ball bearing which can carry both longitudinal and radial loadis higher 
than the cost of single groove ball bearing, currently used in the engine.  
Changing the crankpin fillet radius was not considered as a part of this 
optimization stage since the radius has been increased in Stage I without requiring any 
changes to the connecting rod geometry. In addition, increasing the fillet radius in Stage I 
 
 
138
caused the stresses to decrease, in comparison with the original model. Therefore, no 
more change was required in this regard, to increase the fatigue performance of the 
crankshaft at this location.  
Decrease in the crankpin bearing length was considered and the result was 
increase in the weight of the component. Reducing the length of the crankpin bearing 
required machining less material from the crankpin of the as-forged crankshaft. Also, to 
balance the crankshaft, material had to be added to the counter weights. Therefore, the 
final optimized crankshaft weighed heavier than the modified crankshaft from Stage I. If 
reducing crankpin bearing length is not performed by machining less material from the 
crankpin, the distance between crank webs has to be reduced. This will cause the 
crankshaft to shorten in length. This means that the final optimized crankshaft in this case 
will be shorter and smaller than the original one. The objective of the optimization on this 
component was that the final optimized crankshaft could be used in the current engine, 
with limited modifications to the bearings and/or connecting rod, but not changing the 
size of the entire engine block. Based on these considerations, the final optimized 
geometry from this stage resulted in reduced main bearing diameters of the crankshaft. 
The optimized crankshaft from this stage requires changing the main bearings to thrust 
bearings with proper size according to optimized diameters. As discussed earlier, this 
requires further analysis which could result in additional changes to the crankshaft, 
connecting rod, and piston assembly.  
 
 
139
5.4 Cost Analysis 
Cost analysis is based on geometry changes and weight, modification in 
manufacturing process and the use of alternative material. The optimized geometry 
requires redesign and remanufacturing the forging dies used. The geometry parameters 
that influence machining and the final cost of the component include the increase of 
drilling process, because the drilled holes at the back of the crankshaft and the crankpin 
are redesigned to have larger diameters, and the bore at the back is modified to have more 
depth than the original bore.  
Adding residual stress by fillet rolling process is a parameter in the manufacturing 
process that will add to the cost of the finished component.  
Nallicheri et al. (1991) studied material alternatives for the automotive crankshaft 
based on manufacturing economics. The approach they used in technical cost modeling is 
to separate the different cost elements and estimate each one separately. As defined in 
their study, the costs are separated in two elements of variable and fixed costs. Variable 
cost elements are the contribution to piece cost whose values are independent of the 
number of elements produced. And in contrast with the variable costs, the fixed costs are 
those elements of piece cost which are a function of the annual production volume. 
Assumptions made for the cost analysis modeling are tabulated in Tables 5.7 and 5.8. 
These tables show manufacturing assumptions used as the basis of cost estimation for a 
32.6 lb crankshaft using hot rolled steel bar and microalloyed steel. The major difference 
between the assumptions in the case of hot rolled steel forging and microalloy forging 
were those of the die life and material cost. A minor improvement in die life was 
assumed owing to the enhanced formability of microalloyed steel. In case of microalloy 
 
 
140
forging, the quench and temper step was eliminated, resulting in cost savings. The 
fabrication costs estimated by different models for the two cases are presented in Table 
5.9. The use of microalloy forging eliminates some heat treating costs and yields savings 
in the as-forged state over conventional steel forgings. Figure 5.35 shows the finished 
piece costs for alternative manufacturing processes as a function of annual production 
volume. 
Although microalloy grade steel, as of March 2007, is $0.028/lb more expensive 
than hot-rolled steel bar, the heat treatment cost savings, which are at least $0.15/lb, are 
large enough to offset this difference (Wicklund, 2007). Apart from the heat treatment 
costs, the use of microalloyed steel also results in savings in machining costs stemming 
from enhanced production rates and longer tool life (Nallicheri et al. 1991). In addition, 
microalloyed steel has 5% to 10% better machinability than quenched and tempered steel 
(Wicklund, 2007).  Considering these factors, along with the reduced material cost due to 
the 18% weight reduction for Stage I and 26% for Stage II, indicates significant reduction 
in the total cost of the forged steel crankshaft. It should, however be mentioned that Stage 
II requires higher cost angular contact ball bearing and additional analysis is needed for 
this stage, which may result in additional changes in the crankshaft, connecting rod, and 
piston assembly. Figure 5.36 shows the modified manufacturing process for the 
optimized crankshaft considering aforementioned changes. 
 
 
141
Table 5.1 Chemical composition of AISI 1045 by percent weight (Williams and 
Fatemi, 2006). 
Element Percent by weight 
C 0.45 
Mn 0.81 
P 0.016 
S 0.024 
Si 0.27 
Al 0.033 
Cr 0.1 
Ni 0.05 
Cu 0.13 
N 0.008 
O 13 ppm 
Fe balance 
 
Table 5.2 Cost breakdown for a forged steel crankshaft weighing 32.6 lbs by factor 
in the study by (Nallicheri, 1991). 
 
 
 
 
142
Table 5.3 Cost breakdown for forged steel crankshaft weighing 32.6 lbs by process 
in the study by (Nallicheri, 1991). 
 
 
 
Table 5.4 Possible combination of optimization cases*. 
  Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Case 7 
Case 1 - X X X X X X 
Case 2 X - X X X X X 
Case 3 X X - X X X X 
Case 4 X X X - - - - 
Case 5 X X X - - - - 
Case 6 X X X - - - X 
Case 7 X X X - - X - 
 
* For example Case 1 can be combined with all other cases and Case 6 can be combined 
with Cases 1, 2, 3, and 7. 
 
 
143
Table 5.5 Fatigue experiment results on specimens from competitor crankshaft 
materials (Pichard et al., 1993). 
 
 
Table 5.6 Typical mechanical and fatigue properties of Ti-added controlled-cooled 
35MV7 steel (Pichard et al., 1993) and AISI 1045 steel (Williams and 
Fatemi, 2007). 
Steel Heat Treatment 
Ultimate 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Yield 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Fatigue 
Strength 
(MPa) 
Percent 
Elongation 
(%) 
Percent 
Reduction 
in Area (%) 
AISI 1045 Q + T 827 625 395 54 58 
35MV7 Cont. Cooled 925 630 478 15 50 
 
Table 5.7 Manufacturing assumptions for a forged steel crankshaft weighing 32.6 lbs 
(Nallicheri, 1991). 
 
 
 
 
144
Table 5.8 Manufacturing assumptions for a microalloyed steel forging crankshaft 
weighing 32.6 lbs (Nallicheri, 1991). 
 
 
Table 5.9 Break of cost by factor for a crankshaft weighing 32.6 lbs, fully machined 
part cost (Nallicheri, 1991). 
 
 
 
145
Forged Steel Crankshaft 
Optimization Alternatives
No Change in 
Connecting Rod 
and Engine Block
Focus:
Minimize mass while 
maintaining the overall 
shape and size of 
crankshaft, connecting 
rod and engine block
Modify manufacturing 
process
Considering 
microalloyed steel as 
material alternative
Limited Change in 
Connecting Rod 
and Engine Block
Focus:
Minimize mass and 
increase performance 
with limited changes in 
engine block and/or 
connecting rod 
geometry
STAGE I
STAGE II
 
Figure 5.1 Crankshaft optimization stages followed in this study 
 
 
 
146
 
Figure 5.2 General flow chart of forged steel crankshaft optimization procedure. 
 
 
 
147
Raw Material Input
Raw Material Inspection
Cut to Rough Dimensions
Furnace Heating
Pre-Forming Dies, Rough 
Shape of the Crankshaft
Forging, First Definite 
Shape of Crankshaft
Trimming
Coining
Shot Cleaning
Facing and Centering 
Total Length Size
All Turned Dia’s and Length
CAM Turning
All Drilling Operations
Cutting Threads
Heat Treatment
Shot Blasting
Straightening
Rough Dia’s Grinding
Rough CAM Grinding
Final Dia’s Grinding
Final CAM Grinding
Face Grinding
Dynamic Balancing
Final Washing
Final Inspection, 
Packing and Dispatch}
FORGING MACHINING
}
 
Figure 5.3 Manufacturing process flowchart for the forged steel crankshaft. 
 
 
148
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.4 Stress distribution under critical loading condition at the crank angle of 
355 degrees. 
 
 
Figure 5.5 Location of the treaded hole at the back of the crankshaft. 
Threaded hole 
 
 
149
 
 
Figure 5.6 Case 1: Original hole depth and increased hole depth. Dimensions are in 
mm. 
 
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
Mean Stress  Stress Range  Weight
D
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t (
O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Case 7
 
Figure 5.7 Stress results for the critical location. The horizontal line at 1 stands for 
the original crankshaft with 73 MPa for mean stress, 188 MPa for stress 
range, and 3.72 kg for weigh. Case 1: Increasing the depth of the drilled 
hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the hole diameter of 
the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, Case 3: Redesigning 
the geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: Rectangular material removal from 
the center of the crank web symmetric to the central axis, Case 5: Half 
circle material removal from the center of the crank web symmetric to the 
central axis, Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the web, and Case 7: 
Modification to the crank web design. 
 
Critical Location
 
 
150
 
Figure 5.8 Locations on the forged crankshaft where displacements were traced over 
one complete engine cycle. 
 
C
B
A
U2 
U3 
U1 X
 
 
151
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
Location A Location  B Location CD
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t (
O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Case 7
 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
Location A Location  B Location CD
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t (
O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
 
Figure 5.9 Displacements in (a) Longitudinal direction, U3, (b) Radial direction, 
resultant of U1 and U2 ( 22 U2U1 + ), at different locations on the 
crankshaft shown in Figure 5.8. Case 1: Increasing the depth of the drilled 
hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the hole diameter of 
the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, Case 3: Redesigning 
the geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: Rectangular material removal from 
the center of the crank web symmetric to the central axis, Case 5: Half 
circle material removal from the center of the crank web symmetric to the 
central axis, Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the web, and Case 7: 
Modification to the crank web design. 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
152
 
 
Figure 5.10 Case 2: Original crankpin hole diameter and increased diameter with 
modification to the counter weights for dynamic balance. Including 
increased fillet radii. All dimensions are in mm. 
 
 
Figure 5.11 Case 3: Redesigned crankpin geometry and modification to counter 
weights for dynamic balance. 
 
 
 
153
 
        Original cross section          Optimized cross section 
 
Figure 5.12 Cross section view of the original and optimized crankshaft in Case 3. 
 
 
Figure 5.13 Case 4: Rectangular material removal from the crank web symmetric to 
the central axis of the crankshaft. 
 
 
 
154
 
Figure 5.14 Case 5: Semi-circular material removal from the crank web symmetric to 
the central axis of the crankshaft. 
 
 
Figure 5.15 Case 6: Web thickness reduction and material added to the counter 
weights for dynamic balance of the crankshaft. 
 
 
 
155
 
Figure 5.16 Case 7: Modification to crank web geometry. 
 
 
Figure 5.17 Dimensions of eccentricity of the crankpin hole. 
 
 
 
156
0.00029
0.00031
0.00033
0.00035
0.00037
0.00039
0.00041
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Eccenricity, e  (mm)
C
oe
ffi
ci
en
t o
f M
 in
 S
tre
ss
, l
/I  
(1
/m
m
^3
)
 
Figure 5.18 Effect of eccentricity on bending moment (M) coefficient in stress 
I
lM
e
×
=σ . 
 
Figure 5.19 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, and 4. 
 
Concentric 
 
 
157
 
Figure 5.20 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, and 6. 
 
 
Figure 5.21 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, and 7 
 
 
 
158
 
Figure 5.22 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6. 
 
 
Figure 5.23 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, and 6. 
 
 
 
159
 
Figure 5.24 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, and 7. 
 
 
Figure 5.25 Optimized crankshaft with combination of Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7. 
 
 
 
160
0
50
100
150
200
250
1 2 3 4 5 6
Location Number
St
re
ss
 R
an
ge
 (M
Pa
)
Cases 1, 2, 3, and 4 Case 1, 2, 3, and 6 Cases 1, 2, 3 and 7
Cases 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 Cases 1, 2, and 6 Cases 1, 2, and 7
Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7 Cases 1, 2*, 6*, and 7
 
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1 2 3 4 5 6
Location Number
D
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 
C
ra
nk
sh
af
t (
O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
 
Figure 5.26 (a) Stress range results for different combination options at different 
locations on the crankshaft. (b) Comparison of stress range results with the 
original crankshaft at different locations. The horizontal line at 1 stands 
for the original crankshaft. Case 1: Increasing the depth of the drilled hole 
at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the hole diameter of the 
crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, Case 3: Redesigning the 
geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: Rectangular material removal from the 
center of the crank web symmetric to the central axis, Case 6: Reducing 
the thickness of the web, Case 7: Modification to the crank web design, 
Case 2*: Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole further than 
Case 2, and Case 6*: Reducing the thickness of the web further than Case 
6. 
(b) 
(a) 
 
 
161
 
 
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2
Mean Stress  Stress Range  WeightD
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t (
O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
Cases 1, 2, 3, and 4 Case 1, 2, 3, and 6 Cases 1, 2, 3 and 7
Cases 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 Cases 1, 2, and 6 Cases 1, 2, and 7
Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7 Cases 1, 2*, 6*, and 7
 
Figure 5.27 Stress results for the critical location and weights. The horizontal line at 1 
stands for the original crankshaft with 73 MPa for mean stress, 188 MPa 
for stress range, and 3.72 kg for weigh. Case 1: Increasing the depth of the 
drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the hole 
diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, Case 3: 
Redesigning the geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: Rectangular material 
removal from the center of the crank web symmetric to the central axis, 
Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the web, Case 7: Modification to the 
crank web design, Case 2*: Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin 
oil hole further than Case 2, and Case 6*: Reducing the thickness of the 
web further than Case 6. 
 
 
 
 
162
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
Location A Location  B Location C
D
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t 
(O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
Cases 1, 2, 3, and 4 Cases 1, 2, 3, and 6 Cases 1, 2, 3, and 7
Cases 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 Cases 1, 2, and 6 Cases 1, 2, and 7
Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7 Cases 1, 2*, 6*, and 7
 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
Location A Location  B Location C
D
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t 
(O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
 
Figure 5.28 Displacements in (a) Longitudinal direction, U3, (b) Radial direction, 
resultant of U1 and U2 ( 22 U2U1 + ), at different locations on the 
optimized crankshaft in directions shown in Figure 5.8. Case 1: Increasing 
the depth of the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: 
Increasing the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing the 
fillet radius, Case 3: Redesigning the geometry of the crankpin, Case 4: 
Rectangular material removal from the center of the crank web symmetric 
to the central axis, Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the web, Case 7: 
Modification to the crank web design, Case 2*: Increasing the hole 
diameter of the crankpin oil hole further than Case 2, and Case 6*: 
Reducing the thickness of the web further than Case 6. 
(a)
(b)
 
 
163
 
 
 
Figure 5.29 Dimensions of the final optimized geometry, which is a combination of 
Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7. Case 1: Increasing the depth of the drilled hole at the 
back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing the hole diameter of the 
crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, Case 6: Reducing the 
thickness of the web, and Case 7: Modification to the crank web design. 
All dimensions shown are in mm. 
 
Original 
Optimized 
 
 
164
 
Figure 5.30 Geometry optimization flowchart. 
165 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.31 Optimized crankshaft from Stage II of the optimization process. 
 
 
 
166
 
Figure 5.32 Dimensions of the optimized geometry from Stage II, which is a 
combination of Cases 1, 2, 6, and 7 including changes from Stage II as 
compared with Stage I and original crankshaft. Case 1: Increasing the 
depth of the drilled hole at the back of the crankshaft, Case 2: Increasing 
the hole diameter of the crankpin oil hole and increasing the fillet radius, 
Case 6: Reducing the thickness of the web, and Case 7: Modification to 
the crank web design. All dimensions shown are in mm. 
 
Original 
Optimized Stage I 
Optimized Stage II 
 
 
167
0
50
100
150
200
250
1 2 3 4 5 6
Location Number
St
re
ss
 R
an
ge
 (M
Pa
)
Original Stage II
 
Figure 5.33 Stress range at different locations in the original and optimized crankshaft 
from Stage II. 
 
 
 
168
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
Location A Location  B Location C
D
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t (
O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
Stage II
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
Location A Location  B Location C
D
iff
er
en
ce
 w
ith
 O
rig
in
al
 C
ra
nk
sh
af
t (
O
rig
in
al
 =
 1
)
 
Figure 5.34 Displacements in (a) Longitudinal direction, U3, and (b) Radial direction, 
resultant of U1 and U2 ( 22 U2U1 + ), at different locations on the 
optimized crankshaft from Stage II in directions shown in Figure 5.8. 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
169
 
Figure 5.35 Finished piece costs – alternative processes as a function of annual 
production volume for 32.6 lbs automotive crankshafts (Nallicheri et al., 
1991). 
 
 
 
170
} }
 
Figure 5.36 Modified manufacturing process for the forged steel crankshaft. 
 
 
171 
 
6 Summary and Conclusions 
A forged steel and a ductile cast iron crankshaft were chosen for this study, both 
of which belong to similar single cylinder four stroke air cooled gasoline engines. First, 
both crankshafts were digitized using a CMM machine. Load analysis was performed 
based on dynamic analysis of the slider crank mechanism consisting of the crankshaft, 
connecting rod, and piston assembly, using analytical approach and verification of results 
by ADAMS modeling of the engine. FEA model of each crankshaft was created and 
superposition of stresses from unit load analysis in the FEA, according to dynamic 
loading, resulted in stress history at different locations on the crankshaft geometry during 
an entire engine cycle. As the next step of this study, geometry and manufacturing cost 
optimization was performed on the forged steel crankshaft. In the first stage of geometry 
optimization local geometry changes at different locations on the crankshaft were 
considered. Final optimized geometry from the first stage, which is replaceable in the 
engine without any change to the engine block and the connecting rod, is a result of 
combining local geometry optimization potentials considering manufacturing feasibility 
and cost. In the next stage of optimization, minor changes to the engine block and/or 
connecting rod geometry was considered. 
The following conclusions can be drawn from the analysis conducted in this 
study: 
 
 
172
1. Dynamic loading analysis of the crankshaft results in more realistic stresses 
whereas static analysis provides overestimated results. Accurate stresses are critical input 
to fatigue analysis and optimization of the crankshaft. 
2. There are two different load sources in an engine; inertia and combustion. 
These two load source cause both bending and torsional load on the crankshaft. The 
maximum load occurs at the crank angle of 355 degrees for this specific engine. At this 
angle only bending load is applied to the crankshaft. 
3. Considering torsional load in the overall dynamic loading conditions has no 
effect on von Mises stress at the critically stressed location. The effect of torsion on the 
stress range is also relatively small at other locations undergoing torsional load. 
Therefore, the crankshaft analysis could be simplified to applying only bending load. 
4. Superposition of FEM analysis results from two perpendicular loads is an 
efficient and simple method of achieving stresses for different loading conditions 
according to forces applied to the crankshaft from the dynamic analysis. 
5. Experimental stress and FEA results showed close agreement, within 7% 
difference. These results indicate non-symmetric bending stresses on the crankpin 
bearing, whereas using analytical method predicts bending stresses to be symmetric at 
this location. The lack of symmetry is a geometry deformation effect, indicating the need 
for FEA modeling due to the relatively complex geometry of the crankshaft. 
6. Critical (i.e. failure) locations on the crankshaft geometry are all located on the 
fillet areas because of high stress gradients in these locations, which result in high stress 
concentration factors. 
 
 
173
7. Using the rainflow cycle counting method on the critical stress history plot 
shows that in an entire cycle only one peak is important and can cause fatigue damage in 
the component. 
8. Geometry optimization resulted in 18% weight reduction of the forged steel 
crankshaft, which was achieved by changing the dimensions and geometry of the crank 
webs while maintaining dynamic balance of the crankshaft. This stage of optimization 
did not require any changes in the engine block or connecting rod. 
9. As a result of geometry optimization from Stage II, the weight of the 
crankshaft was reduced by 26%. Crankshaft geometry changes in this optimization stage 
required changing the main bearings in the engine according to the optimized diameters 
and using thrust bearings to reduce the increase of axial displacement of the crankshaft.  
10. Adding fillet rolling was considered in the manufacturing process. Fillet rolling 
induces compressive residual stress in the fillet areas, which results in 165% increase in 
fatigue strength of the crankshaft and increases the life of the component significantly.  
11. Using microalloyed steel as an alternative material to the current forged steel 
results in the elimination of the heat treatment process. In addition, considering better 
machinability of the microalloyed steel along with the reduced material cost due to the 
18% weight reduction in Stage I or the 26% weight reduction in Stage II result in 
significant reduction in overall cost of the forged steel crankshaft. But further analysis 
and modeling is needed for the 26% weight reduction in Stage II, due to requiring thrust 
bearing after optimization, which may result in changes to other components. 
 
174 
 
References 
Altan, T., Oh, S., and Gegel, H. L., 1983, “Metal Forming Fundamentals and 
Applications,” American Society for Metals, Metal Park, OH, USA. 
Ando, S., Yamane, S., Doi, Y., Sakurai, H., and Meguro, H., 1992, “Method for Forming 
a Crankshaft,” US Patent No. 5115663, United States Patent. 
Baxter, W. J., 1993, “Detection of Fatigue Damage in Crankshafts with the Gel 
Electrode,” SAE Technical Paper No. 930409, Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Borges, A. C., Oliveira, L. C., and Neto, P. S., 2002, “Stress Distribution in a Crankshaft 
Crank Using a Geometrically Restricted Finite Element Model,” SAE Technical Paper 
No. 2002-01-2183, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Burrell, N. K., 1985, “Controlled Shot Peening of Automotive Components,” SAE 
Technical Paper No. 850365, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Chien, W. Y., Pan, J., Close, D., and Ho, S., 2005, “Fatigue Analysis of Crankshaft 
Sections Under Bending with Consideration of Residual Stresses,” International Journal 
of Fatigue, Vol. 27, pp. 1-19. 
Fergusen, C. R., 1986, “Internal Combustion Engines, Applied Thermodynamics,” John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA. 
Guagliano, M., Terranova, A., and Vergani, L., 1993, “Theoretical and Experimental 
Study of the Stress Concentration Factor in Diesel Engine Crankshafts,” Journal of 
Mechanical Design, Vol. 115, pp. 47-52. 
Halderman J. D. and Mitchell, C. D., 2001, “Automotive Engines,” 1st edition, Prentice 
Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.  
Henry, J., Topolsky, J., and Abramczuk, M., 1992, “Crankshaft Durability Prediction – A 
New 3-D Approach,” SAE Technical Paper No. 920087, Society of Automotive 
Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Hoffmann, J. H. and Turonek, R. J., 1992, “High Performance Forged Steel Crankshafts - 
Cost Reduction Opportunities,” SAE Technical Paper No. 920784, Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
 
 
175
http://www.castsolutions.com/, (accessed April, 2007). 
http://www.deere.com/, (accessed November, 2005). 
http://www.engineersedge.com/, (accessed April, 2007). 
http://www.forging.org/, (accessed April, 2007). 
http://www.jobshop.com/, (accessed April, 2007). 
http://www.makinamuhendisi.com/, (accessed April, 2007) 
http://www.qcforge.net/, (accessed April, 2007). 
http://www.sme.org/, (accessed April, 2007). 
http://www.steel.org/, (accessed April, 2007). 
http://www.wikipedia.org/, (accessed February, 2007). 
Jensen, E. J., 1970, “Crankshaft Strength Through Laboratory Testing,” SAE Technical 
Paper No. 700526, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Kalpakjian, S. and Schmid, S. R., 2003, “Manufacturing Processes for Engineering 
Materials,” 4th Edition, Pearson Education, Inc., Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 
USA. 
Kamimura, T., 1985, “Effects of Fillet Rolling on Fatigue Strength of Ductile Cast Iron 
Crankshaft,” SAE Technical Paper No. 852204, Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Kawasaki Engine Division, 1989, “FB460V, Four-Stroke Air Cooled Gasoline Engine,” 
Workshop Manual, Kawasaki Motors Copr., Grand Rapids, MI, USA. 
Koike, T. and Matsui, T., 2001, “Engine Crankshaft Made by Forging,” US Patent No. 
6324942, United States Patent. 
Love, R. J. and Waistall, D. N., 1954, “The Improvement in the Bending Fatigue Strength 
of Production Crankshafts by Cold Rolling,” M.I.R.A., Report No. 1954/1, pp. 1-8. 
Mikulec, A., Reams, L., Chottiner, J., Page, R. W., and Lee, S., 1998, “Crankshaft 
Component Conceptual Design and Weight Optimization,” SAE Technical Paper No. 
980566, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Montazersadgh, F. H. and Fatemi, A., 2007, “Dynamic Load and Stress Analysis of a 
Crankshaft,” SAE Technical Paper No. 2007-01-0258, Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Warrendale, PA, USA. 
 
 
176
Mourelatos, Z. P., 1995, “An Analytical Investigation of the Crankshaft-Flywheel 
Bending Vibrations for a V6 Engine,” SAE Technical Paper No. 951276, Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Nallicheri, N. V., Clark, J. P., and Field, F. R., 1991, “Material Alternatives for the 
Automotive Crankshaft; A Competitive Assessment Based on Manufacturing 
Economics,” SAE Technical Paper No. 910139, Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Park, H., Ko, Y. S., and Jung, S. C., 2001, “Fatigue Life Analysis of Crankshaft at 
Various Surface Treatments,” SAE Technical Paper No. 2001-01-3374, Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Payer, E., Kainz, A., and Fiedler, G. A., 1995, “Fatigue Analysis of Crankshafts Using 
Nonlinear Transient Simulation Techniques,” SAE Technical Paper No. 950709, Society 
of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Pichard, C., Tomme, C., and Rezel, D., 1993, “Alternative Materials for the Manufacture 
of Automobile Components: Example of Industrial Development of a Microalloyed 
Engineering Steel for the Production of Forged Crankshafts,” In Proceedings of the 26th 
ISATA International Symposium on Automotive Technology and Automation, pp. 157-
163, Aachen, Germany. 
Prakash, V., Aprameyan, K., and Shrinivasa, U., 1998, “An FEM Based Approach to 
Crankshaft Dynamics and Life Estimation,” SAE Technical Paper No. 980565, Society of 
Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Shamasundar, S., Takale, S., and Khose, P., 2003, “Crankshaft Forging Design 
Optimization Using Computer Simulation,” Forging Magazine, June 2003, Cleveland, 
OH, USA. 
Shiomi, K. and Watanabe, S., 1995, “Stress Calculation of Crankshaft Using Artificial 
Neural Network,” SAE Technical Paper No. 951810, Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Silva, F. S., 2003, “An Investigation into the Mechanism of a Crankshaft Failure,” Key 
Engineering Materials, Vols. 245-246, pp. 351-358. 
Spiteri, P. V., Lee, Y. L., and Segar, R., 2005, “An Exploration of Failure Modes in 
Rolled, Ductile, Cast Iron Crankshafts Using a Resonant Bending Testing Rig,” SAE 
Technical Paper No. 2005-01-1906, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, 
USA. 
Stephens, R. I., Fatemi, A., Stephens, R. R., and Fuchs, H. O., 2000, “Metal Fatigue in 
Engineering,” 2nd Edition, John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York, NY, USA. 
 
 
177
Uchida, S. and Hara, K., 1984, “The Development of the DCI Crankshaft for the Nissan 
60°-V6 Engine,” SAE Technical Paper No. 841220, Society of Automotive Engineers, 
Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Webster, W. D., Coffell, R., and Alfaro, D., 1983, “A Three Dimensional Finite Element 
Analysis of a High Speed Diesel Engine Connecting Rod,” SAE Technical Paper No. 
831322, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, PA, USA. 
Wicklund, M. A., 2007, Private Communication in Feb. 2007. 
Williams, J., 2007, “Fatigue Performance Comparison and Life Predictions of Forged 
Steel and Ductile Cast Iron Crankshafts,” Masters Thesis, The University of Toledo, 
Toledo, OH, USA. 
Williams, J., Montazersadgh, F. H., Fatemi, A., 2007, “Fatigue Performance Evaluation 
and Optimization of Crankshafts,” 27th Forging Industry Technical Conference, Ft. 
Worth, TX, USA. 
Yu, V., Chien, W. Y., Choi, K.S., Pan, J., and Close, D., 2004, “Testing and Modeling of 
Frequency Drops in Resonant Bending Fatigue Tests of Notched Crankshaft Sections,” 
SAE Technical Paper No. 2004-01-1501, Society of Automotive Engineers, Warrendale, 
PA, USA. 
Zoroufi, M. and Fatemi, A., 2004, “Durability Comparison and Life Predictions of 
Competing Manufacturing Processes: An Experimental Study of Steering Knuckle,” 25th 
Forging Industry Technical Conference, Detroit, MI, USA. 
Zoroufi, M. and Fatemi, A., 2005, “A Literature Review on Durability Evaluation of 
Crankshafts Including Comparisons of Competing Manufacturing Processes and Cost 
Analysis,” 26th Forging Industry Technical Conference, Chicago, IL, USA. 
Zoroufi, M. and Fatemi, A., 2005, “Fatigue Performance Evaluation of Forged versus 
Competing Process Technologies: A Comparative Study of Forged Steel versus 
Austempered Ductile Iron Crankshafts,” A report prepared for: Forging Industry 
Educational and Research Foundation (FIERF) and American Iron and Steel Institute 
(AISI), Toledo, OH, USA. 
 
 
178 
 
Appendix A 
Analytical Approach to Dynamic Analysis of the Crankshaft, 
Connecting Rod, and Piston Assembly Mechanism (Slider 
Crank Four Bar Linkage). 
 
Figure A.1 Parametric representation of the crankshaft, connecting rod, and piston 
assembly. 
 
The following analysis is required in order to obtain the load history applied to 
crankshaft bearings. These calculations are based on the single degree of freedom 
mechanism shown in Figure A.1. 
The angular velocity and acceleration of the crankshaft are given by: 
dt
dθω =1          (1) 
mp 
mr, L2 
mc, L1 
Gr Lg 
rpx 
 
 
179
dt
d 1
1
ωα =          (2) 
The angle of the connecting rod, β , is related to θ  by: 
( ) ( )
2
1
L
θ SinLβSin =         (3) 
Angular velocity and acceleration of the connecting rod are obtained by differentiating 
the angle β  and 2ω  with respect to time, respectively: 
dt
dβω =2          (4) 
dt
d 2
2
ωα =          (5) 
Differentiating Equation (3) with respect to time will result in: 
( ) ( )
2
11
2 L
θ Cos Lωβ Cosω =        (6) 
Calculating ( )βCos  from Equation (3): 
( ) ( )2
2
22
1  1
L
SinLCos θβ −=        (7) 
Replacing Equation (7) into Equation (6) gives the angular velocity of the connecting rod, 
2ω , as a function of θ : 
( )
( )
2
2
22
1
2
11
2
1
L
θ SinL L
θ Cos Lωω
−
=        (8) 
The angular acceleration of the connecting rod, 2α , is calculated by differentiating 
Equation (8) with respect to time and replacing for 
dt
d 1ω  and 
dt
dθ from Equation (2) and 
Equation (1), respectively: 
 
 
180
( ) ( )( )
( )
( ) ( )
( )
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
+
−
−
=
2
2
22
13
2
23
1
2
1
2
2
22
1
2
2
111
2
11
L
θ SinL L
θ Sinθ Cos Lω
L
θ SinL L
θ Sinωθ Cosα Lα    (9) 
Location of center of mass of the connecting rod, gr , from the origin, A, is given in X 
and Y directions by the following equations: 
( ) ( )β CosLθ CosLr ggx += 1        (10) 
( ) ( )β SinLθ SinLr ggy −= 1        (11) 
Substituting for ( )βSin  and ( )βCos  from Equations (3) and (7) into Equations (10) and 
(11): 
( ) ( )2
2
22
1
1
 1
L
SinL Lθ CosLr ggx
θ
−+=       (12) 
( ) ( )
2
1
1 L
θ SinL Lθ SinLr ggy −=        (13) 
Linear velocity of the center of mass of the connecting rod, gV , in X and Y directions is 
obtained by differentiating Equations (12) and (13) with respect to time: 
 ( ) ( )
( )
2
2
22
12
2
1
2
1
11
12
2
L
θ SinL  L
 θ Sin ω LL
θ Sin ωLV ggx
−
−−=      (14) 
 ( ) ( )
2
11
11 L
θ Cos ω LL
θ Cos LV ggy −= ω       (15) 
 
Differentiating Equation (14) with respect to time will result in the linear acceleration of 
the center of mass of the connecting rod in the X direction, rxa : 
 
 
181
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
( )
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
⎟⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
+−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
−
−−−=
2
2
2
12
2
22
1
2
2
22
12
1
2
1
2
2
22
12
2
2
2
22
12
2
2
112
1111
12
2 122
22
1
1 2
2
L
θ SinL  L
 θSinL
L
θ SinLθ Cos  L Lω
L
θ Sin LL
L
θ SinL L
θ Sin L Lα
θ Cos ωLθ Sin αLa
g
g
rx
 
For the linear acceleration of the center of mass of the connecting rod in the Y direction:  
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
2
11
2
112
1111 L
θ Sin ω LL
L
θ Cos α LL
θ Sin ωLθ Cos αLa ggry +−−=  (17) 
Considering the location of the piston as pr  with respect to the origin, the following 
equation could be written: 
 ( ) ( )β CosLθ CosLrpx 21 +=        (18) 
And 0=pyr , since the piston does not have displacement in the Y direction. 
Substituting for ( )βCos  from Equation (7) into Equation (18): 
( ) ( )2
2
22
1
21
 1
L
SinL Lθ CosLrpx
θ
−+=       (19) 
Linear velocity of the piston is obtained by differentiating Equation (19) with respect to 
time: 
( ) ( )
( )
2
2
22
1
2
1
2
1
11
12
2
L
θ SinL  L
 θ Sin ωLθ Sin ωLVpx
−
−−=      (20) 
Differentiating Equation (20) with respect to time will give the linear acceleration of the 
piston, pa : 
(16) 
 
 
182
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
( )
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
⎟⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
+−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
−
−−−=
2
2
22
12
2
2
1
2
2
2
22
12
1
2
1
2
2
22
1
2
2
2
22
1
2
1
2
12
1111
12
2122
22
1
1 2
2
L
θ SinL  L
 LθSin
L
θ SinLθ Cos  Lω
L
θ Sin L L
L
θ SinL L
θ Sin αLθ Cos ωLθ Sin αLapx
 
Summing all forces acting on the piston in the X direction will result in: 
cppxppx PRπ amF   
2+=        (22) 
where pm is the mass of the piston assembly consisting of the piston, piston pin, and 
piston rings. cP  is the pressure in the cylinder applied on the top of the piston. pR  is the 
radius of the piston.  
Substituting for pxa  from Equation (21) into Equation (22), the following equation will 
be obtained for the force on the piston pin in the X direction, pxF : 
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
( )
( ) ( ) ( )
( )
⎟⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
⎛
−
+−
⎟⎟
⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−
−
+
−
−−−=
2
2
22
12
2
2
1
2
2
2
22
12
1
2
1
2
2
22
1
2
2
2
2
22
1
2
1
2
12
1111
12
2122
22
 
  
1 2
2 
  
L
θ SinL  L
 LθSin
L
θ SinLθ Cos  Lω
L
θ Sin L L
m
PRπ
L
θ SinL L
θ Sin αLm
θ Cos ωLmθ Sin αLmF
p
cp
p
pppx
 
Solving the equations of forces in X and Y direction and moment about the center 
of mass of the connecting rod will result in forces on the joint between the connecting rod 
and the crankshaft, C. These forces are given by: 
pxrxrax F amF +=         (24) 
(21) 
(23) 
 
 
183
( ) ( )
( ) ( )⎟⎟⎠
⎞
⎜⎜
⎝
⎛
−+
−−−
= gryr
gpxgaxzz
ay LL  amβCos
β SinLLF LF αI
L
F 2
22
2
1   (25) 
where zzI  and rm  are the moment of inertia and the mass of the connecting rod, 
respectively. 
axF  and ayF  are expressed in the global coordinate system, which is not rotating 
with the crankshaft. Forces expressed in a coordinate system attached to the crankshaft, 
better explain the loading history applied to the crankshaft. These forces are given by: 
( ) ( )θ SinFθ CosFF ayaxx +=        (26) 
( ) ( )θ SinFθ CosFF axayy −=        (27) 
 These equations have been used in a MATLAB program, detailed in Appendix B, 
in order to solve the mechanism for different angles of the crankshaft.  
 
184 
 
Appendix B 
MATLAB program used in dynamic analysis of the slider 
crank mechanism developed using equations from Appendix A. 
 
clc 
clear 
 
% measured weight of components 
% piston                    330.87gr 
% piston+pin                417.63gr 
% connecting-rod+bolts      283.35gr 
% connecting-rod            244.89 
% bolts                     38.50gr 
% pin                       86.79gr 
  
l1 = 36.98494e-3; 
l2 = 120.777e-3; 
mcrank = 3.7191; 
mrod = 283.35e-3; 
I2 = 662523.4802e-9; 
lg = 28.5827e-3; 
mp = 417.63e-3; 
load = xlsread('load.xls'); 
  
for theta_t = 1:145 
    theta = (theta_t-1)*5*pi/180; 
    theta_d = 2000*2*pi/60; 
    theta_dd = 0; 
    beta(theta_t) = asin(l1*sin(theta)/l2); 
    beta_d(theta_t) = theta_d*l1*cos(theta)/l2/sqrt(1-
(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2); 
    beta_dd(theta_t) = l1/l2*(theta_dd*cos(theta)-
theta_d^2*sin(theta))/sqrt(1-(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2) + 
theta_d^2*l1^2/l2^2*(cos(theta))^2*l1/l2*sin(theta)/((1-
(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2)^1.5); 
    v_pis(theta_t) = -l1*theta_d*sin(theta) - 
l1^2/l2*theta_d*sin(theta)*cos(theta)/sqrt(1-
(l1/l2*sin(theta)^2)); 
    a_rod_x(theta_t) = -l1*theta_dd*sin(theta) - 
l1*theta_d^2*cos(theta) - 
theta_dd*lg*l1^2*sin(2*theta)/(l2^2*2*sqrt(1-
(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2)) - 
theta_d^2*lg*l1^2/l2^2*(2*cos(2*theta)*sqrt(1-
(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2) + 
 
 
185
sin(2*theta)*l1^2/l2^2*sin(theta)*cos(theta)/sqrt(1-
(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2)) / (2*(1-(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2)); 
    a_rod_y(theta_t) = l1*theta_dd*cos(theta) - l1*theta_d^2*sin(theta) 
- lg*l1/l2*theta_dd*cos(theta) + lg*l1/l2*theta_d^2*sin(theta); 
    a_pis_x(theta_t) = -l1*theta_dd*sin(theta) - 
l1*theta_d^2*cos(theta) - 
l1^2/l2*theta_dd*sin(theta)*cos(theta)/sqrt(1-
(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2) - 
theta_d^2*l1^2/l2*(2*cos(2*theta)*sqrt(1-
(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2)+sin(2*theta)*l1^2/l2^2*sin(theta)*cos(thet
a)/sqrt(1-(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2))/(2*(1-(l1*sin(theta)/l2)^2)); 
    f_pis_x(theta_t) = mp*a_pis_x(theta_t) + 
load(theta_t,2)*1e5*pi*.089^2/4; 
    f_a_x(theta_t) = mrod*a_rod_x(theta_t) + f_pis_x(theta_t); 
    f_a_y(theta_t) = 1/l2*((I2*beta_dd(theta_t)-(f_a_x(theta_t)*lg + 
f_pis_x(theta_t)*(l2-
lg))*sin(beta(theta_t)))/cos(beta(theta_t)))+1/l2*mrod*a_rod_y(t
heta_t)*(l2-lg); 
  
    f_local_x(theta_t) = f_a_x(theta_t)*cos(theta) + 
f_a_y(theta_t)*sin(theta); 
    f_local_y(theta_t) = f_a_y(theta_t)*cos(theta) - 
f_a_x(theta_t)*sin(theta); 
end 
  
  
figure(2) 
hold off 
plot(load(:,1),f_local_x/1000,'g--') 
hold on 
plot(load(:,1),f_local_y/1000,'-.') 
plot(load(:,1),sqrt(f_local_y.^2+f_local_x.^2)/1000,'r-') 
grid 
title('Force Between Piston and Connecting rod @ 2000 rpm') 
xlabel('Crankshaft Angle (Degree)') 
ylabel('Force (kN)') 
legend('Axial','Normal','Magnitude') 
 

