Co-Integration and Error Correction: Representation, Estimation, and Testing
Robert F. Engle; C. W. J. Granger
Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 2. (Mar., 1987), pp. 251-276.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198703%2955%3A2%3C251%3ACAECRE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
Econometrica is currently published by The Econometric Society.
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use, available at
http://www.jstor.org/about/terms.html. JSTOR's Terms and Conditions of Use provides, in part, that unless you have obtained
prior permission, you may not download an entire issue of a journal or multiple copies of articles, and you may use content in
the JSTOR archive only for your personal, non-commercial use.
Please contact the publisher regarding any further use of this work. Publisher contact information may be obtained at
http://www.jstor.org/journals/econosoc.html.
Each copy of any part of a JSTOR transmission must contain the same copyright notice that appears on the screen or printed
page of such transmission.
The JSTOR Archive is a trusted digital repository providing for long-term preservation and access to leading academic
journals and scholarly literature from around the world. The Archive is supported by libraries, scholarly societies, publishers,
and foundations. It is an initiative of JSTOR, a not-for-profit organization with a mission to help the scholarly community take
advantage of advances in technology. For more information regarding JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
http://www.jstor.org
Thu Jun 21 09:55:08 2007
Econometrics, Vol. 55, No. 2 (March, 1987), 251-276 
CO-INTEGRATION AND ERROR CORRECTION: 

REPRESENTATION, ESTIMATION, AND TESTING 

The relationship between co-integration and error correction models, first suggested in 
Granger (1981), is here extended and used to develop estimation procedures, tests, and 
empirical examples. 
If each element of a vector of time series x ,  first achieves stationarity after differencing, 
but a linear combination a ' % ,  is already stationary, the time series x, are said to be 
co-integrated with co-integrating vector a .  There may be several such co-integrating vectors 
so that a becomes a matrix. Interpreting a ' x , =0 as a long run equilibrium, co-integration 
implies that deviations from equilibrium are stationary, with finite variance, even though 
the series themselves are nonstationary and have infinite variance. 
The paper presents a representation theorem based on Granger (1983), which connects 
the moving average, autoregressive, and error correction representations for co-integrated 
systems. A vector autoregression in differenced variables is incompatible with these rep- 
resentations. Estimation of these models is discussed and a simple but asymptotically 
efficient two-step estimator is proposed. Testing for co-integration combines the problems 
of unit root tests and tests with parameters unidentified under the null. Seven statistics are 
formulated and analyzed. The critical values of these statistics are calculated based on a 
Monte Carlo simulation. Using these critical values, the power properties of the tests are 
examined and one test procedure is recommended for application. 
In a ~ e r i e s  of examples it is found that consumption and income are co-integrated, 
wages and prices are not, short and long interest rates are, and nominal GNPis  co-integrated 
with M2, but not MI,  M3, or aggregate liquid assets. 
KEYWORDS:Co-integration, vector autoregression, unit roots, error correction, multi- 
variate time series, Dickey-Fuller tests. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
AN INDIVIDUAL ECONOMIC VARIABLE,viewed as a time series, can wander exten- 
sively and yet some pairs of series may be expected to move so that they do not 
drift too far apart. Typically economic theory will propose forces which tend to 
keep such series together. Examples might be short and long term interest rates, 
capital appropriations and expenditures, household income and expenditures, 
and prices of the same commodity in different markets or close substitutes in the 
same market. A similar idea arises from considering equilibrium relationships, 
where equilibrium is a stationary point characterized by forces which tend to 
push the economy back toward equilibrium whenever it moves away. If x, is a 
vector of economic variables, then they may be said to be in equilibrium when 
the specific linear constraint 
' The authors are indebted to David Hendry and Sam Yoo for many useful conversations and 
suggestions as well as to Gene Savin, David Dickey, Alok Bhargava, and Marco Lippi. Two referees 
provided detailed constructive criticism, and thanks go to Yoshi Baba, Sam Yoo, and Alvaro Ecribano 
who creatively carried out the simulations and examples. Financial support was provided by NSF 
SES-80-08580 and SES-82-08626. A previous version of this paper was entitled "Dynamic Model 
Specification with Equilibrium Constraints: Co-integration and Error Correction." 
252 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C. W. J .  GRANGER 
occurs. In most time periods, x, will not be in equilibrium and the univariate 
quantity 
may be called the equilibrium error. If the equilibrium concept is to have any 
relevance for the specification of econometric models, the economy should appear 
to prefer a small value of z, rather than a large value. 
In this paper, these ideas are put onto a firm basis and it is shown that a class 
of models, known as error-correcting, allows long-run components of variables 
to obey equilibrium constraints while short-run components have a flexible 
dynamic specification. A condition for this to be true, called co-integration, was 
introduced by Granger (1981) and Granger and Weiss (1983) and is precisely 
defined in the next section. Section 3 discusses several representations of co- 
integrated systems, Section 4 develops estimation procedures, and Section 5 
develops tests. Several applications are presented in Section 6 and conclusions 
are offered in Section 7. A particularly simple example of this class of models is 
shown in Section 4, and it might be useful to examine it for motivating the 
analysis of such systems. 
2. INTEGRATION, CO-INTEGRATION, A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
It is well known from Wold's theorem that a single stationary time series with 
no deterministic components has an infinite moving average representation which 
is generally approximated by a finite autoregressive moving average process. See, 
for example, Box and Jenkins (1970) or Granger and Newbold (1977). Commonly 
however, economic series must be differenced before the assumption of station- 
arity can be presumed to hold. This motivates the following familiar definition 
of integration: 
DEFINITION:A series with no deterministic component which has a stationary, 
invertible, ARMA representation after differencing d times, is said to be integrated 
of order d, denoted x,- I ( d ) .  
For ease of exposition, only the values d =0 and d = 1 will be considered in 
much of the paper, but many of the results can be generalized to other cases 
including the fractional difference model. Thus, for d =0 x, will be stationary 
and for d = 1 the change is stationary. 
There are substantial differences in appearance between a series that is I(0) 
and another that is I(1). For more discussion see, for example, Feller (1968) or 
Granger and Newbold (1977). 
(a) If x,- I(0) with zero mean then (i) the variance of x, is finite; (ii) an 
innovation has only a temporary effect on the value of x,; (iii) the spectrum of 
x,,f ( w ) , has the property 0 <f (0)<a;(iv) the expected length of times between 
crossings of x =O is finite; (v) the autocorrelations, p,, decrease steadily in 
magnitude for large enough k, so that their sum is finite. 
253 CO-INTEGRATION A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
(b) If x, - 1(1) with x,= 0, then (i) variance x, goes to infinity as t goes to 
infinity; (ii) an innovation has a permanent effect on the value of x,, as x, is the 
sum of all previous changes; (iii) the spectrum of x, has the approximate shape 
f(w) -A W for small w so that in particular ~ ~ f (0) =a ;  (iv) the expected time ~ 
between crossings of x =0 is infinite; (v) the theoretical autocorrelations, p, + 1 
for all k as t +a .  
The theoretical infinite variance for an I(1) series comes completely from the 
contribution of the low frequencies, or long run part of the series. Thus an 1(1) 
series is rather smooth, having dominant long swings, compared to an I(0)  series. 
Because of the relative sizes of the variances, it is always true that the sum of 
an I(0) and an 1(1) will be I(1).  Further, if a and b are constants, b f 0, and if 
x,- I ( d ) ,  then a + b x ,  is also I ( d ) .  
If x, and y, are both I ( d ) ,  then it is generally true that the linear combination 
Z, =X,  -ay, 
will also be I ( d ) .  However, it is possible that z, - I ( d  -b), b >0. When this 
occurs, a very special constraint operates on the long-run components of the 
series. Consider the case d = b = 1, so that x,, y, are both I(1)  with dominant 
long run components, but z, is I(0) without especially strong low frequencies. 
The constant a is therefore such that the bulk of the long run components of x, 
and y, cancel out. For a = 1, the vague idea that x, and y, cannot drift too far 
apart has been translated into the more precise statement that "their difference 
will be I(O)." The use of the constant a merely suggests that some scaling needs 
to be used before the I(0)  difference can be achieved. It should be noted that it 
will not generally be true that there is an a which makes z, - I(0).  
An analogous case, considering a different important frequency, is when x, 
and y, are a pair of series, each having important seasonal component, yet there 
is an a so that the derived series z, has no seasonal. Clearly this could occur, 
but might be considered to be unlikely. 
To formalize these ideas, the following definition adapted from Granger (1981) 
and Granger and Weiss (1983) is introduced: 
DEFINITION:The components of the vector x, are said to be co-integrated of 
order d, b, denoted x, - CI(d, b), if (i) all components of x, are I ( d ) ;  (ii) there 
exists a vector a (  # 0) SO that z, = a'x,  - I ( d  -b), b >0. The vector a is called 
the co-integrating vector. 
Continuing to concentrate on the d = 1, b = 1 case, co-integration would mean 
that if the components of x, were all 1(1), then the equilibrium error would be 
I(O), and z, will rarely drift far from zero if it has zero mean and z, will often 
cross the zero line. Putting this another way, it means that equilibrium will 
occasionally occur, at least to a close approximation, whereas if x, was not 
co-integrated, then z, can wander widely and zero-crossings would be very rare, 
suggesting that in this case the equilibrium concept has no practical implications. 
254 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C. W. J. GRANGER 
The reduction in the order of integration implies a special kind of relationship 
with interpretable and testable consequences. If however all the elements of x, 
are already stationary so that they are I(O), then the equilibrium error z, has no 
distinctive property if it is I(0). It could be that z, - I(-I),  so that its spectrum 
is zero at zero frequency, but if any of the variables have measurement error, 
this property in general cannot be observed and so this case is of little realistic 
interest. When interpreting the co-integration concept it might be noted that in 
the N = 2, d = b = 1 case, Granger and Weiss (1983) show that a necessary and 
sufficient condition for co-integration is that the coherence between the two series 
is one at zero frequency. 
If x,has N components, then there may be more than one cointegrating vector 
a. It is clearly possible for several equilibrium relations to govern the joint 
behavior of the variables. In what follows, it will be assumed that there are exactly 
r linearly independent co-integrating vectors, with r S N - 1, which are gathered 
together into the N x r array a. By construction the rank of a will be r which 
will be called the "co-integrating rank" of x,. 
The close relationship between co-integration and error correcting models will 
be developed in the balance of the paper. Error correction mechanisms have 
been used widely in economics. Early versions are Sargan (1964) and Phillips 
(1957). The idea is simply that a proportion of the disequilibrium from one period 
is corrected in the next period. For example, the change in price in one period 
may depend upon the degree of excess demand in the previous period. Such 
schemes can be derived as optimal behavior with some types of adjustment costs 
or incomplete information. Recently, these models have seen great interest follow- 
ing the work of Davidson, Hendry, Srba, and Yeo (1978) (DHSY), Hendry and 
von Ungern Sternberg (1980), Currie (1981), Dawson (1981), and Salmon (1982) 
among others. 
For a two variable system a typical error correction model would relate the 
change in one variable to past equilibrium errors, as well as to past changes in 
both variables. For a multivariate system we can define a general error correction 
representation in terms of B, the backshift operator, as follows. 
DEFINITION:A vector time series x,has an error correction representation if 
it can be expressed as: 
where u, is a stationary multivariate disturbance, with A(0) = I, A(1) has all 
elements finite, z, = a'x,,and y # 0. 
In this representation, only the disequilibrium in the previous period is an 
explanatory variable. However, by rearranging terms, any set of lags of the z can 
be written in this form, therefore it permits any type of gradual adjustment toward 
a new equilibrium. A notable difference between this definition and most of the 
applications which have occurred is that this is a multivariate definition which 
does not rest on exogeneity of a subset of the variables. The notion that one 
255 CO-INTEGRATION A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
variable may be weakly exogenous in the sense of Engle, Hendry, and Richard 
(1983)may be investigated in such a system as briefly discussed below. A second 
notable difference is that a is taken to be an unknown parameter vector rather 
than a set of constants given by economic theory. 
3. PROPERTIES OF CO-INTEGRATED VARIABLES A N D  THEIR REPRESENTATIONS 
Suppose that each component of x, is I ( 1 )so that the change in each component 
is a zero mean purely nondeterministic stationary stochastic process. Any known 
deterministic components can be subtracted before the analysis is begun. It 
follows that there will always exist a multivariate Wold representation: 
taken to mean that both sides will have the same spectral matrix. Further, C ( B )  
will be uniquely defined by the conditions that the function det [ C ( z ) ] ,  z  = e'", 
have all zeroes on or outside the unit circle, and that C ( 0 )= I,, the N x N 
identity matrix (see Hannan (1970, p. 6 6 ) ) .In this representation the E ,  are zero 
mean white noise vectors with 
so that only contemporaneous correlations can occur. 
The moving average polynomial C ( B )  can always be expressed as 
by simply rearranging the terms. If C ( B )  is of finite order, then C * ( B )  will be 
of finite order. If C * ( 1 )  is identically zero, then a similar expression involving 
( 1  -B ) ~can be defined. 
The relationship between error correction models and co-integration was first 
pointed out in Granger (1981).A theorem showing precisely that co-integrated 
series can be represented by error correction models was originally stated and 
proved in Granger (1983).The following version is therefore called the Granger 
Representation Theorem. Analysis of related but more complex cases is covered 
by Johansen (1985) and Yoo (1985).  
GRANGERREPRESENTATION If the N x 1 vector x, given in (3.1)THEOREM: 
is co-integrated with d = 1 ,  b = 1 and with co-integrating rank r, then: 
( 1 )  C ( l )  is of rank N - r. 
( 2 )  There exists a vector A R M A  representation 
with the properties that A ( l )  has rank r and d ( B )  is a scalar lag polynomial with 
d ( 1 )  Jinite, and A ( 0 )  = I,. When d ( B )  = 1 ,  this is a vector autoregression. 
256 ROBERT F. E N G L E  A N D  C. W. J .  GRANGER 
(3) There exist N x r matrices, a, y, of rank r such that 
a'C(1) = 0, 
C(l1-Y =o, 
A(l)  = ya'. 
(4) There exists an error correction representation with z, = a'x,, an r x 1 vector 
of stationary random variables: 
with A*(O)= IN. 
( 5 )  The vector z, is given by 
where K(B) is an r x N matrix of lag polynomials given by arC*(B) with all 
elements of K(1) jinite with rank r, and det (a 'y)> 0. 
(6) If a jinite vector autoregressive representation is possible, it will have the form 
given by (3.3) and (3.4) above with d (B)= 1 and both A(B) and A*(B) as matrices 
of jinite polynomials. 
In order to prove the Theorem the following lemma on determinants and 
adjoints of singular matrix polynomials is needed. 
L E M M A1: If G(A) is a jinite valued N x N matrix polynomial on A E [O, 11, 
with rank G(0)= N - r for 0s r N, and if G*(O)# 0 in 
G(A) = G(O)+ AG*(A), 
then 
(i) det (G(A))= A 'g(A)IN with g(0)jinite, 
(ii) Adj (G(A))= A'-'H(A), 
where I,,, is the N x N identity matrix, 1s rank (H(0)) r, and H(0) is jinite. 
PROOF:The determinant of G can be expressed in a power series in A as 
a3 

det (G(A))= C '. 
i = O  
Each 6, is a sum of a finite number of products of elements of G(A) and therefore 
is itself finite valued. Each has some terms from G(0) and some from AG*(A). 
Any product with more than N - r terms from G(0) will be zero because this 
will be the determinant of a submatrix of larger order than the rank of G(0). 
The only possible non-zero terms will have r or more terms from AG*(A) and 
257 CO-INTEGRATION A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
therefore will be associated with powers of A of r or more. The first possible 
nonzero 6, is 6,. 
Defining 
establishes the first part of the lemma since 6 ,  must be finite. 
To establish the second statement, express the adjoint matrix of G in a power 
series in A: 
05 
Adj G(A)= 1 A 'Hi ,  
i = O  
Since the adjoint is a matrix composed of elements which are determinants of 
order N - 1, the above argument establishes that the first r - 1 terms must be 
identically zero. Thus 
Because the elements of H,-,  are products of finitely many finite numbers, H(0) 
must be finite. 
The product of a matrix and its adjoint will always give the determinant so: 
Equating powers of A we get 
Thus the rank of H(0) must be less than or equal to r as it lies entirely in the 
column null space of the rank N - r matrix G(0). If r = 1, the first term in the 
expression for the adjoint will simply be the adjoint of G(0) which will have 
rank 1 since G(0) has rank N - 1.  Q.E.D. 
PROOFOF GRANGER THEOREM:REPRESENTATION The conditions of the 
Theorem suppose the existance of a Wold representation as in (3.1) for an N 
vector of random variables x, which are co-integrated. Suppose the co-integrating 
vector is a! so that 
is an r-dimensional stationary purely nondeterministic time series with invertible 
moving average representation. Multiplying a times the moving average rep- 
resentation in (3.1) gives 
(1-B)zt= ( a l C ( l ) +  (1 -B ) a t C * ( B ) ) ~ , .  
258 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C. W. J .  GRANGER 
For z, to be I(O),  a ' C ( 1 )  must equal 0.  Any vector with this property will be a 
co-integrating vector; therefore C ( 1 ) must have rank N - r with a null space 
containing all co-integrating vectors. It also follows that a l C * ( B ) must be an 
invertible moving average representation and in particular a l C * ( l )# 0 .Otherwise 
the co-integration would be with b =2 or higher. 
Statement ( 2 ) is established using Lemma 1 ,  letting A = ( 1  -B ) ,  G ( A )  = C ( B ) ,  
H ( A )=A ( B ) ,and g ( A )= d ( B ) .Since C ( B )has full rank and equals IN at B =0 ,  
its inverse is A ( 0 ) which is also IN .  
Statement ( 3 ) follows from recognition that A ( l )  has rank between 1 and r 
and lies in the null space of C ( 1 ) . Since a spans this null space, A ( l )  can be 
written as linear combinations of the co-integrating vectors 
A ( l ) = ya' 
Statement (4) follows by manipulation of the autoregressive structure. Rear- 
ranging terms in (3 .3) gives: 
A*(O)= A ( 0 )= I,. 
The fifth condition follows from direct substitution in the Wold representation. 
The definition of co-integration implies that this moving average be stationary 
and invertible. Rewriting the error correction representation with A * ( B )= 
I + A * * ( B )  where A**(O)=0 ,  and premultiplying by a '  gives: 
For this to be equivalent to the stationary moving average representation the 
autoregression must be invertible. This requires that det ( a ' y )>0 .  If the deter- 
minant were zero then there would be at least one unit root, and if the determinant 
were negative, then for some value of w between zero and one, 
det ( I ,  - ( I ,  - a r y ) w )  = 0 ,  
implying a root inside the unit circle. 
Condition six follows by repeating the previous steps, setting d ( B )= 1 .  
Q.E.D. 
Stronger results can be obtained by further restrictions on the multiplicity of 
roots in the moving average representations. For example, Yoo (1985), using 
Smith Macmillan forms, finds conditions which establish that d ( 1 )# 0 , that A*(1)  
is of full rank, and that facilitate the transformation from error correction models 
to co-integrated models. However, the results given above are sufficient for the 
estimation and testing problems addressed in this paper. 
259 CO-INTEGRATIONAND ERROR CORRECTION 
The autoregressive and error correction representations given by (3.3) and (3.4) 
are closely related to the vector autoregressive models so commonly used in 
econometrics, particularly in the case when d ( B ) can reasonably be taken to be 
1. However, each differs in an important fashion from typical VAR applications. 
In the autoregressive representation 
the co-integration of the variables x, generates a restriction which makes A ( 1 )  
singular. For r = 1, this matrix will only have rank 1. The analysis of such systems 
from an innovation accounting point of view is treacherous as some numerical 
approaches to calculating the moving average representation are highly unstable. 
The error correction representation 
looks more like a standard vector autoregression in the differences of the data. 
Here the co-integration is implied by the presence of the levels of the variables 
so a pure VAR in differences will be misspecified if the variables are co-integrated. 
Thus vector autoregressions estimated with co-integrated data will be mis- 
specified if the data are differenced, and will have omitted important constraints 
if the data are used in levels. Of course, these constraints will be satisfied 
asymptotically but efficiency gains and improved multistep forecasts may be 
achieved by imposing them. 
As x, - I ( 1 ) ,  z, - I ( O ) , it should be noted that all terms in the error correction 
models are I ( 0 ) . The converse also holds; if x ,  - I ( 1 )  are generated by an error 
correction model, then x, is necessarily co-integrated. It may also be noted that 
if x ,  - I ( O ) , the generation process can always be written in the error correction 
form and so, in this case, the equilibrium concept has no impact. 
As mentioned above, typical empirical examples of error correcting behavior 
are formulated as the response of one variable, the dependent variable, to shocks 
of another, the independent variable. In this paper all the variables are treated 
as jointly endogenous; nevertheless the structure of the model may imply various 
Granger causal orderings and weak and strong exogeneity conditions as in Engle, 
Hendry, and Richard (1983). For example, a bivariate co-integrated system must 
have a causal ordering in at least one direction. Because the z's must include 
both variables and y cannot be identically zero, they must enter into one or both 
of the equations. If the error correction term enters into both equations, neither 
variable can be weakly exogenous for the parameters of the other equation 
because of the cross equation restriction. 
The notion of co-integration can in principle be extended to series with trends 
or explosive autoregressive roots. In these cases the co-integrating vector would 
still be required to reduce the series to stationarity. Hence the trends would have 
to be proportional and any explosive roots would have to be identical for all the 
series. We do not consider these cases in this paper and recognize that they may 
complicate the estimation and testing problems. 
260 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C . W. J .  GRANGER 
4. ESTIMATING CO-INTEGRATED SYSTEMS 
In defining different forms for co-integrated systems, several estimation pro- 
cedures have been implicitly discussed. Most convenient is the error correction 
form (particularly if it can be assumed that there is no moving average term). 
There remain cross-equation restrictions involving the parameters of the co-
integrating vectors; and therefore the maximum likelihood estimator, under 
Gaussian assumptions, requires an  iterative procedure. 
In this section, we will propose another estimator which is a two step estimator. 
In the first step the parameters of the co-integrating vector are estimated and in 
the second these are used in the error correction form. Both steps require only 
single equation least squares and it will be shown that the result is consistent for 
all the parameters. The procedure is far more convenient because the dynamics 
d o  not need to be specified until the error correction structure has been estimated. 
As a byproduct we obtain some test statistics useful for testing for co-integration. 
From (3.5) the sample moment matrix of the data can be directly expressed. 
Let the moment matrix divided by T be denoted by: 
Recalling that z,= cu'x,, (3.5) implies that 
Following the argument of Dickey and Fuller (1979) or  Stock (1984), it can be 
shown that for processes satisfying (3.1), 
(4.1) lim E ( M,) = M a finite nonzero matrix, 
7-r 

and 
(4.2) cu'M = 0, or (vec cu)'(l OM )  = 0. 
Although the moment matrix of data from a co-integrated process will be 
nonsingular for any sample, in the limit, it will have rank N - r. This accords 
well with the common observation that economic time series data are highly 
collinear so that moment matrices may be nearly singular even when samples 
are large. Co-integration appears to be a plausible hypothesis from a data analytic 
point of view. 
Equations (4.2) d o  not uniquely define the co-integrating vectors unless 
arbitrary normalizations are imposed. Let q and Q be arrays which incorporate 
these normalizations by reparametrizing cu into 8, a j x 1 matrix of unknown 
parameters which lie in a compact subset of R':  
(4.3) vec cu = q + Qt). 
Typically q and Q will be all zeros and ones, thereby defining one coefficient in 
each column of cu to be unity and defining rotations if r > 1. The parameters 0 
261 CO-INTEGRATION A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
are said to be "identified" if there is a unique solution to (4.2), (4.3). This solution 
is given by 
where by the assumption of identification, ( Z @ M ) Q  has a left inverse even 
though M does not. 
As the moment matrix MT will have full rank for finite samples, a reasonable 
approach to estimation is to minimize the sum of squared deviations from 
equilibrium. In the case of a single co-integrating vector, 6 will minimize a l M T a  
subject to any restrictions such as (4.3) and the result will be simply ordinary 
least squares. For multiple co-integrating vectors, define 6 as the minimizer of 
the trace ( a l M T a ) .The estimation problem becomes: 
Min tr ( a 1 M T ~ )Min vec a l ( I @  M T )  vec (Y= 
as.r.(4.3) a c . 1 .  (4.3) 
= Min ( q +  QO)'(Z@ M T ) ( q +  QO), 
e 
which implies the solution 
This approach to estimation should provide a very good approxir,?tion to the 
true co-integrating vector because it is seeking vectors with minimal residual 
variance and asymptotically all linear combinations of x will have infinite variance 
except those which are co-integrating vectors. 
When r = 1 this estimate is obtained simply by regressing the variable normal- 
ized to have a unit coefficient upon the other variables. This regression will be 
called the "co-integrating regression" as it attempts to fit the long run or equili- 
brium relationship without worrying about the dynamics. It will be shown to 
provide an estimate of the elements of the co-integrating vector. Such a regression 
has been pejoratively called a "spurious" regression by Granger and Newbold 
(1974) primarily because the standard errors are highly misleading. They were 
particularly concerned about the non-co-integrated case where there was no 
relationship but the unit root in the error process led to a low Durbin Watson, 
a high R ~ ,and apparently high significance of the coefficients. Here we only seek 
coefficient estimates to use in the second stage and for tests of the equilibrium 
relationship. The distribution of the estimated coefficients is investigated in Stock 
(1984). 
When N =2, there are two possible regressions depending on the normalization 
chosen. The nonuniqueness of the zstimate derives from the well known fact that 
the least squares fit of a reverse regression will not give the reciprocal of the 
coefficient in the forward regression. In this case, however, the normalization 
matters very little. As the moment matrix approaches singularity, the R' 
approaches 1 which is the product of the forward and reverse regression 
coefficients. This would be exactly true if there were only two data points which, 
262 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C. W. J. GRANGER 
of course, defines a singular matrix. For variables which are trending together, 
the correlation approaches one as each variance approaches infinity. The 
regression line passes nearly through the extreme points almost as if there were 
just two observations. 
Stock (1984) in Theorem 3 proves the following proposition: 
PROPOSITION1 :  Suppose that x, satisjes (3.1) with C*(B)absolutely summable, 
that the disturbances havejinite fourth absolute moments, and that x, is co-integrated 
(11, 1 )  with r co-integrating vectors satisfying (4.3) which identify 0. Then, dejning 
by (4.51, 
(4.6) T I - ' ( ; - 19) 5 0 for 6 >0. 
The proposition establishes that the estimated parameters converge very rapidly 
to their probability limits. It also establishes that the estimates are consistent with 
a finite sample bias of order 1/ T Stock presents some Monte Carlo examples to 
show that these biases may be important for small samples and gives expressions 
for calculating the limiting distribution of such estimates. 
The two step estimator proposed for this co-integrated system uses the estimate 
of a from (4.5) as a known parameter in estimating the error correction form of 
the system of equations. This substantially simplifies the estimation procedure 
by imposing the cross-equation restrictions and allows specification of the 
individual equation dynamic patterns separately. Notice that the dynamics did 
not have to be specified in order to estimate a. Surprisingly, this two-step estimator 
has excellent properties; as shown in the Theorem below, it is just as efficient as 
the maximum likelihood estimator based on the known value of a. 
THEOREM2: The two-step estimator of a single equation of an error correction 
system, obtained by taking cu^ from (4.5) as the true value, will have the same limiting 
distribution as the maximum likelihood estimator using the true value of a. Least 
squares standard errors will be consistent estimates of the true standard errors. 
PROOF: Rewrite the first equation of the error correction system (3.4) as 
where X ,  = xi,  W is an array with selected elements of Ax,-i and y is an element 
of Ax, so that all regressors are I ( 0 ) .  Then letting the same variables without 
subscripts denote data arrays, 
263 CO-INTEGRATION A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
This expression simplifies because f ' ( z - 2 )  = 0. From Fuller (1976) or Stock 
(1984), X f X /  T~ and X'  W /  T  are both of order 1. Rewriting, 
and therefore the first and second factors to the right of the equal sign are of 
order 1 and the third goes to zero so that the entire expression vanishes asymptoti- 
cally. Because the terms in ( z- vanish asymptotically, least squares stan- f)/n 
dard errors will be consistent. 
Letting S= plim [ ( f ,  W) ' ($ ,  W ) /  TI ,  
where D represents the limiting distribution. Under additional but standard 
assumptions, this could be guaranteed to be normal. 
To establish that the estimator using the true value of a has the same limiting 
distribution it is sufficient to show that the probability limit of [ ( z ,  W) ' ( z ,  W ) /  TI 
is also S and that z ' E / ~  Examininghas the same limiting distribution as $ ' & I n .  
the off diagonal terms of S first, 
The first and second factors are of order 1 and the third is 1 / T  so the entire 
expression vanishes asymptotically: 
( 2 - z ) ' ( f - z ) / T =  z f z / T - i ' f / T  
= T ( 6- ~ ( 6a ) ( l /  T ) .  a ) ' [ X ' X /T ~ ]  -
Again, the first three factors are of order 1 and the last is 1 / T  so even though 
the difference between these covariance matrices is positive definite, it will vanish 
asymptotically. Finally, 
which again vanishes asymptotically. 
Under standard conditions the estimator using knowledge of a will be 
asymptotically normal and therefore the two-step estimator will also be asymptoti- 
cally normal under these conditions. This completes the proof. Q.E. D. 
A simple example will illustrate many of these points and motivate the approach 
to testing described in the next section. Suppose there are two series, x, ,  and x2,,  
which are jointly generated as a function of possibly correlated white noise 
disturbances E , ,  and E,, according to the following model: 
Clearly the parameters a and P are unidentified in the usual sense as there are 
no exogenous variables and the errors are contemporaneously correlated. The 
264 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C .  W. J. GRANGER 
reduced form for this system will make x , ,  and x2,  linear combinations of u , ,  
and u,, and therefore both will be I ( 1 ) .The second equation describes a particular 
linear combination of the random variables which is stationary. Hence x , ,  and 
x,, are C I ( 1 , l )  and the question is whether it would be possible to detect this 
and estimate the parameters from a data set. 
Surprisingly, this is easy to do. A linear least squares regression of x , ,  on x,, 
produces an excellen; estimate of a .  This is the "co-integrating regression." All 
linear combinations of x , ,  and x,, except that defined in equation ( 4 . 8 )will have 
infinite variance and, therefore, least squares is easily able to estimate a .  The 
correlation between x,, and u2,which causes the simultaneous equations bias is 
of a lower order in T than the variance of x, , .  In fact the reverse regression of 
x,, on x , ,  has exactly the same property and thus gives a consistent estimate of 
1 / a .  These estimators converge even faster to the true value than standard 
econometric estimates. 
While there are other consistent estimates of a ,  several apparently obvious 
choices are not. For example, regression of the first differences of x ,  on the 
differences of x, will not be consistent, and the use of Cochrane Orcutt or other 
serial correlation correction in the co-integrating regression will produce incon- 
sistent estimates. Once the parameter a has been estimated, the others can be 
estimated in a variety of ways conditional on the estimate of a .  
The model in ( 4 . 7 )and ( 4 . 8 )can be expressed in the autoregressive reprer,nta- 
tion (after subtracting the lagged values from both sides and letting 6 =  
( 1  -p ) / ( a - P I )  as: 
(4 .9)  Ax, ,  = P6x1 , - I+ aPGx2,-I+ 711, 
where the 7's are linear combinations of the E'S. The error correction representa- 
tion becomes: 
where z ,  = x , , + ax, , .  There are three unknown parameters but the autoregressive 
form apparently has four unknown coefficients while the error correction form 
has two. Once a is known there are no longer constraints in the error correction 
form which motivates the two-step estimator. Notice that if p -,1, the series are 
correlated random walks but are no longer co-integrated. 
5 .  TESTING FOR CO-INTEGRATION 
It is frequently of interest to test whether a set of variables are co-integrated. 
This may be desired because of the economic implications such as whether some 
system is in equilibrium in the long run, or it may be sensible to test such 
hypotheses before estimating a multivariate dynamic model. 
265 CO-INTEGRATION A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
Unfortunately the set-up is nonstandard and cannot simply be viewed as an 
application of Wald, likelihood ratio, or Lagrange multiplier tests. The testing 
problem is closely related to tests for unit roots in observed series as initially 
formulated by Fuller (1976)and Dickey and Fuller (1979,1981)and more recently 
by Evans and Savin (1981), Sargan and Bhargava (1983),and Bhargava (1984), 
and applied by Nelson and Plosser (1983). It also is related to the problem of 
testing when some parameters are unidentified under the null as discussed by 
Davies (1977) and Watson and Engle (1982). 
To illustrate the problems in testing such an hypothesis, consider the simple 
model in (4.7) and (4.8). The null hypothesis is taken to be no co-integration or 
p = 1. If a were known, then a test for the null hypothesis could be constructed 
along the lines of Dickey and Fuller taking z, as the series which has a unit root 
under the null. The distribution in this case is already nonstandard and was 
computed through a simulation by Dickey (1976).However, when a is not known, 
it must be estimated from the data. But if the null hypothesis that p = 1 is true, 
a is not identified. Thus only if the series are co-integrated can a be simply 
estimated by the "co-integrating regression," but a test must be based upon the 
distribution of a statistic when the null is true. OLS seeks the a which minimizes 
the residual variance and therefore is most likely to be stationary, so the distribu- 
tion of the Dickey-Fuller test will reject the null too often if a must be estimated. 
In this paper a set of seven test statistics is proposed for testing the null of 
non-co-integration against the alternative of co-integration. It is maintained that 
the true system is a bivariate linear vector autoregression with Gaussian errors 
where each of the series is individually I ( 1 ) . As the null hypothesis is composite, 
similar tests will be sought so that the probability of rejection will be constant 
over the parameter set included in the null. See, for example, Cox and Hinkley 
(1974, p. 134-136). 
Two cases may be distinguished. In the first, the system is known to be of first 
order and therefore the null is defined by 
This is clearly the model implied by (4.11) and (4.12) when p = 1 which implies 
that 6 = O .  The composite null thus includes all positive definite covariance 
matrices a.It will be shown below that all the test statistics are similar with 
respect to the matrix 0 so without loss of generality, we take 0 = I. 
In the second case, the system is assumed merely to be a stationary linear 
system in the changes. Consequently, the null is defined over a full set of stationary 
autoregressive and moving average coefficients as well as R. The "augmented" 
tests described below are designed to be asymptotically similar for this case just 
as established by Dickey and Fuller for their univariate tests. 
The seven test statistics proposed are all calculable by least squares. The critical 
values are estimated for each of these statistics by simulation using 10,000 
replications. Using these critical values, the powers of the test statistics are 
266 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C. W. J. GRANGER 
computed by simulations under various alternatives. A brief motivation of each 
test is useful. 
1. CRDW. After running the co-integrating regression, the Durbin Watson 
statistic is tested to see if the residuals appear stationary. If they are nonstationary, 
the Durbin Watson will approach zero and thus the test rejects non-co-integration 
(finds co-integration) if DW is too big. This was proposed recently by Bhargava 
(1984) for the case where the series is observed and the null and alternative are 
first order models. 
2. DF. This tests the residuals from the co-integrating regression by running 
an auxiliary regression as described by Dickey and Fuller and outlined in Table 
I. It also assumes that the first order model is correct. 
3. ADF. The augmented Dickey-Fuller test allows for more dynamics in the 
D F  regression and consequently is over-parametrized in the first order case but 
correctly specified in the higher order cases. 
4. RVAR. The restricted vector autoregression test is similar to the two step 
estimator. Conditional on the estimate of the co-integrating vector from the 
co-integrating regression, the error correction representation is estimated. The 
test is whether the error correction term is significant. This test requires 
specification of the full system dynamics. In this case a first order system is 
assumed. By making the system triangular, the disturbances are uncorrelated, 
and under normality the t statistics are independent. The test is based on the 
sum of the squared t statistics. 
5. ARVAR. The augmented RVAR test is the same as RVAR except that a 
higher order system is postulated. 
6. UVAR. The unrestricted VAR test is based on a vector autoregression in 
the levels which is not restricted to satisfy the co-integration constraints. Under 
the null, these are not present anyway so the test is simply whether the levels 
would appear at all, or whether the model can be adequately expressed entirely 
in changes. Again by triangularizing the coefficient matrix, the F tests from the 
two regressions can be made independent and the overall test is the sum of the 
two F's times their degrees of freedom, 2. This assumes a first order system again. 
7. AUVAR. This is an augmented or higher order version of the above test. 
To establish the similarity of these tests for the first order case for all positive 
definite symmetric matrices 0,it is sufficient to show that the residuals from the 
regression of y on x for general 0 will be a scalar multiple of the residuals for 
0 = I. To show this, let E , ,  and E ~ ,be drawn as independent standard normals. 
Then 
and 
CO-INTEGRATION AND ERROR CORRECTION 
To generate y* and x* from 0,let 
where 
2c = G x x ,  a=w?,/c, b2=w,-w,,,/w,,. 
Then substituting (5.4) in (5.2) 
X*=CX, y * = a y + b x ,  
= ay +bx - cxC(ay,+bx,)cx,/Cc2x: 

= au, 

thus showing the exact similarity of the tests. If the same random numbers are 
used, the same test statistics will be obtained regardless of a. 
In the more complicated but realistic case that the system is of infinite order 
but can be approximated by a p order autoregression, the statistics will only be 
asymptotically similar. Although exact similarity is achieved in the Gaussian 
fixed regressor model, this is not possible in time series models where one cannot 
condition on the regressors; similarity results are only asymptotic. Tests 5 and 7 
are therefore asymptotically similar if the p order model is true but tests 1, 2, 4, 
and 6 definitely are not even asymptotically similar as these tests omit the lagged 
regressors. (This is analogous to the biased standard errors resulting from serially 
correlated errors.) It is on this basis that we prefer not to suggest the latter tests 
except in the first order case. Test 3 will also be asymptotically similar under the 
assumption that u, the residual from the co-integration regression, follows a p 
order process. This result is proven in Dickey and Fuller (1981, pp. 1065-1066). 
While the assumption that the system is p order allows the residuals to be of 
infinite order, there is presumably a finite autoregressive model, possibly of order 
less than p, which will be a good approximation. One might therefore suggest 
some experimentation to find the appropriate value of p in either case. An 
alternative strategy would be to let p be a slowly increasing nonstochastic function 
of T, which is closely related to the test proposed by Phillips (1985) and Phillips 
and Durlauf (1985). Only substantial simulation experimentation will determine 
whether it is preferable to use a data based selection of p for this testing procedure 
although the evidence presented below shows that estimation of extraneous 
parameters will decrease the power of the tests. 
In Table I, the seven test statistics are formally stated. In Table 11, the critical 
values and powers of the tests are considered when the system is first order. Here 
the augmented tests would be expected to be less powerful because they estimate 
parameters which are truly zero under both the null and alternative. The other 
four tests estimate no extraneous parameters and are correctly specified for this 
experiment. 
From Table I1 one can perform a 5 per cent test of the hypothesis of non-co- 
integration with the co-integrating regression Durbin Watson test, by simply 
ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C. W. J. GRANGER 
TABLE I 

T H E  TEST STATISTICS: REJECT FOR LARGE VALUES 

1. The Co-integrating Regression Durbin Watson: y, = a x , +c + u, 
= D W. The null is DW =0. 
2. Dickey Fuller Regression: Au, = -+u , - ,  + F , .  
t2= 7,: the t statistic for +. 
3. Augmented DF Regression: Au, = -+u, - ,  + b 1 A u , - ,  +.  . . + b,Au, - p  + E , .  
53 = 7,. 
4. Restricted VAR: Ay, = P , u , - ,  + & I , ,  AX,  = + YAY,+F2,.P Z U , - ~  
5. Augmented Restricted VAR: Same as (4) but with p lags of Ay, and Ax, in each equation. 
t5= T ; ~+ T;~.  
6. Unrestricted VAR: Ay, = P l y , - ,  +P2x ,_ ,+cl + E L , ,  AX,=P3y1- ,  +P4x , -1  + YAY,+c2+ ~ 2 ,  
t 6 =  2 [ F , +  F2]  where F ,  is the F statistic for testing P I  and P 2  both equal to zero in 
the first equation, and F2 is the comparable statistic in the second. 
7. Augmented Unrestricted VAR: The same as (6) except for p lags of Ax, and Ay, in each equation. 
Y7 =~ [ F I+ F2l. 
NOTES: y, and x ,  are the original da ta  sets and u ,  are the residuals from the co-integrating regression 
checking DW from this regression and, if it exceeds 0.386, rejecting the null and 
finding co-integration. If the true model is Model I1 with p = .9 rather than 1, 
this will only be detected 20 per cent of the time; however if the true p = .8 this 
rises to 66 per cent. Clearly, test 1 is the best in each of the power calculations 
and should be preferred for this set-up, while test 2 is second in almost every 
case. Notice also that the augmented tests have practically the same critical values 
as the basic tests; however, as expected, they have slightly lower power. Therefore, 
if it is known that the system is first order, the extra lags should not be introduced. 
Whether a pre-test of the order would be useful remains to be established. 
In Table I11 both the null and alternative hypotheses have fourth order 
autoregressions. Therefore the basic unaugmented tests now are misspecified 
while the augmented ones are correctly specified (although some of the intervening 
lags could be set to zero if this were known). Notice now the drop in the critical 
values of tests 1, 4, and 6 caused by their nonsimilarity. Using these new critical 
values, test 3 is the most powerful for the local alternative while at p = .8, test 1 
is the best closely followed by 2 and 3. The misspecified or unaugmented tests 
4 and 6 perform very badly in this situation. Even though they were moderately 
powerful in Table 11, the performance here dismisses them from consideration. 
Although test 1 has the best performance overall, it is not the recommended 
choice from this experiment because the critical value is so sensitive to the 
particular parameters within the null. For most types of economic data the 
differences are not white noise and, therefore, one could not in practice know 
CO-INTEGRATION AND ERROR CORRECTION 
TABLE I1 

CRITICALVALUESA N D  POWER 

I MODEL: J?.,Jx  independent standard normal, 100 observations, 10,000 repl~cations, 
p = 4 .  
Critical Values 

Statistic Name 1% 5% 1 0 

1 CRDW ,511 ,386 .322 
2 D F  4.07 3.37 3.03 
3 A D F  3.77 3.17 2.84 
4 RVAR 18.3 13.6 11.0 
5 ARVAR 15.8 11.8 9.7 
6 UVAR 23.4 18.6 16.0 
7 AUVAR 22.6 17.9 15.5 
I IMODEL:  r , + ? r , = u , ,  r , t y , = u , ,  dv,=v,; p = . 8 , . 9 .A u , = ( ~ - ~ ) u , ~ , + E , .  100 
observations, 1000 replications, p = 4. 
Rejections per 100:p = .9 
Statistic Name 1% 5% 10% 
1 CRDW 4.8 19.9 33.6 
2 D F  2.2 15.4 29.0 
3 A D F  1.5 11.0 22.7 
4 RVAR 2.3 11.4 25.3 
5 ARVAR 1 .O 9.2 17.9 
6 UVAR 4.3 13.3 26.1 
7 AUVAR 1.6 8.3 16.3 
Rejections per 100:p = .8 
Statistic Name 1% 596 10% 
1 CRDW 34.0 66.4 82.1 
2 D F  20.5 59.2 76.1 
3 A D F  7.8 30.9 51.6 
4 RVAR 15.8 46.2 67.4 
5 ARVAR 4.6 22.4 39.0 
6 UVAR 19.0 45.9 63.7 
7 AUVAR 4.8 18.3 33.4 
what critical value to use. Test 3, the augmented Dickey-Fuller test, has essentially 
the same critical value for both finite sample experiments, has theoretically the 
same large sample critical value for both cases, and has nearly as good observed 
power properties in most comparisons, and is therefore the recommended 
approach. 
Because of its simplicity, the CRDW might be used for a quick approximate 
result. Fortunately, none of the best procedures require the estimation of the full 
system, merely the co-integrating regression and then perhaps an auxiliary time 
series regression. 
This analysis leaves many questions unanswered. The critical values have only 
been constructed for one sample size and only for the bivariate case, although 
recently, Engle and Yoo (1986) have calculated critical values for more variables 
ROBERT F. E N G L E  A N D  C. W. J. G R A N G E R  
TABLE 111 

CRITICALVALUESA N D  POWERWITH LAGS 

M O D E L  I :  dp, = .84\, ,_4+F , .  dr, = 7,; 100 observations, 10,000 replications,. 8 1 1 . ~ , _ ~ +  
p = 4 .  F , ,  q, independent standard normal. 
Critical Values 
Statistic Name 1% 5% 10% 
1 CRDW ,455 ,282 ,209 
2 D F  3.90 3.05 2.71 
3 A D F  3.73 3.17 2.91 
4 RVAR 37.2 22.4 17.2 
5 ARVAR 16.2 12.3 10.5 
6 UVAR 59.0 40.3 31.4 
7 AUVAR 28.0 22.0 19.2 
MODELII :  ! . , + ~ . X , = U , ,  y , + x , = v , .d u , = ( p - I ) ~ , - , + . 8 d u , _ ~ + ~ , ,  
d v , = .8dv ,_ ,+  q,:p = .9. .8 100 observations. 1000replications, p = 4 
Rejections per 100: p = .9 
Statistic Name 1% 5% 10% 
1 CRDW 15.6 39.9 65.6 
2 D F  9.4 25.5 37.8 
3 A D F  36.0 61.2 72.2 
4 RVAR .3 4.4 10.9 
5 ARVAR 26.4 48.5 62.8 
6 UVAR .O .5 3.5 
7 AUVAR 9.4 26.8 40.3 
Rejections per 100: p = .8 
Statistic Name 1% 5% 10% 
1 CRDW 77.5 96.4 98.6 
2 D F  66.8 89.7 96.0 
3 A D F  68.9 90.3 94.4 
4 RVAR 7.0 42.4 62.5 
5 ARVAR 57.2 80.5 89.3 
6 UVAR 2.5 10.8 25.9 
7 AUVAR 32.2 53.0 67.7 
and sample sizes using the same general approach. There is still no optimality 
theory for such tests and alternative approaches may prove superior. Research 
on the limiting distribution theory by Phillips (1985) and Phillips and Durlauf 
(1985) may lead to improvements in test performance. 
Nevertheless, it appears that the critical values for ADF given in Table I1 can 
be used as a rough guide in applied studies at this point. The next section will 
provide a variety of illustrations. 
6. EXAMPLES 
Several empirical examples will be presented to show performance of the tests 
in practice. The relationship between consumption and income will be studied 
C O - I N T E G R A T I O NA N D  ERROR C O R R E C T I O N  27 1 
in some detail as it was analyzed from an error correction point of view in DHSY 
and a time series viewpoint in Hall (1978) and others. Briefer analyses of wages 
and prices, short and long term interest rates, and the velocity of money will 
conclude this section. 
DHSY have presented evidence for the error correction model of consumption 
behavior from both empirical and theoretical points of view. Consumers make 
plans which may be frustrated; they adjust next period's plans to recoup a portion 
of the error between income and consumption. Hall finds that U.S. consumption 
is a random walk and that past values of income have no explanatory power 
which implies that income and consumption are not co-integrated, at least if 
income does not depend on the error correction term. Neither of these studies 
models income itself and it is taken as exogenous in DHSY. 
Using U.S. quarterly real per capita consumption on nondurables and real per 
capita disposable income from 1947-1 to 1981-11, it was first checked that the 
series were I (1) .  Regressing the change in consumption on its past level and two 
past changes gave a t statistic of +.77 which is even the wrong sign for consumption 
to be stationary in the levels. Running the same model with second differences 
on lagged first differences and two lags of second differences, the t statistic was 
-5.36 indicating that the first difference is stationary. For income, four past lags 
were used and the two t statistics were -.01 and -6.27 respectively, again 
establishing that income is I (1) .  
The co-integrating regression of consumption ( C )  on income ( Y) and a constant 
was run. The coefficient of Y was .23 (with a t statistic of 123 and an R~ of .99). 
The DW was however .465 indicating that by either table of critical values one 
rejects the null of "non-co-integration" or accepts co-integration at least at the 
5 per cent level. Regressing the change in the residuals on past levels and four 
lagged changes, the t statistic on the level is 3.1 which is essentially the critical 
value for the 5 per cent ADF test. Because the lags are not significant, the D F  
regression was run giving a test statistic of 4.3 which is significant at the 1 per 
cent level, illustrating that when it is appropriate, it is a more powerful test. In 
the reverse regression of Y on C, the coefficient is 4.3 which has reciprocal .23, 
the same as the coefficient in the forward regression. The DW is now .463 and 
the t statistic from the ADF test is 3.2. Again the first order D F  appears appropriate 
and gives a test statistic of 4.4. Whichever way the regression is run, the data 
rejects the null of non-co-integration at any level above 5 per cent. 
To establish that the joint distribution of C and Y is an error correction system, 
a series of models was estimated. An unrestricted vector autoregression of the 
change in consumption on four lags of consumption and income changes plus 
the lagged levels of consumption and income is given next in Table IV. The 
lagged levels are of the appropriate signs and sizes for an error correction term 
and are individually significant or nearly so. Of all the lagged changes, only the 
first lag of income change is significant. Thus the final model has the error 
correction term estimated from the co-integrating regression and one lagged 
change in income. The standard error of this model is even lower than the VAR 
suggesting the efficiency of the parameter restrictions. The final model passes a 
272 ROBERT F. E N G L E  A N D  C .  W. J .  G R A N G E R  
TABLE IV 
REGRESSIONSOF CONSUMPTIONA N D  INCOME 
Dep. Var.: C AEC L  EC LC AC 
Y .23 (123) 

c ( - l )  -.I9 (-2.5) 

y ( -1 )  ,046 (2.5) 

EC(-1) -.22 (-3.1) -.26 (-4.3) -.I4 (-2.2) 

AC(-1) ,092 (0.9) 

AC(-2) ,017 (0.2) 

AC(-3) .16 (1.5) 

AC(-4) ,009 (0.1) 

AY(-1) ,059 (1.8) .068 (2.5) 

A Y(-2) -.023 (-.7) 

A Y(-3) -.027 (-.8) 

A Y(-4) -.020 (-.7) 

AEC(-1) -.I3 (-1.4) 

AEC(-2) .12 (1.4) 

AEC(-3) .03 (0.4) 

AEC(-4) -.I3 (-1.6) 

CONST .52 (85) .10 (2.4) .003 (2.6) 

u ,01628 ,00999 0.01015 .O 1094 .01078 

D W  .46 2.0 2.2 2.0 1.9 

Dep. Var: Y LEY LEY LY  LY 
C 
C ( - l )  
Y(-1) 
EY(-1)  
AC(-1) 
AC(-2) 
LC(-3)  
AC(-4) 
AY(-1) 
A Y(-2) 
A Y(-3) 
A Y(-4) 
AEY(-1) 
AEY(-2) 
AEY(-3) 
LEY(-4) 
CONST 
u 

D W  
NOTES. Data are from 1947-1to 1981-11.EC are the residuals from the first regression and EY are the residuals from the sixth 
regression. T ratios are in parentheses. 
series of diagnostic tests for serial correlation, lagged dependent variables, non- 
linearities, ARCH, and omitted variables such as a time trend and other lags. 
One might notice that an easy model building strategy in this case would be 
to estimate the simplest error correction model first and then test for added lags 
of C and Y, proceeding in a "simple to general" specification search. 
The model building process for Y produced a similar model. The same 
unrestricted VAR was estimated and distilled to a simple model with the error 
273 CO-INTEGRATION A N D  ERROR CORRECTION 
correction term, first and fourth lagged changes in C and a fourth lagged change 
in Y. The error correction is not really significant with a t statistic of -1.1 
suggesting that income may indeed be weakly exogenous even though the variables 
are co-integrated. In this case the standard error of the regression is slightly 
higher in the restricted model but the difference is not significant. The diagnostic 
tests are again generally good. 
tampbell (1985) uses a similar structure to develop a test of the permanent 
income hypothesis which incorporates "saving for a rainy day" behavior. In this 
case the error correction term is approximately saving which should be high when 
income is expected to fall (such as when current income is above permanent 
income). Using a broader measure of consumption and narrower measure of 
income he finds the error correction term significant in the income equation. 
The second example examines monthly wages and prices in the U.S. The data 
are logs of the consumer price index and production worker wage in manufactur- 
ing over the three decades of 50's, 60's and 70's. Again, the test is run both 
directions to show that there is little difference in the result. For each of the 
decades there are 120 observations so the critical values as tabulated should be 
appropriate. 
For the full sample period the Durbin Watson from the co-integrating regression 
in either direction is a notable .0054. One suspects that this will be insignificantly 
different from zero even for samples much larger than this. Looking at the 
augmented Dickey Fuller test statistic, for p on w we find -.6 and for w on p 
we find +.2. Adding a twelfth lag in the ADF tests improves the fit substantially 
and raises the test statistics to .88 and 1.50 respectively. In neither case do these 
approach the critical values of 3.2. The evidence accepts the null of non-co- 
integration for wages and prices over the thirty year period. 
For individual decades none of the ADF tests are significant at even the 10 
per cent level. The largest of these six test statistics is for the 50's regressing p 
on w which reaches 2.4, which is still below the 10 per cent level of 2.8. Thus 
we find evidence that wages and prices in the U.S. are not co-integrated. Of 
course, if a third variable such as productivity were available (and were I ( l ) ) ,  
the three might be co-integrated. 
The next example tests for co-integration between short and long term interest 
rates. Using monthly yields to maturity of 20 year treasury bonds as the long 
term rate (R,) and the one month treasury bill rate r, as the short rate, co- 
integration was tested with data from February, 1952 to December, 1982. With 
the long rate as the dependent variable, the co-integrating regression gave: 
R, = 1.93+.785 r, + ER,, D W  = .126; R~ = .866, 
with a t ratio of 46 on the short rate. The DW is not significantly different from 
zero, at least by Tables I1 and 111; however, the correct critical value depends 
upon the dynamics of the errors (and of course the sample size is 340-much 
greater than for the tabulated values). The ADF test with four lags gives: 
AER, = - .06 ER,-I 

(-3.27) 

274 ROBERT F. ENGLE AND C . W. J .  GRANGER 
When the twelfth lag is added instead of the fourth, the test statistic rises to 3.49. 
Similar results were found with the reverse regression where the statistics were 
3.61 and 3.89 respectively. Each of these test statistics exceeds the 5 per cent 
critical values from Table 111. Thus these interest rates are apparently co-
integrated. 
This finding is entirely consistent with the efficient market hypothesis. The 
one-period excess holding yield on long bonds as linearized by Shiller and 
Campbell (1984) is: 
E H Y =  DR,-,-(D-1)R, -r ,  
where D is the duration of the bond which is given by 
with c as the coupon rate and i the number of periods to maturity. The efficient 
market hypothesis implies that the expectation of the EHY is a constant represent- 
ing a risk premium if agents are risk averse. Setting E H Y  = k + & and rearranging 
terms gives the error correction form: 
AR, = ( D -  1)-'(R,-, - r , - , )+ k t +  F,, 
implying that R and r are co-integrated with a unit coefficient and that for long 
maturities, the coefficients of the error correction term is c, the coupon rate. If 
the risk premium is varying over time but is 1(0) already, then it need not be 
included in the test of co-integration. 
The final example is based upon the quantity theory equation: M V =  PY. 
Empirical implications stem from the assumption that velocity is constant or at 
least stationary. Under this condition, log M, log P, and log Y should be 
co-integrated with known unit parameters. Similarly, nominal money and nominal 
GNP should be co-integrated. A test of this hypothesis was constructed for four 
measures of money: M I ,  M2, and M3, and L, total liquid assets. In each case 
the sample period was 1959-1 through 1981-11, quarterly. The ADF tests statistics 
were: 
M 1  1.81 1.90 
M 2  3.23 3.13 
M 3  2.65 2.55 
L 2.15 2.13 
where in the first column the log of the monetary aggregate was the dependent 
variable while in the second, it was log GNP. For only one of the M 2  tests is 
the test statistic significant at the 5 per cent level, and none of the other aggregates 
are significant even at the 10 per cent level. (In several cases it appears that the 
DF test could be used and would therefore be more powerful.) Thus the most 
stable relationship is between M 2  and nominal G N P  but for the other aggregates, 
we reject co-integration and the stationarity of velocity. 
CO-INTEGRATION AND ERROR CORRECTION 
7. CONCLUSION 
If each element of a vector of time series x, is stationary only after differencing, 
but a linear combination a'x ,  need not be differenced, the time series x, have 
been defined to be co-integrated of order (1, 1) with co-integrating vector a. 
Interpreting a'x , =0 as a long run equilibrium, co-integration implies that equili- 
brium holds except for a stationary, finite variance disturbance even though the 
series themselves are non-stationary and have infinite variance. 
The paper presents several representations for co-integrated systems including 
an autoregressive representation and an error-correction representation. A vector 
autoregression in differenced variables is incompatible with these representations 
because it omits the error correction term. The vector autoregression in the levels 
of the series ignores cross equation constraints and will give a singular autoregress- 
ive operator. Consistent and efficient estimation of error correction models is 
discussed and a two step estimator proposed. To test for co-integration, seven 
statistics are formulated which are similar under various maintained hypotheses 
about the generating model. The critical values of these statistics are calculated 
based on a Monte Carlo simulation. Using these critical values, the power 
properties of the tests are examined, and one test procedure is recommended for 
application. 
In a series of examples it is found that consumption and income are co- 
integrated, wages and prices are not, short and long interest rates are, and nominal 
GNP is not co-integrated with M I ,  M3, or total liquid assets, although it is 
possibly with M2. 
Department of Economics, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093, ,U.S.A. 
Manuscript received September, 1983; j n a l  revision received June, 1986. 
REFERENCES 
BHARGAVA,ALOK (1984): "On the Theory of Testing For Unit Roots in Observed Time Series," 
manuscript, ICERD, London School of Economics. 
Box,  G. E. P., A N D  G. M. J E N K I N S  (1970): Time Series Analysis, Forecasting and Control. San 
Francisco: Holden Day. 
CAMPBELL,JOHN Y. (1985): "Does Saving Anticipate Declining Labor Income? An Alternative 
Test of the Permanent Income Hypothesis," manuscript, Princeton University. 
C o x ,  D. R., A N D  C. V. H I N K L E Y(1974): Theoretical Statistics. London: Chapman and Hall. 
C U R R I E ,  D. (1981): "Some Long-Run Features of Dynamic Time-Series Models," The Economic 
Journal, 91, 704-715. 
DAVIDSON,J. E. H., D A V I D  F. HENDRY,FRANK SRBA, A N D  STEVEN YEO (1978): "Econometric 
Modelling of the Aggregate Time-series Relationship Between Consumer's Expenditure and 
Income in the United Kingdom," Economic Journal, 88, 661-692. 
DAVIES, R. R. (1977): "Hypothesis Testing When a Nuisance Parameter is Present Only Under the 
Alternative," Biometrika, 64, 247-254. 
DAWSON, A. (1981): "Sargan's Wage Equation: A Theoretical and Empirical Reconstruction," 
Applied Economics, 13, 351-363. 
D I C K E Y ,D A V I D  A. (1976): "Estimation and Hypothesis Testing for Nonstationary Time Series," 
PhD. Thesis, Iowa State University, Ames. 
DICKEY,D A V I DA, A N D  WAYNE A. FULLER (1979): "Distribution of the Estimators for Autoregress- 
ive Time Series With a Unit Root," Journal of the American Statistical Assoc., 74, 427-431. 
276 ROBERT F. ENGLE A N D  C .  W. J. GRANGER 
-(1981): "The Likelihood Ratio Statistics for Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root," 
Econometrica, 49, 1057-1072. 
ENGLE, ROBERT F., DAVID F. HENDRY, A N D  J. F. R I C H A R D  (1983): "Exogeneity," Econometrica, 
51, 277-304. 
ENGLE, ROBERT F., A N D  BYUNG SAM YOO (1986): "Forecasting and Testing in Co-integrated 
Systems," U.C.S.D. Discussion Paper. 
EVANS, G.  B. A,, A N D  N. E. SAVIN (1981): "Testing for Unit Roots: 1," Econometrica, 49, 753-779. 
FELLER, W I L L I A M  (1968): An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, Volume I. New 
York: John Wiley. 
FULLER, WAYNE A. (1976): Introduction to Statistical Time Series. New York: John Wiley. 
GRANGER,C. W. J. (1981): "Some Properties of Time Series Data and Their Use in Econometric 
Model Specification," Journal of Econometrics, 121-130. 
-(1983): "Co-Integrated Variables and Error-Correcting Models," unpublished UCSD Dis- 
cussion Paper 83-13. 
GRANGER, C. W. J., 	A N D  P. NEWBOLD (1977): Forecasting Economic Time Series. New York: 
Academic Press. 
-(1974): "Spurious Regressions in Econometrics," Journal of Econometrics, 26, 1045-1066. 
GRANGER,C. W. J., A N D  A. A. WEISS (1983): "Time Series Analysis of Error-Correcting Models," 
in Studies in Econometrics, Time Series, and Multivariate Statistics. New York: Academic Press, 
255-278. 
HALL, ROBERT E. (1978): "A Stochastic Life Cycle Model of Aggregate Consumption," Journal of 
Political Economy, 971-987. 
H A N N A N ,E. J. (1970): Multiple Time Series. New York: Wiley. 
HENDRY, DAVID F., A N D  T. VON UNGERN-STERNBERG(1981): "Liquidity and Inflation Effects 
on Consumer's Expenditure," in Essays in the Theory and Measurement of Consumer's Behavior, 
ed. by A. S. Deaton. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
JOHANSEN,SOREN (1985): "The Mathematical Structure of Error Correction Models," manuscript, 
University of Copenhagen. 
NELSON, C. R., A N D  CHARLESPLOSSER (1982): "Trends and Random Walks in Macroeconomic 
Time Series," Journal of Monetary Economics, 10, 139-162. 
PAGAN, A. R. (1984): "Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated Regressors," 
International Economic Review, 25, 221-248. 
PHILLIPS,A. W. (1957): "Stabilization Policy and the Time Forms of Lagged Responses," Economic 
Journal, 67, 265-277. 
PHILLIPS,P. C. B. (1985): "Time Series Regression with Unit Roots," Cowles Foundation Discussion 
Paper No. 740, Yale University. 
PHILLIPS,P. C. B., A N D  S. N. DURLAUF (1985): "Multiple Time Series Regression with Integrated 
Processes," Cowles Foundation Discussion Paper 768. 
SALMON,M. (1982): "Error Correction Mechanisms," The Economic Journal, 92, 615-629. 
SARGAN, J. D. (1964): "Wages and Prices in the United Kingdom: a Study in Econometric 
Methodology," in Econometric Analysis for National Economic Planning, ed. by P. E. Hart, G. 
Mills, and J. N. Whittaker. London: Butterworths. 
SARGAN,J. D., A N D  A. BHARGAVA (1983): "Testing Residuals from Least Squares Regression for 
Being Generated by the Gaussian Random Walk," Econometrica, 51, 153-174. 
SHILLER,R. J., A N D  J. Y. CAMPBELL (1984): "A Simple Account of the Behaviour of Long-Term 
Interest Rates," American Economic Review, 74, 44-48. 
STOCK, JAMES H. (1984): "Asymptotic Properties of Least Squares Estimators of Co-Integrating 
Vectors," manuscript, Harvard University. 
WATSON, MARK W., A N D  ROBERT ENGLE (1985): "A Test for Regression Coefficient Stability with 
a Stationary AR(1) Alternative," forthcoming in Review of Economics and Statistics. 
Yoo,  SAM (1985): "Multi-co-integrated Time Series and Generalized Error Correction Models," 
manuscript in preparation, U.C.S.D. 
You have printed the following article:
Co-Integration and Error Correction: Representation, Estimation, and Testing
Robert F. Engle; C. W. J. Granger
Econometrica, Vol. 55, No. 2. (Mar., 1987), pp. 251-276.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198703%2955%3A2%3C251%3ACAECRE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-T
This article references the following linked citations. If you are trying to access articles from an
off-campus location, you may be required to first logon via your library web site to access JSTOR. Please
visit your library's website or contact a librarian to learn about options for remote access to JSTOR.
References
Some Long Run Features of Dynamic Time Series Models
David Currie
The Economic Journal, Vol. 91, No. 363. (Sep., 1981), pp. 704-715.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0013-0133%28198109%2991%3A363%3C704%3ASLRFOD%3E2.0.CO%3B2-L
Econometric Modelling of the Aggregate Time-Series Relationship Between Consumers'
Expenditure and Income in the United Kingdom
James E. H. Davidson; David F. Hendry; Frank Srba; Stephen Yeo
The Economic Journal, Vol. 88, No. 352. (Dec., 1978), pp. 661-692.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0013-0133%28197812%2988%3A352%3C661%3AEMOTAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-J
Hypothesis Testing When a Nuisance Parameter is Present Only Under the Alternative
R. B. Davies
Biometrika, Vol. 64, No. 2. (Aug., 1977), pp. 247-254.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0006-3444%28197708%2964%3A2%3C247%3AHTWANP%3E2.0.CO%3B2-0
Likelihood Ratio Statistics for Autoregressive Time Series with a Unit Root
David A. Dickey; Wayne A. Fuller
Econometrica, Vol. 49, No. 4. (Jul., 1981), pp. 1057-1072.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198107%2949%3A4%3C1057%3ALRSFAT%3E2.0.CO%3B2-4
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 1 of 3 -
Exogeneity
Robert F. Engle; David F. Hendry; Jean-Francois Richard
Econometrica, Vol. 51, No. 2. (Mar., 1983), pp. 277-304.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198303%2951%3A2%3C277%3AE%3E2.0.CO%3B2-W
Testing For Unit Roots: 1
G. B. A. Evans; N. E. Savin
Econometrica, Vol. 49, No. 3. (May, 1981), pp. 753-779.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198105%2949%3A3%3C753%3ATFUR1%3E2.0.CO%3B2-A
Stochastic Implications of the Life Cycle-Permanent Income Hypothesis: Theory and Evidence
Robert E. Hall
The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 86, No. 6. (Dec., 1978), pp. 971-987.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0022-3808%28197812%2986%3A6%3C971%3ASIOTLC%3E2.0.CO%3B2-K
Econometric Issues in the Analysis of Regressions with Generated Regressors
Adrian Pagan
International Economic Review, Vol. 25, No. 1. (Feb., 1984), pp. 221-247.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0020-6598%28198402%2925%3A1%3C221%3AEIITAO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-9
Stabilisation Policy and the Time-Forms of Lagged Responses
A. W. Phillips
The Economic Journal, Vol. 67, No. 266. (Jun., 1957), pp. 265-277.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0013-0133%28195706%2967%3A266%3C265%3ASPATTO%3E2.0.CO%3B2-1
Error Correction Mechanisms
Mark Salmon
The Economic Journal, Vol. 92, No. 367. (Sep., 1982), pp. 615-629.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0013-0133%28198209%2992%3A367%3C615%3AECM%3E2.0.CO%3B2-B
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 2 of 3 -
Testing Residuals from Least Squares Regression for Being Generated by the Gaussian
Random Walk
J. D. Sargan; Alok Bhargava
Econometrica, Vol. 51, No. 1. (Jan., 1983), pp. 153-174.
Stable URL:
http://links.jstor.org/sici?sici=0012-9682%28198301%2951%3A1%3C153%3ATRFLSR%3E2.0.CO%3B2-Q
http://www.jstor.org
LINKED CITATIONS
- Page 3 of 3 -

