 
Relational Learning and Optimization 
in the Semantic Web 
 
Thomas Fischer1 
Lehrstuhl Wirtschaftsinformatik, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena1 
 
Abstract 
In this paper, the author presents his current research topic, objectives of research as well as research 
questions. The paper motivates the integration of implicit background knowledge in data mining and 
optimization techniques based on semantic web knowledge bases. Furthermore, it outlines work of 
related research areas and states the research methodology. 
1 Introduction 
The digital systems of many companies have become fundamental to their strategic and 
operational activities. As the companies continue to utilize information technology to digitize 
and analyse their business processes, they are increasingly able to respond on emerging 
market opportunities. However, a complex and fast changing business environment creates 
difficult decision problems, denoted by conflicting goals, a wide variety of possible scenarios 
and parameters, uncertainty (Klein & Scholl, 2004, p.6ff) as well as a limited amount of 
available time. Therefore, a crucial success factor of any reliable decision is the selection of 
relevant information to avoid intuition and judgement (Bennet & Bennet, 2008). 
Today, the World Wide Web increasingly offers distributed information that can be useful 
for strategic, tactical or operational decisions, including news, events, financial information, 
information about competitors as well as information about the social networks of customers 
and employees etc. The Web is thus a prominent example of a digital system that has the 
potential to have a high impact on competitive actions and competitive dynamics of 
enterprises. However, the growing amount of such distributed information resources leads to 
a dilemma: “… the more distributed and independently managed that resources on the Web 
become, the greater is their potential value, but the harder it is to extract value …“ (Singh 
and Huhns, 2005, p.7).  
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 2 
On the one hand the human ability for information processing is limited (Edelmann, 2000, 
p.168), whilst otherwise the amount of available information of the Web increases 
exponentially (Zhang et al., 2008), which leads to increasing information saturation (or 
information overflow) (Krcmar, 2004, p.52 
In this context, it is interesting to detect useful patterns (Bennet & Bennet, 2008) in the Web 
or other information sources, thus use the whole information as a rich source (Berendt et al., 
2002) (Han and Kamber, 2006, p.628) for data mining to induce competitive actions in 
enterprises. 
In the past, data mining and machine learning research has developed various techniques to 
learn on data and to extract patterns from data to support decision makers in various tasks, 
such as customer profiling, targeted marketing, store layout, and fraud detection (Tan et al., 
2005, p.1). However, the traditional techniques are only able to process data that is in the 
form of a propositional representation, which means that it is represented by a single table 
with an attribute-value structure (Raedt, 2008).  
The traditional approach has several drawbacks, if there is a rich relational structure of 
information (data with multiple entities and relationships amongst them). 
1. The data has to be transformed to a propositional representation, which is an important 
but also time consuming step. 
2. The transformation may results in a loss of information or creates redundant information. 
3. Propositional approaches utilize no implicit information.  
However, this type of drawbacks is not limited to data mining. A similar problem arises in 
optimization, which is another important decision support methodology. In general, 
mathematical programming problems optimize an objective function subject to constraints, 
but they have often to be reengineered to represent new background knowledge or 
constraints. 
It’s the aim of the author’s research to integrate knowledge-based systems with machine 
learning and optimization methodologies to avoid the effort of information transformation, 
loss of information etc. A knowledge-based system is able to find implicit consequences of 
its explicitly represented knowledge, for instance through the definition of a taxonomy as 
well as transitive relations etc. The idea is to make use of the explicit and implicit part of the 
knowledge representation to guide machine learning and optimization, which distinguishes it 
from traditional approaches that access relational databases and flat files. Furthermore, the 
intention is to achieve a separation of concerns to master complexity. This means that 
knowledge representation, reasoning and optimization are separated as much as possible. The 
general idea is to have a layered architecture of deductive reasoning, inductive reasoning and 
optimization, which enables layers to use the reasoning functionality of the layers 
underneath. This means that implicit logical consequences can be utilized in the data mining 
or machine learning step. Whereas optimization may also utilizes implicit information that 
has been derived in the data mining step. 
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 3 
 
Abbildung 1: Architecture 
2 Related Work 
Knowledge representation and logical reasoning, data mining and optimization are the main 
areas of related work that have to be adhered for this research.  
2.1 Knowledge Representation 
The extraction of interesting patterns or logical consequences out of the Web is a complex 
task, because currently the Web is mainly utilized for human consumption. This means that 
available information are represented by markup languages such as HTML (Raggett et al., 
1999) or XHTML (Pemberton et al., 1999) that describe a visual representation of 
information. Unfortunately, these languages are not sufficient to let software agents 
“understand” the information they are processing. For instance, the character string “Jena” 
does neither reflect to a machine that this is the name of a city1, nor does it reflect that this is 
also the title of a famous semantic web framework2 . Due to this, there have been increasing 
efforts in the research community to realize the vision of the so called Semantic Web: “The 
Semantic Web is not a separate Web but an extension of the current one, in which 
information is given well-defined meaning, better enabling computers and people to work in 
cooperation” (Berners-Lee et al., 2001b). 
The Semantic Web (Berners-Lee et al., 2001a) focuses on the extension of the current Web 
by machine readable and ”understandable” meta information. The vocabulary of these 
statements is typically derived from an ontology, which is a shared conceptualization of the 
domain of discourse (Gruber, 1993). The semantic description (meaningful to a machine) of 
Web data has been driven by the research community through the creation of different 
                                                          
1 http://www.jena.de/   
2 http://jena.sourceforge.net/   
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 4 
standards, for instance, the Resource Description Framework (RDF) (Klyne et al., 2004), the 
Resource Description Framework Schema RDF(S) (Brickley et al., 2004) and the Web 
Ontology Language (OWL) (Smith et al., 2004). These approaches provide a formal way to 
specify shared vocabularies that can be used in statements about resources. Furthermore, 
they utilize a syntax based on the Extensible Markup Language (XML) (Beckett & McBride, 
t 
WL) is more expressive than RDF-Schema and is thus 
idespread used sub languages that are based on the 
hange. A detailed overview about 
description logics can be found in Baader et al. (2003). 
2.2 Data Mining 
election, 
2004) and thus can be effectively processed by machines. 
The Resource Description Framework (RDF) (Klyne et al., 2004) is a framework for 
representing information on the Web. RDF allows anyone to make statements about any 
resource, which could be a material or immaterial thing. A statement is defined as a triple, 
consisting a subject s, predicate p and object o, written as p(s,o). This means that s has a 
predicate (or property) p with value o. RDF is based on a graph data model. A RDF graph 
G=(V,E) is a representation of the document triples. A node n of the graph could be a subjec
s or object o, which is connected through a directed arc (s,o) that represents the predicate p. 
RDF-Schema (Brickley et al., 2004) is a minimal ontological language. It has capabilities to 
define classes and properties, and enables the specification of how they should be used 
together. Classes and properties could be arranged in a hierarchy. Instances of a class are 
referenced to its class through the “rdf:type” definition. RDF-Schema provides means to 
define a simple shared vocabulary. Nevertheless, its expressiveness is limited. Amongst 
others things, it provides no support for cardinality constraints on properties, transitive 
properties as well as equivalence and disjointness relationships of classes and individuals. 
The Web Ontology Language (O
considered below in more detail.  
The Web Ontology Language (OWL) (Smith et al., 2004) is build on top of RDF and RDF-
Schema. OWL provides the three sub languages OWL-Lite, OWL-DL and OWL-Full. The 
usage of a language depends on the needed expressiveness of the ontology (Maedche et al., 
2003). OWL-Lite and OWL-DL are w
formalisms of description logics (DL). 
The logical structure of a DL knowledge base is based on a so called TBox and ABox: 
KB=(TBox,ABox). The TBox contains intensional knowledge representation and is build 
through the definition of concepts and properties. The ABox contains assertions about the 
named individuals in terms of the defined vocabulary. Furthermore, the ABox depends on 
the current circumstances and is part of constant c
Data mining (Tan et al., 2005) refers to extracting valid, novel, potentially useful, and 
ultimately understandable patterns from large amounts of data and is part of the KDD 
(Knowledge Discovery from Data) process (Han & Kamber, 2006; Fayyad et al., 1996). The 
process of knowledge discovery is based on data cleaning, data integration, data s
data transformation, data mining, pattern evaluation and knowledge representation. 
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 5 
In the data mining step different techniques such as cluster analysis, predictive modelling 
(classification - discret / regression - continuous), association analysis, anomaly detection, 
overy in the semantic web, which requires data mining 
Knobbe, 2006; Dzeroski, 2003). Such relational algorithms are especially favourable 
ional decision and regression trees (Dzeroski, 2006). In 
ency networks that can represent and reason with 
summarization, evolution analysis can be utilized to achieve the aims of a specific 
knowledge discovery process. 
As stated above, web resources can hold a lot of useful information and it is therefore 
interesting to apply data mining techniques on them, which is called web mining. ”Web 
mining is the application of data mining techniques to the content, structure, and usage of 
Web resources” (Berendt et al., 2002). Such web mining techniques are also often used to 
support the creation of the semantic web (Berendt et al., 2002), as one part of the semantic 
web mining (Stumme et al., 2006), such as ontology learning, mapping and merging of 
ontologies, instance learning etc. However, this is not in focus of this thesis. Instead the 
author focuses on knowledge disc
techniques that can cope with the logical formalisms of the semantic web, to be more precise, 
relational data mining algorithms. 
Traditional data mining techniques can only handle data in a limited representation language, 
which was often propositional. This means that the data was transformed into a single table 
with an attribute-value structure. Instead, relational data mining builds upon the solid and 
expressive theoretical foundations of first-order logic (Raedt, 2008; Dzeroski and Lavrac, 
2001; 
in situations where learning problems involve multiple entities and relationships amongst 
them. 
There are two main research directions: Inductive Logic Programming (ILP) and Statistical 
Relational Learning (SRL). ILP is concerned about the development of relational data 
mining algorithms to perform (deterministic) inductive inference based on the observations 
of a first-order representation of the information (Dzeroski and Lavrac, 2001). The 
propositional data mining algorithms have been upgraded to its first-order variants (Dzeroski 
and Lavrac, 2001), with several application scenarios (Raedt, 2008). Prominent examples are 
relational association rules and relat
general these algorithms are deterministic, but they can have a probabilistic interpretation, 
such as relational association rules. 
SRL performs research to "represent, reason and learn in domains with complex relational 
and rich probabilistic structure" (Getoor & Taskar, 2007). There are logic and framebased 
algorithms, with the logical ones fitting naturally to semantic web description logics. Neville 
and Jensen point out that in relational data sets the evidence of autocorrelation provides 
opportunity to improve the performance of statistical relational models, because inferences 
about one object can inform inferences about related objects (Neville & Jensen, 2007), which 
is called collective inference. Relational dependency networks (RDNs) (Neville & Jensen, 
2007) are a relational extension of depend
cyclic dependencies and exploit autocorrelations. RDNs has been successfully applied to 
fraud detection (Neville & Jensen, 2007).  
SRL approaches such as probabilistic relational models (PRMs) (Friedman et al., 1999), 
Bayesian logic programs (BLPs) (Raedt, 2008) attempt to model a probability distribution 
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 6 
over a set of relational interpretations. PRMs and BLPs extend Bayesian networks with 
expressive relational representations. However, as discussed by (Braz et al., 2007), these 
solutions still perform inference mostly on propositional level, because they instantiate 
propositional graphical models based on a given query. Braz et al. outline that this 
 on applying them on first-
ation is missing. Breaux and Reed (2005), 
Maedche and Zacharias (2002), Grimnes et al. (2008) and Fanizzi et al. (2008) present 
ntities with ontologies. 
 
 different kinds of 
problems, without any code changes and by only changing background logic, if the problem 
structure slightly changes or new domain knowledge becomes present.  
propositional grounding can be computational expensive and therefore motivate first-order 
probabilistic inference, which is one of the current important research topics. 
The research community has transformed the traditional algorithms for association rules, 
predictive modelling, clustering, statistical learning etc. to its first-order variants (Dzeroski 
and Lavrac, 2001). Such algorithms have been successfully applied in different scenarios 
such as genetics, molecules, social network analysis, as well as natural language processing 
(Dzeroski, 2001). However, while there has been detailed research
order logics, there has been only limited research on applying those techniques to the 
description logics (i.e. OWL-DL) and scale of the semantic web. 
Berendt et al. (2003), Berendt et al. (2002) and Stumme et al. (2006) provide a roadmap and 
initial starting point for this special emerging field of research. There are also already some 
application scenarios. Tresp et al. (2008) give an overview about different relational 
techniques and apply an infinite hidden relational model on friend-of-a-friend (foaf5) 
semantic data to recommend new friendships. Caragea et al. (2007) describe a relational 
bayesian classifier i.e. for the classification of computer science research papers in the 
bibliography domain. However, a real world evalu
approaches for clustering e
2.3 Optimization 
Mathematical optimization refers to the selection of a best entity from some set of available 
alternatives. There is a wide variety of specific types of optimization approaches. The author 
focuses on combinatorial optimization, which often requires selecting a subset of items from 
a given search space such that some specific constraints among those items hold. In general 
most combinatorial optimization algorithms directly use the constraints formulated in a 
mathematical program. Furthermore, domain specific knowledge is often fully directly 
implemented in the mathematical program. The mathematical programs often have to be
reengineered even if simple new constraints become present or if there is a change in the 
background knowledge. A prominent example of such a problem is the Knapsack problem.  
The author has already outlined an approach that directly integrates a knowledge 
representation system and logical reasoning into a mathematical program based on a genetic 
algorithm (Fischer & Ruhland, 2011). The approach utilizes implicit information during 
optimization of different kinds of Knapsack problems and models the problem domain more 
complex and realistic. Furthermore, the genetic algorithm is able to run on
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 7 
3 Research Questions 
First, it is the author’s main goal to show that the Semantic Web can serve as an information 
source for knowledge discovery applications and that relational data mining algorithms are 
favourable for this kind of background information. Second, there is no thorough 
understanding of the concrete requirements to relational data mining algorithms in the 
environment of the semantic web. This is important, because the semantic web is a large-
scale distributed system that utilizes heterogeneous knowledge representations. Thus it is 
important to consider how systems are able to intelligently exploit the available information, 
operate on a large-scale (d’Aquin et al., 2008, Berendt et al., 2002), consider the high 
dynamic behaviour (Han and Kamber, 2006, p.628-629), assess the quality of information, 
address semantic heterogeneities and extract useful patterns from it. Furthermore, the 
combination of relational data mining, semantic web, logic etc. is complex and it seems to be 
not likely that managers have a great interest to understand all details (Fayyad, 2007). It is 
therefore important to perform research on manergial utilization of the proposed technology. 
In addition, research has discussed that the semantic web is not really adopted in the 
enterprise world, because the costs of being an early adopter seem to be huge, while the 
benefits or returns on investment are not clear (Alani et al., 2008). Furthermore, despite of 
several promising approaches in relational data mining, the interest in this research topic is 
relatively small in comparison to the overall data mining research, especially in the context 
of semantic web.  
Concerning optimization the general research question is how we can integrate deductive and 
inductive reasoning in combinatorial optimization problems based on statistical relational 
models. The general idea is that the derived implicit information from the relational semantic 
web model should guide the optimization. This approach would also provide an important 
methodology for the integration of optimization with the semantic computing landscape, 
which is an important part of the future (distributed) computing in enterprises and the Web. 
4 Conclusion 
In this paper, the author has outlined his current research topic, objectives of research as well 
as research questions. The idea is to make use of the explicit and implicit part of relation data 
based on a semantic web knowledge representation to guide machine learning and 
optimization. There are several logical reasoners for semantic web data, but inductive 
reasoning in this type of data on a large scale remains is still an important problem. The 
author’s research intents to go also one step further, by integrating explicit and implicit 
background-knowledge derived from deductive and inductive inference into the optimization 
process of combinatorial optimization problems. 
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 8 
 
Literaturverzeichnis 
Alani, H., Chandler, P., Hall, W., O’Hara, K., Shadbolt, N. & Szomszor, M. (2008). Building a 
Pragmatic Semantic Web. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 23(3):61–68. 
Baader, F., Calvanese, D., McGuinness, D. L., Nardi, D. & Patel-Schneider, P. F., editors (2003). The 
Description Logic Handbook: Theory, Implementation, and Applications. Cambridge University 
Press, first edition. 
Bennet, A. & Bennet, D. (2008). The Decision-Making Process in a Complex Situation. In Burstein, F. 
and Holsapple, C. W., editors, Handbook on Decision Support Systems 1: Basic Themes 
(International Handbooks on Information Systems), chapter 1, pages 3–20. Springer, 1 edition. 
Berendt, B., Hotho, A., Mladenic, D., van Someren, M., Spiliopoulou, M., and Stumme, G. (2003). A 
roadmap for web mining: From web to semantic web. In Berendt, B., Hotho, A., Mladenic, D., van 
Someren, M., Spiliopoulou, M., and Stumme, G., editors, Web Mining: From Web to Semantic 
Web, First European Web Mining Forum, EMWF 2003, Cavtat-Dubrovnik, Croatia, September 22, 
2003, Revised Selected and Invited Papers, volume 3209 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 
pages 1–22. Springer. 
Berendt, B., Hotho, A., & Stumme, G. (2002). Towards Semantic Web Mining. In Horrocks, I. and 
Hendler, J. A., editors, The Semantic Web -ISWC 2002, First International Semantic Web 
Conference, Sardinia, Italy, June 9-12, 2002, Proceedings, volume 2342 of Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, pages 264–278. Springer. 
Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J.,& Lassila, O. (2001a). The semantic web. Scientific American, pages 29–
37. 
Berners-Lee, T., Hendler, J., and Lassila, O. (2001b). The Semantic Web -A new form of Web content 
that is meaningful to computers will unleash a revolution of new possibilities. Scientific American 
Magazine. 
Braz, R., Amir, E. & Roth, D. (2007). Lifted First-Order Probabilistic Inference. In Lise Getoor and 
Ben Taskar, editors, Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning (Adaptive Computation and 
Machine Learning). The MIT Press. 
Brickley, D., Guha, R., & McBride, B. (2004). RDF Vocabulary Description Language 1.0: RDF 
Schema. Webpage. 
Caragea, D., Bao, J. & Honavar, V. (2007). Learning relational bayesian classifiers on the semantic 
web. In IJCAI Workshop on Semantic Web for Collaborative Knowledge Acquisition (SWeCKa). 
d’Aquin, M., Motta, E., Sabou, M., Angeletou, S., Gridinoc, L., Lopez, V., and Guidi, D. (2008). 
Toward a New Generation of Semantic Web Applications. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 23(3):20–28. 
Dzeroski, S. (2003). Multi-relational Data Mining: An Introduction. SIGKDD Explorations, 5(1):1–16. 
Dzeroski, S. (2006). Inductive Logic Programming in a Nutshell. In Lise Getoor and Ben Taskar, 
editors, Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine 
Learning). The MIT Press. 
Dzeroski, S. & Lavrac, N., editors (2001). Relational Data Mining. Springer, 1 edition. 
Edelmann, W. (2000). Lernpsychologie. Kösel-Verlag, Verlagsgruppe Beltz, 6 edition. 
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 9 
Elomaa, T., Mannila, H., and Toivonen, H., editors (2002). Principles of Data Mining and Knowledge 
Discovery, 6th European Conference, PKDD 2002, Helsinki, Finland, August 19-23, 2002, 
Proceedings, volume 2431 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer. 
Fanizzi, N., d’Amato, C. & Esposito, F. (2008). Conceptual clustering and its application to concept 
drift and novelty detection. In Bechhofer, S., Hauswirth, M., Hoffmann, J., and Koubarakis, M., 
editors, The Semantic Web: Research and Applications, 5th European Semantic Web Conference, 
ESWC 2008, Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, June 1-5, 2008, Proceedings, volume 5021 of 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 318–332. Springer. 
Fayyad, U. M. (2007). From mining the web to inventing the new sciences underlying the internet. In 
Berkhin, P., Caruana, R., and Wu, X., editors, KDD, pages 2–3. ACM. 
Fayyad, U. M., Piatetsky-Shapiro, G. & Smyth, P. (1996). From Data Mining to Knowledge Discovery 
in Databases. AI Magazine, 17(3):37–54. 
Fischer, T. and Ruhland, J. (2011). A Genetic Algorithm for Optimization of a Relational Knapsack 
Problem with Respect to a Description Logic Knowledge Base. In Hu, B., Morasch, K., Pickl, S., 
Siegle, M., editors, Operations Research Proceedings 2010. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.  
Friedman, N., Getoor, L., Koller, D. & Pfeffer, A. (1999). Learning probabilistic relational models. In 
IJCAI, pages 1300-1309. Morgan Kaufmann. 
Getoor, L. & Taskar, B. (2007). Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning. (Adaptive Computation 
and Machine Learning). The MIT Press. 
Grimnes, G. A., Edwards, P. & Preece, A. D. (2008). Instance based clustering of semantic web 
resources. In Bechhofer, S., Hauswirth, M., Hoffmann, J., and Koubarakis, M., editors, The 
Semantic Web: Research and Applications, 5th European Semantic Web Conference, ESWC 2008, 
Tenerife, Canary Islands, Spain, June 1-5, 2008, Proceedings, volume 5021 of Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, pages 303–317. Springer. 
Gruber, T. R. (1993). Toward principles for the design of ontologies used for knowledge sharing. In 
Guarino, N., Poli, R., Publishers, K. A., Substantial, I. P., and Gruber, T. R., editors, In Formal 
Ontology in Conceptual Analysis and Knowledge Representation, Kluwer Academic Publishers, in 
press. Substantial revision of paper presented at the International Workshop on Formal Ontology. 
Han, J. & Kamber, M. (2006). Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques, Second Edition (The Morgan 
Kaufmann Series in Data Management Systems). Morgan Kaufmann, 2 edition. 
Klein, R. & Scholl, A. (2004). Planung und Entscheidung. Franz Vahlen GmbH. 
Klyne, G., Carroll, J. J., & McBride, B. (2004). RDF Primer. Webpage. 
Knobbe, A. (2006). Multi-Relational Data Mining: Volume 145 Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence and 
Applications. IOS Press. 
Krcmar, H. (2004). Informationsmanagement (German Edition). Springer. 
Maedche, A., Motik, B. & Stojanovic, L. (2003). Managing multiple and distributed ontologies on the 
Semantic Web. VLDB J., 12(4):286–302. 
Maedche, A. & Zacharias, V. (2002). Clustering Ontology-Based Metadata in the Semantic Web. In 
(Elomaa et al., 2002]) pages 348–360. 
 
Relational Learning and Optimization in the Semantic Web 10 
 
Neville, J. & Jensen, D. (2007). Relational Dependency Networks. In Lise Getoor and Ben Taskar, 
editors, Introduction to Statistical Relational Learning (Adaptive Computation and Machine 
Learning). The MIT Press. 
Pemberton, S., Austin, D., Axelsson, J., elik, T., Dominiak, D., Elenbaas, H., Epperson, B., Ishikawa, 
M., Matsui, S., McCarron, S., Navarro, A., Peruvemba, S., Relyea, R., Schnitzenbaumer, S., & 
Stark,P. (1999). XHTML 1.0 The Extensible HyperText Markup Language (Second Edition). 
Webpage. 
Raedt, L. D. (2008). Logical and Relational Learning (Cognitive Technologies). Springer, 1 edition. 
Raggett, D., Hors, A. L., and Jacobs, I. (1999). HTML 4.01 Specification. Webpage. 
Shadbolt, N., Berners-Lee, T., & Hall, W (2006). The Semantic Web Revisited. IEEE Intelligent 
Systems, 21(3): 96–101. 
Singh, M. P. & Huhns, M. N. (2005). Service-Oriented Computing: Semantics, Processes, Agents. 
Wiley, 1 edition. 
Smith, M. K., Welty, C., & McGuinness, D. L. (2004). OWL Web Ontology Language Guide. 
Webpage. 
Stumme, G., Hotho, A. & Berendt, B. (2006). Semantic Web Mining -State of the Art and Future 
Directions. Journal of Web Semantics, 4(2):124–143. 
Tan, P.-N., Steinbach, M., & Kumar, V. (2005). Introduction to Data Mining. Addison Wesley. 
Tresp, V., Bundschus, M., Rettinger, A. & Huang, Y. (2008). Towards Machine Learning on the 
Semantic Web. In Uncertainty Reasoning for the Semantic Web I, ISWC International Workshops, 
URSW 2005-2007, Revised Selected and Invited Papers, volume 5327 of Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science, pages 282–314. Springer. 
Zhang, G.-Q., Zhang, G.-Q., Yang, Q.-F., Cheng, S.-Q., & Zhou, T. (2008). Evolution of the Internet 
and its cores. New Journal of Physics, 10(12). 
Kontaktinformationen 
 
Dipl.-Wirt.-Inf. Thomas Fischer 
Friedrich-Schiller-Universität Jena 
Lehrstuhl Wirtschaftsinformatik 
Carl-Zeiß-Straße 3 
D-07743 Jena 
 
Tel.: +49 (0) 3641 943313 
E-Mail: fischer.thomas@uni-jena.de 
WWW http://www.wiwi.uni-jena.de/wi  
 
 
 

