IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010 371
The Impact of Charging Plug-In Hybrid Electric
Vehicles on a Residential Distribution Grid
Kristien Clement-Nyns, Edwin Haesen, Student Member, IEEE, and Johan Driesen, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Alternative vehicles, such as plug-in hybrid electric
vehicles, are becoming more popular. The batteries of these plug-in
hybrid electric vehicles are to be charged at home from a standard
outlet or on a corporate car park. These extra electrical loads have
an impact on the distribution grid which is analyzed in terms of
power losses and voltage deviations. Without coordination of the
charging, the vehicles are charged instantaneously when they are
plugged in or after a fixed start delay. This uncoordinated power
consumption on a local scale can lead to grid problems. Therefore,
coordinated charging is proposed to minimize the power losses and
to maximize the main grid load factor. The optimal charging profile
of the plug-in hybrid electric vehicles is computed by minimizing
the power losses. As the exact forecasting of household loads is not
possible, stochastic programming is introduced. Two main tech-
niques are analyzed: quadratic and dynamic programming.
Index Terms—Coordinated charging, distribution grid, dy-
namic programming, plug-in hybrid electric vehicles, quadratic
programming.
I. INTRODUCTION
H YBRID electric vehicles (HEVs), battery electric ve-hicles (BEVs) and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles
(PHEVs) are becoming more popular. PHEVs are charged by
either plugging into electric outlets or by means of on-board
electricity generation. These vehicles can drive at full power in
electric-only mode over a limited range. As such, PHEVs offer
valuable fuel flexibility [1]. PHEVs may have a larger battery
and a more powerful motor compared to a HEV, but their range
is still very limited [2].
The charging of PHEVs has an impact on the distribution grid
because these vehicles consume a large amount of electrical en-
ergy and this demand of electrical power can lead to extra large
and undesirable peaks in the electrical consumption. There are
two main places where the batteries of PHEVs can be recharged:
either on a car park, corporate or public, or at home. The focus
in this article lies on the latter. The electrical consumption for
charging PHEVs may take up to 5% of the total electrical con-
sumption in Belgium by 2030 [3]. For a PHEV with a range of
60 miles (100 km), this amount can increase to 8% taking into
account a utility factor which describes the fraction of driving
that is electrical [4].
From the distribution system operator point of view, the
power losses during charging are an economic concern and
Manuscript received May 27, 2009; revised July 27, 2009. First published
December 18, 2009; current version published January 20, 2010. Paper no.
TPWRS-00097-2009.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, 3001 Heverlee, Belgium (e-mail: Kristien.Clement@esat.
kuleuven.be).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TPWRS.2009.2036481
have to be minimized and transformer and feeder overloads
have to be avoided. Not only power losses, but also power
quality (e.g., voltage profile, unbalance, harmonics, etc.) are
essential to the distribution grid operator as well as to grid
customers. Voltage deviations are a power quality concern.
Too large voltage deviations cause reliability problems which
must be avoided to assure good operation of electric appli-
ances. Overnight recharging can also increase the loading of
base-load power plants and smoothen their daily cycle or avoid
additional generator start-ups which would otherwise decrease
the overall efficiency [5]. From the PHEV owner point of view,
the batteries of the PHEV have to be charged overnight so the
driver can drive off in the morning with a fully-charged battery.
This gives opportunities for intelligent or smart charging. The
coordination of the charging could be done remotely in order
to shift the demand to periods of lower load consumption and
thus avoiding higher peaks in electricity consumption.
This research fits in a more global context where also other
new technologies, such as small wind turbines and photovoltaic
cells, are implemented in the distribution grid. In this optimiza-
tion problem, only power losses and voltage deviations are mini-
mized. Other aspects, e.g., power factor control, can be included
as well. The proposed methodology can help evaluating planned
grid reinforcements versus PHEV ancillary services to achieve
the most efficient grid operation.
This article wants to emphasize the improvements in power
quality that are possible by using coordinated charging or smart
metering. It also wants to indicate that uncoordinated charging
of PHEVs decreases the efficiency of the distribution grid.
II. ASSUMPTIONS AND MODELING
A. Load Scenarios
From an available set of residential load measurements [6],
two large groups of daily winter and summer load profiles are
selected. The load profiles cover 24 hours and the instantaneous
power consumption is given on a 15-min time base as shown in
Fig. 1 for an arbitrary day during winter.
B. Specifications of PHEVs
Each of the PHEVs has a battery with a maximum storage
capacity of 11 kWh [5]. Only 80% of the capacity of the battery
can be used to optimize life expectancy. This gives an avail-
able capacity of 8.8 kWh; 10 kWh is required from the utility
grid, assuming an 88% energy conversion efficiency from AC
energy absorbed from the utility grid to DC energy stored in
the battery of the vehicle [4]. The batteries can only be charged
0885-8950/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
372 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
Fig. 1. Household load during winter [6].
Fig. 2. Percentage of trips by vehicle each hour [8].
and not discharged, meaning that the energy flow is unidirec-
tional and the vehicle-to-grid concept is not considered yet. The
charger has a maximum output power of 4 kW. The charger of 4
kW is chosen because the maximum power output of a standard
single phase 230 V outlet is 4.6 kW. Therefore, this is the largest
charger that can be used for a standard outlet at home without
reinforcing the wiring. Fast charging is not considered because
it requires a higher short-circuit power which is not available at
standard electric outlets in households. For fast charging, con-
nections at a higher voltage level are indispensable. A higher
voltage connection could be installed, but this is an extra in-
vestment for the PHEV owner. The maximum penetration de-
gree of PHEVs is 30% by 2030 for Belgium as predicted by the
Tremove model [7].
C. Charging Periods
It is not realistic to assume that PHEVs could be charged any
place a standard outlet is present. Therefore in this article, the
batteries of the vehicles are assumed to be charged at home.
Fig. 2 shows the percentage of all trips by vehicle each hour.
At that moment, they are not available for charging. Based on
Fig. 3. IEEE 34-node test feeder [9].
this figure, three important charging periods are proposed. The
first charging period is during the evening and night. Most of
the vehicles are at home from 21h00 until 06h00 in the morning.
Some PHEVs are immediately plugged in on return from work
in order to be ready to use throughout the evening. Thus the
second charging period takes place between 18h00 and 21h00.
This charging period coincides with the peak load during the
evening. The number of vehicles that will be charged during
this period will probably be smaller. One other charging period
is considered, that is charging during the day between 10h00 and
16h00. The charging will occur in small offices in urban areas.
It is assumed that only one vehicle per household or office can
be charged. The charging of multiple vehicles at a household
or office is not considered because it is not feasible to reflect
all possible scenarios. However, the proposed methods are also
valid for other periods and scenarios. In this article, the focus
lies on charging at home, in weaker non-dedicated distribution
grids.
D. Grid Topology
The radial network used for this analysis is the IEEE 34-node
test feeder [9] shown in Fig. 3. The network is downscaled from
24.9 kV to 230 V so this grid topology represents a residen-
tial radial network. The line impedances are adapted to achieve
tolerable voltage deviations and power losses. Each node is a
connection with a residential load and some, randomly chosen,
nodes will have PHEVs charging.
E. Assumptions
The exact advantage of coordinated charging depends on the
assumptions made in this section. The household load profiles
are typical for Belgium. Other regions may have other load pro-
files because of different weather conditions, such as an air con-
ditioning peak in the afternoon for warm regions. Some regions
will also have other grid voltages, such as 120 V. The IEEE grid
is an example of a distribution grid, so the obtained results are
only valid for this grid. The maximum power of the charger is
determined by the maximum power of a standard electric outlet.
Other parameters which affect the obtained results are the utility
load cycle of the base-load power plants, incentives and the use
of smart meters.
III. UNCOORDINATED CHARGING
At the moment, there is no smart metering system available
for PHEVs, so the vehicles will be charged without coordina-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CLEMENT-NYNS et al.: IMPACT OF CHARGING PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLES ON A RESIDENTIAL DISTRIBUTION GRID 373
tion. Uncoordinated charging indicates that the batteries of the
vehicles are either start charging immediately when plugged in,
or after a user-adjustable fixed start delay. The vehicle owners
currently do not have the incentive nor the essential information
to schedule the charging of the batteries to optimize the grid uti-
lization. The fixed start delay is introduced to give the vehicle
owner the possibility to start charging using off-peak electricity
tariffs.
A. Load Flow Analysis
A load flow analysis is performed to assess the voltage de-
viations and the power losses in the selected distribution grid.
This analysis is based on the backward-forward sweep method
to calculate the node currents, line currents and node voltages
[10]. At the initialization step, a flat profile is taken for the node
voltages. A constant power load model is used at all connec-
tions at each time step. In the backward step, the currents are
computed based on the voltages of the previous iteration. In the
forward step, the voltages are computed based on the voltage
at the root node and the voltage drops of the lines between the
nodes. The currents and voltages are updated iteratively until the
stopping criterion based on node voltages is reached.
B. Methodology
At the start of a 24-h cycle, a daily profile is randomly se-
lected from the available set belonging to a specific scenario
(winter, summer) and assigned at each node. For each scenario,
four cases depending on the penetration degree are selected. The
first case, with no PHEVs, is taken as a reference case. The next
cases have a PHEV penetration of, respectively, 10%, 20%, and
30% representing the proportion of nodes with a PHEV present.
The PHEVs are randomly placed. Separated runs are performed
for each charging period and the number of vehicles is varying
between 0% and 30% for each charging period.
The profile for charging the PHEVs is kept straightforward.
Each individual vehicle starts charging at a random time step
within a specific period of time such that the vehicles are still
fully charged at the end of the charging period. It is assumed
that the batteries of the vehicles are fully discharged at the first
time step. For every quarter of an hour, the backward-forward
sweep method is repeated to compute the voltage at each node
until convergence is obtained.
C. Results
The impact of uncoordinated charging on the distribution grid
is illustrated by computing the power losses and the maximum
voltage deviation for the different charging periods. The number
of samples is 1000, which is large enough to achieve an accurate
average per scenario. Taking more samples does not change the
results significantly.
The results for the 4 kW charger are shown in Tables I and II.
Table I depicts the ratio of the power losses to the total load. The
total load includes the daily household loads and the charging of
the PHEVs, if present. In all cases, the power losses are higher
in the winter season than in the summer season due to the higher
household loads. The increase of the number of PHEVs leads to
a significant increase in power losses. These power losses are
important for the operator of the distribution grid. The distribu-
TABLE I
RATIO OF POWER LOSSES TO TOTAL POWER [%] FOR THE 4 kW
CHARGER IN CASE OF UNCOORDINATED CHARGING
TABLE II
MAXIMUM VOLTAGE DEVIATIONS [%] FOR THE 4 kW
CHARGER IN CASE OF UNCOORDINATED CHARGING
tion system operator (DSO) will compensate higher losses by
increasing its grid tariffs.
Not only the power losses, but also the voltage deviations of
the grid voltage (230 V) which are represented in Table II, are
important for the DSO. An increase in the number of PHEVs
leads to a significant increase in voltage deviations. According
to the mandatory EN50160 standard [11], voltage deviations up
to 10% in low voltage grids, for 95% of the time, are acceptable.
Table II shows that for a penetration of 30%, some of the voltage
deviations are close to 10%, especially during evening peak.
The power losses and the voltage deviations are the highest
while charging during the evening peak, between 18h00 and
21h00. The reasons are twofold. In the first place, this charging
period, wherein the batteries must be fully charged is rather
short, only 4 hours. Therefore, the charger output power must be
higher. Secondly, the household load during the evening is the
highest of the whole day and the output power of the charger is
added to the household loads. Charging during the day is a little
more demanding for the grid compared by charging overnight.
These results are directly related to Fig. 1.
Fig. 4 depicts the voltage profile in a node of the distribution
grid for a penetration degree of 0% and 30% during winter night.
This figure shows two charging examples and is not the average
of several samples. Clearly, there is a decrease of the voltage
in the presence of PHEVs during the charging period between
21h00 and 06h00. Between 23h00 and 04h00, most of the vehi-
cles are charging and the voltage drop during these hours is the
largest and deviates the most from the 0% PHEV voltage profile.
The power needed for charging these vehicles is significantly
higher compared to the household loads during the night. The
small difference in voltage deviations during the rest of the day
is caused by the different load profiles selected for both cases.
IV. COORDINATED CHARGING
In the previous section, the charging of the batteries of the
PHEVs starts randomly, either immediately when they are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
374 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
Fig. 4. Voltage profile in a node with 30% PHEVs compared to the voltage
profile with 0% PHEV.
plugged in, or after a fixed start delay. The idea of this section
is to achieve optimal charging and grid utilization to minimize
the power losses. A direct coordination of the charging will be
done by smart metering and by sending signals to the individual
vehicles.
This optimization problem can be tackled with the quadratic
programming technique (QP). This technique optimizes a
quadratic function of several variables, in this case the power
of the PHEV chargers at all time steps, which is subjected to
linear constraints. In this section, the QP technique is applied
to handle deterministic and stochastic household load profiles.
The objective is to minimize the power losses.
A. Optimization Problem
By minimizing the power losses, the owners of PHEVs will
no longer be able to control the charging profile. The only de-
gree of freedom left for the owners is to indicate the point in
time when the batteries must be fully charged. For the sake of
convenience, the end of the indicated charging period is taken
as the point in time when the vehicles must be fully charged.
The charging power varies between zero and maximum and is
no longer constant. The coordinated charging is analyzed for the
same charging periods as described in the previous section. The
range of PHEV penetration levels remains the same, and the ve-
hicles are also placed randomly. The same IEEE 34-node test
grid is used. For each charging period and season, the power
losses and voltage deviations are calculated and compared with
the values of uncoordinated charging.
B. Methodology
The objective is to minimize the power losses which are
treated as a reformulation of the nonlinear power flow equa-
tions. This nonlinear minimization problem can be tackled as
a sequential quadratic optimization [12]. The charging power
obtained by the quadratic programming cannot be larger than
the maximum power of the charger . The batteries must be
fully charged at the end of cycle, so the energy which flows to
the batteries must equal the capacity of the batteries .
is zero if there is no PHEV placed and is one if there is a PHEV
Fig. 5. Algorithm of coordinated charging.
at node . The goal is to minimize power losses while taking
into account these constraints. The quadratic programming
uses (1) and (2):
(1)
(2)
C. Deterministic Programming
Fig. 5 represents the outline of the algorithm of coordinated
charging. The vehicles are placed randomly after the selection
of a daily load profile and the number of PHEVs. A flat voltage
profile is assumed and the node voltages are computed with
the backward-forward sweep method assuming that there are
no PHEVs. The backward and forward sweep are formulated
as a matrix multiplication. The quadratic optimization is per-
formed in order to determine the optimal charging profile. Then,
the node voltages are computed again. This process is repeated
until the power losses based stopping criterion is reached.
This paragraph describes the results of the coordinated
charging to illustrate the impact on the distribution grid.
Table III and Table IV represent respectively the power losses
and the maximum voltage deviations for the coordinated
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CLEMENT-NYNS et al.: IMPACT OF CHARGING PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLES ON A RESIDENTIAL DISTRIBUTION GRID 375
TABLE III
RATIO OF POWER LOSSES TO TOTAL POWER [%] FOR THE 4 kW
CHARGER IN CASE OF COORDINATED CHARGING
TABLE IV
MAXIMUM VOLTAGE DEVIATIONS [%] FOR THE 4 kW
CHARGER IN CASE OF COORDINATED CHARGING
Fig. 6. Voltage profile in a node with 30% and 10% PHEVs compared to the
voltage profile with 0% PHEV for coordinated charging.
charging during the different charging periods. These results
must be compared with Table I and Table II. For all charging
periods and seasons, the power losses are decreasing if the
coordinated charging is applied. The voltage deviations are in
accordance with EN50160 standard and the maximum voltage
deviation for a penetration degree of 30% is now well below
10%. If there are no PHEVs present, charging during the day
and the night gives more or less the same results. However, if
the number of PHEVs is increased, the voltage deviations and
the power loss increases are larger for charging during the day
than during the night.
Fig. 6 shows that the maximum voltage deviation during
overnight charging when no PHEVs are involved, occurs at the
beginning of the charging period when the household loads
are still high. A penetration degree of 10% gives the same
voltage deviations, meaning that the vehicles are not charged
Fig. 7. Load profile of the 4 kW charger for the charging period from 21h00
until 06h00 during winter.
when the household load peak occurs. The vehicles cause an
extra load during the off-peak hours to obtain the objective to
minimize the power losses. The voltage deviations during these
off-peak hours is smaller compared to the voltage deviations
due to the household loads during the evening peak. For a
vehicle penetration of 20% or more, the number of vehicles is
increased, and the charging is more distributed. Some vehicles
are charging during peak hours and this increases the voltage
deviation and thus lowers the voltage.
Fig. 7 shows the load profiles of the nodes 1 and 33 of Fig. 3
with a penetration degree of 30% during the charging period
from 21h00 until 06h00 during winter. The nodes are chosen at
the starting and end point of the grid feeder. It is clear that the
power output of the charger is not constantly 4 kW, but varies.
D. Stochastic Programming
The previous results are based on deterministic or historical
data for the daily load profiles. So the essential input parame-
ters are fixed. For this approach, a sufficient number of measure-
ment data must be available. Most of the time, however, these
measurements are not adequate to perform a perfect forecasting
of the data. A stochastic approach in which an error in the fore-
casting of the daily load profiles is considered, is therefore more
realistic.
The daily load profiles are the essential input parameters. The
uncertainties of these parameters can be described in terms of
probability density functions. In that way, the fixed input pa-
rameters are converted into random input variables with normal
distributions assumed at each node. independent samples of
the random input variable , the daily load profile, are selected.
Equation (3) gives the estimation for the stochastic optimum
. The function gives the power losses and is
the power rate of the charger for all the PHEVs and time steps.
is a sample-average approximation of the objective of the
stochastic programming problem:
(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
376 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
The mean value of the power losses, , is a lower
bound for the real optimal value of the stochastic programming
problem, [13], as shown in (4):
(4)
can be estimated by generating independent sam-
ples of the random input variable each of size . op-
timization runs are performed in which the nonlinear power
flow equations are solved by using the backward-forward sweep
method. According to (5), is the mean optimal value of the
problem for each of the samples. The optimal values of the
samples constitute a normal distribution:
(5)
In (6), is an unbiased estimator of . Simulations
indicate that in this type of problem, the lower bound converges
to the real optimal value when is sufficiently high:
(6)
A forecasting model for the daily load profile for the next
24 h is required. The daily load profiles of the available set are
varied by a normal distribution function. The standard deviation
is determined in such a way that 99.7% of the samples vary at
maximum 5% or 25% of the average .
E. Results
For 2000 independent samples of the daily load profile, one
optimal charging profile is calculated. This optimal charging
profile is used to determine the power losses for the 2000 in-
dividual load profiles. This is the stochastic optimum. For each
of these 2000 load profiles, the optimal charging profile and the
corresponding power losses are also computed, which is the de-
terministic optimum.
The power losses of the deterministic optimum are subtracted
from the power losses of the stochastic optimum and divided by
the deterministic optimum, defined as . This is shown for a
variation of the household loads of 5 and 25% in Figs. 8 and 9,
respectively. The value of this difference is always positive. The
forecasting of the daily load profiles introduces an efficiency
loss because the charge profiles of the PHEVs are not optimal
for this specific daily load profile. If the standard deviation of
the normal distribution and thus the variation of the household
load is reduced, the 2000 charge profiles of the deterministic
optimum will converge to the optimal charge profile. The effi-
ciency loss will also reduce indicating that the power losses of
the differences will go down by a factor 25 as shown in Fig. 8
compared to Fig. 9.
In general, the difference between the power losses of the
stochastic and the deterministic optimum is rather small. It is
clear that the error in forecasting does not have a large im-
pact on the power losses. The daily household load profiles
during the winter season show the same trend each day during
Fig. 8. Histogram of the efficiency loss of an arbitrary day during winter for a
variation of 5%.
Fig. 9. Histogram of the efficiency loss of an arbitrary day during winter for a
variation of 25%.
Fig. 10. Deterministic optimum and optimal charger profile for node 33.
winter season resulting in a optimal charge profile which resem-
bles a deterministic charge profile of a specific day as shown in
Fig. 10 for the last node of the test grid. Both charge profiles
have the same trend. Therefore, the contrast in terms of power
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CLEMENT-NYNS et al.: IMPACT OF CHARGING PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLES ON A RESIDENTIAL DISTRIBUTION GRID 377
Fig. 11. Histogram of the efficiency loss of an arbitrary day during winter for
other household profiles.
losses between the deterministic and stochastic optimum is not
large. However, the difference between uncoordinated and co-
ordinated charging is much larger because the charge profiles
are more different. The uncoordinated charging has a constant
charge profile for a specific amount of time.
In Fig. 8 and 9, a specific household load profile is assumed
which is varied by a normal distribution function. In Fig. 11, the
load profiles are randomly selected out of a database of house-
hold load profiles. This database contains profiles that differ
more each day and are more peaked which increases the effi-
ciency losses.
V. DYNAMIC PROGRAMMING
The optimal coordination of charging PHEVs can also be
tackled by the dynamic programming technique (DP). The QP
and DP techniques are compared with respect to results, storage
requirements and computational time. The DP technique de-
composes the original optimization problem into a sequence
of subproblems which are solved backward over each stage. A
classical implementation of the DP technique is the shortest path
problem. For the application of this article, the model is repre-
sented as a series of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.
A. Methodology
There are vehicles with batteries charging and the max-
imum value of corresponds with a penetration degree of 30%.
The battery content of these vehicles at each stage is the
state variable, . The number of stages , is the number
of hours of the charging period multiplied by four because the
household loads are available on a 15-min time base.
The backward recursive equations for the conventional dy-
namic programming technique are given in (7) and (8):
(7)
(8)
The function represents the total optimal power losses from
period to the last period . The vector is a Q-dimensional
vector of the possible storage levels at time . is the power
loss during period and is the battery content of the th ve-
hicle at time stage . The power of the chargers is represented
by and is also a -dimensional vector. So the first compo-
nent of this vector gives the power of the charger for the first
PHEV. The output of the charger is not continuous, but has a
step size of 400 W. This is relatively large, but smaller step sizes
would lead to too much computational time which is propor-
tional to [14]. As such, the battery content is also discrete.
The constraints of the problem remain the same and are shown
in (9)–(11):
(9)
(10)
(11)
The power loss is the objective function which must be min-
imized. The storage vector is a Q-dimensional vector and
thus “the curse of dimensionality” [15] arises which is handled
by modifying the original dynamic programming technique.
The dynamic programming technique successive approxima-
tion (DPSA) decomposes the multidimensional problem in a
sequence of one-dimensional problems which are much easier
to handle [16]. The optimizations occur one variable at a time
while holding the other variables at a constant value. All the
variables are evaluated that way. This technique converges to a
optimum for convex problems. This method will be used for the
deterministic and stochastic programming.
B. Deterministic Programming
A daily load profile of the selected season is chosen and the
vehicles are placed randomly. The DPSA technique needs initial
values of the state variables to start the iteration. These values
are generated by calculating the optimal charge trajectory for
each PHEV separately without considering the other PHEVs.
These optimal trajectories are put together into one temporary
optimal trajectory and thus one -dimensional state vector. All
the components of the state vector are held constant, except the
first one. The optimal charge trajectory for the first component
of the state variable is defined. The new value is ascribed to the
first component and the procedure continues until the last com-
ponent of the state vector is optimized. This procedure is re-
peated until convergence is obtained. The problem is switched
from a multidimensional problem to a sequence of one-dimen-
sional problems. The algorithm of dynamic programming suc-
cessive approximation is represented in Fig. 12.
C. Stochastic Programming
The uncertainties of the household loads must also be imple-
mented in the DP technique. Two thousand stochastic household
load profiles are generated and the mean power losses of these
loads are used to determine the total power losses as presented
in (12):
(12)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
378 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
Fig. 12. Algorithm of DPSA charging.
The same stochastic load profiles as produced in the sto-
chastic programming of the QP technique are applied to make
the comparison more clear. One optimal charge profile is gener-
ated for these 2000 stochastic household loads with the DPSA
technique. The power losses are calculated separately for the
2000 household load profiles and the single optimal charge
profile. This is the stochastic optimum. For the deterministic
optimum, the optimal charge profile and power losses are deter-
mined for each of the 2000 stochastic household load profiles,
giving 2000 optimal charge profiles. The power losses of the
deterministic optimum are subtracted from the power losses
of the stochastic optimum and divided by the deterministic
optimum for a variation of the household loads of 5 and 25%.
D. Results
In Fig. 13, the charge profiles for the QP and DP technique are
compared. In general, the difference between the results of the
DP and QP techniques is negligible, although the QP technique
gives more accurate results because the values of the charge
Fig. 13. Charge profile for node 1 for the QP and the DP program technique.
TABLE V
POWER QUALITY AND LOSSES FOR THE TEST GRID
profile are continuous in that case. The DP technique, where
a step size of 400 W is introduced for the power of the charger,
gives a discrete charge profile. Reducing the step to an infini-
tesimal value would give the same result as the QP technique.
This step size is taken rather large in order to reduce the number
of levels and thus computational time and storage requirements.
The storage requirements are heavier for the DP technique com-
pared to the QP technique because every possible path over each
stage must be stored. Since this leads to very large matrices and
increased computational time, the DP technique is slower.
VI. IMPACT ON THE DISTRIBUTION GRID
Uncoordinated charging of the batteries of PHEVs has a non-
negligible impact on the performance of the distribution grid in
terms of power losses and power quality. Both power quality and
power losses are represented in Table V for three cases: without
PHEVs, uncoordinated and coordinated charging. The power
quality is given as the average of 1000 samples of the maximum
load, voltage drop and line current for the IEEE 34-node test
feeder during winter season for a penetration degree of 30%.
The power losses are the ratio of the power losses to the total
load. With respect to uncoordinated charging, the coordination of
the charging reduces the power losses. Power quality is improved
to a level which is similar to the casewhereno PHEVs are present.
Because the extra loads for charging PHEVs remain in the case
of coordinated charging, additional losses are still higher.
The coordination of the charging can be done by a smart me-
tering system. The distribution grid must be enforced to cope
with the increased loads and voltage drops caused by charging
PHEVs if this coordination system is not applied. Both scenarios
will introduce extra costs for the distribution system operators
and eventually for the customers.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
CLEMENT-NYNS et al.: IMPACT OF CHARGING PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC VEHICLES ON A RESIDENTIAL DISTRIBUTION GRID 379
A global estimation is performed in order to indicate the level
of upgrading needed for a small distribution grid. For the argu-
mentation, the IEEE 34-node test feeder is connected to each
phase of a three phase transformer of 100 kVA, forming a global
grid of 100 nodes. When no PHEVs are present, the maximum
load for the three grids together is 69 kVA. Considering no
PHEVs in the future, the transformer has enough reserve ca-
pacity for this global grid to meet additional peak load and load
growth for the next ten years, which is predicted to be a few
percent. A Aluminum underground conductor of
400 V is standard. The maximum capacity of these conductors
is about 160 A [17]. For the case without PHEVs, the standard
underground conductor would be sufficient.
If 30% PHEVs are introduced, the power for the global grid
increases to 108 kVA, which is out of range for the 100 kVA
transformer. This transformer must be replaced by a standard
transformer of 125 kVA to deal with extra PHEVs, load growth
and additional peak load. Due to the PHEVs, the line current
increases to 163 A. The maximum capacity of the current con-
ductor is not enough and must be replaced by a
Aluminum underground conductor with a capacity of 220 A.
Voltage deviations up to 10% in low voltage grids are accept-
able for 95% of the time according to the EN50160 standard
which is mandatory in Belgium. In the case of uncoordinated
charging, this limit has been reached for charging during the
evening and action must be taken to reduce the voltage drop.
The problem of the voltage drop can be tackled by placing a ca-
pacitor bank or a load tap changing transformer. Although the
latter is not common at low voltages, it may be necessary in
the future, especially for the vehicle-to-grid concept. This type
of transformer can handle voltage variations of plus and minus
10% by adjusting among 32 tap settings built into the wind-
ings [18]. There is also another cost involved: the power losses.
These losses increase reasonably in the case of uncoordinated
charging. The power losses and loads must also be produced
and transported over the transmission lines.
A smart metering system must be implemented to control
the coordination and communication between the PHEVs indi-
vidually, the distribution system operator and the transmission
system operator (TSO). The vehicles could also be grouped and
represented by a fleet manager to communicate with the DSO
and TSO. Smart metering will lead to opportunities to make
PHEVs a controllable load, to apply the vehicle-to-grid concept
and to combine PHEVs and renewable energy. This technology
is available for implementation, but capital investments by the
utilities are necessary [19]. For the implementation of smart me-
tering, also other incentives, such as real-time pricing and inte-
gration of renewable energy, are important.
Less grid enforcements are necessary with the coordination
system. The maximum load is lower because the vehicles are
not charging if the household loads are peaking. Therefore, the
voltage drops, line currents and power losses are considerably
reduced. The cost of upgrading the grid must be compared with
the cost of the execution of smart metering. In both cases, the
cost for the implementation and the possible additional power
production will be passed on to the customers. In practice, it
would be no difference for the DSOs which technology is im-
plemented, as they are allowed to have a fair rate of return in a
cost plus mechanism. With this mechanism, the DSOs are not
strongly pushed towards the use of the most efficient technolo-
gies. The tariffs and the performance of the grid are more im-
portant in a price cap mechanism. The realization is favorable
if the smart metering system helps a significant deferral of grid
investments compared to the enhancement of the grid.
VII. CONCLUSION
In general, coordinated charging of plug-in hybrid electric ve-
hicles can lower power losses and voltage deviations by flat-
tening out peak power. However, when the choice of charging
periods is rather arbitrary, the impact of the PHEV penetration
level is large. The implementation of the coordinated charging
is not without costs.
In the first stage, historical data are used so there is a perfect
knowledge of the load profiles. In a second stage, stochastic pro-
gramming is introduced to represent an error in the forecasting
which increase the power losses. This efficiency loss is rather
small if the trend of the household load profiles is known, so
charging during the peak load of the evening can be avoided.
These results are obtained with the quadratic programming
technique. The dynamic programming technique is also imple-
mented but does not improve the computational time nor the
achieved accuracy. The applied techniques and methods can be
extended to other objective functions, such as voltage control by
PHEV reactive power output control and grid balancing.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Raskin and S. Shah, The Emerge of Hybrid Electric Vehicles. New
York: Alliance Bernstein, 2006. [Online]. Available: http://www.cal-
cars.org/alliance-bernstein-hybrids-june06.pdf.
[2] Anderman, “The challenge to fulfil electrical power requirements of
advanced vehicles,” J. Power Sources, vol. 127, no. 1–2, pp. 2–7, Mar.
2004.
[3] K. Clement, K. Van Reusel, and J. Driesen, “The consumption of
electrical energy of plug-in hybrid electric vehicles in Belgium,” in
Proc. 2nd Eur. Ele-Drive Transportation Conf., Brussels, Belgium,
May 2007.
[4] M. Duvall and E. Knipping, Environmental Assessment of Plug-In
Hybrid Electric Vehicles, Volume 1: National Wide Greenhouse Gas
Emissions, EPRI, 2007, Tech. Rep.
[5] P. Denholm and W. Short, An Evaluation of Utility System Impacts
and Benefits of Optimally Dispatched Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehi-
cles, Oct. 2006, Tech. Rep.
[6] Vlaamse Reguleringsinstantie voor de Elektriciteits- en Gas-
markt (VREG), De verbruiksprofielen van huishoudelijke en ni-
ethuishoudelijke elektriciteitsverbruikers voor het jaar 2007. [Online].
Available: http://www.vreg.be.
[7] S. Logghe, B. Van Herbruggen, and B. Van Zeebroeck, “Emissions of
road traffic in Belgium, tmleuven,” Tremove, Jan. 2006.
[8] Nationaal Wetenschappelijke Instituut voor Verkeersveiligheidsonder-
zoek (SWOV), Onderzoek verplaatsingsgedrag (ovg), 2007. [Online].
Available: http://www.swov.nl.
[9] W. H. Kersting, “Radial distribution test feeders,” in Proc. IEEE Power
Eng. Soc. Winter Meeting, Jan. 28–Feb. 1, 2001. [Online]. Available:
http://ewh.ieee.org/soc/pes/dsacom/.
[10] W. Kersting, Distribution System Modeling and Analysis. Boca
Raton, FL: CRC, 2002.
[11] En 50160, Voltage Characteristics of Electricity Supplied by Public
Distribution Systems, 1999.
[12] E. Haesen, J. Driesen, and R. Belmans, “Robust planning methodology
for integration of stochastic generators in distribution grids,” IET J.
Renew. Power Gen., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 25–32, Mar. 2007.
[13] J. Linderoth, A. Shapiro, and S. Wright, “The empirical behavior of
sampling methods for stochastic programming,” Ann. Oper. Res., vol.
142, no. 1, pp. 215–241, Feb. 2006.
[14] J. Labadie, “Optimal operation of multireservoir systems: State-of-the
art review,” J. Water Resource Plan. Manage.-ASCE, vol. 130, no. 2,
pp. 93–111, Mar.–Apr. 2004.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
380 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON POWER SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 1, FEBRUARY 2010
[15] R. Bellman, Adaptive Control Processes: A Guided Tour. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1962.
[16] J. Yi, J. Labadie, and S. Stitt, “Dynamic optimal unit commitment and
loading in hydropower systems,” J. Water Resource Plan. Manage.-
ASCE, vol. 129, no. 5, pp. 388–398, Sep.–Oct. 2003.
[17] S. S. J. P. Green and G. Strbac, “Evaluation of electricity distribution
system design strategies,” Proc. Inst. Elect. Eng., Gen., Transm., Dis-
trib., vol. 146, no. 1, pp. 53–60, Jan. 1999.
[18] H. L. Willis, Power Distribution Planning Reference Book. New
York: Marcel Dekker, 1997.
[19] U.S. Departement of Energy, Summary Report: Discussion Meeting on
Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles, 2006, Tech. Rep.
Kristien Clement-Nyns received the M.S. degree
in electro-mechanical engineering in 2004 with spe-
cialization in energy. Currently, she is pursuing the
Ph.D. degree in electrotechnical engineering at the
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven division ELECTA,
Heverlee, Belgium.
Her research interests include hybrid and electric
vehicles.
Edwin Haesen (S’05) received the M.Sc. degree in
electrical engineering at the Katholieke Universiteit
Leuven (KU Leuven), Heverlee, Belgium, in 2004.
He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the KU
Leuven.
He is a Research Assistant at KU Leuven in the
division ESAT-ELECTA. His research interests are in
the domain of power system analysis and distributed
generation.
Mr. Haesen received the European Talent Award
for Innovative Energy Systems 2005 for his M.Sc.
thesis on “Technical aspects of congestion management”.
Johan Driesen (S’93–M’97) received the M.Sc.
and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from
Katholieke Universiteit Leuven (KU Leuven),
Heverlee, Belgium, in 1996 and 2000, respectively.
Currently, he is an Associate Professor with KU
Leuven and teaches power electronics and drives. In
2000, he was with the Imperial College of Science,
Technology and Medicine, London, U.K. In 2002,
he was with the University of California, Berkeley.
Currently, he conducts research on distributed gener-
ation, power electronics, and its applications.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Katholieke Universiteit Leuven. Downloaded on February 2, 2010 at 11:16 from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 

