Massimo Fornasier 
Technical University of Munich 
Department of Mathematics 
 
 
Garching, April 24, 2017  
TUM Data Innovation Lab 
TUM-DI-LAB 
Data Masters @ TUM   
Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
“Some of the best learning is when you 
actually figure out how to do something 
yourself”  
Ashlee Valente @ Data + Duke University 
Massimo Fornasier 
Technical University of Munich 
Department of Mathematics 
 
 
Garching, April 24, 2017  
TUM Data Innovation Lab 
TUM-DI-LAB 
Data Masters @ TUM   
Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
“Some of the best learning is when you 
actually figure out how to do something 
yourself”  
Ashlee Valente @ Data + Duke University 
3 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Data Value Chain 
Data Engineering Data Analysis and Analytics Real-life applications 
4 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
TUM Integrative Study Program  
TUM has moved in the forefront and is planning one of the first 
Integrative Study Program in Data Science in Germany and Europe. 
 
The Program is in development and promises to be:  
 
-  Integrative: it takes advantage of and integrates all the strong 
competences at TUM in Data Science; 
 
-  International: besides the European partnerships (EuroTech), it draws 
much information and know-how from similar experiences already 
starting in the USA; 
 
-  Dialoguing with companies: professional stages or case study 
laboratories on real-life problems on large data sets offered by 
European companies to nurture the creativity and the self-confidence in 
proposing solutions. 
  
 
5 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
TUM Integrative Study Program  
6 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Big Data Foundations @ CS & MA 
Big 
Data 
Optimization 
Statistics 
Computer 
Science 
Applications 
Legal Social 
and Political 
Studies 
7 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
One Integrative Study Program Two Masters 
For students with a 
background in 
mathematics who seek for 
mathematical methods and 
interdisciplinary training to 
face contemporary 
challenges related to ‘Big 
Data’ 
MSc 
Mathematics in 
Data Science 
For students with a 
background in computer 
science who seek state-of-
the-art methods and 
techniques to face 
contemporary challenges 
related to ‘Big Data’ 
MSc Data 
Engineering & 
Analytics 
8 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
First Class Teaching Personnel 
D
ata E
ngineering 
Prof. Thomas Neumann 
Database Systems at TUM  
Prof. Daniel Cremers 
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition at TUM  
Prof. Claudia Eckert 
 IT Security at TUM  
New Professor position 
Large-Scale Data Analysis and Machine Learning 
New Professor position 
Data Engineering and Analytics 
9 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
First Class Teaching Personnel 
D
ata A
nalytics 
Prof. Michael Gerndt 
HPC at TUM  
Prof. Rüdiger Westermann 
Computer Graphics and Visualization at TUM  
Prof. Patrick van der Smagt 
Robotics and Embedded Systems at TUM  
Dr. Stephan Günnemann 
Data Mining Research Group at TUM  
10 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
First Class Teaching Personnel 
Prof. Claudia Klüppelberg 
Mathematical Statistics at TUM  
Prof. Claudia Czado 
Mathematical Statistics at TUM  
Prof. Fabian Theis 
Mathematical Modeling of Biological Systems at TUM  
and Helmholtz Center Munich  
Prof. Michael Wolf 
Mathematical Physics at TUM  
M
athem
atical S
tatistics and M
achine Learning 
11 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
First Class Teaching Personnel 
Prof. Massimo Fornasier 
Applied Numerical Analysis at TUM   
Prof. Felix Krahmer 
Optimization and Data Analysis at TUM  
Prof. Michael Ulbrich 
Mathematical Optimization at TUM  
M
athem
atical R
epresentation of D
ata and O
ptim
ization 
Prof. Ulrich Bauer 
Applied Topology and Geometry at TUM  
Prof. Peter Gritzmann 
Geometry and Discrete Optimization at TUM  
12 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Founda'ons	  in	  	  
-­‐	  Data	  Engineering	  	  (WS)	  8	  
-­‐	  Data	  Analysis	  (SoSe)	  	  	  	  	  	  8	  
Master	  Mathema*cs	  in	  Data	  Science	  
4	  semesters,	  120	  ECTS	  
Summer/winter 
stageTUM-DI-LAB 
10 
Master’s Seminar 
                                        5 
Master’s Thesis                                  
   30 
Total 53 Total 61 
∑ min. 15 credits 
∑ min. 25 credits 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Analytics 
min. 1 module  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Analysis 
min. 1 module  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Engineering 
min. 1 module  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Advanced Topics in  
Data Analysis 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Special Topics in  
Data Analytics 
 
 
 
 
Electives  
Masters of 
Mathematics 
 
 
 
 
 
Support Electives         3 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Social and Political Aspects 
of Data Science                  3 
Internship or summer/winter stage at  
TUM-DI-LAB  
10 ECTS 
As an alternative to an Internship 
we established the  
 
TUM Data Innovation Lab  
(TUM-DI-LAB) 
 
 
“Some of the best learning is when you actually figure out 
how to do something yourself” 
 
14 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
TUM Data Innovation Lab 
The objective of TUM-DI-LAB is the establishment of a 
consolidated and holistic joint Lab on Big Data for the most 
effective and durable practical education of specialists in Data 
Engineering and Data Analysis. The Lab will be based at the 
Department of Mathematics and will serve as a conduit for the 
Master programs towards 
 
1. joint activities with other Departments of TUM 
 
2. joint activities with innovative companies in the field 
 
3. Exchange with other top Schools (e.g., EuroTech & in the US). 
 
15 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
TUM Data Innovation Lab 
TUM-DI-LAB is a research experience that welcomes 
TUM Master students interested in exploring new data-
driven approaches to interdisciplinary challenges.   
 
Students join small teams, working alongside in a 
communal environment.  
 
They learn how to marshal, analyze, and visualize data, 
while gaining broad exposure to the modern world of 
data science.  
16 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
How does it work? 
1.  Select a given problem offered by another 
Department at TUM or an innovative company; 
 
2.  Assign one qualified internal Doctoral Student, 
Postdoc or Professor to the group of students for 
mentoring; 
 
3.  Select a group of 3-4 TUM students enrolled in the 
program with appropriate interdisciplinary 
background as a student team to attack the given 
problem. 
17 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
TUM Master Programs currently onboard 
•  Data Engineering and Analytics  
 
•  Mathematics in Data Science 
•  Mathematical Finance and Actuarial Science  
•  Mathematics  
•  Mathematics in Bioscience  
•  Mathematics in Operations Research  
 
18 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Requirements for students 
Master students of Mathematics or 
Computer Science: It is preferable that you 
attended at least two of the following courses: 
Foundations of Data Analysis (MA4800), 
Multivariate Statistics (MA4472), Computational 
Statistics (MA3402), Fundamentals of 
Databases (IN0008), Fundamentals of 
Algorithms and Data Structures (IN0007), 
Foundations in Data Engineering (IN2326) 
before signing up for the Lab. 
All other TUM Master students:  Fundamental knowledge of the 
topic of a particular project. 
 
Willingness of being exposed to data analysis and engineering 
techniques by working besides qualified students and mentors. 
19 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Currently offered projects 
•  Climate change and health  
•  Find available parking spaces  
•  A machine learning how to play GO 
20 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Find available parking spaces 
•  Sponsored by: Capgemini 
•  Scientific Lead: M.Sc. Matthias Wissel 
Overview 
 
Finding a parking space in the morning may take longer than expected. 
The goals of this project are: getting key insights into how to compute 
hourly occupation counts of parking spaces, building a visualization tool 
to display the occupancy counts, and computing the optimal "redirection 
spot" to be communicated to a potential user. 
21 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Mentors 
State of the art knowledge and enthusiasm are 
essential for the success of the TUM-DI-LAB.  
 
As a Mentor you are invited to propose project 
themes in your area of research expertise or 
your interests related to data science.  
 
You will then develop a brief and intensive 
research activity, supported by a selected team 
of four master’s students. 
The time you invest as Mentor counts as teaching hours. 
 
TUM Professors, Postdocs, and Doctoral Students are invited and 
encouraged to offer their expertise as Mentors for the TUM-DI-LAB. 
 
You will meet your team once a week to monitor their progress.  
22 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Partners 
You challenge our students with new problems 
and contribute to the extend the TUM-DI-LAB 
experience.  
 
You benefit from the expertise of our 
departments, graduate and undergraduate 
students.  
 
Partnership with the Lab builds pathways for 
acquiring relevant know-how and recruiting of 
skillful personnel. 
Our Lab is open to partners from all TUM faculties, other universities, 
research institutions, and industries interested in developing data analyses. 
 
Together we will foster a generation of students ready to take the lead in a 
data-rich world. 
23 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Milestones 
M1. Kick-off of the TUM-DI-LAB (Oct. 2016) 
 
M2. Building alliances (October 2016 – May 2017) 
 
M3. Projektbörse (October 2016 – May 2017) 
 
M4. Student teams (Apr 2017 – June 2017) 
 
M5. First internship at TUM-DI-LAB (August 1 – October 10, 2017) 
 
M6. Communication&Dissemination (October 2017 – May 2018) 
 
M7. Evaluation&Improvements (October 2017 – September 2018) 
 
M8. Long-term consolidation (September 2018 -  …) 
24 TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  
Responsible Persons  
 
 
 
Mathematics in Data Science and TUM-DI-LAB 
Prof. Massimo Fornasier 
Department of Mathematics 
massimo.fornasier@ma.tum.de    
Coordinator of the TUM-DI-LAB 
Dr. Ricardo Acevedo-Cabra 
Department of Mathematics 
ricardo.acevedo@ma.tum.de  
25 
 
 
 
 
www.di-lab.tum.de  
“Some of the best learning is when you 
actually figure out how to do something 
yourself” 
TUM-DI-LAB | Data Masters @ TUM | Professor Massimo Fornasier (MA)  

